WHITE WINGS, VOLUME IThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almostno restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.Title: White Wings, Volume IA Yachting RomanceAuthor: William BlackRelease Date: September 27, 2013 [EBook #43828]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITE WINGS, VOLUME I (OF 3)***Produced by Al Haines.WHITE WINGS:A Yachting Romance.BYWILLIAM BLACK,AUTHOR OF "THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A PHAETON,""GREEN PASTURES AND PICCADILLY," ETC.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.London:MACMILLAN AND CO.1880.The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved.LONDON:R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR,BREAD STREET HILL.TO OUR*QUEEN MABS,*IN MEMORY OF HER FIRST CRUISE ON BOARD ANYYACHT, THIS RECORD OF OUR LONG SUMMER IDLENESSIN 1878 IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, BY HEROBLIGED AND HUMBLE SERVANT,THE AUTHOR.BRIGHTON, June 1880.*CONTENTS.*CHAPTER I.ON THE QUAYCHAPTER II.MARY AVONCHAPTER III.UNDER WAYCHAPTER IV.A MESSAGECHAPTER V.A BRAVE CAREERCHAPTER VI.OUR NEW GUESTSCHAPTER VII.NORTHWARDCHAPTER VIII.PLOTS AND COUNTER-PLOTSCHAPTER IX.A WILD STUDIOCHAPTER X."DUNVEGAN!OH!  DUNVEGAN!"CHAPTER XI.DRAWING NEARERCHAPTER XII.THE OLD SCHOOL AND THE NEWCHAPTER XIII.FERDINAND AND MIRANDACHAPTER XIV.EVIL TIDINGSCHAPTER XV.TEMPTATIONCHAPTER XVI.THROUGH THE DARK*WHITE WINGS:**A Yachting Romance.**CHAPTER I.**ON THE QUAY.*A murmur runs through the crowd; the various idlers grow alert; all eyesare suddenly turned to the south.  And there, far away over the greenheadland, a small tuft of brown smoke appears, rising into the goldenglow of the afternoon, and we know that by and by we shall see the greatsteamer with her scarlet funnels come sailing round the point.  TheLaird of Denny-mains assumes an air of still further importance; hepulls his frock-coat tight at the waist; he adjusts his black satinnecktie; his tall, white, stiff collar seems more rigid and white thanever.  He has heard of the wonderful stranger; and he knows that now sheis drawing near.Heard of her?  He has heard of nothing else since ever he came to us inthese northern wilds.  For the mistress of this householdwith all herdomineering ways and her fits of majestic temperhas a love for herintimate girl-friends far passing the love of men; especially when theyoung ladies are obedient, and gentle, and ready to pay to her matronlydignity the compliment of a respectful awe. And this particular friendwho is now coming to us: what has not the Laird heard about her duringthese past few days?of her high courage, her resolute unselfishness,her splendid cheerfulness?  "A singing-bird in the house," that was oneof the phrases used, "in wet weather or fine."  And then theenthusiastic friend muddled her metaphors somehow, and gave the puzzledLaird to understand that the presence of this young lady in a house waslike having sweet-brier about the rooms.  No wonder he put on hishighest and stiffest collar before he marched grandly down with us tothe quay."And does she not deserve a long holiday sir?" says the Laird's hostessto him, as together they watch for the steamer coming round the point."Just fancy!  Two months' attendance on that old woman, who was hermother's nurse.  Two months in a sick-room, without a soul to break themonotony of it. And the girl living in a strange town all by herself!""Ay; and in such a town as Edinburgh," remarks the Laird, with greatcompassion. His own property lies just outside Glasgow."Dear me," says he, "what must a young English leddy have thought of ourScotch way of speech when she heard they poor Edinburgh bodies and theiryaumering sing-song?  Not that I quarrel with any people for having anaccent in their way of speaking; they have that in all parts of Englandas well as in Scotlandin Yorkshire, and Somersetshire, and what not;and even in London itself there is a way of speech that is quiterecognisable to a stranger.  But I have often thought that there wasless trace of accent about Glesca and the west of Scotland than in anyother part; in fact, ah have often been taken for an Englishman maself.""Indeed!" says this gentle creature standing by him; and her upturnedeyes are full of an innocent belief.  You would swear she was meditatingon summoning instantly her boys from Epsom College that they mightacquire a pure accentor get rid of all accenton the banks of theClyde."Yes," say the Laird, with a decision almost amounting to enthusiasm,"it is a grand inheritance that we in the south of Scotland arepreserving for you English people; and you know little of it.  You donot know that we are preserving the English language for you as it wasspoken centuries ago, and as you find it in your oldest writings.Scotticisms! Why, if ye were to read the prose of Mandeville or Wyclif,or the poetry of Robert of Brunne or Langdale, ye would find that ourScotticisms were the very pith and marrow of the English language.  Ay;it is so."The innocent eyes express such profound interest that the Laird ofDenny-mains almost forgets about the coming steamer, so anxious is he tocrush us with a display of his erudition."It is just remarkable," he says, "that your dictionaries should putdown, as obsolete, words that are in common use all over the south ofScotland, where, as I say, the old Northumbrian English is preserved inits purity; and that ye should have learned people hunting up in Chauceror Gower for the very speech that they might hear among the bits o'weans running about the Gallowgate or the Broomielaw.  'Wha's achtye?' you say to one of them; and you think you are talking Scotch. No,no; acht is only the old English for possession: isn't 'Wha's achtye?' shorter and pithier than 'To whom do you belong?'"Oh, certainly!" says the meek disciple: the recall of the boys fromSurrey is obviously decided on."And speir for inquire; and ferly for wonderful; and tyne forlose; and fey for about to die; and reek for smoke; andmenseful for becoming; and belyve, and fere, and biggan, andsuch words.  Ye call them Scotch?  Oh, no, ma'am; they are English; yefind them in all the old English writers; and they are the best ofEnglish too; a great deal better than the Frenchified stuff that yoursouthern English has become."Not for worlds would the Laird have wounded the patriotic sensitivenessof this gentle friend of his from the South; but indeed, she had surelynothing to complain of in his insisting to an Englishwoman on the valueof thorough English?"I thought," says she, demurely, "that the Scotch had a good many Frenchwords in it."The Laird pretends not to hear: he is so deeply interested in thesteamer which is now coming over the smooth waters of the bay. But,having announced that there are a great many people on board, he returnsto his discourse."Ah'm sure of this, too," says he, "that in the matter of pronunciationthe Lowland Scotch have preserved the best Englishyou can see thatfaither, and twelmonth, and twa, and such words are nearer theoriginal Anglo-Saxon"His hearers had been taught to shudder at the phrase Anglo-Saxonwithoutexactly knowing why.  But who could withstand the authority of theLaird?  Moreover, we see relief drawing near; the steamer's paddles arethrobbing in the still afternoon."If ye turn to Piers the Plowman," continues the indefatigableDenny-mains, "ye will find Langdale writingAnd a fewe Cruddes and Crayme.Why, it is the familiar phrase of our Scotch children!Do ye think theywould say curds? And then, fewe.  I am not sure, but I imagine weScotch are only making use of old English when we make certain forms offood plural. We say 'a few broth;' we speak of porridge as 'they.'Perhaps that is a survival, too, eh?""Oh, yes, certainly.  But please mind the ropes, sir," observes hishumble pupil, careful of her master's physical safety.  For at thismoment the steamer is slowing into the quay; and the men have the ropesready to fling ashore."Not," remarks the Laird, prudently backing away from the edge of thepier, "that I would say anything of these matters to your young Englishfriend; certainly not.  No doubt she prefers the southern English shehas been accustomed to.  But, bless me! just to think that she shouldjudge of our Scotch tongue by the way they Edinburgh bodies speak!""It is sad, is it not?" remarks his companionbut all her attention isnow fixed on the crowd of people swarming to the side of the steamer."And, indeed," the Laird explains, to close the subject, "it is only ahobby of mineonly a hobby.  Ye may have noticed that I do not use thosewords in my own speech, though I value them.  No, I will not force anyScotch on the young leddy.  As ah say, ah have often been taken for anEnglishman maself, both at home and abroad."And nowand nowthe great steamer is in at the quay; the gangways arerun over; there is a thronging up the paddle-boxes; and eager faces onshore scan equally eager faces on boardeach pair of eyes looking forthat other pair of eyes to flash a glad recognition. And where isshethe flower of womankindthe possessor of all virtue and grace andcouragethe wonder of the world?  The Laird shares in our excitement.He, too, scans the crowd eagerly.  He submits to be hustled by theporters; he hears nothing of the roaring of the steam; for is she notcoming ashore at last?  And we knowor guessthat he is looking out forsome splendid creaturesome Boadicea, with stately tread and imperiousmiensome Jephtha's daughter, with proud death in her eyessome Rosamondof our modern days, with a glory of loveliness on her face and hair.And we know that the master who has been lecturing us for half-an-houron our disgraceful neglect of pure English will not shock the sensitiveSouthern ear by any harsh accent of the North; but will address her inbeautiful and courtly strains, in tones such as Edinburgh never knew.Where is the queen of womankind, amid all this commonplace, hurrying,loquacious crowd?Forthwith the Laird, with a quick amazement in his eyes, sees a smalland insignificant personhe only catches a glimpse of a black dress anda white facesuddenly clasped round in the warm embrace of her friend.He stares for a second; and then he exclaimsapparently to himself:"Dear me!  What a shilpit bit thing!"Paleslightdelicatetiny: surely such a master of idiomatic Englishcannot have forgotten the existence of these words.  But this is all hecries to himself, in his surprise and wonder:"Dear me!  What a shilpit bit thing!"*CHAPTER II.**MARY AVON.*The bright, frank laugh of her face!the friendly, unhesitating,affectionate look in those soft black eyes!  He forgot all aboutRosamond and Boadicea when he was presented to this "shilpit" person.And when, instead of the usual ceremony of introduction, she bravely puther hand in his, and said she had often heard of him from their commonfriend, he did not notice that she was rather plain.  He did not evenstop to consider in what degree her Southern accent might be improved byresidence amongst the preservers of pure English.  He was anxious toknow if she was not greatly tired.  He hoped the sea had been smooth asthe steamer came past Easdale.  And her luggageshould he look after herluggage for her?But Miss Avon was an expert traveller, and quite competent to look afterher own luggage. Even as he spoke, it was being hoisted on to thewaggonette."You will let me drive?" says she, eying critically the two shaggy,farm-looking animals."Indeed I shall do nothing of the kind," says her hostess, promptly.But there was no disappointment at all on her face as we drove awaythrough the golden eveningby the side of the murmuring shore, past theoverhanging fir-wood, up and across the high land commanding a view ofthe wide western seas.  There was instead a look of such intense delightthat we knew, however silent the lips might be, that the bird-soul wassinging within.  Everything charmed herthe cool, sweet air, the scentof the sea-weed, the glow on the mountains out there in the west.  Andas she chattered her delight to uslike a bird escaped from its prisonand glad to get into the sunlight and free air againthe Laird sate muteand listened.  He watched the frank, bright, expressive face. Hefollowed and responded to her every moodwith a sort of fond paternalindulgence that almost prompted him to take her hand.  When she smiled,he laughed.  When she talked seriously, he looked concerned.  He wasentirely forgetting that she was a "shilpit bit thing;" and he wouldhave admitted that the Southern way of speaking Englishalthough, nodoubt, fallen away from the traditions of the Northumbrian dialecthad,after all, a certain music in it that made it pleasant to the ear.Up the hill, then, with a flourish for the last!the dust rolling awayin clouds behind usthe view over the Atlantic widening as we ascend.And here is Castle Osprey, as we have dubbed the place, with its wideopen door, and its walls half hidden with tree-fuchsias, and its greatrose-garden.  Had Fair Rosamond herself come to Castle Osprey thatevening, she could not have been waited on with greater solicitude thanthe Laird showed in assisting this "shilpit bit thing" to alightthough,indeed there was a slight stumble, of which no one took any notice atthe time. He busied himself with her luggage quite unnecessarily.  Hesuggested a cup of tea, though it wanted but fifteen minutes todinner-time.  He assured her that the glass was risingwhich was not thecase.  And when she was being hurried off to her own room to prepare fordinnerby one who rules her household with a rod of ironhe had theeffrontery to tell her to take her own time: dinner could wait.  The manactually proposed to keep dinner waitingin Castle Osprey.That this was love at first sight, who could doubt?  And perhaps thenimble brain of one who was at this moment hurriedly dressing in her ownroomand whom nature has constituted an indefatigable matchmakermayhave been considering whether this rich old bachelor might not marry,after all.  And if he were to marry, why should not he marry the younglady in whom he seemed to have taken so sudden and warm an interest?  Asfor her: Mary Avon was now two or three-and-twenty; she was not likelyto prove attractive to young men; her small fortune was scarcely worthconsidering; she was almost alone in the world.  Older men had marriedyounger women.  The Laird had no immediate relative to inheritDenny-mains and his very substantial fortune.  And would they not seeplenty of each other on board the yacht?But in her heart of hearts the schemer knew better.  She knew that theromance-chapter in the Laird's lifeand a bitter chapter it washad beenfinished and closed and put away many and many a year ago.  She knew howthe great disappointment of his life had failed to sour him; how he wasready to share among friends and companions the large and generous heartthat had been for a time laid at the feet of a jilt; how his keen andactive interest, that might have been confined to his children and hischildren's children, was now devoted to a hundred thingsthe planting atDenny-mains, the great heresy case, the patronage of young artists, eventhe preservation of pure English, and what not.  And that fortunateyoung gentlemanostensibly his nephewwhom he had sent to Harrow and toCambridge, who was now living a very easy life in the Middle Temple, andwho would no doubt come in for Denny-mains?  Well, we knew a littleabout that young man, too.  We knew why the Laird, when he found thatboth the boy's father and mother were dead, adopted him, and educatedhim, and got him to call him uncle.  He had taken under his care the sonof the woman who had jilted him five-and-thirty years ago; the lad hadhis mother's eyes.And now we are assembled in the drawing-roomall except the new guest;and the glow of the sunset is shining in at the open windows. The Lairdis eagerly proving to us that the change from the cold east winds ofEdinburgh to the warm westerly winds of the Highlands must make animmediate change in the young lady's faceand declaring that she oughtto go on board the yacht at once-and asserting that the ladies' cabinon board the White Dove is the most beautiful little cabin he eversawwhenWhen, behold! at the open doormeeting the glow of the sunshineappearsa figuredressed all in black velvet, plain and unadorned but for abroad belt of gold fringe that comes round the neck and crosses thebosom.  And above that again is a lot of white muslin stuff, on whichthe small, shapely, smooth-dressed head seems gently to rest.  The plainblack velvet dress gives a certain importance and substantiality to theotherwise slight figure; the broad fringe of gold glints and gleams asshe moves towards us; but who can even think of these things when hemeets the brave glance of Mary Avon's eyes?  She was humming, as shecame down the stairO think na lang, lassie, though I gang awa;For I'll come and see ye, in spite o' them a',we might have known it was the bird-soul come among us.Now the manner in which the Laird of Denny-mains set about capturing theaffections of this innocent young thingas he sate opposite her atdinnerwould have merited severe reproof in one of less mature age; andmight, indeed, have been followed by serious consequences but for thevery decided manner in which Miss Avon showed that she could take careof herself.  Whoever heard Mary Avon laugh would have been assured.  Andshe did laugh a good deal; for the Laird, determined to amuse her, wasrelating a series of anecdotes which he called "good ones," and whichseemed to have afforded great enjoyment to the people of the south ofScotland during the last century or so.  There was in especial aHighland steward of a steamer about whom a vast number of these storieswas told; and if the point was at times rather difficult to catch, whocould fail to be tickled by the Laird's own and obvious enjoyment?"There was another good one, Miss Avon," he would say; and then the barememory of the great facetiousness of the anecdote would break out insuch half-suppressed guffaws as altogether to stop the current of thenarrative.  Miss Avon laughedwe could not quite tell whether it was atthe Highland steward or the Lairduntil the tears ran down her checks.Dinner was scarcely thought of.  It was a disgraceful exhibition."There was another good one about Homesh," said the Laird, vainlyendeavouring to suppress his laughter.  "He came up on deck oneenormously hot day, and looked ashore, and saw some cattle standingknee-deep in a pool of water.  Says heha! ha! ha!ho! ho! ho!sayshe-says he'A wish a wass a stot!'he! he! he!ho! ho! ho!"Of course we all laughed heartily, and Mary Avon more than any of us;but if she had gone down on her knees and sworn that she knew what thepoint of the story was, we should not have believed her.  But the Lairdwas delighted.  He went on with his good ones.  The mythical Homesh andhis idiotic adventures became portentous.  The very servants couldscarcely carry the dishes straight.But in the midst of it all the Laird suddenly let his knife and forkdrop on his plate, and stared.  Then he quickly exclaimed"Bless me! lassie!"We saw in a second what had occasioned his alarm.  The girl's face hadbecome ghastly white; and she was almost falling away from her chairwhen her hostess, who happened to spring to her feet first, caught her,and held her, and called for water.  What could it mean?  Mary Avon wasnot of the sighing and fainting fraternity.And presently she came to herselfand faintly making apologies, would gofrom the room.  It was her ankle, she murmuredwith the face still whitefrom pain.  But when she tried to rise, she fell back again: the agonywas too great.  And so we had to carry her.About ten minutes thereafter the mistress of the house came back to theLaird, who had been sitting by himself, in great concern."That girl! that girl!" she exclaimsand one might almost imagine thereare tears in her eyes.  "Can you fancy such a thing!  She twists herankle in getting down from the waggonettebrings back the oldsprainperhaps lames herself for lifeand, in spite of the pain, sitshere laughing and joking, so that she may not spoil our first eveningtogether! Did you ever hear of such a thing!  Sitting here laughing,with her ankle swelled so that I had to cut the boot off!""Gracious me!" says the Laird; "is it as bad as that?""And if she should become permanently lamewhywhy"But was she going to make an appeal direct to the owner of Denny-mains?If the younger men were not likely to marry a lame little white-facedgirl, that was none of his business. The Laird's marrying days haddeparted five-and-thirty years before.However, we had to finish our dinner, somehow, in consideration to ourelder guest. And then the surgeon came; and bound up the ankle hard andfast; and Miss Avon, with a thousand meek apologies for being so stupid,declared again and again that her foot would be all right in themorning, and that we must get ready to start.  And when her friendassured her that this preliminary canter of the yacht might just as wellbe put off for a few daysuntil, for example, that young doctor fromEdinburgh came who had been invited to go a proper cruise with usherdistress was so great that we had to promise to start next daypunctually at ten.  So she sent us down again to amuse the Laird.But hark! what is this we hear just as Denny-mains is having his whiskyand hot water brought in?  It is a gay voice humming on the stairsBy the margin of fair Zrich's waters."That girl!" cries her hostess angrily, as she jumps to her feet.The door opens; and here is Mary Avon, with calm self-possession, makingher way to a chair."I knew you wouldn't believe me," she says coolly, "if I did not comedown.  I tell you my foot is as well as may be; and Dot-and-carry-onewill get down to the yacht in the morning as easily as any of you.  Andthat last story about Homesh," she says to the Laird, with a smile inthe soft black eyes that must have made his heart jump.  "Really, sir,you must tell me the ending of that story; it was so stupid of me!""Shilpit" she may have been; but the Laird, for one, was beginning tobelieve that this girl had the courage and nerve of a dozen men.*CHAPTER III.**UNDER WAY.*The first eager glance out on this brilliant and beautiful morning; andbehold! it is all a wonder of blue seas and blue skies that we findbefore us, with Lismore lying golden-green in the sunlight, and thegreat mountains of Mull and Morven shining with the pale etherialcolours of the dawn.  And what are the rhymes that are ringing throughone's brainthe echo perchance of something heard far away among theislandsthe islands that await our coming in the west?O land of red heather!O land of wild weather,And the cry of the waves, and the laugh of the breeze!O love, now, togetherThrough the wind and wild weatherWe spread our while sails to encounter the seas!Up and out, laggards, now; and hoist this big red and blue and whitething up to the head of the tall pole that the lads far below may knowto send the gig ashore for us!  And there, on the ruffled blue waters ofthe bay, behold! the noble White Dove, with her great mainsail, andmizzen, and jib, all set and glowing in the sun; and the scarlet caps ofthe men are like points of fire in this fair blue picture; and the redensign is fluttering in the light north-westerly breeze.  Breakfast ishurried over; and a small person who has a passion for flowers isdashing hither and thither in the garden until she has amassed an armfulof our old familiar friendsabundant roses, fuchsias, heart's-ease,various coloured columbine, and masses of southernwood to scent ourfloating saloon; the waggonette is at the door, to take our invalid downto the landing-slip; and the Laird has discarded his dignified costume,and appears in a shooting-coat and a vast gray wide-awake.  As for MaryAvon, she is laughing, chatting, singing, here, there, andeverywheregiving us to understand that a sprained ankle is rather apleasure than otherwise, and a great assistance in walking; until theLaird pounces upon heras one might pounce on a butterflyand imprisonsher in the waggonette, with many a serious warning about her imprudence.There let her sing to herself as she likesamid the wild confusion ofthings forgotten till the last moment and thrust upon us just as westart.And here is the stalwart and brown-bearded Captain JohnJohn of Skye wecall himhimself come ashore in the gig, in all his splendour of blueand brass buttons; and he takes off his peaked cap to the mistress ofour householdwhom some of her friends call Queen Titania, because ofher midge-like sizeand he says to her with a smile"And will Mrs.  herself be going with us this time?"That is Captain John's chief concern: for he has a great regard for thisdomineering small woman; and shows his respect for her, and his own highnotions of courtesy, by invariably addressing her in the third person."Oh, yes, John!" says sheand she can look pleasant enough when shelikes"and this is a young friend of mine, Miss Avon, whom you have totake great care of on board."And Captain John takes off his cap again; and is understood to tell theyoung lady that he will do his best, if she will excuse his not knowingmuch English.  Then, with great care, and with some difficulty, MissAvon is assisted down from the waggonette, and conducted along the roughlittle landing-slip, and helped into the stern of the shapely andshining gig.  Away with her, boys!  The splash of the oars is heard inthe still bay; the shore recedes; the white sails seem to rise higherinto the blue sky as we near the yacht; here is the black hull with itsline of goldthe gangway openthe ropes readythe white decks brilliantin the sun.  We are on board at last."And where will Mr.  himself be for going?" asks John of Skye, as themen are hauling the gig up to the davits.Mr.  briefly but seriously explains to the captain that, from someslight experience of the winds on this coast, he has found it of aboutas much use to order the tides to be changed as to settle upon anydefinite route. But he suggests the circumnavigation of the adjacentisland of Mull as a sort of preliminary canter for a few days, until acertain notable guest shall arrive; and he would prefer going by thesouth, if the honourable winds will permit.  Further, John of Skye isnot to be afraid of a bit of sea, on account of either of those ladies;both are excellent sailors. With these somewhat vague instructions,Captain John is left to get the yacht under way; and we go below to lookafter the stowage of our things in the various staterooms.And what is this violent altercation going on, in the saloon?"I will not have a word said against my captain," says Mary Avon.  "I amin love with him already.  His English is perfectly correct."This impertinent minx talking about correct English in the presence ofthe Laird of Denny-mains!"Mrs.  herself is perfectly correct; it is only politeness; it is likesaying 'Your Grace' to a Duke."But who was denying it?  Surely not the imperious little woman who wasarranging her flowers on the saloon table; nor yet Denny-mains, who wasexamining a box of variegated and recondite fishing-tackle?"It is all very well for fine ladies to laugh at the blunders of servantmaids," continues this audacious girl.  "'Miss Brown presents hercompliments to Miss Smith; and would you be so kind,' and so on.  Butdon't they often make the same blunder themselves?"Well, this was a discovery!"Doesn't Mrs. So-and-So request the honour of the company of Mr.So-and-So or Miss So-and-So for some purpose or other; and then you findat one corner of the card 'R.S.V.P.?'  'Answer if YOU please'!"A painful silence prevailed.  We began to reflect.  Whom did she mean tocharge with this deadly crime?But her triumph makes her considerate. She will not harry us with scorn."It is becoming far less common now, however," she remarks.  "'An answeris requested,' is much more sensible.""It is English," says the Laird, with decision.  "Surely it must be moresensible for an English person to write English.  Ah never use a Frenchword maself."But what is the English that we hear nowcalled out on deck by the voiceof John of Skye?"Eachan, slack the lee topping-lift!  Ay, and the tackle, too.  That'lldo, boys.  Down with your main-tack, now!""Why," exclaims our sovereign mistress, who knows something of nauticalmatters, "we must have started!"Then there is a tumbling up the companion-way; and lo! the land isslowly leaving us; and there is a lapping of the blue water along theside of the boat; and the white sails of the White Dove are filledwith this gentle breeze.  Deck-stools are arranged; books andfield-glasses and what not scattered about; Mary Avon is helped on deck,and ensconced in a snug little camp-chair.  The days of our summeridleness have begun.And as yet these are but familiar scenes that steal slowly bythe longgreen island of LismoreLios-mor, the Great Garden; the dark ruins ofDuart, sombre as if the shadow of nameless tragedies rested on thecrumbling walls; Loch Don, with its sea-bird-haunted shallows, and LochSpeliv leading up to the awful solitudes of Glen More; then, stretchingfar into the wreathing clouds, the long rampart of precipices, ruggedand barren and lonely, that form the eastern wall of Mull.There is no monotony on this beautiful summer morning; the scene changesevery moment, as the light breeze bears us away to the south.  For thereis the Sheep Island; and Garvelochwhich is the rough island; andEilean-na naomhawhich is the island of the Saints.  But what are theseto the small transparent cloud resting on the horizon?smaller than anyman's hand.  The day is still; and the seas are smooth: cannot we hearthe mermaiden singing on the far shores of Colonsay?"Colonsay!" exclaims the Laird, seizing a field-glass.  "Dear me!  Isthat Colonsay? And they telled me that Tom Galbraith was going therethis very year."The piece of news fails to startle us altogether; though we have heardthe Laird speak of Mr. Galbraith before."Ay," says he, "the world will know something o' Colonsay when TomGalbraith gets there.""Whom did you say?" Miss Avon asks."Why, Galbraith!" says he.  "Tom Galbraith!"The Laird stares in amazement.  Is it possible she has not heard of TomGalbraith? And she herself an artist; and coming direct from Edinburgh,where she has been living for two whole months!"Gracious me!" says the Laird.  "Ye do not say ye have never heard ofGalbraithhe's an Academeecian!a Scottish Academeecian!""Oh, yes; no doubt," she says, rather bewildered."There is no one living has had such an influence on our Scotch schoolof painters as Galbraitha man of great abeelitya man of great anduncommon abeelityhe is one of the most famous landscape painters of ourday""I scarcely met any one in Edinburgh," she pleads."But in Londonin London!" exclaims the astonished Laird.  "Do ye meanto say you never heard o' Tom Galbraith?""II think not," she confesses.  "II don't remember his name in theAcademy catalogue""The Royal Academy!" cries the Laird, with scorn.  "No, no!  Ye need notexpect that.  The English Academy is afraid of the Scotchmen: theirpictures are too strong: you do not put good honest whisky beside smallbeer.  I say the English Academy is afraid of the Scotch school"But flesh and blood can stand this no longer: we shall not have MaryAvon trampled upon."Look here, Denny-mains: we always thought there was a Scotchman or twoin the Royal Academy itselfand quite capable of holding their ownthere, too.  Why, the President of the Academy is a Scotchman! And asfor the Academy exhibition, the very walls are smothered with Scotchhills, Scotch spates, Scotch peasants, to say nothing of the thousandherring-smacks of Tarbert.""I tell ye they are afraid of Tom Galbraith; they will not exhibit oneof his pictures," says the Laird, stubbornly; and here the discussion isclosed; for Master Fred tinkles his bell below, and we have to go downfor luncheon.It was most unfair of the wind to take advantage of our absence, and tosneak off, leaving us in a dead calm.  It was all very well, when wecame on deck again, to watch the terns darting about in theirswallow-like fashion, and swooping down to seize a fish; and the stringsof sea-pyots whirring by, with their scarlet beaks and legs; and thesudden shimmer and hissing of a part of the blue plain, where a shoal ofmackerel had come to the surface; but where were we, now in the openAtlantic, to pass the night? We relinquished the doubling of the Ross ofMull; we should have been contentmore than content, for the sake ofauld lang syneto have put into Carsaig; we were beginning even to haveignominious thoughts of Loch Buy.  And yet we let the golden eveningdraw on with comparative resignation; and we watched the colourgathering in the west, and the Atlantic taking darker hues, and a ruddytinge beginning to tell on the seamed ridges of Garveloch and the isleof Saints.  When the wind sprung up againit had backed to due west, andwe had to beat against it with a series of long tacks, that took us downwithin sight of Islay and back to Mull apparently all for nothingwewere deeply engaged in prophesying all manner of things to be achievedby one Angus Sutherland, an old friend of ours, though yet a young manenough."Just fancy, sir!" says our hostess to the Lairdthe Laird, by the way,does not seem so enthusiastic as the rest of us, when he hears that thishero of modern days is about to join our party.  "What he has done beatsall that I ever heard about Scotch University students; and you knowwhat some of them have accomplished in the face of difficulties.  Hisfather is a minister in some small place in Banffshire; perhaps he has200*l.* a year at the outside.  This son of his has not cost him afarthing for either his maintenance or his education, since he wasfourteen; he took bursaries, scholarships, I don't know what, when hewas a mere lad; supported himself and travelled all over Europebut Ithink it was at Leipsic and at Vienna he studied longest; and the papershe has writtenthe lecturesand the correspondence with all the greatscientific peoplewhen they made him a Fellow, all he said was, 'I wishmy mother was alive.'"This was rather an incoherent and jumbled account of a young man'scareer."A Fellow of what?" says the Laird."A Fellow of the Royal Society!  They made him a Fellow of the RoyalSociety last year!  And he is only seven-and-twenty!  I do believe hewas not over one-and-twenty when he took his degree at Edinburgh.  Andthenand thenthere is really nothing that he doesn't know: is there,Mary?"This sudden appeal causes Mary Avon to flush slightly; but she saysdemurely, looking down"Of course I don't know anything that he doesn't know.""Hm!" says the Laird, who does not seem over pleased.  "I have observedthat young men who are too brilliant at the first, seldom come to muchafterwards.  Has he gained anything substantial?  Has he a goodpractice? Does he keep his carriage yet?""No, no!" says our hostess, with a fine contempt for such things.  "Hehas a higher ambition than that.  His practice is almost nothing.  Heprefers to sacrifice that in the meantime.  But his reputationamong thescientificwhywhy, it is European!""Hm!" says the Laird.  "I have sometimes seen that persons who gavethemselves up to erudeetion, lost the character of human beingsaltogether.  They become scientific machines.  The world is just made upof books for themand lecturesthey would not give a halfpenny to abeggar for fear of poleetical economy""Oh, how can you say such a thing of Angus Sutherland!" says shethoughhe has said no such thing of Angus Sutherland. "Why, here is this girlwho goes to Edinburghall by herselfto nurse an old woman in her lastillness; and as Angus Sutherland is in Edinburgh on somebusinessconnected with the University, I believeI ask him to call onher and see if he can give her any advice. What does he do?  He stops inEdinburgh two monthsediting that scientific magazine there instead ofin Londonand all because he has taken an interest in the old woman andthinks that Mary should not have the whole responsibility on hershoulders.  Is that like a scientific machine?""No," says the Laird, with a certain calm grandeur; "you do not oftenfind young men doing that for the sake of an old woman."  But of coursewe don't know what he means."And I am so glad he is coming to us!" she says, with real delight inher face.  "We shall take him away from his microscopes, and hissocieties, and all that.  Oh, and he is such a delightful companionsosimple, and natural, and straightforward!  Don't you think so, Mary?"Mary Avon is understood to assent: she does not say muchshe is sodeeply interested in a couple of porpoises that appear from time to timeon the smooth plain on the sea."I am sure a long holiday would do him a world of good," says this eagerhostess; "but that is too much to expect.  He is always too busy.  Ithink he has got to go over to Italy soon, about some exhibition ofsurgical instruments, or something of that sort."We had plenty of further talk about Dr. Sutherland, and of the wonderfulfuture that lay before him, that evening before we finally put into LochBuy.  And there we dined; and after dinner we found the wan, cleartwilight filling the northern heavens, over the black range ofmountains, and throwing a silver glare on the smooth sea around us.  Wecould have read on deck at eleven at night-had that been necessary; butMary Avon was humming snatches of songs to us, and the Laird wasdiscoursing of the wonderful influence exerted on Scotch landscape-artby Tom Galbraith. Then in the south the yellow moon rose; and a goldenlane of light lay on the sea, from the horizon across to the side of theyacht; and there was a strange glory on the decks and on the tall,smooth masts.  The peace of that night!the soft air, the silence, thedreamy lapping of the water!"And whatever lies before Angus Sutherland," says one of us"whether abaronetcy, or a big fortune, or marriage with an Italian princesshewon't find anything better than sailing in the White Dove among thewestern islands."*CHAPTER IV.**A MESSAGE.*What fierce commotion is this that awakes us in the morningwhatpandemonium broken loose of wild storm-sounds-with the stately WhiteDove, ordinarily the most sedate and gentle of her sex, apparently gonemad, and flinging herself about as if bent on somersaults?  When oneclambers up the companion-way, clinging hard, and puts one's head outinto the gale, behold! there is not a trace of land visibleanywherenothing but whirling clouds of mist and rain; andmountain-masses of waves that toss the White Dove about as if she werea plaything; and decks all running wet with the driven spray.  John ofSkye, clad from head to heel in black oilskinsand at one moment up inthe clouds, the next moment descending into the great trough of thesea-hangs on to the rope that is twisted round the tiller; and laughs agood-morning; and shakes the salt water from his shaggy eyebrows andbeard."Hallo!  Johnwhere on earth have we got to?""Ay, ay, sir.""I say WHERE ARE WE?" is shouted, for the roar of the rushing Atlanticin deafening."'Deed I not think we are far from Loch Buy," says John of Skye, grimly."The wind is dead ahead of usay, shist dead ahead!""What made you come out against a headwind then?""When we cam' out," says Johnpicking his English, "the wind will befrom the norseay, a fine light breeze from the norse.  And will Mr. himself be for going on now? it is a ferry bad sea for the leddiesaferry coorse sea."But it appears that this conversationbawled aloudhas been overheard.There are voices from below.  The skylight of the ladies' cabin ispartly open."Don't mind us," calls Mary Avon.  "Go on by all means!"The other voice calls"Why can't you keep this fool of a boat straight?  Ask him when we shallbe into the Sound of Iona."One might as well ask him when we shall be into the Sound of Jericho orJerusalem. With half a gale of wind right in our teeth, and with theheavy Atlantic swell running, we might labour here all dayand all thenight toowithout getting round the Ross of Mull. There is nothing forit but to turn and run, that we may have our breakfast in peace.  Lether away, then, you brave John of Skye!slack out the main-sheet, andgive her plenty of it, too: then at the same moment Sandy from Islayperceives that a haul at the weather topping-lift will clear the boomfrom the davits; and nowand now, good Master Fredour much-esteemed andshifty Friedrich d'orif you will but lay the cloth on the table, wewill help you to steady the dancing phantasmagoria of plates and forks!"Dear me!" says the Laird, when we are assembled together, "it has beenan awful night!""Oh, I hope you have not been ill!" says his hostess, with a quickconcern in the soft, clear eyes.He does not look as if he had suffered much.  He is contentedly chippingan egg; and withal keeping an eye on the things near him, for the WhiteDove, still plunging a good deal, threatens at times to make ofeverything on the table a movable feast."Oh, no, ma'am, not ill," he says.  "But at my time of life, ye see, oneis not as light in weight as one used to be; and the way I was flungabout in that cabin last night was just extraordinary.  When I wastrying to put on my boots this morning, I am sure I resembled nothing somuch as a pea in a bladderindeed it was soI was knocked about like apea in a bladder."Of course we expressed great sympathy, and assured him that the WhiteDovefamed all along this coast for her sober and steady-goingbehaviourwould never act so any more."However," said he thoughtfully, "the wakefulness of the night is oftenof use to people.  Yes, I have come to a decision."We were somewhat alarmed: was he going to leave us merely because ofthis bit of tossing?"I dare say ye know, ma'am," says he slowly, "that I am one of theCommissioners of the Burgh of Strathgovan.  It is a poseetion of graveresponsibility.  This very question nowabout our getting a steamfire-enginehas been weighing on my mind for many a day.  Well, I havedecided I will no longer oppose it.  They may have the steam fire-engineas far as I am concerned."We felt greatly relieved."Yes," continued the Laird, solemnly, "I think I am doing my duty inthis matter as a public man shouldlaying aside his personal prejudice.But the cost of it!  Do ye know that we shall want bigger nozzles to allthe fire-plugs?"Matters were looking grave again."However," said the Laird cheerfullyfor he would not depress us toomuch, "it may all turn out for the best; and I will telegraph mydecision to Strathgovan as soon as ever the storm allows us to reach aport."The storm, indeed!  When we scramble up on deck again, we find that itis only a brisk sailing breeze we have; and the White Dove is bowlingmerrily along, flinging high the white spray from her bows.  And then webegin to see that, despite those driving mists around us, there isreally a fine clear summer day shining far above this twopenny-halfpennytempest.  The whirling mists break here and there; and we catch glimpsesof a placid blue sky, flecked with lines of motionless cirrhus cloud.The breaks increase; floods of sunshine fall on the gleaming decks;clearer and clearer become the vast precipices of southern Mull; andthen, when we get well to the lee of Eilean-straid-ean, behold! the blueseas around us once more; and the blue skies overhead; and the redensign fluttering in the summer breeze.  No wonder that Mary Avon singsher delightas a linnet sings after the rain; and though the song is notmeant for us at all, but is really hummed to herself as she clings on tothe shrouds and watches the flashing and dipping of the white-wingedgulls, we know that it is all about a jolly young waterman.  Theaudacious creature: John of Skye has a wife and four children.Too quickly indeed does the fair summer day go byas we pass the oldfamiliar Duart and begin to beat up the Sound of Mull against a finelight sailing breeze.  By the time we have reached Ardtornish, the Lairdhas acquired some vague notion as to how the gaff topsail is set.Opposite the dark-green woods of Funeray, he tells us of theextraordinary faculty possessed by Tom Galbraith of representing thetexture of foliage. At Salen we have Master Fred's bell summoning usdown to lunch; and thereafter, on deck, coffee, draughts, crochet, and aprofoundly interesting description of some of the knotty points in thegreat Semple heresy case. And here again, as we bear away over almost tothe mouth of Loch Sunart, is the open Atlanticof a breezy grey underthe lemon-colour and silver of the calm evening sky. What is the use ofgoing on against this contrary wind, and missing, in the darkness of thenight, all the wonders of the western islands that the Laird is anxiousto see?  We resolve to run into Tobermory; and by and by we findourselves under the shadow of the wooded rocks, with the little whitetown shining along the semicircle of the bay.  And very cleverly indeeddoes John of Skye cut in among the various craftshowing off a littlebit, perhapsuntil the White Dove is brought up to the wind, and thegreat anchor-cable goes out with a roar.Now it was by the merest accident that we got at Tobermory a telegramthat had been forwarded that very day to meet us on our return voyage.There was no need for any one to go ashore, for we were scarcely in portbefore a most praiseworthy gentleman was so kind as to send us on boarda consignment of fresh flowers, vegetables, milk, eggs, and so forththevery things that become of inestimable value to yachting people.However, we had two women on board; and of coursedespite a certainbandaged anklethey must needs go shopping.  And Mary Avon, when we gotashore, would buy some tobacco for her favourite Captain John; and wentinto the post-office for that purpose, and was having the black stuffmeasured out by the yard when some mention was made of the White Dove.Then a question was asked; there was a telegram; it was handed to MissAvon, who opened it and read it."Oh!" said she, looking rather concerned; and then she regarded herfriend with some little hesitation."It is my uncle," she says; "he wants to see me on very urgent business.He iscomingto see methe day after to-morrow."Blank consternation followed this announcement. This person, even thoughhe was Mary Avon's sole surviving relative, was quite intolerable to us.East Wind we had called him in secret, on the few occasions on which hehad darkened our doors.  And just as we were making up our happy familypartywith the Laird, and Mary, and Angus Sutherlandto sail away to thefar Hebrides, here was this insufferable creaturewith his raucousvoice, his washed-out eyes, his pink face, his uneasy manner, andgeneral groom or butler-like appearancethrusting himself on us!"Well, you know, Mary," says her hostessentirely concealing her dismayin her anxious politeness"we shall almost certainly be home by the dayafter to-morrow, if we get any wind at all.  So you had better telegraphto your uncle to come on to Castle Osprey, and to wait for you if youare not there; we cannot be much longer than that. And Angus Sutherlandwill be there; he will keep him company until we arrive."So that was done, and we went on board againone of us meanwhile vowingto himself that ere ever Mr. Frederick Smethurst set sail with us onboard the White Dove, a rifle-bullet through her hull would send thatgallant vessel to the lobsters.Now what do you think our Mary Avon set to work to doall during thisbeautiful summer evening, as we sat on deck and eyed curiously the othercraft in the bay, or watched the firs grow dark against thesilver-yellow twilight?  We could not at first make out what she wasdriving at.  Her occupation in the world, so far as she had anybeyondbeing the pleasantest of companions and the faithfullest of friendswasthe painting of landscapes in oil, not the construction of Frankensteinmonsters.  But here she begins by declaring to us that there is one typeof character that has never been described by any satirist, ordramatist, or fictionista common type, too, though only becomingpronounced in rare instances.  It is the moral Tartuffe, shedeclaresthe person who is through and through a hypocrite, not to cloakevil doings, but only that his eager love of approbation may begratified.  Look now how this creature of diseased vanity, of plausiblemanners, of pretentious humbug, rises out of the smoke like the figuresummoned by a wizard's wand!  As she gives us little touches here andthere of the ways of this professor of bonhomiethis bundle ofaffectationswe begin to prefer the most diabolical villainy that anythousand of the really wicked Tartuffes could have committed.  He growsand grows.  His scraps of learning, as long as those more ignorant thanhimself are his audience; his mock humility anxious for praise; hisparade of generous and sententious sentiment; hispretencepretencepretenceall arising from no evil machinationswhatever, but from a morbid and restless craving for esteem.  Hence,horrible shadow! Let us put out the candles and get to bed.But next morning, as we find ourselves out on the blue Atlantic again,with Ru-na-Gaul lighthouse left far behind, and the pale line of Coll atthe horizon, we begin to see why the skill and patient assiduity of thisamateur psychologist should have raised that ghost for us the nightbefore.  Her uncle is coming. He is not one of the plausible kind.  Andif it should be necessary to invite him on board, might we not the morereadily tolerate his cynical bluntness and rudeness, after we have beentaught to abhor as the hatefullest of mortals the well-meaning hypocritewhose vanity makes his life a bundle of small lies? Very clever indeed,Miss Avonvery clever. But don't you raise any more ghosts; they areunpleasant companyeven as an antidote. And now, John of Skye, if itmust be that we are to encounter this pestilent creature at the end ofour voyage, clap on all sail now, and take us right royally down throughthese far islands of the west.  Ah! do we not know them of old?  Soon aswe get round the Cailleach Point we descry the nearest of them amid theloneliness of the wide Atlantic sea. For there is Carnaburg, with herspur of rock; and Fladda, long and rugged, and bare; and Lunga, with herpeak; and the Dutchman's Capa pale blue in the south.  How bravely theWhite Dove swings on her wayspringing like a bird over the westernswell!  And as we get past Ru-Treshnish, behold! another group ofislandsGometra and the green-shored Ulva, that guard the entrance toLoch Tua; and Colonsay, the haunt of the sea birds; and the rock ofErisgeirall shining in the sun.  And then we hear a strangesounddifferent from the light rush of the wavesa low, and sullen, anddistant booming, such as one faintly hears in a sea-shell. As the WhiteDove ploughs on her way, we come nearer and nearer to this wonder ofthe deepthe ribbed and fantastic shores of Staffa; and we see how thegreat Atlantic rollers, making for the cliffs of Gribun and Burg, arecaught by those outer rocks and torn into masses of white foam, and sentroaring and thundering into the blackness of the caves. We pass closeby; the air trembles with the shock of that mighty surge; there is amist of spray rising into the summer air.  And then we sail away again;and the day wears on as the white-winged White Dove bounds over theheavy seas; and Mary Avonas we draw near the Ross of Mull, all glowingin the golden eveningis singing a song of Ulva.But there is no time for romance, as the White Dove (drawing eightfeet of water) makes in for the shallow harbour outside Bunessan."Down foresail!" calls out our John of Skye; and by and by her headcomes up to the wind, the great mainsail flapping in the breeze.  Andagain, "Down chub, boys!" and there is another rattle and roar amid thesilence of this solitary little bay.  The herons croak their fright andfly away on heavy wing; the curlews whistle shrilly; the sea-pyots whirralong the lonely shores.  And then our good Friedrich d'or sounds hissilver-toned bell.The stillness of this summer evening on deck; the glory deepening overthe wide Atlantic; the delightful laughter of the Laird over those "goodones" about Homesh; the sympathetic glance of Mary Avon's soft blackeyes: did we not value them all the more that we knew we had somethingfar different to look forward to?  Even as we idled away the beautifuland lambent night, we had a vague consciousness that our enemy wasstealthily drawing near.  In a day or two at the most we should find thegrim spectre of the East Wind in the rose-garden of Castle Osprey.*CHAPTER V.**A BRAVE CAREER.*Bur when we went on deck the next morning we forgot all about thedetestable person who was about to break in upon our peace (there wassmall chance that our faithful Angus Sutherland might encounter thesnake in this summer paradise, and trample on him, and pitch him out;for this easy way of getting rid of disagreeable folk is not permittedin the Highlands nowadays) as we looked on the beautiful bay shining allaround us."Dear me!" said Denny-mains, "if Tom Galbraith could only see that now!It is a great peety he has never been to this place. I'm thinking I mustwrite to him."The Laird did not remember that we had an artist on boardone who, ifshe was not so great an artist as Mr. Galbraith, had at least exhibitedone or two small landscapes in oil at the Royal Academy.  But then theAcademicians, though they might dread the contrast between their ownwork and that of Tom Galbraith, could have no fear of Mary Avon.And even Mr. Galbraith himself might have been puzzled to find among hispigments any equivalent for the rare and clear colours of this morningscene as now we sailed away from Bunessan with a light topsail breeze.How blue the day wasblue skies, blue seas, a faint transparent bluealong the cliffs of Burg and Gribun, a darker blue where the farRu-Treshanish ran out into the sea, a shadow of blue to mark where thecaves of Staffa retreated from the surface of the sun-brown rocks!  Andhere, nearer at hand, the warmer colours of the shorethe soft, velvetyolive-greens of the moss and breckan; the splashes of lilac where therocks were bare of herbage; the tender sunny reds where the granitepromontories ran out to the sea; the beautiful cream-whites of the sandybays!Here, too, are the islands again as we get out into the openGometra,with its one white house at the point; and Inch Kenneth, where the sealsshow their shining black heads among the shallows; and Erisgeir andColonsay, where the skarts alight to dry their wings on the rocks; andStaffa, and Lunga, and the Dutchman, lying peaceful enough now on thecalm blue seas.  We have time to look at them, for the wind is slight,and the broad-beamed White Dove is not a quick sailer in a lightbreeze.  The best part of the forenoon is over before we find ourselvesopposite to the gleaming white sands of the northern bays of Iona."But surely both of us together will be able to make him stay longerthan ten days," says the elder of the two women to the youngerand youmay be sure she was not speaking of East Wind.Mary Avon looks up with a start; then looks down againperhaps with theleast touch of colour in her faceas she says hurriedly"Oh, I think you will.  He is your friend. As for meyou seeIIscarcely know him.""Oh, Mary!" says the other reproachfully. "You have been meeting himconstantly all these two months; you must know him better than any ofus.  I am sure I wish he was on board nowhe could tell us all about thegeology of the islands, and what not.  It will be delightful to havesomebody on board who knows something."Such is the gratitude of women!and the Laird had just been describingto her some further points of the famous heresy case."And then he knows Gaelic!" says the elder woman.  "He will tell us whatall the names of the islands mean.""Oh, yes," says the younger one, "he understands Gaelic very well,though he cannot speak much of it.""And I think he is very fond of boats," remarks our hostess."Oh, exceedinglyexceedingly!" says the other, who, if she does not knowAngus Sutherland, seems to have picked up some information about himsomehow.  "You cannot imagine how he has been looking forward to sailingwith you; he has scarcely had any holiday for years.""Then he must stay longer than ten days," says the elder woman; addingwith a smile, "you know, Mary, it is not the number of his patients thatwill hurry him back to London.""Oh, but I assure you," says Miss Avon seriously, "that he is not at allanxious to have many patientsas yet!  Oh, no!I never knew any one whowas so indifferent about money.  I know he would live on bread andwaterif that were necessaryto go on with his researches.  He told mehimself that all the time he was at Leipsic his expenses were never morethan 1*l.* a week."She seemed to know a good deal about the circumstances of this youngF.R.S."Look at what he has done with those ansthetics," continues Miss Avon."Isn't it better to find out something that does good to the whole worldthan give yourself up to making money by wheedling a lot of old women?"This estimate of the physician's art was not flattering."But," she says warmly, "if the Government had any sense, that is justthe sort of man they would put in a position to go on with hisinvaluable work.  And Oxford and Cambridge, with all their wealth, theyscarcely even recognise the noblest profession that a man can devotehimself towhen even the poor Scotch Universities and the Universitiesall over Europe have always had their medical and scientific chairs.  Ithink it is perfectly disgraceful!"Since when had she become so strenuous an advocate of the endowment ofresearch?"Why, look at Dr. Sutherlandwhen he is burning to get on with his ownproper workwhen his name is beginning to be known all over Europehehas to fritter away his time in editing a scientific magazine and inthose hospital lectures.  And that, I suppose, is barely enough to liveon.  But I know," she says, with decision, "that in spite ofeverythingI know that before he is five-and-thirty, he will bePresident of the British Association."Here, indeed, is a brave career for the Scotch student: cannot onecomplete the sketch as it roughly exists in the minds of those twowomen?At twenty-one, B.M. of Edinburgh.At twenty-six, F.R.S.At thirty, Professor of Biology at Oxford: the chair founded through theintercession of the women of Great Britain.At thirty-five, President of the British Association.At forty, a baronetcy, for further discoveries in the region ofansthetics.At forty-five, consulting physician to half the gouty old gentlemen ofEngland, and amassing an immense fortune.At fiftyWell, at fifty, is it not time that "the poor Scotch student," nowbecome great and famous and wealthy, should look around for somebeautiful princess to share his high estate with him?  He has not hadtime before to think of such matters.  But what is this now?  Is it thatmicroscopes and test-tubes have dimmed his eyes?  Is it that honours andresponsibilities have silvered his hair?  Or, is the drinking deep ofthe Pactolus stream a deadly poison?  There is no beautiful princessawaiting him anywhere.  He is alone among his honours.  There was once abeautiful princessbeautiful-souled and tender-eyed, if not otherwisetoo lovelyawaiting him among the Western Seas; but that time is overand gone many a year ago.  The opportunity has passed. Ambition calledhim away, and he left her; and the last he saw of her was when he badegood-bye to the White Dove.What have we to do with these idle dreams? We are getting within sightof Iona village now; and the sun is shining on the green shores, and onthe ruins of the old cathedral, and on that white house just above thecornfield.  And as there is no good anchorage about the island, we haveto make in for a little creek on the Mull side of the Sound, calledPolterriv, or the Bull-hole; and this creek is narrow, tortuous, andshallow; and a yacht drawing eight feet of water has to be guided withsome circumspectionespecially if you go up to the inner harbour abovethe rock called the Little Bull.  And so we make inquiries of John ofSkye, who has not been with us here before.  It is even hinted, that ifhe is not quite sure of the channel, we might send the gig over to Ionafor John Macdonald, who is an excellent pilot."John Macdonald!" exclaims John of Skye, whose professional pride hasbeen wounded. "Will John Macdonald be doing anything more than I wass domyself in the Bull-holeay, last yearlast year I will tek my own smackout of the Bull-hole at the norse end, and ferry near low water, too;and her deep-loaded?  Oh, yes, I will be knowing the Bull-hole this manya year."And John of Skye is as good as his word. Favoured by a flood-tide, westeal gently into the unfrequented creek, behind the great rocks of redgranite; and so extraordinarily clear is the water that, standingupright on the deck, we can see the white sand of the bottom with shoalsof young saithe darting this way and that.  And then just as we getopposite an opening in the rocks, through which we can descry thenorthern shores of Iona, and above those the blue peak of the Dutchman,away goes the anchor with a short, quick rush; her head swings round tomeet the tide; the White Dove is safe from all the winds that blow.Now lower away the gig, boys, and bear us over the blue waters of theSound!"I am really afraid to begin," Mary Avon says, as we remonstrate withher for not having touched a colour-tube since she started. "Besides,you know, I scarcely look on it that we have really set out yet.  Thisis only a sort of shaking ourselves into our places; I am only gettingaccustomed to the ways of our cabin now.  I shall scarcely consider thatwe have started on our real voyaging until"Oh, yes, we know very well.  Until we have got Angus Sutherland onboard.  But what she really said was, after slight hesitation:"until we set out for the Northern Hebrides.""Ay, it's a good thing to feel nervous about beginning," says the Laird,as the long sweep of the four oars brings us nearer and nearer to theIona shores.  "I have often heard Tom Galbraith say that to the youngermen.  He says if a young man is over confident, he'll come to nothing.But there was a good one I once heard Galbraith tell about a young manthat was pentin at Tarbertthat's Tarbert on Loch Fyne, Miss Avon.  Ay,well, he was pentin away, and he was putting in the young lass of thehouse as a fisher-lass; and he asked her if she could not get a creel tostrap on her back, as a background for her head, ye know.  Well, saysshe"Here the fierce humour of the story began to bubble up in the Laird'sblue-grey eyes. We were all half laughing already.  It was impossible toresist the glow of delight on the Laird's face."Says shejust as pat as ninepencesays she, 'it's your ain head thatwants a creel!'"The explosion was inevitable.  The roar of laughter at this good one wasso infectious that a subdued smile played over the rugged features ofJohn of Skye.  "It's your ain head that wants a creel:" the Lairdlaughed, and laughed again, until the last desperately suppressed soundswere something like kee! kee! kee!  Even Mary Avon pretended tounderstand."There was a real good one," says he, obviously overjoyed to have soappreciative an audience, "that I mind of reading in the Dean'sReminiscences.  It was about an old leddy in Edinburgh who met in ashop a young officer she had seen before.  He was a tall young man, andshe eyed him from head to heel, and says sheha! ha!says she, 'Od,ye're a lang lad: God gie ye grace.'  Dryvery drywasn't it?  Therewas real humour in thata pawky humour that people in the South cannotunderstand at all.  'Od', says she, 'ye're a lang lad: God grant yegrace.'  There was a great dale of character in that."We were sure of it; but still we preferred the Laird's stories aboutHomesh.  We invariably liked best the stories at which the Laird laughedmostwhether we quite understood their pawky humour or not."Dr. Sutherland has a great many stories about the Highlanders," saysMiss Avon timidly; "they are very amusing.""As far as I have observed," remarked the Lairdfor how could he relishthe notion of having a rival anecdote-monger on board?"as far as I haveobserved, the Highland character is entirely without humour.  Ay, I haveheard Tom Galbraith say that very often, and he has been everywhere inthe Highlands.""Well, then," says Mary Avon, with a quick warmth of indignation in herfacehow rapidly those soft dark eyes could change their expression!"Ihope Mr. Galbraith knows more about painting than he knows about theHighlanders!  I thought that anybody who knows anything knows that theCeltic nature is full of imagination, and humour, and pathos, andpoetry; and the Saxonthe Saxon!it is his business to plod overploughed fields, and be as dull and commonplace as the other animals hesees there!"Gracious goodness!here was a tempest! The Laird was speechless; for,indeed, at this moment we bumped against the sacred shoresthat is tosay, the landing-slipof Iona; and had to scramble on to the big stones.Then we walked up and past the cottages, and through the potato-field,and past the white inn, and so to the hallowed shrine and its graves ofthe kings.  We spent the whole of the afternoon there.When we got back to the yacht and to dinner we discovered that a friendhad visited us in our absence, and had left of his largesse behindhimnasturtiums and yellow-and-white pansies, and what notto saynothing of fresh milk, and crisp, delightful lettuce.  We drank hishealth.Was it the fear of some one breaking in on our domestic peace that madethat last evening among the western islands so lovely to us?  We wentout in the gig after dinner; the Laird put forth his engines ofdestruction to encompass the innocent lythe; we heard him humming the"Haughs o' Cromdale" in the silence.  The wonderful glory of thatevening!Iona become an intense olive-green against the gold and crimsonof the sunset; the warm light shining along the red granite of westernMull.  Then the yellow moon rose in the southinto the calm violet-huedvault of the heavens; and there was a golden fire on the ripples and onthe wet blades of the oars as we rowed back with laughter and singing.Sing tantara! sing tantara!Sing tantara! sing tantara!Said he, the Highland army ruesThat ere they came to Cromdale!And then, next morning, we were up at five o'clock.  If we were going tohave a tooth pulled, why not have the little interview over at once?East Wind would be waiting for us at Castle Osprey.Blow, soft westerly breeze, then, and bear us down by Fion-phort, andround the granite Rossshining all a pale red in the early dawn. Andhere is Ardalanish Point; and there, as the morning goes by, are theCarsaig arches, and then Loch Buy, and finally the blue Firth of Lorn.Northward now, and still northwarduntil, far away, the white houseshining amidst the firs, and the flag fluttering in the summer air.Have they descried us, then? Or is the bunting hoisted in honour ofguests? The pale cheek of Mary Avon tells a tale as she descries thatfar signal; but that is no business of ours.  Perhaps it is only of heruncle that she is thinking.*CHAPTER VI.**OUR NEW GUESTS.*Behold, now!this beautiful garden of Castle Osprey all ablaze in thesunthe roses, pansies, poppies, and what not bewildering our eyes afterthe long looking at the blue water and, in the midst of the brilliantparadisejust as we had fearedthe snake!  He did not scurry away at ourapproach, as snakes are wont to do; or raise his horrent head, and hiss.The fact is, we found him comfortably seated under a drooping ash,smoking.  He rose and explained that he had strolled up from the shoreto await our coming.  He did not seem to notice that Mary Avon, as shecame along, had to walk slowly, and was leaning on the arm of the Laird.Certainly nature had not been bountiful to this short, spare person whohad now come among us.  He had closely-cropped, coarse grey hair; aneagle beak; a certain pink and raw appearance of the face, as ifperpetual east winds had chafed the skin; and a most pernicious habit ofloudly clearing his husky throat. Then with the aggressive nose went awell-defined pugilist's jaw and a general hang-dog scowl about themouth.  For the rest Mr. Smethurst seemed desirous of making up forthose unpleasant features which nature had bestowed upon him by astudied air of self-possession, and by an extreme precision of dress.Alack, and well-a-day! these laudable efforts were of little avail.Nature was too strong for him.  The assumption of a languid air was notquite in consonance with the ferrety grey eyes and the bull-dog mouth;the precision of his costume only gave him the look of a well-dressedgroom, or a butler gone on the turf.  There was not much grateful to thesight about Mr. Frederick Smethurst.But were we to hate the man for being ugly? Despite his raw face, hemight have the white soul of an angel.  And in fact we knew absolutelynothing against his public character or private reputation, except thathe had once gone through the Bankruptcy Court; and even of that littlecircumstance our womenfolk were not aware.  However, there was no doubtat all that a certain coldnessapparent to us who knew her wellmarkedthe manner of this small lady who now went up and shook hands with him,and declaredunblushinglythat she was so glad he had run up to theHighlands."And you know," said she, with that charming politeness which she wouldshow to the arch-fiend himself if he were properly introduced to her,"you know, Mr. Smethurst, that yachting is such an uncertain thing, onenever knows when one may get back; but if you could spare a few days totake a run with us, you would see what a capital mariner Mary hasbecome, and I am sure it would be a great pleasure to us."These were actually her words.  She uttered them without the leasttremor of hesitation. She looked him straight in the face with thoseclear, innocent, confiding eyes of hers.  How could the man tell thatshe was wishing him at Jericho?And it was in silence that we waited to hear our doom pronounced.  Ayachting trip with this intolerable Jonah on board! The sunlight wentout of the day; the blue went out of the sky and the seas; the world wasfilled with gloom, and chaos, and East Wind!Imagine, then, the sudden joy with which we heard of our deliverance!Surely it was not the raucous voice of Frederick Smethurst, but a soundof summer bells."Oh, thank you," he said, in his affectedly indifferent way; "but thefact is, I have run up to see Mary only on a little matter of business,and I must get back at once.  Indeed, I purpose leaving by the Dalmallycoach in the afternoon.  Thank you very much, though; perhaps some othertime I may be more fortunate."How we had wronged this poor man!  We hated him no longer.  On thecontrary, great grief was expressed over his departure; and he wasbegged at least to stay that one evening.  No doubt he had heard of Dr.Angus Sutherland, who had made such discoveries in the use ofansthetics? Dr. Sutherland was coming by the afternoon steamer.  Wouldnot he stay and meet him at dinner?Our tears broke out afreshmetaphoricallywhen East Wind persisted inhis intention of departure; but of course compulsion was out of thequestion.  And so we allowed him to go into the house, to have thatbusiness interview with his niece."A poor crayture!" remarked the Laird confidently, forgetting that hewas talking of a friend of ours.  "Why does he not speak out like a man,instead of drawling and dawdling? His accent is jist insufferable.""And what business can he have with Mary?" says our sovereign ladysharplyjust as if a man with a raw skin and an eagle-beak mustnecessarily be a pickpocket. "He was the trustee of that little fortuneof hers, I know; but that is all over.  She got the money when she cameof age.  What can he want to see her about now?"We concerned ourselves not with that.  It was enough for us that thesnake was about to retreat from our summer paradise of his own free willand pleasure.  And Angus Sutherland was coming; and the provisioning ofthe yacht had to be seen to; for to-morrowto-morrow we spread our whitewings again and take flight to the far north!Never was parting guest so warmly speeded. We concealed our tears as thecoach rolled away.  We waved a hand to him.  And then, when it wassuggested that the wagonette that had brought Mary Avon down from CastleOsprey might just as well go along to the quayfor the steamer bringingDr. Sutherland would be in shortlyand when we actually did set out inthat direction, there was so little grief on our faces that you couldnot have told we had been bidding farewell to a valued friend andrelative.Now if our good-hearted Laird had had a grain of jealousy in his nature,he might well have resented the manner in which these two women spoke ofthe approaching guest.  In their talk the word "he" meant only oneperson.  "He" was sure to come by this steamer.  "He" was so punctual inhis engagements.  Would he bring a gun or a rod; or would the sailing beenough amusement for him?  What a capital thing it was for him to beable to take an interest in some such out-of-door exercise, as adistraction to the mind! And so forth, and so forth.  The Laird heardall this, and his expectations were no doubt rising and rising.Forgetful of his disappointment on first seeing Mary Avon, he was in alllikelihood creating an imaginary figure of Angus Sutherlandand, ofcourse, this marvel of erudition and intellectual power must be a tall,wan, pale person, with the travail of thinking written in lines acrossthe spacious brow.  The Laird was not aware that for many a day after wefirst made the acquaintance of the young Scotch student he was generallyreferred to in our private conversation as "Brose."And, indeed, the Laird did stare considerably when he sawelbowing hisway through the crowd and making for us with a laugh of welcome on thefresh-coloured facea stout-set, muscular, blue-eyed, sandy-haired,good-humoured-looking, youngish man; who, instead of having anythingCeltic about his appearance, might have been taken for the son of asouth-country farmer.  Our young Doctor was carrying his ownportmanteau, and sturdily shoving his way through the porters who wouldfain have seized it."I am glad to see you, Angus," said our queen regent, holding out herhand; and there was no ceremonial politeness in that receptionbut youshould have seen the look in her eyes.Then he went on to the waggonette."How do you do, Miss Avon?" said he, quite timidly, like a school-boy.He scarcely glanced up at her face, which was regarding him with a verypleasant welcome; he seemed relieved when he had to turn and seize hisportmanteau again.  Knowing that he was rather fond of driving, ourmistress and admiral-in-chief offered him the reins, but he declined thehonour; Mary Avon was sitting in front.  "Oh, no, thank you," said hequite hastily, and with something uncommonly like a blush.  The Laird,if he had been entertaining any feeling of jealousy, must have beenreassured.  This Doctor-fellow was no formidable rival.  He spoke verylittlehe only listenedas we drove away to Castle Osprey.  Mary Avonwas chatting briskly and cheerfully, and it was to the Laird that sheaddressed that running fire of nonsense and merry laughter.But the young Doctor was greatly concerned when, on our arrival atCastle Osprey, he saw Mary Avon helped down with much care, and heardthe story of the sprain."Who bandages your ankle?" said he at once, and without any shyness now."I do it myself," said she cheerfully.  "I can do it well enough.""Oh, no, you cannot!" said he abruptly; "a person stooping cannot.  Thebandage should be as tight, and as smooth, as the skin of a drum.  Youmust let some one else do that for you."And he was disposed to resent this walking about in the garden beforedinner.  What business had she to trifle with such a serious matter as asprain?  And a sprain which was the recall of an older sprain.  "Did shewish to be lame for life?" he asked sharply.Mary Avon laughed, and said that worse things than that had befallenpeople.  He asked her whether she found any pleasure in voluntarymartyrdom; she blushed a little, and turned to the Laird.The Laird was at this moment laying before us the details of a mostgigantic scheme.  It appeared that the inhabitants of Strathgovan, notcontent with a steam fire-engine, were talking about having a publicparkactually proposing to have a public park, with beds of flowers, andiron seats; and, to crown all, a gymnasium, where the youths of theneighbourhood might twirl themselves on the gay trapeze to their hearts'content.  And where the subscriptions were to come from; and what werethe hardiest plants for borders; and whether the gymnasium should befurnished with ropes or with chainsthese matters were weighing heavilyon the mind of our good friend of Denny-mains.  Angus Sutherlandrelapsed into silence, and gazed absently at a tree-fuchsia that stoodby."It is a beautiful tree, is it not?" said a voice beside himthat of ourmidge-like empress.He started."Oh, yes," he said cheerfully.  "I was thinking I should like to livethe life of a tree like that, dying in the winter, you know, and beingquite impervious to frost, and snow, and hard weather; and then, as soonas the fine warm spring and summer came round, coming to life again andspreading yourself out to feel all the sunlight and the warm winds. Thatmust be a capital life.""But do you really think they can feel that? Why, you must believe thatthose trees and flowers are alive!""Does anybody doubt it?" said he quite simply.  "They are certainlyalive.  Why"And here he bethought himself for a moment."If I only had a good microscope now," said he eagerly, "I would showyou the life of a plant directlyin every cell of it: did you never seethe constant life in each cellthe motion of the chlorophyll granulescircling and circling night and day?  Did no one ever show you that?"Well, no one had ever shown us that.  We may now and again haveentertained angels unawares; but we were not always stumbling againstFellows of the Royal Society."Then I must borrow one somewhere," said he decisively, "and show youthe secret life of even the humblest plant that exists.  And then lookwhat a long life it is, in the case of the perennial plants.  Did youever think of that? Those great trees in the Yosemite valleythey werealive and feeling the warm sunlight and the winds about them when Alfredwas hiding in the marshes; and they were living the same undisturbedlife when Charles the First had his head chopped off; and they werelivingin peace and quietnesswhen all Europe had to wake up to stampout the Napoleonic pest; and they are alive now and quite careless ofthe little creatures that come to span out their circumference, andticket them, and give them ridiculous names.  Had any of the patriarchsa life as long as that?"The Laird eyed this young man askance. There was something uncanny abouthim. What might not he say whenin the northern solitudes to which wewere goingthe great Semple heresy-case was brought on for discussion?But at dinner the Laird got on very well with our new guest; for thelatter listened most respectfully when Denny-mains was demonstrating theexceeding purity, and strength, and fitness of the speech used in thesouth of Scotland.  And indeed the Laird was generous. He admitted thatthere were blemishes.  He deprecated the introduction of French words;and gave us a much longer list of those aliens than usually appears inbooks.  What about conjee, and que-vee, and fracaw as used byScotch children and old wives?Then after dinnerat nine o'clock the wonderful glow of the summerevening was still filling the drawing-roomthe Laird must needs haveMary Avon sing to him.  It was not a custom of hers.  She rarely wouldsing a song of set purpose.  The linnet sings all daywhen you do notwatch her; but she will not sing if you go and ask.However, on this occasion, her hostess went to the piano, and sat downto play the accompaniment; and Mary Avon stood beside her and sang, inrather a low voicebut it was tender enoughsome modern version of theold ballad of the Queen's Maries.  What were the words?  These were ofthem, any way:Yestreen the Queen had four Maries;This night she'll hae but three:There was Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton,And Mary Carmichael, and me.But indeed, if you had seen that graceful slim figureclad all in blackvelvet, with the broad band of gold fringe round the neckand the small,shapely, smoothly-brushed head above the soft swathes of whitemuslinand if you had caught a glimpse of the black eyelashes droopingoutward from the curve of the pale cheekand if you had heard thetender, low voice of Mary Avon, you might have forgotten about theQueen's Maries altogether.And then Dr. Sutherland: the Laird was determinedin true Scotchfashionthat everybody who could not sing should be goaded to sing."Oh, well," said the young man, with a laugh, "you know a student inGermany must sing whether he can or not.  And I learned there to smashout something like an accompaniment also."And he went to the piano without more ado and did smash out anaccompaniment.  And if his voice was rather harsh?well, we should havecalled it raucous in the case of East Wind, but we only called it manlyand strenuous when it was Angus Sutherland who sang. And it was a manlysong, tooa fitting song for our last night on shore, the words hailingfrom the green woods of Fuinary, the air an air that had many a timebeen heard among the western seas.  It was the song of the Biorlinn[#]that he sang to us; we could hear the brave chorus and the splash of thelong oars:Send the biorlinn on careering!Cheerily and all togetherHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull togetherHo, ro, clansmen!Give her way and show her wake'Mid showering spray and curling eddiesHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull togetherHo, ro, clansmen!Do we not hear now the measured stroke in the darkness of the morning?The water springs from her bows; one by one the headlands are passed.But lo! the day is breaking; the dawn will surely bring a breeze withit; and then the sail of the gallant craft will bear her over the seas:Another cheer, our Isle appears!Our biorlinn bears her on the fasterHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull togetherHo, ro, clansmen!Ahead she goes! the land she knows!Behold! the snowy shores of CannaHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull togetherHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together indeed: who could resist joining in thethunder of the chorus? And we were bound for Canna, too: this was ourlast night on shore.[#] Biorlinnthat is, a rowing-boat.  The word is pronouncedbyurlen.  The song, which in a measure imitates the rhythm peculiar toHighland poetryconsisting in a certain repetition of the same vowelsoundsis the production of Dr. Macleod, of Morven.  And here, for thebenefit of any one who minds such things, is a rough draft of the air,arranged by a most charming young lady, who, however, says she wouldmuch rather die than have her name mentioned:[Illustration: Music fragments]Our last night on shore.  In such circumstances one naturally has aglance round at the people with whom one is to be brought into suchclose contact for many and many a day. But in this particular case, whatwas the use of speculating, or grumbling, or remonstrating? There is acertain household that is ruled with a rod of iron.  And if the mistressof that household chose to select as her summer companions a "shilpitbit thing," and a hard-headed, ambitious Scotch student, and a parochialmagnate haunted by a heresy-case, how dared one object?  There is such athing as peace and quietness.But however unpromising the outlook might be, do we not know the remarkthat is usually made by that hard-worked officer, the chief mate, when,on the eve of a voyage, he finds himself confronted by an unusuallymongrel crew?  He regards those loafers and outcastsfrom the Bowery,and Ratcliffe Highway, and the BroomielawGreeks, niggers, andMexicanswith a critical and perhaps scornful air, and forthwithproceeds to address them in the following highly polished manner:"By etcetera-etcetera, you are an etceteraed rum-looking lot; butetcetera-etcetera me if I don't lick you into shape before we get toRio."And sogood-night!and let all good people pray for fair skies and afavouring breeze!  And if there is any song to be heard in our dreams,let it be the song of the Queen's Mariesin the low, tender voice ofMary Avon:There was Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton,And Mary Carmichael, and me.*CHAPTER VII.**NORTHWARD.*We have bidden good-bye to the land; the woods and the green hills havebecome pale in the haze of the summer light; we are out here, alone, onthe shining blue plain.  And if our young Doctor betrays a tendency tokeep forwardconversing with John of Skye about blocks, and tackle, andwinches; and if the Lairdwhose parental care and regard for Mary Avonis becoming beautiful to seeshould have quite a monopoly of the younglady, and be more bent than ever on amusing her with his "good ones;"and if our queen and governor should spend a large portion of her timebelow, in decorating cabins with flowers, in overhauling napery, and inearnest consultation with Master Fred about certain culinary mysteries;notwithstanding all these divergences of place and occupation, ourlittle kingdom afloat is compact enough.  There is always, for example,a reassembling at meals. There is an instant community of interest whena sudden cry calls all hands on deck to regard some new thingthespouting of a whale or the silvery splashing of a shoal of mackerel.But nowbut nowif only some cloud-compelling Jove would break thisinsufferably fine weather, and give us a tearing good gale!It is a strange little kingdom.  It has no postal service.  Shillingtelegrams are unknown in it; there is no newspaper at breakfast. Thereare no barrel-organs; nor rattling hansoms raising the dust in windystreets; there is no afternoon scandal; overheated rooms at midnight area thing of the past.  Serene, independent, self-centred, it minds itsown affairs; if the whole of Europe were roaring for war, not even anecho of the cry would reach us.  We only hear the soft calling of thesea-birds as we sit and read, or talk, or smoke; from time to timewatching the shadows move on the blistering hot decks, or guessing atthe names of the blue mountains that rise above Loch Etive and Lochaber.At the present moment there is a faint summer haze over these mountains;as yet we have around us none of the dazzling light and strangelyintense colours that are peculiar to this part of the world, and thatare only possible, in fact, in an atmosphere frequently washed clear bysqualls of rain.  This question of rain turns up at lunch."They prayed for rain in the churches last Sundayso Captain John says,"Mary Avon remarks."The distilleries are stopped: that's very serious," continues theLaird."Well," says Queen T., "people talk about the rain in the WestHighlands.  It must be true, as everybody says it is true.  Butnowexcepting the year we went to America with Sylvia Balfourwe havebeen here for five years running; and each year we made up our mind fora delugethinking we had deserved it, you know.  Well, it never came.Look at this now."And the fact was that we were lying motionless on the smooth bosom ofthe Atlantic, with the sun so hot on the decks that we were glad to getbelow."Very strangevery strange, indeed," remarked the Laird, with a profoundair.  "Now what value are we to put on any historical evidence if wefind such a conflict of testimony about what is at our own doors?  Howshould there be two opeenions about the weather in the West Highlands?It is a matter of common experiencedear me!  I never heard the like.""Oh, but I think we might try to reconcile those diverse opinions!" saidAngus Sutherland, with an absolute gravity.  "You hear mostly thecomplaints of London people, who make much of a passing shower.  Thenthe tourist and holiday folk, especially from the South, come in theautumn, when the fine summer weather has broken.  And then," he added,addressing himself with a frank smile to the small creature who had beenexpressing her wonder over the fine weather, "perhaps, if you arepleased with your holiday on the whole, you are not anxious to rememberthe wet days; and then you are not afraid of a shower, I know; andbesides that, when one is yachting, one is more anxious for wind thanfor fine weather.""Oh, I am sure that is it!" called out Mary Avon quite eagerly.  She didnot care how she destroyed the Laird's convictions about the value ofhistorical evidence.  "That is an explanation of the whole thing."At this, our young Doctor-who had been professing to treat this matterseriously merely as a jokequickly lowered his eyes.  He scarcely everlooked Mary Avon in the face when she spoke to him, or when he had tospeak to her.  And a little bit of shy embarrassment in his mannertowards herperceivable only at timeswas all the more singular in a manwho was shrewd and hard-headed enough, who had knocked about the worldand seen many persons and things, and who had a fair amount ofunassuming self-confidence, mingled with a vein of sly and reticenthumour.  He talked freely enough when he was addressing ouradmiral-in-chief. He was not afraid to meet her eyes.  Indeed, theywere so familiar friends that she called him by his Christian nameapractice which in general she detested.  But she would as soon havethought of applying "Mr." to one of her own boys at Epsom College as toAngus Sutherland."Well, you know, Angus," says she pleasantly, "you have definitelypromised to go up to the Outer Hebrides with us, and back. The longerthe calms last, the longer we shall have you.  So we shall gladly put upwith the fine weather.""It is very kind of you to say so; but I have already had such a longholiday""Oh!" said Mary Avon, with her eyes full of wonder and indignation.  Shewas too surprised to say any more.  She only stared at him.  She knew hehad been working night and day in Edinburgh."I mean," said he hastily, and looking down, "I have been away so longfrom London. Indeed, I was getting rather anxious about my next month'snumber; but luckily, just before I left Edinburgh, a kind friend sent mea most valuable paper, so I am quite at ease again.  Would you like toread it, sir? It is set up in type."He took the sheets from his pocket, and handed them to the Laird.Denny-mains looked at the title.  It was On the Radiolarians of theCoal Measures, and it was the production of a well-known professor.The Laird handed back the paper without opening it."No, thank you," said he, with some dignity. "If I wished to beinstructed, I would like a safer guide than that man."We looked with dismay on this dangerous thing that had been brought onboard: might it not explode and blow up the ship?"Why," said our Doctor, in unaffected wonder, and entirely mistaking theLaird's exclamation, "he is a perfect master of his subject.""There is a great deal too much speculation nowadays on these matters,and parteecularly among the younger men," remarked the Laird severely.And he looked at Angus Sutherland. "I suppose now ye are well acquaintedwith the Vestiges of Creation?""I have heard of the book," said Broseregretfully confessing hisignorance, "but I never happened to see it."The Laird's countenance lightened."So much the betterso much the better. A most mischievous andunsettling book.  But all the harm it can do is counteracted by a nobleworka conclusive work that leaves nothing to be said.  Ye have read theTestimony of the Rocks, no doubt?""Oh, yes, certainly," our Doctor was glad to be able to say; "butbut itwas a long time agowhen I was a boy, in fact.""Boy, or man, you'll get no better book on the history of the earth.  Itell ye, sir, I never read a book that placed such firm conviction in mymind.  Will ye get any of the new men they are talking about as keen anobserver and as skilful in arguing as Hugh Miller?  No, no; not one ofthem dares to try to upset the Testimony of the Rocks."Angus Sutherland appealed against this sentence of finality only in avery humble way."Of course, sir," said he meekly, "you know that science is still movingforward""Science?" repeated the Laird.  "Science may be moving forward or movingbackward; but can it upset the facts of the earth? Science may say whatit likes; but the facts remain the same."Now this point was so conclusive that we unanimously hailed the Laird asvictor.  Our young Doctor submitted with an excellent good humour.  Heeven promised to post that paper on the Radiolarians at the very firstpost-office we might reach: we did not want any such explosive compoundson board.That night we only got as far as Fishnish Baya solitary little harbourprobably down on but few maps; and that we had to reach by getting outthe gig for a tow.  There was a strange bronze-red in the northernskies, long after the sun had set; but in here the shadow of the greatmountains was on the water.  We could scarcely see the gig; but AngusSutherland had joined the men and was pulling stroke; and along with themeasured splash of the oars, we heard something about "Ho, ro,clansmen!"  Then, in the cool night air, there was a slight fragranceof peat-smoke; we knew we were getting near the shore."He's a fine fellow, that," says the Laird, generously, of his defeatedantagonist.  "A fine fellow.  His knowledge of different things is justremarkable; and he's as modest as a girl.  Ay, and he can row, too; awhile ago when it was lighter, I could see him put his shoulders intoit.  Ay, he's a fine, good-natured fellow, and I am glad he has not beenled astray by that mischievous book, the Vestiges of Creation."Come on board now, boys, and swing up the gig to the davits!  Twelvefathoms of chain?away with her then!and there is a roar in the silenceof the lonely little bay. And thereafter silence; and the sweetfragrance of the peat in the night air, and the appearance, above theblack hills, of a clear, shining, golden planet that sends a quiveringline of light across the water to us.  And, once more, good-night andpleasant dreams!But what is this in the morning?  There have been no pleasant dreams forJohn of Skye and his merry men during the last night; for here we arealready between Mingary Bay and Ru-na-Gaul Lighthouse; and before us isthe open Atlantic, blue under the fair skies of the morning.  And hereis Dr. Sutherland, at the tiller, with a suspiciously negligent lookabout his hair and shirt-collar."I have been up since four," says he, with a laugh.  "I heard themgetting under way, and did not wish to miss anything.  You know theseplaces are not so familiar to me as they are to you.""Is there going to be any wind to-day, John?""No mich," says John of Skye, looking at the cloudless blue vault abovethe glassy sweeps of the sea.Nevertheless, as the morning goes by, we get as much of a breeze asenables us to draw away from the mainlandround Ardnamurchan ("theheadland of the great sea") and out into the openwith Muick Island, andthe sharp Scuir of Eigg, and the peaks of Rum lying over there on thestill Atlantic, and far away in the north the vast and spectralmountains of Skye.And now the work of the day begins.  Mary Avon, for mere shame's sake,is at last compelled to produce one of her blank canvases and open herbox of tubes.  And now it would appear that Angus Sutherlandthoughdeprived of the authority of the sick-roomis beginning to lose his fearof the English young lady.  He makes himself usefulnot with theelaborate and patronising courtesy of the Laird, but in a sort ofsubmissive, matter-of-fact shifty fashion.  He sheathes the spikes ofher easel with cork so that they shall not mark the deck.  He rigs up,to counterbalance that lack of stability, a piece of cord with a heavyweight.  Then, with the easel fixed, he fetches her a deck-chair to sitin, and a deck-stool for her colours, and these and her he places underthe lee of the foresail, to be out of the glare of the sun.  Thus ourartist is started; she is going to make a sketch of the after-part ofthe yacht with Hector of Moidart at the tiller: beyond, the calm blueseas, and a faint promontory of land.Then the Lairdhaving confidentially remarked to Miss Avon that TomGalbraith, than whom there is no greater authority living, invariablymoistens the fresh canvas with megilp before beginning workhas turnedto the last report of the Semple case."No, no," says he to our sovereign lady, who is engaged in somemysterious work in wool, "it does not look well for the Presbytery to goover every one of the charges in the major proposeetionsupported by theaverments in the minoronly to find them irrelevant; and then bring hometo him the part of the libel that deals with tendency.  No, no; thatshows a lamentable want of purpose.  In view of the great danger to beapprehended from these secret assaults on the inspiration of theScriptures, they should have stuck to each charge with tenahcity.  Now,I will just show ye where Dr. Carnegie, in defendingSecundoillustrated as it was with the extracts and averments in theminorlet the whole thing slip through his fingers."But if any one were disposed to be absolutely idle on this calm,shining, beautiful dayfar away from the cares and labours of the land?Out on the taffrail, under shadow of the mizen, there is a seat that isgratefully cool.  The Mare of the sea no longer bewilders the eyes; onecan watch with a lazy enjoyment the teeming life of the open Atlantic.The great skarts go whizzing by, long-necked, rapid of flight.  Thegannets poise in the air, and then there is a sudden dart downwards, anda spout of water flashes up where the bird has dived.  The guillemotsfill the silence with their soft kurrooingand here they are on allsides of usKirroo! Kurroo!dipping their bills in the water,hastening away from the vessel, and then rising on the surface to flaptheir wings.  But this is a strange thing: they are all inpairsobviously mother and childand the mother calls Kurroo!Kurroo!and the young one unable as yet to dive or swim, answersPe-yoo-it!  Pe-yoo-it! and flutters and paddles after her.  But whereis the father?  And has the guillemot only one of a family?  Over thatone, at all events, she exercises a valiant protection.  Even though thestem of the yacht seems likely to run both of them down, she willneither dive nor fly until she has piloted the young one out of danger.Then a sudden cry startles the Laird from his heresy-case and Mary Avonfrom her canvas.  A sound far away has turned all eyes to the north;though there is nothing visible there, over the shining calm of the sea,but a small cloud of white spray that slowly sinks.  In a second or two,however, we see another jet of white water arise; and then a great brownmass heave slowly over; and then we hear the spouting of the whale."What a huge animal!" cries one.  "A hundred feet!""Eighty, any way!"The whale is sheering off to the north: there is less and less chance ofour forming any correct estimate."Oh, I am sure it was a hundred!  Don't you think so, Angus?" says ouradmiral."Well," says the Doctor, slowlypretending to be very anxious aboutkeeping the sails full (when there was no wind)"you know there is agreat difference between 'yacht measurement' and 'registered tonnage.'A vessel of fifty registered tons may become eighty or ninety by yachtmeasurement.  And I have often noticed," continues this graceless youngman, who takes no thought how he is bringing contempt on his elders,"that objects seen from the deck of a yacht are naturally subject to'yacht measurement.'  I don't know what the size of that whale may be.Its registered tonnage, I suppose, would be the number of Jonahs itcould carry.  But I should think that if the apparent 'yachtmeasurement' was a hundred feet, the whale was probably about twentyfeet long."It was thus he tried to diminish the marvels of the deep!  But, howeverhe might crush us otherwise, we were his masters on one point. TheSemple heresy-case was too deep even for him.  What could he make of"the first alternative of the general major"?And see now, on this calm summer evening, we pass between Muick andEigg; and the sea is like a plain of gold.  As we draw near the sombremass of Rum, the sunset deepens, and a strange lurid mist hangs aroundthis remote and mountainous island rising sheer from the Atlantic.Gloomy and mysterious are the vast peaks of Haleval and Haskeval; wecreep under themfavoured by a flood-tideand the silence of thedesolate shores seems to spread out from them and to encompass us.Mary Avon has long ago put away her canvas; she sits and watches; andher soft black eyes are full of dreaming as she gazes up at thosethunder-dark mountains against the rosy haze of the west."Haleval and Haskeval?" Angus Sutherland repeats, in reply to hishostess; but he starts all the same, for he has been covertly regardingthe dark and wistful eyes of the girl sitting there.  "Oh, these areNorse names.  Scuir na Gillean, on the other hand, is Gaelicit is thepeak of the young men.  Perhaps, the Norsemen had the north of theisland, and the Celts the south."Whether they were named by Scandinavian or by Celt, Haleval and Haskevalseemed to overshadow us with their sultry gloom as we slowly glided intothe lonely loch lying at their base.  We were the only vessel there; andwe could make out no sign of life on shore, until the glass revealed tous one or two half-ruined cottages.  The northern twilight shone in thesky far into the night; but neither that clear metallic glow, nor anyradiance from moon, or planet, or star, seemed to affect thethunder-darkness of Haskeval and Haleval's silent peaks.There was another tale to tell belowthe big saloon aglow with candles;the white table-cover with its centre-piece of roses, nasturtiums, andferns; the delayed dinner, or supper, or whatever it might be called,all artistically arranged; our young Doctor most humbly solicitous thatMary Avon should be comfortably seated, and, in fact, quite usurping theoffice of the Laird in that respect; and then a sudden sound in thegalley, a hissing as of a thousand squibs, telling us that Master Fredhad once more and ineffectually tried to suppress the released genie ofthe bottle by jamming down the cork. Forthwith the Laird, with hisold-fashioned ways, must needs propose a health, which is that of ourmost sovereign and midge-like mistress; and this he does with anelaborate and gracious and sonorous courtesy.  And surely there is noreason why Mary Avon should not for once break her habit and join inthat simple ceremony; especially when it is a real live Doctorand notonly a Doctor, but an encyclopdia of scientific and all otherknowledgewho would fain fill her glass? Angus Sutherland timidly butseriously pleads; and he does not plead in vain; and you would thinkfrom his look that she had conferred an extraordinary favour on him.Then wewe propose a health toothe health of the FOUR WINDS! and we donot care which of them it is who is coming to-morrow, so long as he orshe comes in force.  Blow, breezes, blow!from the Coolins of Skye, orthe shores of Coll, or the glens of Arisaig and Moidartfor to-morrowmorning we shake out once more the white wings of the White Dove, andset forth for the loneliness of the northern seas.*CHAPTER VIII.**PLOTS AND COUNTER-PLOTS.*Now the Laird has a habitlaudable or notof lingering over anadditional half-cup at breakfast, as an excuse for desultory talk; andthus it is, on this particular morning, the young people having gone ondeck to see the yacht get under way, that Denny-mains has a chance ofrevealing to us certain secret schemes of his over which he hasapparently been brooding. How could we have imagined that all thisplotting and planning had been going on beneath the sedate exterior ofthe Commissioner for the Burgh of Strathgovan?"She's just a wonderful bit lass!" he says, confidently, to his hostess;"as happy and contented as the day is long; and when she's not singingto herself, her way of speech has a sort ofa sort of music in it thatis quite new to me.  Yes, I must admit that; I did not know that thesouthern English tongue was so accurate and pleasant to the ear.  Ay,but what will become of her?"What, indeed!  The lady whom he was addressing had often spoken to himof Mary Avon's isolated position in the world."It fairly distresses me," continues the good-hearted Laird, "when Ithink of her condeetionnot at present, when she has, if I may beallowed to say so, several friends near her who would be glad to dowhat they could for her; but by and by, when she is becoming older"The Laird hesitated.  Was it possible, after all, that he was about tohint at the chance of Mary Avon becoming the mistress of the mansion andestate of Denny-mains?  Then he made a plunge."A young woman in her position should have a husband to protect her,that is what I am sure of.  Have ye never thought of it, ma'am?""I should like very well to see Mary married," says the other, demurely."And I know she would make an excellent wife.""An excellent wife!" exclaims the Laird; and then he adds, with a toneapproaching to severity, "I tell ye he will be a fortunate man that getsher.  Oh, ay; I have watched her. I can keep my eyes open when there isneed. Did you hear her asking the captain about his wife and children?I tell you there's human nature in that lass."There was no need for the Laird to be so pugnacious; we were notcontesting the point. However, he resumed"I have been thinking," said he, with a little more shyness, "about mynephew.  He's a good lad.  Well, ye know, ma'am, that I do not approveof young men being brought up in idleness, whatever their prospects mustbe; and I have no doubt whatever that my nephew Howard is working hardenoughwhat with the reading of law-books, and attending the courts, andall thatthough as yet he has not had much business.  But then there isno necessity. I do not think he is a lad of any great ambeetion, likeyour friend Mr. Sutherland, who has to fight his way in the world in anycase.  But HowardI have been thinking now that if he was to get marriedand settled, he might give up the law business altogether; and, if theywere content to live in Scotland, he might look after Denny-mains.  Itwill be his in any case, ye know; he would have the interest of a manlooking after his own property.  Now, I will tell ye plainly, ma'am,what I have been thinking about this day or two back; if Howard wouldmarry your young lady friend, that would be agreeable to me."The calm manner in which the Laird announced his scheme showed that ithad been well matured.  It was a natural, simple, feasible arrangement,by which two persons in whom he took a warm interest would be benefitedat once."But then, sir," said his hostess, with a smile which she could notwholly repress, "you know people never do marry to please a thirdpersonat least, very seldom.""Oh, there can be no forcing," said the Laird with decision.  "But Ihave done a great deal for Howard; may I not expect that he will dosomething for me?""Oh, doubtless, doubtless," says this amiable lady, who has had someexperience in match-making herself; "but I have generally found thatmarriages that would be in every way suitable and pleasing to friends,and obviously desirable, are precisely the marriages that never comeoff.  Young people, when they are flung at each other's heads, to usethe common phrase, never will be sensible and please their relatives.Now if you were to bring your nephew here, do you think Mary would fallin love with him because she ought?  More likely you would find that,out of pure contrariety, she would fall in love with Angus Sutherland,who cannot afford to marry, and whose head is filled with other things.""I am not sure, I am not sure," said the Laird, musingly.  "Howard is agood-looking young fellow, and a capital lad, too.  I am not so sure.""And then, you know," said the other shyly, for she will not plainly sayanything to Mary's disparagement, "young men have different tastes intheir choice of a wife.  He might not have the high opinion of her thatyou have."At this the Laird gave a look of surpriseeven of resentment."Then I'll tell ye what it is, ma'am," said he, almost angrily; "if mynephew had the chance of marrying such a girl, and did not do so, Ishould consider himI should consider him a fool, and say so."And then he added, sharply"And do ye think I would let Denny-mains pass into the hands of afool?"Now this kind lady had had no intention of rousing the wrath of theLaird in this manner; and she instantly set about pacifying him.  Andthe Laird was easily pacified.  In a minute or two he was laughinggood-naturedly at himself for getting into a passion; he said it wouldnot do for one at his time of life to try to play the part of the sternfather as they played that in theatre piecesthere was to be no forcing."But he's a good lad, ma'am, a good lad," said he, rising as his hostessrose; and he added, significantly, "he is no fool, I assure ye, ma'am;he has plenty of common sense."When we get up on deck again, we find that the White Dove is gentlygliding out of the lonely Loch Scresorst, with its solitary house amongthe trees, and its crofters' huts at the base of the sombre hills.  Andas the light cool breezegratefully cool after the blazing heat of thelast day or twocarries us away northward, we see more and more of theawful solitudes of Haleval and Haskeval, that are still thunderous anddark under the hazy sky. Above the great shoulders, and under the purplepeaks, we see the far-reaching corries opening up, with here and there awhite waterfall just visible in the hollows.  There is a sense of escapeas we draw away from that overshadowing gloom.Then we discover that we have a new skipper to-day, vice John of Skye,deposed. The fresh hand is Mary Avon, who is at the tiller, and lookingexceedingly business-like. She has been promoted to this post by Dr.Sutherland, who stands by; she receives explanations about the procedureof Hector of Moidart, who is up aloft, lacing the smaller topsail to themast; she watches the operations of John of Skye and Sandy, who are atthe sheets below; and, like a wise and considerate captain, she pretendsnot to notice Master Fred, who is having a quiet smoke by the windlass.And so, past those lonely shores sails the brave vesselthe yawl WhiteDove, Captain Mary Avon, bound for anywhere.But you must not imagine that the new skipper is allowed to stand by thetiller. Captain though she may be, she has to submit civilly todictation, in so far as her foot is concerned, Our young Doctor hascompelled her to be seated, and he has passed a rope round the tillerthat so she can steer from her chair, and from time to time he givessuggestions, which she receives as orders."I wish I had been with you when you first sprained your foot," he says."Yes?" she answers, with humble inquiry in her eyes."I would have put it in plaster of Paris," he says, in a matter-of-factway, "and locked you up in the house for a fortnight; at the end of thattime you would not know which ankle was the sprained one."There was neither "with your leave" nor "by your leave" in this youngman's manner when he spoke of that accident.  He would have takenpossession of her.  He would have discarded your bandages and hartshorn,and what not; when it was Mary Avon's foot that was concernedit wasintimated to ushe would have had his own way in spite of all comers."I wish I had known," she says, timidly, meaning that it was thetreatment she wished she had known."There is a more heroic remedy," said he, with a smile; "and that iswalking the sprain off.  I believe that can be done, but most peoplewould shrink from the pain.  Of course, if it were done at all, it wouldbe done by a woman; women can bear pain infinitely better than men.""Oh, do you think so!" she says, in mild protest.  "Oh, I am sure not.Men are so much braver than women, so much stronger"But this gentle quarrel is suddenly stopped, for some one callsattention to a deer that is calmly browsing on one of the high slopesabove that rocky shore, and instantly all glasses are in request.  It isa hind, with a beautifully shaped head and slender legs; she takes nonotice of the passing craft, but continues her feeding, walking a fewsteps onward from time to time.  In this way she reaches the edge of agully in the rugged cliffs where there is some brushwood, and probably astream; into this she sedately descends, and we see her no more.Then there is another cry; what is this cloud ahead, or waterspoutresting on the calm bosom of the sea?  Glasses again in request, amidmany exclamations, reveal to us that this is a dense cloud of birds; aflock so vast that towards the water it seems black; can it be the deadbody of a whale that has collected this world of wings from all theNorthern seas?  Hurry on, White Dove; for the floating cloud with theblack base is moving and seethingin fantastic white fumes, as itwerein the loveliness of this summer day. And now, as we draw nearer,we can descry that there is no dead body of a whale causing thatblackness; but only the density of the mass of seafowl.  And nearer andnearer as we draw, behold! the great gannets swooping down in suchnumbers that the sea is covered with a mist of waterspouts; and the airis filled with innumerable cries; and we do not know what to make ofthis bewildering, fluttering, swimming, screaming mass of terns,guillemots, skarts, kittiwakes, razorbills, puffins, and gulls.  Butthey draw away again.  The herring-shoal is moving northward.  Themurmur of cries becomes more remote, and the seething cloud of thesea-birds is slowly dispersing.  When the White Dove sails up to thespot at which this phenomenon was first seen, there is nothing visiblebut a scattered assemblage of guillemotskurroo! kurroo! answered bype-yoo-it! pe-yoo-it!and great gannets"as big as a sheep," says Johnof Skyeapparently so gorged that they lie on the water withinstone's-throw of the yacht, before spreading out their long, snow-white,black-tipped wings to bear them away over the sea.And now, as we are altering our course to the westfar away to our rightstand the vast Coolins of Skyewe sail along the northern shores of Rum.There is no trace of any habitation visible; nothing but the precipitouscliffs, and the sandy bays, and the outstanding rocks dotted with rowsof shining black skarts. When Mary Avon asks why those sandy bays shouldbe so red, and why a certain ruddy warmth of colour should shine througheven the patches of grass, our F.R.S. begins to speak of powdered basaltrubbed down from the rocks above.  He would have her begin anothersketch, but she is too proud of her newly acquired knowledge to forsakethe tiller.The wind is now almost dead aft, and we have a good deal of gybing.Other people might think that all this gybing was an evidence of badsteering on the part of our new skipper; but Angus Sutherlandand wecannot contradict an F.R.S.assures Miss Avon that she is doingremarkably well; and, as he stands by to lay hold of the main sheet whenthe boom swings over, we are not in much danger of carrying away eitherport or starboard davits."Do you know," says he lightly, "I sometimes think I ought to apply forthe post of surgeon on board a man-of-war?  That would just suit me""Oh, I hope you will not," she blurts out quite inadvertently; andthereafter there is a deep blush on her face."I should enjoy it immensely, I know," says he, wholly ignorant of herembarrassment, because he is keeping an eye on the sails. "I believe Ishould have more pleasure in life that way than any other""But you do not live for your own pleasure," says she hastily, perhapsto cover her confusion."I have no one else to live for, any way," says he, with a laugh; andthen he corrected himself.  "Oh, yes, I have.  My father is a sadheretic.  He has fallen away from the standards of his faith; he has setup idolsthe diplomas and medals I have got from time to time.  He hasthem all arranged in his study, and I have heard that he positively sitsdown before them and worships them. When I sent him the medal fromViennait was only bronzehe returned to me his Greek Testament, that hehad interleaved and annotated when he was a student; I believe it washis greatest possession.""And you would give up all that he expects from you to go away and be adoctor on board a ship!" says Mary Avon, with some proud emphasis."That would not be my ambition if I were a man, andandif I hadif"Well, she could not quite say to Brose's face what she thought of hispowers and prospects; so she suddenly broke away and said"Yes; you would go and do that for your own amusement?  And what wouldthe amusement be?  Do you think they would let the doctor interfere withthe sailing of the ship?""Well," said he, laughing, "that is a practical objection.  I don'tsuppose the captain of a man-of-war or even of a merchant vessel wouldbe as accommodating as your John of Skye.  Captain John has hiscompensation when he is relieved; he can go forward, and light hispipe.""Well, I think for your father's sake," says Miss Avon, with decision,"you had better put that idea out of your head, once and for all."Now blow, breezes, blow!  What is the great headland that appears,striking out into the wide Atlantic?Ahead she goes! the land she knows!Behold! the snowy shores of Canna!Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansmen!"Tom Galbraith," the Laird is saying solemnly to his hostess, "hasassured me that Rum is the most picturesque island on the whole of thewestern coast of Scotland.  That is his deleeberate opinion.  And indeedI would not go so far as to say he was wrong.  Arran! They talk aboutArran!  Just look at those splendid mountains coming sheer down to thesea; and the light of the sun on them!  Eh me, what a sunset there willbe this night!""Canna?" says Dr. Sutherland, to his interlocutor, who seems veryanxious to be instructed.  "Oh, I don't know.  Canna in Gaelic issimply a can; but then Cana is a whale; and the island in the distancelooks long and flat on the water.  Or it may be from canachthat is,the moss-cotton; or from cannachthat is, the sweet-gale. You see,Miss Avon, ignorant people have an ample choice."Blow! breezes blow! as the yellow light of the afternoon shines over thebroad Atlantic. Here are the eastern shores of Canna, high and rugged,and dark with caves; and there the western shores of Rum, the mightymountains aglow in the evening light.  And this remote and solitarylittle bay, with its green headlands, and its awkward rocks at themouth, and the one house presiding over it amongst that shiningwilderness of shrubs and flowers? Here is fair shelter for the night.After dinner, in the lambent twilight, we set out with the gig; andthere was much preparation of elaborate contrivances for the entrappingof fish.  But the Laird's occult and intricate tacklethe spinningminnows, and spoons, and india-rubber sand-eelsproved no competitor forthe couple of big white flies that Angus Sutherland had busked.  And ofcourse Mary Avon had that rod; and when some huge lithe dragged the endof the rod fairly under water, and when she cried aloud, "Oh! oh! Ican't hold it; he'll break the rod!" then arose our Doctor's word ofcommand:"Haul him in!  Shove out the butt!  No scientific playing with a lithe!Well done!well done!a five-pounder I'll bet ten farthings!"It was not scientific fishing; but we got big fishwhich is of moreimportance in the eyes of Master Fred.  And then, as the night fell, weset out again for the yacht; and the Doctor pulled stroke; and he sangsome more verses of the biorlinn song as the blades dashed fire intothe rushing sea:Proudly o'er the waves we'll bound her,As the staghound bounds the heather!Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansmen!Through the eddying tide we'll guide her,Round each isle and breezy headland,Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansmen!The yellow lamp at the bow of the yacht grew larger and larger; the hullof the boat looked black between us and the starlit heavens; as weclambered on board there was a golden glow from the saloon skylight. Andthen, during the long and happy evening, amid all the whist-playing andother amusements going forward, what about certain timid courtesies andan occasional shy glance between those two young people?  Some of usbegan to think that if the Laird's scheme was to come to anything, itwas high time that Mr. Howard Smith put in an appearance.*CHAPTER IX.**A WILD STUDIO.*There is a fine bustle of preparation next morningfor the gig iswaiting by the side of the yacht; and Dr. Sutherland is carefullygetting our artist's materials into the stern; and the Laird is busywith shawls and waterproofs; and Master Fred brings along theluncheon-basket.  Our Admiral-in-chief prefers to stay on board; she hasletters to write; there are enough of us to go and be tossed on theAtlantic swell off the great caves of Canna.And as the men strike their oars in the water and we wave a last adieu,the Laird catches a glimpse of our larder at the stern of the yacht.Alas! there is but one remaining piece of fresh meat hanging there,under the white canvas."It reminds me," says he, beginning to laugh already, "of a good onethat Tom Galbraith told mea real good one that was.  Tom had a littlebit yacht that his man and himself sailed when he was painting, ye know;and one day they got into a bay where Duncanthat was the man's namehadsome friends ashore.  Tom left him in charge of the yacht; andandha!ha! ha!there was a leg of mutton hanging at the stern.  Well, Tom wasrowed ashore; and painted all day; and came back to the yacht in theafternoon. There was no leg of mutton!  'Duncan,' says he, 'where isthe leg of mutton?'  Duncan pretended to be vastly surprised.  'Iss itaway?' says he.  'Away?' says Tom.  'Don't you see it is away?  I wantto know who took it!'  Duncan looked all round himat the sea and theskyand then says hethen says he, 'Maybe it wass a dog!'ha! ha! hee!hee! hee!'maybe it wass a dog,' says he; and they were half a mile fromthe shore! I never see the canvas at the stern of a yacht withoutthinking o' Tom Galbraith and the leg of mutton;" and here the Lairdlaughed long and loud again."I have heard you speak once or twice about Tom Galbraith," remarked ouryoung Doctor, without meaning the least sarcasm; "he is an artist, Isuppose?"The Laird stopped laughing.  There was a look of indignantwonderapproaching to horroron his face.  But when he proceeded, withsome dignity and even resentment, to explain to this ignorant person theimmense importance of the school that Tom Galbraith had been chieflyinstrumental in forming; and the high qualities of that artist'spersonal work; and how the members of the Royal Academy shook in theirshoes at the mere mention of Tom Galbraith's name, he became morepacified; for Angus Sutherland listened with great respect, and evenpromised to look out for Mr. Galbraith's work if he passed throughEdinburgh on his way to the south.The long, swinging stroke of the men soon took us round the successiveheadlands until we were once more in the open, with the mountains ofSkye in the north, and, far away at the horizon, a pale line which weknew to be North Uist.  And now the green shores of Canna were becomingmore precipitous; and there was a roaring of the sea along the spurs ofblack rock; and the long Atlantic swell, breaking on the bows of thegig, was sending a little more spray over us than was at all desirable.Certainly no one who could have seen the Doctor at this momentwith hisfresh-coloured face dripping with the salt water and shining in thesunlightwould have taken him for a hard-worked and anxious student.His hard work was pulling stroke-oar, and he certainly put his shouldersinto it, as the Laird had remarked; and his sole anxiety was about MaryAvon's art-materials.  That young lady shook the water from the twoblank canvases, and declared it did not matter a bit.These lonely cliffs!becoming more grim and awful every moment, as thismite of a boat still wrestles with the great waves, and makes its wayalong the coast.  And yet there are tender greens where the pasturageappears on the high plateaus; and there is a soft ruddy hue where thebasalt shines.  The gloom of the picture appears belowin the caveswashed out of the conglomerate by the heavy seas; in the spurs andfantastic pillars and arches of the black rock; and in this leaden-huedAtlantic springing high over every obstacle to go roaring and boominginto the caverns.  And these innumerable white specks on the sparsegreen plateaus and on this high promontory: can they be mushrooms inmillions?  Suddenly one of the men lifts his oar from the rowlock, andrattles it on the gunwale of the gig.  At this sound a cloud rises fromthe black rocks; it spreads; the next moment the air is darkened overour heads; and almost before we know what has happened, this vastmultitude of puffins has wheeled by us, and wheeled again further out toseaa smoke of birds!  And as we watch them, behold! stragglers comebackin thousands upon thousandsthe air is filled with themsome ofthem swooping so near us that we can see the red parrot-like beak andthe orange-hued web-feet, and then again the green shelves of grass andthe pinnacles of rock become dotted with those white specks.  Themyriads of birds; the black caverns; the arches and spurs of rock; theleaden-hued Atlantic bounding and springing in white foam: what saysMary Avon to that?  Has she the courage?"If you can put me ashore?" says she."Oh, we will get you ashore, somehow," Dr. Sutherland answers.But, indeed, the nearer we approach that ugly coast the less we like thelook of it. Again and again we make for what should be a sheltered bit;but long before we can get to land we can see through the plunging seagreat masses of yellow, which we know to be the barnacled rock; and thenahead we find a shore that, in this heavy surf, would make match-wood ofthe gig in three seconds.  Our Doctor, however, will not give in.  If hecannot get the gig on to any beach or into any creek, he will land ourartist somehow.  And at lastand in spite of the remonstrances of Johnof Skyehe insists on having the boat backed in to a projecting mass ofconglomerate, all yellowed over with small shell-fish, against which thesea is beating heavily.  It is an ugly landing-place; we can see theyellow rock go sheer down in the clear green sea; and the surf isspouting up the side in white jets.  But if she can watch a high wave,and put her foot thereand therewill she not find herself directly on aplateau of rock at least twelve feet square?"Back her, John!back her!" and therewith the Doctor, watching hischance, scrambles out and up to demonstrate the feasibility of thething.  And the easel is handed out to him; and the palette andcanvases; and finally Mary Avon herself.  Nay, even the Laird willadventure, sending on before him the luncheon-basket.It is a strange studiothis projecting shell-crusted rock, surrounded onthree sides by the sea, and on the fourth by an impassable cliff. Andthe sounds beneath our feetthere must be some subterranean passage orcave into which the sea roars and booms.  But Angus Sutherland rigs upthe easel rapidly; and arranges the artist's camp-stool; and sets herfairly agoing; then he proposes to leave the Laird in charge of her.  Heand the humble chronicler of the adventures of these people mean to havesome further exploration of this wild coast.But we had hardly gone a quarter of a mile or soit was hard workpulling in this heavy seawhen the experienced eye of Sandy from Islaysaw that something was wrong."What's that?" he said, staring.We turned instantly, and strove to look through the mists of spray.Where we had left the Laird and Mary Avon there were now visible onlytwo mites, apparently not bigger than puffins.  But is not one of thepuffins gesticulating wildly?"Round with her, John!" the Doctor calls out.  "They want usI'm sure."And away the gig goes againplunging into the great troughs and thenswinging up to the giddy crests.  And as we get nearer and nearer, whatis the meaning of the Laird's frantic gestures?  We cannot understandhim; and it is impossible to hear, for the booming of the sea into thecaves drowns his voice."He has lost his hat," says Angus Sutherland; and then, the next second,"Where's the easel?"Then we understand those wild gestures. Pull away, merry men! for hasnot a squall swept the studio of its movables?  And there, sure enough,tossing high and low on the waves, we descry a variety of thingsaneasel, two canvases, a hat, a veil, and what not.  Up with the boat-hookto the bow; and gently with those plunges, you eager Hector of Moidart!"I am so sorry," she says (or rather shrieks), when her drippingproperty is restored to her."It was my fault," our Doctor yells; "but I will undertake to fastenyour easel properly this time"and therewith he fetches a lump of rockthat might have moored a man-of-war.We stay and have luncheon in this gusty and thunderous studiothoughMary Avon will scarcely turn from her canvas.  And there is no paintingof pink geraniums about this young woman's work.  We see already thatshe has got a thorough grip of this cold, hard coast (the sun isobscured now, and the various hues are more sombre than ever); and,though she has not had time as yet to try to catch the motion of therolling sea, she has got the colour of ita leaden-grey, with glints ofblue and white, and with here and there a sudden splash of deep, rich,glassy, bottle green, where some wave for a moment catches, just as itgets to the shore, a reflection from the grass plateaus above.  Verygood, Miss Avon; very goodbut we pretend that we are not looking.Then away we go again, to leave the artist to her work; and we go asnear as possiblethe high sea will not allow us to enterthe vast blackcaverns; and we watch through the clear water for those masses of yellowrock. And then the multitudes of white-breasted, red-billed birdsperched up thereclose to the small burrows in the scant grass; theyjerk their heads about in a watchful way just like the prairie-dogs atthe mouth of their sandy habitations on the Colorado plains.  And thenagain a hundred or two of them come swooping down from the rockypinnacles and sail over our headstwinkling bits of colour between thegrey-green sea and the blue-and-white of the sky.  They resent thepresence of strangers in this far-home of the sea-birds.It is a terrible business getting that young lady and her paraphernaliaback into the gig again; for the sea is still heavy, and, of course,additional care has now to be taken of the precious canvas.  But at lastshe, and the Laird, and the luncheon-basket, and everything else havebeen got on board; and away we go for the yacht again, in the nowclearing afternoon.  As we draw further away from the roar of the caves,it is more feasible to talk; and naturally we are all very complimentaryabout Mary Avon's sketch in oils."Ay," says the Laird, "and it wants but one thing; and I am sure I couldget Tom Galbraith to put that in for you.  A bit of a yacht, ye know, orother sailing vessel, put below the cliffs, would give people a notionof the height of the cliffs, do ye see?  I am sure I could get TomGalbraith to put that in for ye.""I hope Miss Avon won't let Tom Galbraith or anybody else meddle withthe picture." says Angus Sutherland, with some emphasis. "Why, a yacht!Do you think anybody would let a yacht come close to rocks like these!As soon as you introduce any making-up like that, the picture is a sham.It is the real thing now, as it stands.  Twenty years hence you couldtake up that piece of canvas, and there before you would be the very daythat you spent hereit would be like finding your old life of twentyyears before opened up to you with a lightning-flash.  The pictureiswhy I should say it is invaluable, as it stands."At this somewhat fierce praise, Mary Avon colours a little.  And thenshe says with a gentle hypocrisy"Oh, do you really think there isthere issome likeness to the place?""It is the place itself!" says he warmly."Because," she says, timidly, and yet with a smile, "one likes to haveone's work appreciated, however stupid it may be.  Andandif you thinkthatwould you like to have it?  Because I should be so proud if youwould take itonly I am ashamed to offer my sketches to anybody""That!" said he, staring at the canvas as if the mines of Golconda weresuddenly opened to him.  But then he drew back.  "Oh, no," he said; "youare very kindbutbut, you know, I cannot.  You would think I had beenasking for it.""Well," says Miss Avon, still looking down, "I never was treated likethis before.  You won't take it?  You don't think it is worth putting inyour portmanteau?"At this the young Doctor's face grew very red; but he said boldly"Very well, now, if you have been playing fast and loose, you shall bepunished.  I will take the picture, whether you grudge it me or not.And I don't mean to give it up now.""Oh," said she, very gently, "if it reminds you of the place, I shall bevery pleasedandand it may remind you too that I am not likely toforget your kindness to poor Mrs. Thompson."And so this little matter was amicably settledthough the Laird lookedwith a covetous eye on that rough sketch of the rocks of Canna, andregretted that he was not to be allowed to ask Tom Galbraith to put in atouch or two. And so back to the yacht, and to dinner in the silverclear evening; and how beautiful looked this calm bay of Canna, with itsglittering waters and green shores, after the grim rocks and the heavyAtlantic waves!That evening we pursued the innocent lithe againour larder was becomingterribly emptyand there was a fine take.  But of more interest to someof us than the big fish was the extraordinary wonder of colour in seaand sky when the sun had gone down; and there was a wail on the part ofthe Laird that Mary Avon had not her colours with her to put down somejotting for further use.  Or if on paper: might not she write downsomething of what she saw; and experiment thereafter?  Well, if anyartist can make head or tail of words in such a case as this, here theyare for himas near as our combined forces of observation could go.The vast plain of water around us a blaze of salmon-redwith the waves(catching the reflection of the zenith) marked in horizontal lines ofblue.  The great headland of Canna, between us and the western sky, amass of dark, intense olive-green.  The sky over that a pale, clearlemon-yellow.  But the great feature of this evening scene was a mass ofcloud that stretched all across the heavensa mass of flaming,thunderous, orange-red cloud that began in the far pale mists in theeast, and came across the blue zenith overhead, burning with a splendidglory there, and then stretched over to the west, where it narrowed downand was lost in the calm, clear gold of the horizon.  The splendour ofthis great cloud was bewildering to the eyes; one turned gratefully tothe reflection of it in the sultry red of the sea below, broken by theblue lines of waves.  Our attention was not wholly given to the fishingor the boat on this lambent evening; perhaps that was the reason we ranon a rock, and with difficulty got off again.Then back to the yacht again about eleven o'clock.  What is thisterrible news from Master Fred, who was sent off with instructions tohunt up any stray crofter he might find, and use such persuasions in theshape of Gaelic friendliness and English money as would enable us toreplenish our larder?  What! that he had walked two miles and seennothing eatable or purchasable but an old hen?  Canna is a beautifulplace; but we begin to think it is time to be off.On this still night, with the stars coming out, we cannot go below.  Wesit on deck and listen to the musical whisper along the shore, and watchone golden-yellow planet rising over the dusky peaks of Rum, far in theeast.  And our young Doctor is talking of the pathetic notices that arecommon in the Scotch papersin the advertisements of deaths.  "NewZealand papers, please copy."  "Canadian papers, please copy."  Whenyou see this prayer appended to the announcement of the death of someold woman of seventy or seventy-five, do you not know that it is amessage to loved ones in distant climes, wanderers who may forget butwho have not been forgotten? They are messages that tell of a scatteredraceof a race that once filled the glens of these now almost desertedislands.  And surely, when some birthday or other time of recollectioncomes round, those far away,Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe,must surely bethink themselves of the old people left behindliving inGlasgow or Greenock now, perhapsand must bethink themselves too of theland where last they saw the bonny red heather, and where last theyheard the pipes playing the sad Farewell, MacCruimin as the ship stoodout to sea. They cannot quite forget the scenes of their youththe roughseas and the red heather and the islands; the wild dancing at theweddings; the secret meetings in the glen, with Ailasa, or Morag, orMairi, come down from the sheiling, all alone, a shawl round her head toshelter her from the rain, her heart fluttering like the heart of atimid fawn.  They cannot forget.And we, too, we are going away; and it may be that we shall never seethis beautiful bay or the island there again.  But one of us carriesaway with him a talisman for the sudden revival of old memories.  Andtwenty years hencethat was his own phrasewhat will AngusSutherlandperhaps a very great and rich person by that timewhat willhe think when he turns to a certain picture, and recalls the long summerday when he rowed with Mary Avon round the wild shores of Canna?*CHAPTER X.**"DUNVEGAN!OH!  DUNVEGAN!"*Commander Mary Avon sends her orders below: everything to be made snugin the cabins, for there is a heavy sea running outside, and the WhiteDove is already under way. Farewell, then, you beautiful blue bayallrippled into silver now with the breezeand green shores and picturesquecliffs!  We should have lingered here another day or two, perhaps, butfor the report about that one old hen.  We cannot ration passengers andcrew on one old hen.And here, as we draw away from Canna, is the vast panorama of thesea-world around us once morethe mighty mountain range of Skye shiningfaintly in the northern skies; Haleval and Haskeval still of a gloomypurple in the east; and away beyond these leagues of rushing Atlanticthe clear blue line of North Uist.  Whither are we bound, then, yousmall captain with the pale face and the big, soft, tender black eyes?Do you fear a shower of spray that you have strapped thattightly-fitting ulster round the graceful small figure?  And are youquite sure that you know whether the wind is on the port or starboardbeam?"Look! look! look!" she calls, and our F.R.S., who has been busy overthe charts, jumps to his feet.Just at the bow of the vessel we see the great shining black thingdisappear.  What if there had been a collision?"You cannot call that a porpoise, any way," says she.  "Why, it musthave been eighty feet long!""Yes, yacht measurement," says he.  "But it had a back fin, which issuspicious, and it did not blow.  Now," he addsfor we have been lookingall round for the re-appearance of the huge stranger"if you want to seereal whales at work, just look over there, close under Rum.  I shouldsay there was a whole shoal of them in the Sound."And there, sure enough, we see from time to time the whitespoutingsrising high into the air in the form of the letter V, andslowly falling again.  They are too far away for us to hear the sound oftheir blowing, nor can we catch any glimpse, through the best of ourglasses, of their appearance at the surface. Moreover, the solitarystranger that nearly ran against our bows makes no reappearance; he hashad enough of the wonders of the upper world for a time.It is a fine sailing morning, and we pay but little attention to thefact that the wind, as usual, soon gets to be dead ahead.  So long asthe breeze blows, and the sun shines, and the white spray flies from thebows of the White Dove, what care we which harbour is to shelter usfor the night?  And if we cannot get into any harbour, what then?  Wecarry our own kingdom with us; and we are far from being dependent onthe one old hen.But in the midst of much laughing at one of the Laird's good onestheinexhaustible Homesh was again to the forea head appears at the top ofthe companion-way; and there is a respectful silence.  Unseemly mirthdies away before the awful dignity of this person."Angus," she says, with a serious remonstrance on her face, "do youbelieve what scientific people tell you?"Angus Sutherland starts, and looks up; he has been deep in a chart ofLoch Bracadaile."Don't they say that water finds its own level?  Now do you call thiswater finding its own level?"and as she propounds this conundrum, sheclings on tightly to the side of the companion, for, in truth, theWhite Dove is curveting a good deal among those great masses of waves."Another tumbler broken!" she exclaims. "Now who left that tumbler onthe table?""I know," says Mary Avon."Who was it then?" says the occupant of the companion-way; and we beginto tremble for the culprit."Why, you yourself!""Mary Avon, how can you tell such a story!" says the other, with a sternface."Oh, but that is so," calls out our Doctor, "for I myself saw you bringthe tumbler out of the ladies' cabin with water for the flowers."The universal shout of laughter that overwhelms Madame Dignity is toomuch for her. A certain conscious, lurking smile begins to break throughthe sternness of her face."I don't believe a word of it," she declares, firing a shot as sheretreats.  "Not a word of it.  You are two conspirators.  To tell such astory about a tumbler-!"But at this moment a further assault is made on the majesty of thisimperious small personage.  There is a thunder at the bows; a rattlingas of pistol-shots on the decks forward; and at the same moment thefag-ends of the spray come flying over the after part of the yacht.What becomes of one's dignity when one gets a shower of salt water overone's head and neck?  Go down below, madam!retreat, retreat,discomfited!go, dry your face and your bonny brown hairand bother usno more with your broken tumbler!And despite those plunging seas and the occasional showers of spray,Mary Avon still clings bravely to the rope that is round the tiller; andas we are bearing over for Skye on one long tack, she has no need tochange her position.  And if from time to time her face gets wet withthe salt water, is it not quickly dried again in the warm sun and thebreeze? Sun and salt water and sea-air will soon chase away the pallorfrom that gentle face: cannot one observe alreadyafter only a few days'sailinga touch of sun-brown on her cheeks?And now we are drawing nearer and nearer to Skye, and before us lies thelonely Loch Breatal, just under the splendid Coolins.  See how the vastslopes of the mountains appear to come sheer down to the lake; and thereis a soft, sunny green on thema beautiful, tender, warm colour thatbefits a summer day.  But far above and beyond those sunny slopes adifferent sight appears.  All the clouds of this fair day have gatheredround the upper portions of the mountains; and that solitary range ofblack and jagged peaks is dark in shadow, dark as if with theexpectation of thunder.  The Coolins are not beloved of mariners.  Thosebeautiful sunlit ravines are the secret haunts of hurricanes thatsuddenly come out to strike the unwary yachtsman as with the blow of ahammer.  Stand by, forward, then, lads! About ship!  Down with thehelm, Captain Avon!and behold! we are sailing away from the blackCoolins, and ahead of us there is only the open sea, and the sunlightshining on the far cliffs of Canna."When your course is due north," remarks Angus Sutherland, who hasrelieved Mary Avon at the helm, "and when the wind is due north, you geta good deal of sailing for your money."The profound truth of this remark becomes more and more apparent as theday passes in a series of long tacks which do not seem to be bringingthose far headlands of Skye much nearer to us.  And if we are beating inthis heavy sea all day and night, is there not a chance of one or otherof our women-folk collapsing?  They are excellent sailors, to besurebutbutDr. Sutherland is consulted.  Dr. Sutherland's advice is prompt andemphatic.  His sole and only precaution against sea-sickness is simple:resolute eating and drinking.  Cure for sea-sickness, after it has setin, he declares there is none: to prevent it, eat and drink, and let thedrink be brut champagne.  So our two prisoners are ordered below toundergo that punishment.And, perhaps, it is the brut champagne, or perhaps it is merely thesnugness of our little luncheon-party that prompts Miss Avon to remarkon the exceeding selfishness of yachting and to suggest a proposal thatfairly takes away our breath by its audacity."Now," she says, cheerfully, "I could tell you how you could occupy anidle day on board a yacht so that you would give a great deal ofhappinessquite a shock of delightto a large number of people."Well, we are all attention."At what cost?" says the financier of our party."At no cost."This is still more promising.  Why should not we instantly set aboutmaking all those people happy?"All that you have got to do is to get a copy of the Field or of theTimes or some such paper."Yes; and how are we to get any such thing? Rum has no post-office.  Nomail calls at Canna.  Newspapers do not grow on the rocks of LochBracadaile."However, let us suppose that we have the paper.""Very well.  All you have to do is to sit down and take theadvertisements, and write to the people, accepting all their offers ontheir own terms.  The man who wants 500*l.* for his shooting in theautumn; the man who will sell his steam-yacht for 7,000*l,*; the curatewho will take in another youth to board at 200*l.* a year; the lady whowants to let her country-house during the London season; all the peoplewho are anxious to sell things.  You offer to take them all.  If a manhas a yacht to let on hire, you will pay for new jerseys for the men.If a man has a house to be let, you will take all the fixtures at hisown valuation.  All you have to do is to write two or three hundredlettersas an anonymous person, of courseand you make two or threehundred people quite delighted for perhaps a whole week!"The Laird stared at this young lady as if she had gone mad; but therewas only a look of complacent friendliness on Mary Avon's face."You mean that you write sham letters?" says her hostess.  "You gullthose unfortunate people into believing that all their wishes arerealised?""But you make them happy!" says Mary Avon, confidently."Yesand the disappointment afterwards!" retorts her friend, almost withindignation. "Imagine their disappointment when they find they have beenduped!  Of course they would write letters and discover that theanonymous person had no existence.""Oh, no!" says Mary Avon, eagerly. "There could be no such greatdisappointment. The happiness would be definite and real for the time.The disappointment would only be a slow and gradual thing when theyfound no answer coming to their letter.  You would make them happy for awhole week or so by accepting their offer; whereas by not answeringtheir letter or letters you would only puzzle them, and the matter woulddrop away into forgetfulness.  Do you not think it would be an excellentscheme?"Come on deck, you people; this girl has got demented.  And behold! as weemerge once more into the sunlight and whirling spray and wind, we findthat we are nearing Skye again on the port tack, and now it is the mouthof Loch Bracadaile that we are approaching.  And these pillars of rock,outstanding from the cliffs, and worn by the northern seas?"Why, these must be Macleod's Maidens!" says Angus Sutherland, unrollingone of the charts.And then he discourses to us of the curious fancies of sailorspassingthe lonely coasts from year to yearand recognising as old friends, notany living thing, but the strange conformations of the rocksand givingto these the names of persons and of animals.  And he thinks there issomething more weird and striking about these solitary and sea-wornrocks fronting the great Atlantic than about any comparatively modernSphinx or Pyramid; until we regard the sunlit pillars, and their frettedsurface and their sharp shadows, with a sort of morbid imagination; andwe discover how the sailors have fancied them to be stone women; and wesee in the largest of themher head and shoulder tilted over a bitsomeresemblance to the position of the Venus discovered at Milo.  All thisis very fine; but suddenly the sea gets darkened over there; a squallcomes roaring out of Loch Bracadaile; John of Skye orders the boatabout; and presently we are running free before this puff from thenorth-east.  Alas! alas! we have no sooner got out of the reach of thesquall than the wind backs to the familiar north, and our laboriousbeating has to be continued as before.But we are not discontented.  Is it not enough, as the golden andglowing afternoon wears on, to listen to the innocent prattle ofDenny-mains, whose mind has been fired by the sight of those pillars ofrock.  He tells us a great many remarkable thingsabout the similaritybetween Gaelic and Irish, and between Welsh and Armorican; and hediscusses the use of the Druidical stones, as to whether the priestsfollowed serpent-worship or devoted those circles to human sacrifice. Hetells us about the Picts and Scots; about Fingal and Ossian; about thedoings of Arthur in his kingdom of Strathclyde.  It is a most innocentsort of prattle."Yes, sir," says our Doctorquite gravelythough we are not quite surethat he is not making fun of our simple-hearted Laird, "there can be nodoubt that the Aryan race that first swept over Europe spoke a Celticlanguage, more or less akin to Gaelic, and that they were pushed out, bysuccessive waves of population, into Brittany, and Wales, and Ireland,and the Highlands.  And I often wonder whether it was they themselvesthat modestly call themselves the foreigners or strangers, and affixedthat name to the land they laid hold of, from Galicia and Gaul toGalloway and Galway? The Gaelic word gall, a stranger, you findeverywhere.  Fingal himself is only Fionn-gallthe Fair Stranger;Dubh-gallthat is, the familiar Dugaldor the Black Strangeris whatthe Islay people call a Lowlander. Ru-na-Gaul, that we passed theother daythat is the Foreigner's Point.  I think there can be no doubtthat the tribes that first brought Aryan civilisation through the westof Europe spoke Gaelic or something like Gaelic.""Ay," said the Laird, doubtfully.  He was not sure of this young man.He had heard something about Gaelic being spoken in the Garden of Eden,and suspected there might be a joke lying about somewhere.However, there was no joking about our F.R.S. when he began to tell MaryAvon how, if he had time and sufficient interest in such things, hewould set to work to study the Basque people and their languagethatstrange remnant of the old race who inhabited the west of Europe longbefore Scot, or Briton, or Roman, or Teuton had made his appearance onthe scene.  Might they not have traditions, or customs, or verbalsurvivals to tell us of their pre-historic forefathers?  The Lairdseemed quite shocked to hear that his favourite Picts and ScotsandFingal and Arthur and all the rest of themwere mere modern interlopers.What of the mysterious race that occupied these islands before the greatAryan tide swept over from the East?Well, this was bad enough; but when the Doctor proceeded to declare hisconviction that no one had the least foundation for the variousconjectures about the purposes of those so-called Druidical stonesthatit was all a matter of guess-work whether as regarded council-halls,grave-stones, altars, or serpent-worshipand that it was quite possiblethese stones were erected by the non-Aryan race who inhabited Europebefore either Gaul or Roman or Teuton came west, the Laird interruptedhim, triumphantly"But," says he, "the very names of those stones show they are of Celticoriginwill ye dispute that?  What is the meaning of Carnac, that isin Brittanyeh?  Ye know Gaelic?""Well, I know that much," said Angus, laughing.  "Carnac means simplythe place of piled stones.  But the Celts may have found the stonesthere, and given them that name.""I think," says Miss Avon, profoundly, "that when you go into a questionof names, you can prove anything.  And I suppose Gaelic is asaccommodating as any other language."Angus Sutherland did not answer for a moment; but at last he said,rather shyly"Gaelic is a very complimentary language, at all events.  Beau is 'awoman;' and bean-nachd is 'a blessing.'  An ti a bheannaich thuthatis, 'the one who blessed you.'"Very pretty; only we did not know how wildly the young man might not befalsifying Gaelic grammar in order to say something nice to Mary Avon.Patience works wonders.  Dinner-time finds us so far across the Minchthat we can make out the lighthouse of South Uist.  And all these outerHebrides are now lying in a flood of golden-red light; and on the cliffsof Canna, far away in the south-east, and now dwarfed so that they lielike a low wall on the sea, there is a paler red, caught from the glareof the sunset. And here is the silver tinkle of Master Fred's bell.On deck after dinner; and the night air is cooler now; and there arecigars about; and our young F.R.S. is at the tiller; and Mary Avon issinging, apparently to herself, something about a Berkshire farmer'sdaughter. The darkness deepens, and the stars come out; and there is onestarlarger than the rest, and low down, and burning a steady redthatwe know to be Ushinish lighthouse.  And then from time to time thesilence is broken by, "Stand by, forrard!  'Bout ship!" and there is arattling of blocks and cordage and then the head-sails fill and away shegoes again on the other tack.  We have got up to the long headlands ofSkye at last.Clear as the night is, the wind still comes in squalls, and we have thetopsail down.  Into which indentation of that long, low line of darkland shall we creep in the darkness?But John of Skye keeps away from the land. It is past midnight.  Thereis nothing visible but the black sea and the clear sky, and the red starof the lighthouse; nothing audible but Mary Avon's humming to herselfand her friendthe two women sit arm-in-arm under half-a-dozen ofrugssome old-world ballad to the monotonous accompaniment of thepassing seas.One o'clock: Ushinish light is smaller now, a minute point of red fire,and the black line of land on our right looms larger in the dusk. Lookat the splendour of the phosphorous-stars on the rushing waves.And at last John of Skye says in an undertone to Angus"Will the leddies be going below now?""Going below!" he says in reply.  "They are waiting till we get toanchor.  We must be just off Dunvegan Loch now."Then John of Skye makes his confession."Oh, yes; I been into Dunvegan Loch more as two or three times; but Inot like the dark to be with us in going in; and if we lie off till thedaylight comes, the leddies they can go below to their peds.  And if Dr.Sutherland himself would like to see the channel in going in, will Isend below when the daylight comes?""No, no, John; thank you," is the answer. "When I turn in, I turn in forgood.  I will leave you to find out the channel for yourself."And so there is a clearance of the deck, and rugs and camp-stools handeddown the companion.  Deoch-an-doruis in the candle-lit saloon?  Tobedto bed!It is about five o'clock in the morning that the swinging out of theanchor-chain causes the yacht to tremble from stem to stern; and thesleepers start in their sleep, but are vaguely aware that they are at asafe anchorage at last. And do you know where the brave White Dove islying now?  Surely if the new dawn brings any stirring of windand ifthere is a sound coming over to us from this far land of legend andromanceit is the wild, sad wail of Dunvegan!  The mists are clearingfrom the hills; the day breaks wan and fair; the great grey castle,touched by the early sunlight, looks down on the murmuring sea.  And isit the sea, or is it the cold wind of the morning, that sings and singsto us in our dreamsDunveganoh!  Dunvegan!*CHAPTER XI.**DRAWING NEARER.*She is all alone on deck.  The morning sun shines on the beautiful bluebay; on the great castle perched on the rocks over there; and on thewooded green hills beyond. She has got a canvas fixed on her easel; shesings to herself as she works.Now this English young lady must have beguiled the tedium of her longnursing in Edinburgh by making a particular acquaintance with Scotchballads; or how otherwise could we account for her knowledge of the"Song of Ulva," and now of the "Song of Dunvegan?"Macleod the faithful, and fearing none!Dunveganoh!  Dunvegan!she hums to herself as she is busy with this rough sketch of sea andshore.  How can she be aware that Angus Sutherland is at this verymoment in the companion way, and not daring to stir hand or foot lest heshould disturb her?Friends and foes had our passion thwarted,she croons to herself, though, indeed, there is no despair at all in hervoice, but a perfect contentmentBut true, tender, and lion-hearted,Lived he on, and from life departed,Macleod, whose rival is breathing none!Dunveganoh, Dunvegan!She is pleased with the rapidity of her work. She tries to whistle alittle bit.  Or, perhaps it is only the fresh morning air that has puther in such good spirits?Yestreen the Queen had four Maries.What has that got to do with the sketch of the shining grey castle?Among these tags and ends of ballads, the young Doctor at last becomesemboldened to put in an appearance."Good morning, Miss Avon," says he; "you are busy at work again?"She is not in the least surprised.  She has got accustomed to his comingon deck before the others; they have had a good deal of quiet chattingwhile as yet the Laird was only adjusting his high white collar andsatin neckcloth."It is only a sketch," said she, in a rapid and highly business-likefashion, "but I think I shall be able to sell it.  You know most peoplemerely value pictures for their association with things they areinterested in themselves.  A Yorkshire farmer would rather have apicture of his favourite cob than any Raphael or Titian.  And theordinary English squire: I am sure that you know in his own heart heprefers one of Herring's farm yard pieces to Leonardo's Last Supper.Well, if some yachting gentleman, who has been in this loch, should seethis sketch, he will probably buy it, however bad it is, just because itinterests him""But you don't really mean to sell it?" said he."That depends," said she demurely, "on whether I get any offer for it.""Why," he exclaimed, "the series of pictures you are now making shouldbe an invaluable treasure to you all your life long: a permanent recordof a voyage that you seem to enjoy very much.  I almost shrink fromrobbing you of that one of Canna; still, the temptation is too great.And you propose to sell them all?""What I can sell of them," she says; and then she adds, rather shyly,"You know I could not very well afford to keep them all for myself.  IIhave a good many almoners in London; and I devote to them what I can getfor my scrawlsthat is, I deduct the cost of the frames, and keep therest for them.  It is not a large sum.""Any other woman would spend it in jewellery and dresses," says hebluntly.At this, Miss Mary Avon flushes slightly, and hastily draws hisattention to a small boat that is approaching.  Dr. Sutherland does notpay any heed to the boat.He is silent for a second or so; and then he says, with an effort totalk in a cheerful and matter-of-fact way"You have not sent ashore yet this morning: don't you know there is apost-office at Dunvegan?""Oh, yes; I heard so.  But the men are below at breakfast, I think, andI am in no hurry to send, for there won't be any letters for me, Iknow.""Oh, indeed," he says, with seeming carelessness, "it must be a longtime since you have heard from your friends.""I have not many friends to hear from," she answers, with a light laugh,"and those I have don't trouble me with many letters.  I suppose theythink I am in very good hands at present.""Oh, yesno doubt," says he, and suddenly he begins to talk in warmterms of the delightfulness of the voyage.  He is quite charmed with theappearance of Dunvegan Loch and castle.  A more beautiful morning henever saw.  And in the midst of all this enthusiasm the small boat comesalongside.There is an old man in the boat, and when he has fastened his oars, hesays a few words to Angus Sutherland, and hands up a big black bottle.Our young Doctor brings the bottle over to Mary Avon.  He seems to bevery much pleased with everything this morning."Now, is not that good-natured?" says he. "It is a bottle of fresh milk,with the compliments of , of Uginish.  Isn't it good-natured?""Oh, indeed it is," says she, plunging her hand into her pocket.  "Youmust let me give the messenger half-a-crown.""No, no; that is not the Highland custom," says the Doctor; andtherewith he goes below, and fetches up another black bottle, and poursout a glass of whiskey with his own hand, and presents it to the ancientboatman.  You should have seen the look of surprise in the old man'sface when Angus Sutherland said something to him in the Gaelic.And alas! and alas!as we go ashore on this beautiful bright day, wehave to give up for ever the old Dunvegan of many a dreamthe dark andsolitary keep that we had imagined perched high above the Atlanticbreakersthe sheer precipices, the awful sterility, the wail oflamentation along the lonely shores.  This is a different picturealtogether that Mary Avon has been trying to put down on her canvasaspacious, almost modern-looking, but nevertheless picturesque castle,sheltered from the winds by softly wooded hills, a bit of smooth, bluewater below, and further along the shores the cheerful evidences offertility and cultivation.  The wail of Dunvegan?  Why, here is a briskand thriving village, with a post-office, and a shop, and a buildingthat looks uncommonly like an inn; and there, dotted all about, andencroaching on the upper moorland, any number of those small crofts thatwere once the pride of the Highlands and that gave to England the moststalwart of her regiments.  Here are no ruined huts and voicelesswastes; but a cheerful, busy picture of peasant-life; the strappingwenches at work in the small farm-yards, well-built and frank of face;the men well clad; the children well fed and merry enough.  It is ascene that delights the heart of our good friend of Denny-mains.  If wehad but time, he would fain go in among the tiny farms, and inquireabout the rent of the holdings, and the price paid for those picturesquelittle beasts that the artists are for ever paintingwith a louring skybeyond, and a dash of sunlight in front.  But our Doctor is obdurate.He will not have Mary Avon walk further; she must return to the yacht.But on our way back, as she is walking by the side of the road, hesuddenly puts his hand on her arm, apparently to stop her. Slight as thetouch is, she naturally looks surprised."I beg your pardon," he says, hastily, "but I thought you would rathernot tread on it"He is regarding a weed by the waysidea thing that looks like asnapdragon of some sort.  We did not expect to find a hard-headed man ofscience betray this trumpery sentiment about a weed."I thought you would rather not tread upon it when you knew it was astranger," he says, in explanation of that rude assault upon her arm."That is not an English plant at all; it is the Mimulus, its real homeis in America."We began to look with more interest on the audacious small foreignerthat had boldly adventured across the seas."Oh," she says, looking back along the road, "I hope I have not trampledany of them down.""Well, it does not much matter," he admits, "for the plant is becomingquite common now in parts of the West Highlands; but I thought as it wasa stranger, and come all the way across the Atlantic on a voyage ofdiscovery, you would be hospitable.  I suppose the Gulf-stream broughtthe first of them over.""And if they had any choice in the matter," says Mary Avon, lookingdown, and speaking with a little self-conscious deliberation, "and ifthey wanted to be hospitably received, they showed their good sense incoming to the West Highlands."After that there was a dead silence on the part of Angus Sutherland.But why should he have been embarrassed?  There was no complimentlevelled at him that he should blush like a schoolboy.  It was quitetrue that Miss Avon's likingeven lovefor the West Highlands wasbecoming very apparent; but Banffshire is not in the West Highlands.What although Angus Sutherland could speak a few words in the Gaelictongue to an old boatman?  He came from Banff.  Banffshire is not in theWest Highlands.Then that afternoon at the great castle itself: what have we but aconfused recollection of twelfth-century towers; and walls nine feetthick; and ghost-chambers; and a certain fairy-flag, that is called theBratach-Sith; and the wide view over the blue Atlantic; and of a greatkindness that made itself visible in the way of hothouse flowers andbaskets of fruit, and what not?  The portraits, too: the variouscenturies got mixed up with the old legends, until we did not know inwhich face to look for some transmitted expression that might tell ofthe Cave of Uig or the Uamh-na-Ceann. But there was one portrait there,quite modern, and beautiful, that set all the tourist-folk a raving, solovely were the life-like eyes of it; and the Laird was bold enough tosay to the gentle lady who was so good as to be our guide, that it wouldbe one of the greatest happinesses of his life if he might be allowed toask Mr. Galbraith, the well-known artist of Edinburgh, to select a youngpainter to come up to Dunvegan and make a copy of this picture for him,Denny-mains.  And Dr. Sutherland could scarcely come away from thatbeautiful face; and our good Queen T. was quite charmed with it; and asfor Mary Avon, when one of us regarded her, behold! as she looked up,there was a sort of moisture in the soft black eyes.What was she thinking of?  That it must be a fine thing to be sobeautiful a woman, and charm the eyes of all men?  But nownow that wehad had this singing-bird with us on board the yacht for so long atimewould any one of us have admitted that she was rather plain?  Itwould not have gone well with any one who had ventured to say so to theLaird of Denny-mains, at all events.  And as for our sovereign-lady andmistress, these were the lines which she always said described MaryAvon:Was never seen thing to be praised derre,[#]Nor under blacke cloud so bright a sterre,As she was, as they saiden, every oneThat her behelden in her blacke weed;And yet she stood, full low and still, alone,Behind all other folk, in little brede,[#]And nigh the door, ay under shame's drede;Simple of bearing, debonair of cheer,With a full sur[#] looking and mannere.[#] derre, dearer.[#] in little brede, without display.[#] sur, frank.How smart the saloon of the White Dove looked that evening at dinner,with those geraniums, and roses, and fuchsias, and what not, set amidthe tender green of the maidenhair fern!  But all the same there was aserious discussion.  Fruit, flowers, vegetables, and fresh milk, howeverwelcome, fill no larder; and Master Fred had returned with the dolefultale that all his endeavours to purchase a sheep at one of theneighbouring farms had been of no avail.  Forthwith we resolve to makeanother effort.  Far away, on the outer shores of Dunvegan Loch, we canfaintly descry, in the glow of the evening, some crofter's huts on theslopes of the hill.  Down with the gig, then, boys; in with thefishing-rods; and away for the distant shores, where haply, some tenderewe-lamb, or brace of quacking duck, or some half-dozen half-starvedfowls may be withdrawn from the reluctant tiller of the earth!It is a beautiful clear evening, with lemon-gold glory in thenorth-west.  And our stout-sinewed Doctor is rowing stroke, and there isa monotonous refrain ofHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansmen!"We must give you a wage as one of the hands, Angus," says Queen T."I am paid already," says he.  "I would work my passage through for thesketch of Canna that Miss Avon gave me.""Would you like to ask the other men whether they would take the samepayment?" says Miss Avon, in modest depreciation of her powers."Do not say anything against the landscape ye gave to Dr. Sutherland,"observes the Laird.  "No, no; there is great merit in it. I have told yebefore I would like to show it to Tom Galbraith before it goes south; Iam sure he would approve of it.  Indeed, he is jist such a friend ofmine that I would take the leeberty of asking him to give it a bit touchhere and therewhat an experienced artist would see amiss ye know""Mr. Galbraith may be an experienced artist," says our Doctor friendwith unnecessary asperity, "but he is not going to touch that picture.""Ah can tell ye," says the Laird, who is rather hurt by this rejection,"that the advice of Tom Galbraith has been taken by the greatest artistsin England.  He was up in London last year, and was at the studio of oneof the first of the Acadameecians, and that very man was not ashamed toask the opeenion of Tom Galbraith.  And says Tom to him, 'The face isvery fine, but the right arm is out of drawing.'  You would think thatimpertinent? The Acadameecian, I can tell you, thought differently.Says he, 'That has been my own opeenion, but no one would ever tell meso; and I would have left it as it is had ye no spoken.'""I have no doubt the Academacian who did not know when his picture wasout of drawing was quite right to take the advice of Tom Galbraith,"says our stroke-oar.  "But Tom Galbraith is not going to touch MissAvon's sketch of Canna" and here the fierce altercation is stopped,for stroke-oar puts a fresh spurt on, and we hear another soundSoon the freshening breeze will blow.Well show the snowy canvas on her,Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansmen!Well, what was the result of our quest? After we had landed Master Fred,and sent him up the hills, and gone off fishing for lithe for an hour orso, we returned to the shore in the gathering dusk.  We found ourmessenger seated on a rock, contentedly singing a Gaelic song, andplucking a couple of fowls which was all the provender he had secured.It was in vain that he tried to cheer us by informing us that theanimals in question had cost only sixpence a-piece.  We knew that theywere not much bigger than thrushes. Awful visions of tinned meats beganto rise before us.  In gloom we took the steward and the microscopicfowls on board, and set out for the yacht.But the Laird did not lose his spirits.  He declared thatself-preservation was the first law of nature, and that, despite theinjunctions of the Wild Birds' Protection Act, he would get out his gunand shoot the first brood of "flappers" he saw about those lonely lochs.And he told us such a "good one" about Homesh that we laughed nearly allthe way back to the yacht.  Provisions?  We were independent ofprovisions!  With a handful of rice a day we would cross the Atlanticwewould cross twenty Atlanticsso long as we were to be regaled andcheered by the "good ones" of our friend of Denny-mains.Dr. Sutherland, too, seemed in no wise depressed by the famine in theland.  In the lamp-lit saloon, as we gathered round the table, and cardsand things were brought out, and the Laird began to brew his toddy, theyoung Doctor maintained that no one on land could imagine the snugnessof life on board a yacht.  And now he had almost forgotten to speak ofleaving us; perhaps it was the posting of the paper on Radiolarians,along with other MSS., that had set his mind free.  But touching thatmatter of the Dunvegan post-office: why had he been so particular inasking Mary Avon if she were not expecting letters; and why did he sosuddenly grow enthusiastic about the scenery on learning that the younglady, on her travels, was not pestered with correspondence?  Miss Avonwas not a Cabinet Minister.*CHAPTER XII.**THE OLD SCHOOL AND THE NEW.*The last instructions given to John of Skye that night were large andliberal.  At break of day he was to sail for any port he might chance toencounter on the wide seas.  So long as Angus Sutherland did not speakof returning, what did it matter to us?Loch Boisdale, Loch Seaforth,Stornaway, St. Kilda, the North Pole were all the same.  It is true thatof fresh meat we had on board only two fowls about the size of wrens;but of all varieties of tinned meats and fruit we had an abundant store.And if perchance we were forced to shoot a sheep on the Flannen Islands,would not the foul deed be put down to the discredit of those dastardlyFrenchmen? When you rise up as a nation and guillotine all therespectable folk in the country, it is only to be expected of youthereafter that you should go about the seas shooting other people'ssheep.And indeed when we get on deck after breakfast, we find that John ofSkye has fulfilled his instructions to the letter; that is to say, hemust have started at daybreak to get away so far from Dunvegan and theheadlands of Skye.  But as for going farther?  There is not a speck ofcloud in the dome of blue; there is not a ripple on the dazzling sea;there is not a breath of wind to stir the great white sails all aglow inthe sunlight; nor is there even enough of the Atlantic swell to move theindolent tiller.  How John of Skye has managed to bring us so far on socalm a morning remains a mystery."And the glass shows no signs of falling," says our young Doctor quiteregretfully: does he long for a hurricane, that so he may exhibit hissailor-like capacities?But Mary Avon, with a practical air, is arranging her easel on deck, andfixing up a canvas, and getting out the tubes she wantsthe while sheabsently sings to herself something aboutBeauty liesIn many eyes,But love in yours, my Nora Creina.And what will she attack now?  Those long headlands of Skye, dark inshadow, with a glow of sunlight along their summits; or those lonelyhills of Uist set far amid the melancholy main; or those vaster andpaler mountains of Harris, that rise on the north of the dreaded Sound?"Well, you have courage," says Angus Sutherland, admiringly, "to tryto make a picture out of that!""Oh," she says, modestly, though she is obviously pleased, "that is apet theory of mine.  I try for ordinary every-day effects, without anytheatrical business; and if I had only the power to reach them, I know Ishould surprise people.  Because you know most people go through theworld with a sort of mist before their eyes; and they are awfullygrateful to you when you suddenly clap a pair of spectacles on theirnose and make them see things as they are.  I cannot do it as yet, youknow; but there is no harm in trying.""I think you do it remarkably well," he says; "but what are you to makeof that?nothing but two great sheets of blue, with a line of bluerhills between?"But Miss Avon speedily presents us with the desired pair of spectacles.Instead of the cloudless blue day we had imagined it to be, we find thatthere are low masses of white cloud along the Skye cliffs, and thesethrow long reflections on the glassy sea, and moreover we begin toperceive that the calm vault around us is not an uninterrupted blue, butmelts into a pale green as it nears the eastern horizon.  AngusSutherland leaves the artist to her work.  He will not interrupt her byidle talk.There is no idle talk going forward where the Laird is concerned.  Hehas got hold of an attentive listener in the person of his hostess, whois deep in needlework; and he is expounding to her more clearly thanever the merits of the great Semple case, pointing out more particularlyhow the charges in the major proposition are borne out by the extractsin the minor.  Yes; and he has caught the critics, too, on the hip.What about the discovery of those clever gentlemen that Genesis X. and10 was incorrect?  They thought they were exceedingly smart in provingthat the founders of Babel were the descendants, not of Ham, but ofShem.  But when the ruins of Babel were examined, what then?"Why, it was distinctly shown that the founders were the descendants ofHam, after all!" says Denny-mains, triumphantly.  "What do ye think ofthat, Dr. Sutherland?"Angus Sutherland starts from a reverie: he has not been listening."Of what?" he says.  "The Semple case?""Ay.""Oh, well," he says, rather carelessly, "all that wrangling is as goodan occupation as any otherto keep people from thinking."The Laird stares, as if he had not heard aright.  Angus Sutherland isnot aware of having said anything startling.  He continues quiteinnocently"Any occupation is valuable enough that diverts the mindthat is whyhard work is conducive to complete mental health; it does not matterwhether it is grouse-shooting, or commanding an army, or wrangling aboutmajor or minor propositions.  If a man were continually to be facing theawful mystery of existenceasking the record of the earth and the starshow he came to be here, and getting no answer at allhe must inevitablygo mad. The brain could not stand it.  If the human race had not busieditself with wars and commerce, and so forth, it must centuries ago havecommitted suicide.  That is the value of hard workto keep people fromthinking of the unknown around them; the more a man is occupied, thehappier he isit does not matter whether he occupies himself with SchoolBoards, or salmon-fishing, or the prosecution of a heretic."He did not remark the amazed look on the Laird's face, nor yet that MaryAvon had dropped her painting and was listening."The fact is," he said, with a smile, "if you are likely to fall tothinking about the real mysteries of existence anywhere, it is amongsolitudes like these, where you see what a trivial little accident humanlife is in the history of the earth.  You can't think about such thingsin Regent Street; the cigar-shops, the cabs, the passing people occupyyou.  But here you are brought back as it were to all sorts of firstprinciples; and commonplaces appear somehow in their original freshness.In Regent Street you no doubt know that life is a strange thing, andthat death is a strange thing, because you have been told so, and youbelieve it, and think no more about it.  But herewith the seas andskies round you, and with the silence of the night making you think, youfeel the strangeness of these things.  Now just look over there; theblue sea, and the blue sky, and the hillsit is a curious thing to thinkthat they will be shining there just as they are nowon just suchanother day as thisand you unable to see them or anything elsepassedaway like a ghost.  And the White Dove will be sailing up here; andJohn will be keeping an eye on Ushinish lighthouse; but your eyes won'tbe able to see anything""Well, Angus, I do declare," exclaims our sovereign mistress, "you havechosen a comforting thing to talk about this morning.  Are we to bealways thinking about our coffin?""On the contrary," says the young Doctor; "I was only insisting on thewholesomeness of people occupying themselves diligently with somedistraction or other, however trivial.  And how do you think the Semplecase will end, sir?"But our good friend of Denny-mains was far too deeply shocked andastounded to reply. The great Semple case a trivial thingadistractionan occupation to keep people from serious thinking!  Thepublic duties, too, of the Commissioner for the Burgh of Strathgovan;were these to be regarded as a mere plaything? The new steam fire-enginewas only a toy, then?  The proposed new park and the addition to therates were to be regarded as a piece of amiable diversion?The Laird knew that Angus Sutherland had not read the Vestiges ofCreation, and that was a hopeful sign.  But, Vestiges or noVestiges, what were the young men of the day coming to if their daringspeculations led them to regard the most serious and important concernsof life as a pastime?  The Commissioners for the Burgh of Strathgovenwere but a parcel of children, then, playing on the sea-shore, andunaware of the awful deeps beyond?"I am looking at these things only as a doctor," says Dr. Sutherland,lightlyseeing that the Laird is too dumbfounded to answer his question,"and I sometimes think a doctor's history of civilisation would be anodd thing, if only you could get at the physiological facts of the case.I should like to know, for example, what Napoleon had for supper on thenight before Waterloo.  Something indigestible, you may be sure; if hisbrain had been clear on the 15th, he would have smashed the Allies, andaltered modern history.  I should have greatly liked, too, to make theacquaintance of the man who first announced his belief that infantsdying unbaptised were to suffer eternal torture: I think it must havebeen his liver.  I should like to have examined him.""I should like to have poisoned him," says Mary Avon, with a flash ofanger in the soft eyes."Oh, no; the poor wretch was only the victim of some ailment," said ourDoctor, charitably.  "There must have been something very much thematter with Calvin, too.  I know I could have cured Schopenhauer of hispessimism if he had let me put him on a wholesome regimen."The Laird probably did not know who Schopenhauer was; but the audacityof the new school was altogether too much for him."II suppose," he said, stammering in his amazement, "ye would havetaken Joan of Arc, and treated her as a lunatic?""Oh, no; not as a confirmed lunatic," he answered, quite simply.  "Butthe diagnosis of that case is obvious; I think she could have beencured.  All that Joanna Southcote wanted was a frank physician."The Laird rose and went forward to where Mary Avon was standing at hereasel.  He had had enough.  The criticism of landscape painting was morewithin his compass."Very goodvery good," says he, as if his whole attention had beenoccupied by her sketching.  "The reflections on the water are just fine.Ye must let me show all your sketches to Tom Galbraith before ye go backto the south.""I hear you have been talking about the mysteries of existence," shesays, with a smile."Oh, ay, it is easy to talk," he says, sharplyand not willing toconfess that he has been driven away from the field.  "I am afraid thereis an unsettling tendency among the young men of the present daya wantof respect for things that have been established by the common sense ofthe world.  Not that I am against all innovation.  No, no.  The worldcannot stand still.  I myself, now; do ye know that I was among thefirst in Glasgow to hold that it might be permissible to have an organto lead the psalmody of a church?""Oh, indeed," says she, with much respect."That is true.  No, no; I am not one of the bigoted.  Give me theEssentials, and I do not care if ye put a stone cross on the top of thechurch.  I tell ye that honestly; I would not object even to a cross onthe building if all was sound within.""I am sure you are quite right, sir," says Mary Avon, gently."But no tampering with the Essentials. And as for the millinery, andincense, and crucifixes of they poor craytures that have not the courageto go right over to Romewho stop on this side, and play-act at beingRomansit is seeckeningperfectly seeckening.  As for the Romansthemselves, I do not condemn them.  No, no.  If they are in error, Idoubt not they believe with a good conscience.  And when I am in aforeign town, and one o' their processions of priests and boys comes by,I raise my hat.  I do indeed.""Oh, naturally," says Mary Avon."No, no," continues Denny-mains, warmly, "there is none of the bigotabout me.  There is a minister of the Episcopalian Church that I know;and there is no one more welcome in my house: I ask him to say gracejust as I would a minister of my own Church.""And which is that, sir?" she asked meekly.The Laird stares at her.  Is it possible that she has heard him soelaborately expound the Semple prosecution, and not be aware to whatdenomination he belongs?"The Freethe Free Church, of course," he says, with some surprise."Have ye not seen the Report of Proceedings in the Semple case?""No, I have not," she answers, timidly. "You have been so kind inexplaining it thatthat a printed report was quite unnecessary.""But I will get ye oneI will get ye one directly," says he.  "I haveseveral copies in my portmanteau.  And ye will see my name in front asone of the elders who considered it fit and proper that a full reportshould be published, so as to warn the public against these inseediousattacks against our faith.  Don't interrupt your work, my lass; but Iwill get ye the pamphlet; and whenever you want to sit down for a time,ye will find it most interesting readingmost interesting."And so the worthy Laird goes below to fetch that valued report.  Andscarcely has he disappeared than a sudden commotion rages over the deck.Behold! a breeze coming swiftly over the searuffling the glassy deep asit approaches!  Angus Sutherland jumps to the tiller.  The head-sailsfill; and the boat begins to move.  The lee-sheets are hauled taut; andnow the great mainsail is filled too.  There is a rippling and hissingof water; and a new stir of life and motion throughout the vessel fromstem to stern.It seems but the beginning of the day now, though it is near lunch-time.Mary Avon puts away her sketch of the dead calm, and sits down justunder the lee of the boom, where the cool breeze is blowing along.  TheLaird, having brought up the pamphlet, is vigorously pacing the deck forhis morning exercise; we have all awakened from these idle reveriesabout the mystery of life."Ha, ha," he says, coming aft, "this is finethis is fine now.  Why notgive the men a glass of whiskey all round for whistling up such a finebreeze?  Do ye think they would object?""Better give them a couple of bottles of beer for their dinner,"suggests Queen T., who is no lover of whiskey.But do you think the Laird is to be put off his story by any suchsuggestion?  We can see by his face that he has an anecdote to fire off;is it not apparent that his mention of whiskey was made with a purpose?"There was a real good one," says heand the laughter is alreadytwinkling in his eyes, "about the man that was apologising before hisfamily for having been drinking whiskey with some friends.  'Ay,' sayshe, 'they just held me and forced it down my throat.'  Then says hissona little chap about tensays he, 'I think I could ha' held yemysel', feyther'ho! ho! ho!' says he, 'I think I could ha' held yemysel', feyther;'" and the Laird laughed, and laughed again, till thetears came into his eyes.  We could see that he was still internallylaughing at that good one when we went below for luncheon.At luncheon, too, the Laird quite made up his feud with AngusSutherland, for he had a great many other good ones to tell aboutwhiskey and whiskey drinking; and he liked a sympathetic audience.  Butthis general merriment was suddenly dashed by an ominous suggestioncoming from our young Doctor.  Why, he asked, should we go on fightingagainst these northerly winds?  Why not turn and run before them?"Then you want to leave us, Angus," said his hostess reproachfully."Oh, no," he said, and with some colour in his face.  "I don't want togo, but I fear I must very soon now.  However, I did not make thatsuggestion on my own account; if I were pressed for time, I could getsomewhere where I could catch the Clansman."Mary Avon looked down, saying nothing."You would not leave the ship like that," says his hostess.  "You wouldnot run away, surely?  Rather than that we will turn at once. Where arewe now?""If the breeze lasts, we will get over to Uist, to Loch na Maddy, thisevening, but you must not think of altering your plans on my account.  Imade the suggestion because of what Captain John was saying.""Very well," says our Admiral of the Fleet, taking no heed of properlyconstituted authority.  "Suppose we set out on our return voyageto-morrow morning, going round the other side of Skye for a change.  Butyou know, Angus, it is not fair of you to run away when you say yourselfthere is nothing particular calls you to London.""Oh," says he, "I am not going to London just yet.  I am going to Banff,to see my father.  There is an uncle of mine, too, on a visit to themanse.""Then you will be coming south again?""Yes.""Then why not come another cruise with us on your way back?"It was not like this hard-headed young Doctor to appear so embarrassed."That is what I should like very much myself," he stammered, "ifif Iwere not in the way of your other arrangements.""We shall make no other arrangements," says the other definitely.  "Nowthat is a promise, mind.  No drawing back.  Mary will put it down inwriting, and hold you to it."Mary Avon had not looked up all this time."You should not press Dr. Sutherland too much," she says shyly; "perhapshe has other friends he would like to see before leaving Scotland."The hypocrite!  Did she want to make Angus Sutherland burst ablood-vessel in protesting that of all the excursions he had made in hislife this would be to him for ever the most memorable; and that arepetition or extension of it was a delight in the future almost toogreat to think of?  However, she seemed pleased that he spoke so warmly,and she did not attempt to contradict him.  If he had really enjoyed allthis rambling idleness, it would no doubt the better fit him for hiswork in the great capital.We beat in to Loch na Maddythat is, the Lake of the Dogsin the quietevening; and the rather commonplace low-lying hills, and the plainhouses of the remote little village, looked beautiful enough under theglow of the western skies.  And we went ashore, and walked inland for aspace, through an intricate network of lagoons inbranching from the sea;and we saw the trout leaping and making circles on the gold-red pools,and watched the herons rising from their fishing and winging their slowflight across the silent lakes.And it was a beautiful night, too, and we had a little singing on deck.Perhaps there was an under-current of regret in the knowledge thatnowfor this voyage, at leastwe had touched our farthest point.To-morrow we were to set out again for the south.*CHAPTER XIII.**FERDINAND AND MIRANDA.*The wind was laughing at Angus Sutherland. All the time we had beensailing north it had blown from the north; how that we turned our faceseastward, it wheeled round to the east, as if it would imprison him forever in this floating home."You would fain get away"this was the mocking sound that one of usseemed to hear in those light airs of the morning that blew along thewhite canvas"the world calls; ambition, fame, the eagerness ofrivalry, the spell that science throws over her disciples, all these arepowerful, and they draw you, and you would fain get away.  But the handof the wind is uplifted against you; you may fret as you will, but youare not round Ru Hunish yet!"And perhaps the imaginative small creature who heard these strangethings in the light breeze against which we were fighting our way acrossthe Minch may have been forming her own plans.  Angus Sutherland, sheused often to say, wanted humanising.  He was too proud and scornful inthe pride of his knowledge; the gentle hand of a woman was needed tolead him into more tractable ways.  And then this Mary Avon, with herdexterous, nimble woman's wit, and her indomitable courage, and her lifeand spirit, and abounding cheerfulness; would she not be a splendidcompanion for him during his long and hard struggle?  This bornmatch-maker had long ago thrown away any notion about the Lairdtransferring our singing-bird to Denny-mains.  She had almost forgottenabout the project of bringing Howard Smith, the Laird's nephew, andhalf-compelling him to marry Mary Avon: that was preposterous on theface of it.  But she had grown accustomed, during those long days oftranquil idleness, to see our young Doctor and Mary Avon together, cutoff from all the distractions of the world, a new Paul and Virginia.Whyshe may have asked herselfshould not these two solitary waifs, thusthrown by chance together on the wide ocean of existence, why shouldthey not cling to each other and strengthen each other in the comingdays of trial and storm?  The strange, pathetic, phantasmal farce oflife is brief; they cannot seize it and hold it, and shape it to theirown ends; they know not whence it comes, or whither it goes; but whilethe brief, strange thing lasts, they can grasp each other's hand, andmake sureamid all the unknown things around them, the mountains, andthe wide seas, and the starsof some common, humble, human sympathy.  Itis so natural to grasp the hand of another in the presence of somethingvast and unknown.The rest of us, at all events, have no time for such vague dreams andreveries.  There is no idleness on board the White Dove out here onthe shining deep.  Dr. Sutherland has rigged up for himself a sort ofgymnasium by putting a rope across the shrouds to the peak halyards; andon this rather elastic cross-bar he is taking his morning exercise bygoing through a series of performances, no doubt picked up in Germany.Miss Avon is busy with a sketch of the long headland running out toVaternish Point; though, indeed, this smooth Atlantic roll makes itdifficult for her to keep her feet, and introduces a certain amount ofhaphazard into her handiwork. The Laird has brought on deck a formidableportfolio of papers, no doubt relating to the public affairs ofStrathgovan; and has put on his gold spectacles; and has got his pencilin hand.  Master Fred is re-arranging the cabins; the mistress of theyacht is looking after her flowers.  And then is heard the voice of Johnof Skye"Stand by, boys!" and "Bout ship!" and the helm goes down,and the jib and foresail flutter and tear at the blocks and sheets, andthen the sails gently fill, and the White Dove is away on anothertack."Well, I give in," says Mary Avon, at last, as a heavier lurch thanusual threatens to throw her and her easel together into the scuppers."It is no use.""I thought you never gave in, Mary," says our Admiral, whose head hasappeared again at the top of the companion-stairs."I wonder who could paint like this," says Miss Avon, indignantly.  Andindeed she is trussed up like a fowl, with one arm round one of the gigdavits."Turner was lashed to the mast of a vessel in order to see a storm,"says Queen T."But not to paint," retorts the other. "Besides, I am not Turner.Besides, I am tired."By this time, of course, Angus Sutherland has come to her help; andremoves her easel and what not for her; and fetches her a deck-chair."Would you like to play chess?" says he."Oh, yes," she answers dutifully, "if you think the pieces will stay onthe board.""Draughts will be safer," says he, and therewith he plunges below, andfetches up the squared board.And so, on this beautiful summer day, with the shining seas around them,and a cool breeze tempering the heat of the sun, Ferdinand and Mirandaset to work.  And it was a pretty sight to see themher soft dark eyesso full of an anxious care to acquit herself well; his robust, hard,fresh-coloured face full of a sort of good-natured forbearance.  Butnevertheless it was a strange game.  All Scotchmen are supposed to playdraughts; and one brought up in a manse is almost of necessity a goodplayer.  But one astonished onlooker began to perceive that, whereasMary Avon played but indifferently, her opponent played with a blindnessthat was quite remarkable.  She had a very pretty, small, white hand;was he looking at that that he did not, on one occasion, see how hecould have taken three pieces and crowned his man all at one fell swoop?And then is it considered incumbent on a draught-player to inform hisopponent of what would be a better move on the part of the latter?However that may be, true it is that, by dint of much advice, opportuneblindness, and atrocious bad play, the Doctor managed to get the gameended in a draw."Dear me," said Mary Avon, "I never thought I should have had a chance.The Scotch are such good draught-players.""But you play remarkably well," said heand there was no blush of shameon his face.Draughts and luncheon carry us on to the afternoon; and still the lightbreeze holds out; and we get nearer and nearer to the most northerlypoints of Skye.  And as the evening draws on, we can now make out thehilly line of Ross-shirea pale rose-colour in the far east; and nearerat hand is the Skye coast, with the warm sunlight touching on the ruinsof Duntulme, where Donald Gorm Mor fed his imprisoned nephew on saltbeef, and then lowered to him an empty cupmocking him before he died;and then in the west the mountains of Harris, a dark purple against theclear lemon-golden glow.  But as night draws on, behold! the wind diesaway altogether; and we lie becalmed on a lilac-and-silver sea, withsome rocky islands over there grown into a strange intense green in theclear twilight.Down with the gig, then, John of Skye!and hurry in all our rods, andlines, and the occult entrapping inventions of our patriarch ofDenny-mains.  We have no scruple about leaving the yacht in mid-ocean,in charge of the steward only.  The clear twilight shines in the sky;there is not a ripple on the sea; only the long Atlantic swell that wecan hear breaking far away on the rocks.  And surely such calms areinfrequent in the Minch; and surely these lonely rocks can have beenvisited but seldom by passing voyagers?Yet the great rollersas we near the forbidding shoresbreak with anominous thunder on the projecting points and reefs.  The Doctor insistson getting closer and closerhe knows where the big lithe are likely tobe foundand the men, although they keep a watchful eye about them,obey.  And thenit is Mary Avon who first calls outand behold!  her rodis suddenly dragged downthe point is hauled below the wateragony andalarm are on her face."Heretake ittake it!" she calls out. "The rod will be broken.""Not a bit," the Doctor calls out.  "Give him the butt hard!  Never mindthe rod! Haul away!"And indeed by this time everybody was alternately calling and hauling;and John of Skye, attending to the rods of the two ladies, had scarcelytime to disengage the big fish, and smooth the flies again; and theLaird was declaring that these lithe fight as hard as a twenty-poundsalmon.  What did we care about those needles and points of black rockthat every two or three seconds showed their teeth through the breakingwhite surf?"Keep her close in, boys!" Angus Sutherland cried.  "We shall have afine pickling to-morrow."Then one fish, stronger or bigger than his fellows, pulls the rod cleanout of Mary Avon's hands."Well, I have done it this time," she says."Not a bit!" her companion cries.  "Up all lines!  Back now,ladsgently!"And as the stern of the boat is shoved over the great glassy billows,behold! a thin dark line occasionally visiblethe end of the lost rod!Then there is a swoop on the part of our Doctor; he has both his handson the butt; there elapses a minute or two of fighting between man andfish; and then we can see below the boat the wan gleam of the capturedanimal as it comes to the surface in slow circles.  Hurrah! aseven-pounder!  John of Skye chuckles to himself as he grasps the biglithe."Oh, ay!" he says, "the young leddy knows ferry well when to throw awaythe rod.  It is a gran' good thing to throw away the rod when there willbe a big fish.  Ay, ay, it iss a good fish."But the brutes that fought hardest of all were the dog-fishthe snakesof the sea; and there was a sort of holy Archangelic joy on the face ofJohn of Skye when he seized a lump of stick to fell these hideouscreatures before flinging them back into the water again. And yet whyshould they have been killed on account of their snake-like eyes andtheir cruel mouth?  The human race did not rise and extirpate FrederickSmethurst because he was ill-favoured.By half-past ten we had secured a good cargo of fish; and then we setout for the yacht.  The clear twilight was still shining above theHarris hills; but there was a dusky shadow along the Outer Hebrides,where the orange ray of Scalpa light was shining; and there was dusk inthe south, so that the yacht had become invisible altogether.  It was along pull back; for the White Dove had been carried far by the ebbtide.  When we found her, she looked like a tall grey ghost in thegathering darkness; and no light had as yet been put up; but all thesame we had a laughing welcome from Master Fred, who was glad to havethe fresh fish wherewith to supplement our frugal meals.Then the next morningwhen we got up and looked aroundwe were in thesame place!  And the glass would not fall; and the blue skies kept blue;and we had to encounter still another day of dreamy idleness."The weather is conspiring against you, Angus," our sovereign lady said,with a smile. "And you know you cannot run away from the yacht: it wouldbe so cowardly to take the steamer.""Well, indeed," said he, "it is the first time in my life that I havefound absolute idleness enjoyable; and I am not so very anxious itshould end.  Somehow, though, I fear we are too well off.  When we getback to the region of letters and telegrams, don't you think we shallhave to pay for all this selfish happiness?""Then why should we go back?" she says lightly.  "Why not make a compactto forsake the world altogether, and live all our life on board theWhite Dove?"Somehow, his eyes wandered to Mary Avon; and he saidrather absently"I, for one, should like it well enough; if it were only possible.""No, no," says the Laird, brusquely, "that will no do at all.  It wasnever intended that people should go and live for themselves like that.Ye have your duties to the nation and to the laws that protect ye.  WhenI left Denny-mains I told my brother Commissioners that what I could dowhen I was away to further the business of the Burgh I would do; and Ihave entered most minutely into several matters of great importance.And that is why I am anxious to get to Portree.  I expect most importantletters there."Portree!  Our whereabouts on the chart last night was marked between 45and 46 fathoms W.S.W. from some nameless rocks; and here, as far as wecan make out, we are still between these mystical numbers.  What can wedo but chat, and read, and play draughts, and twirl round a rope, andascend to the cross-trees to look out for a breeze, and watch and listento the animal-life around us?"I do think," says Mary Avon to her hostess, "the calling of thosedivers is the softest and most musical sound I ever heard; perhapsbecause it is associated with so many beautiful places.  Just fancy,now, if you were suddenly to hear a diver symphony beginning in anoperaif all the falsetto recitative and the blare of the trumpets wereto stopand if you were to hear the violins and flutes beginning, quitelow and soft, a diver symphony, would you not think of the Hebrides, andthe White Dove, and the long summer days?  In the winter, you know, inLondon, I fancy we should go once or twice to see that opera!""I have never been to an opera," remarks the Laird, quite impervious toMary Avon's tender enthusiasm.  "I am told it is a fantasticexhibeetion."One incident of that day was the appearance of a new monster of thedeep, which approached quite close to the hull of the White Dove.Leaning over the rail we could see him clearly in the clear waterabeautiful, golden, submarine insect, with a conical body like that of aland-spider, and six or eight slender legs, by the incurving of which heslowly propelled himself through the water.  As we were perfectlyconvinced that no one had ever been in such dead calms in the Minchbefore, and had lain for twenty-four hours in the neighbourhood of 45and 46, we took it for granted that this was a new animal.  In thetemporary absence of our F.R.S., the Laird was bold enough to name itthe Arachne Mary-Avonensis; but did not seek to capture it.  It wenton its golden way.But we were not to linger for ever in these northern seas, surrounded byperpetual summer calmshowever beautiful the prospect might be to ayoung man fallen away, for the moment, from his high ambitions.Whatever summons from the far world might be awaiting us at Portree wassoon to be served upon us.  In the afternoon a slight breeze sprung upthat gently carried us away past Ru Hunish, and round by Eilean Trodda,and down by Altavaig. The grey-green basaltic cliffs of the Skye coastwere now in shadow; but the strong sunlight beat on the grassy ledgesabove; and there was a distant roar of water along the rocks. This otherthrobbing sound, too: surely that must be some steamer far away on theother side of Rona?The sunset deepened.  Darker and darker grew the shadows in the greatmountains above us.  We heard the sea along the solitary shores.The stars came out in the twilight: they seemed clearest just over theblack mountains. In the silence there was the sound of a waterfallsomewherein among those dark cliffs. Then our side-lights were put up;and we sate on deck; and Mary Avon, nestling close to her friend, waspersuaded to sing for herYestreen the Queen had four Mariesjust as if she had never heard the song before.  The hours went by;Angus Sutherland was talking in a slow, earnest, desultory fashion; andsurely he must have been conscious that one heart there at least waseagerly and silently listening to him.  The dawn was near at hand whenfinally we consented to go below.What time of the morning was it that we heard John of Skye call out"Six or seven fathoms 'll do?"  We knew at least that we had got intoharbour; and that the first golden glow of the daybreak was streamingthrough the skylights of the saloon.  We had returned from the wilds tothe claims and the cares of civilisation; if there was any message tous, for good or for evil, from the distant world we had left for solong, it was now waiting for us on shore.*CHAPTER XIV.**EVIL TIDINGS.*We had indeed returned to the world: the first thing we saw on enteringthe saloon in the morning was a number of lettersactual letters, thathad come through a post-officelying on the breakfast-table.  We staredat these strange things.  Our good Queen T. was the first to approachthem.  She took them up as if she expected they would bite her."Oh, Mary," she says, "there is not one for younot one."Angus Sutherland glanced quickly at the girl.  But there was not theleast trace of disappointment on her face.  On the contrary, she said,with a cheerful indifference"So much the better.  They only bother people."But of course they had to be opened and readeven the bulky parcel fromStrathgovan. The only bit of intelligence that came from that quarterwas to the effect that Tom Galbraith had been jilted by his lady-love;but as the rumour, it appeared, was in circulation among the Glasgowartists, the Laird instantly and indignantly refused to believe it.Envy is the meanest of the passions; and we knew that the Glasgowartists could scarcely sleep in their bed at night for thinking of thegreat fame of Mr. Galbraith of Edinburgh.  However, amid all theseletters one of us stumbled upon one little item that certainly concernedus.  It was a clipping from the advertisement column of a newspaper.  Itwas inclosed, without word or comment, by a friend in London who knewthat we were slightly acquainted, perforce, with Mr. FrederickSmethurst.  And it appeared that that gentleman, having got intodifficulties with his creditors, had taken himself off, in asurreptitious and evil manner, insomuch that this newspaper clipping wasnothing more nor less than a hue and cry after the fraudulent bankrupt.That letter and its startling inclosure were quickly whipped into thepocket of the lady to whom they had been sent.By great good luck Mary Avon was the first to go on deck.  She wasanxious to see this new harbour into which we had got.  And then, withconsiderable dismay on her face, our sovereign mistress showed us thisugly thing. She was much excited.  It was so shameful of him to bringthis disgrace on Mary Avon! What would the poor girl say?  And thisgentle lady would not for worlds have her told while she was withusuntil at least we got back to some more definite channel ofinformation.  She was, indeed, greatly distressed.But we had to order her to dismiss these idle troubles.  We formedourselves into a committee on the spot; and this committee unanimously,if somewhat prematurely, and recklessly, resolvedFirst, that it was not of the slightest consequence to us or any humancreature where Mr. Frederick Smethurst was, or what he might do withhimself.Secondly, that if Mr. Frederick Smethurst were to put a string and astone round his neck and betake himself to the bottom of the sea, hewould earn our gratitude and in some measure atone for his previousconduct.Thirdly, that nothing at all about the matter should be said to MaryAvon: if the man had escaped, there might probably be an end of thewhole business.To these resolutions, carried swiftly and unanimously, Angus Sutherlandadded a sort of desultory rider, to the effect that moral or immoralqualities do sometimes reveal themselves in the face.  He was also ofopinion that spare persons were more easy of detection in this manner.He gave an instance of a well-known character in Londona most promisingruffian who had run through the whole gamut of discreditable offences.Why was there no record of this brave career written in the man's face?Because nature had obliterated the lines in fat.  When a man attains tothe dimensions and appearance of a scrofulous toad swollen to the sizeof an ox, moral and mental traces get rubbed out.  Therefore, contendedour F.R.S., all persons who set out on a career of villany, and don'twant to be found out, should eat fat-producing foods. Potatoes and sugarhe especially mentioned as being calculated to conceal crime.However, we had to banish Frederick Smethurst and his evil deeds fromour minds; for the yacht from end to end was in a bustle of commotionabout our going ashore; and as for uswhy, we meant to run riot in allthe wonders and delights of civilisation.  Innumerable fowls, tons ofpotatoes and cabbage and lettuce, fresh butter, new loaves, new milk:there was no end to the visions that rose before the excited brain ofour chief commissariat officer.  And when the Laird, in the act ofstepping, with much dignity, into the gig, expressed his firm convictionthat somewhere or other we should stumble upon a Glasgow newspaper notmore than a week old, so that he might show us the reports of themeetings of the Strathgovan Commissioners, we knew of no further luxurythat the mind could desire.And as we were being rowed ashore, we could not fail to be struck by theextraordinary abundance of life and business and activity in the world.Portree, with its wooded crags and white houses shining in the sun,seemed a large and populous city.  The smooth waters of the bay werecrowded with craft of every description; and the boats of the yachtswere coming and going with so many people on board of them that we werequite stared out of countenance.  And then, when we landed, and walkedup the quay, and ascended the hill into the town, we regarded the signsover the shop-doors with the same curiosity that regards the commonestfeatures of a foreign street.  There was a peculiarity about Portree,however, that is not met with in continental capitals.  We felt that theground swayed lightly under our feet.  Perhaps these were the lastoscillations of the great volcanic disturbance that shot the blackCoolins into the sky.Then the shops: such displays of beautiful things, in silk, and wool,and cunning woodwork; human ingenuity declaring itself in a thousandways, and appealing to our purses. Our purses, to tell the truth, weregaping.  A craving for purchase possessed us.  But, after all, the Lairdcould not buy servant girls' scarves as a present for Mary Avon; andAngus Sutherland did not need a second waterproof coat; and though wereached the telegraph office, there would have been a certain monotonyin spending innumerable shillings on unnecessary telegrams, even thoughwe might be rejoicing in one of the highest conveniences ofcivilisation.  The plain truth must be told.  Our purchases were limitedto some tobacco and a box or two of paper collars for the men; to one ortwo shilling novels; and a flask of eau-de-Cologne.  We did not halfavail ourselves of all the luxuries spread out so temptingly before us."Do you think the men will have the water on board yet?" Mary Avon says,as we walk back.  "I do not at all like being on land. The sun scorchesso, and the air is stifling.""In my opeenion," says the Laird, "the authorities of Portree aredeserving of great credit for having fixed up the apparatus to let boatsget water on board at the quay.  It was a public-spirited projectit wasthat.  And I do not suppose that any one grumbles at having to pay ashilling for the privilege.  It is a legeetimate tax.  I am sure itwould have been a long time or we could have got such a thing atStrathgovan, if there was need for it there; ye would scarcely believeit, ma'am, what a spirit of opposition there is among some o' theCommissioners to any improvement, ye would not believe it.""Indeed," she says, in innocent wonder; she quite sympathises with thispublic-spirited reformer."Ay, it's true.  Mind ye, I am a Conservative myself; I will havenothing to do with Radicals and their Republics; no, no, but a wiseConservative knows how to march with the age.  Take my own poseetion:for example, as soon as I saw that the steam fire-engine was anecessity, I withdrew my opposition at once.  I am very thankful to you,ma'am, for having given me an opportunity of carefully considering thequestion.  I will never forget our trip round Mull.  Dear me! it is warmthe day," added the Laird, as he raised his broad felt hat, and wipedhis face with his voluminous silk handkerchief.Here come two pedestriansgood-looking young lads of an obviouslyEnglish typeand faultlessly equipped from head to heel.  They lookneither to the left nor right; on they go manfully through the dust, thesun scorching their faces; there must be a trifle of heat under theseknapsacks.  Well, we wish them fine weather and whole heels.  It is notthe way some of us would like to pass a holiday. For what is this thatMiss Avon is singing lightly to herself as she walks carelessly on,occasionally pausing to look in at a shopAnd often have we seamen heard how men are killed or undone,By overturns of carriages, and thieves, and fires in London.Here she turns aside to caress a small terrier; but the animal,mistaking her intention, barks furiously, and retreats, growling andferocious, into the shop.  Miss Avon is not disturbed. She walks on, andcompletes her nautical balladall for her own benefitWe've heard what risk all landsmen run, from noblemen to tailors,So, Billy, let's thank Providence that you and I are sailors!"What on earth is that, Mary?" her friend behind asks.The girl stops with a surprised look, as if she had scarcely beenlistening to herself; then she says lightly:"Oh, don't you know the sailor's songI forget what they call it:A strong sou-wester's blowing, Billy, can't you hear it roar now,Lord help 'em, how I pities all unhappy folks on shore now."You have become a thorough sailor, Miss Avon," says Angus Sutherland,who has overheard the last quotation."II like it betterI am more interested," she says, timidly, "since youwere so kind as to show me the working of the ship.""Indeed," says he, "I wish you would take command of her, and order herpresent captain below.  Don't you see how tired his eyes are becoming?He won't take his turn of sleep like the others; he has been scarcelyoff the deck night or day since we left Canna; and I find it is no useremonstrating with him.  He is too anxious; and he fancies I am in ahurry to get back; and these continual calms prevent his getting on.Now the whole difficulty would be solved, if you let me go back by thesteamer; then you could lie at Portree here for a night or two, and lethim have some proper rest.""I do believe, Angus," says his hostess, laughing in her gentle way,"that you threaten to leave us just to see how anxious we are to keepyou.""My position as ship's doctor," he retorts, "is compromised.  If CaptainJohn falls ill on my hands whom am I to blame but myself?""I am quite sure I can get him to go below," says Mary Avon, withdecision"quite sure of it.  That is, especially," she adds, rathershyly, "if you will take his place.  I know he would place moredependence on you than on any of the men."This is a very pretty compliment to pay to one who is rather proud ofhis nautical knowledge."Well," he says, laughing, "the responsibility must rest on you.  Orderhim below, to-night, and see whether he obeys.  If we don't get to aproper anchorage, we will manage to sail the yacht somehow among usyoubeing captain, Miss Avon.""If I am captain," she says, lightlythough she turns away her headsomewhat, "I shall forbid your deserting the ship.""So long as you are captain, you need not fear that," he answers.Surely he could say no less.But it was still John of Skye who was skipper when, on getting underway, we nearly met with a serious accident.  Fresh water and allprovisions having been got on board, we weighed anchor only to find thebreeze die wholly down.  Then the dingay was got out to tow the yachtaway from the sheltered harbour; and our young Doctor, always anxiousfor hard work, must needs jump in to join in this service.  But thelittle boat had been straining at the cable for scarcely five minuteswhen a squall of wind came over from the north-west and suddenly filledthe sails.  "Look out there, boys!" called Captain John, for we wererunning full down on the dingay.  "Let go the rope!  Let go!" heshouted: but they would not let go, as the dingay came sweeping by. Infact, she caught the yacht just below the quarter, and seemed todisappear altogether. Mary Avon uttered one brief cry; and then stoodpaleclasping one of the ropesnot daring to look.  And John of Skyeuttered some exclamation in the Gaelic; and jumped on to the taffrail.But the next thing we saw, just above the taffrail, was the red andshining and laughing face of Angus Sutherland, who was hoisting himselfup by means of the mizen boom; and directly afterwards appeared thescarlet cap of Hector of Moidart.  It was upon this latter culprit thatthe full force of John of Skye's wrath was expended."Why did you not let go the rope when I wass call to you?""It is all right, and if I wass put into the water, I have been in thewater before," was the philosophic reply.And now it was, as we drew away from Portree, that Captain Mary Avonendeavoured to assume supreme command and would have the deposed skippergo below and sleep.  John of Skye was very obedient, but he said:"Oh,ay.  I will get plenty of sleep.  But that hill there, that is BenInivaig; and there is not any hill in the West Highlands so bad forsqualls as that hill.  By and by I will get plenty of sleep."Ben Inivaig let us go past its great, gloomy, forbidding shoulders andcliffs without visiting us with anything worse than a few variablepuffs; and we got well down into the Raasay Narrows.  What a picture ofstill summer loveliness was around us!the rippling blue seas, the greenshores, and far over these the black peaks of the Coolins now taking apurple tint in the glow of the afternoon.  The shallow Sound of Scalpawe did not venture to attack, especially as it was now low water; wewent outside Scalpa, by the rocks of Skier Dearg. And still John of Skyeevaded, with a gentle Highland courtesy, the orders of the captain. Thesilver bell of Master Fred summoned us below for dinner, and still Johnof Skye was gently obdurate."Now, John," says Mary Avon, seriously, to him, "you want to make meangry.""Oh, no, mem; I not think that," says he, deprecatingly."Then why won't you go and have some sleep?  Do you want to be ill?""Oh, there iss plenty of sleep," says he. "Maybe we will get to KyleAkin to-night; and there will be plenty of sleep for us.""But I am asking you as a favour to go and get some sleep now.  Surelythe men can take charge of the yacht!""Oh, yes, oh, yes!" says John of Skye. "They can do that ferry well."And then he pausedfor he was great friends with this young lady, anddid not like to disoblige her."You will be having your dinner now. After the dinner, if Mr. Sutherlandhimself will be on deck, I will go below and turn in for a time.""Of course Dr. Sutherland will be on deck," says the new captain,promptly; and she was so sure of one member of her crew that she added,"and he will not leave the tiller for a moment until you come to relievehim."Perhaps it was this promiseperhaps it was the wonderful beauty of theeveningthat made us hurry over dinner.  Then we went on deck again; andour young Doctor, having got all his bearings and directions clear inhis head, took the tiller, and John of Skye at length succumbed to theauthority of Commander Avon and disappeared into the forecastle.The splendour of colour around us on that still evening!away in thewest the sea of a pale yellow green, with each ripple a flash ofrose-flame, and over there in the south the great mountains of SkyetheCoolins, Blaven, and Ben-na-Cailleachbecome of a plum-purple in theclear and cloudless sky. Angus Sutherland was at the tillercontemplatively smoking an almost black meerschaum; the Laird wasdiscoursing to us about the extraordinary pith and conciseness of theScotch phrases in the Northumbrian Psalter; while ever and anon acertain young lady, linked arm-in-arm with her friend, would break thesilence with some aimless fragment of ballad or old-world air.And still we glided onwards in the beautiful evening; and now ahead ofus in the dusk of the evening, the red star of Kyle Akin lighthousesteadily gleamed.  We might get to anchor, after all, without awakingJohn of Skye."In weather like this," remarked our sovereign lady, "in the gatheringdarkness, John might keep asleep for fifty years.""Like Rip Van Winkle," said the Laird, proud of his erudition.  "That isa wonderful story that Washington Irving wrotea verra fine story.""Washington Irving!the story is as old as the Coolins," says Dr.Sutherland.The Laird stared as if he had been Rip Van Winkle himself: was he forever to be checkmated by the encyclopdic knowledge of Young EnglandorYoung Scotland ratherand that knowledge only the gatherings andsweepings of musty books that anybody with a parrot-like habit mightacquire?"Why, surely you know that the legend belongs to that common stock oflegends that go through all literatures?" says our young Doctor.  "Ihave no doubt the Hindoos have their Epimenides; and that Peter Klausturns up somewhere or other in the Gaelic stories. However, that is oflittle importance; it is of importance that Captain John should get somesleep.  Hector, come here!"There was a brief consultation about the length of anchor-chain wantedfor the little harbour opposite Kyle Akin; Hector's instructions were onno account to disturb John of Skye.  But no sooner had they set aboutgetting the chain on deck than another figure appeared, black among therigging; and there was a well-known voice heard forward.  Then CaptainJohn came aft, and, despite all remonstrances, would relieve hissubstitute.  Rip Van Winkle's sleep had lasted about an hour and a half.And now we steal by the black shores; and that solitary red star comesnearer and nearer in the dusk; and at length we can make out two orthree other paler lights close down by the water.  Behold! the yellowports of a steam-yacht at anchor; we know, as our own anchor goesrattling out in the dark, that we shall have at least one neighbour andcompanion through the still watches of the night.*CHAPTER XV.**TEMPTATION.*But the night, according to John of Skye's chronology, lasts only untilthe tide turns or until a breeze springs up.  Long before the wan glarein the east has arisen to touch the highest peaks of the Coolins, wehear the tread of the men on deck getting the yacht under way.  And thenthere is a shuffling noise in Angus Sutherland's cabin; and we guessthat he is stealthily dressing in the dark.  Is he anxious to behold thewonders of daybreak in the beautiful Loch Alsh, or is he bound to takehis share in the sailing of the ship?  Less perturbed spirits sink backagain into sleep, and contentedly let the White Dove go on her own waythrough the expanding blue-grey light of the dawn.Hours afterwards there is a strident shouting down the companion-way;everybody is summoned on deck to watch the yacht shoot the Narrows ofKyle Rhea.  And the Laird is the first to express his surprise: arethese the dreaded Narrows that have caused Captain John to start beforedaybreak so as to shoot them with the tide?  All around is a dream ofsummer beauty and quiet.  A more perfect picture of peace and lovelinesscould not be imagined than the green crags of the mainland, and the vasthills of Skye, and this placid channel between shining in the fair lightof the morning.  The only thing we notice is that on the glassy green ofthe waterthis reflected, deep, almost opaque green is not unlike thecolour of Niagara below the Fallsthere are smooth circular lines hereand there; and now and again the bows of the White Dove slowly swerveaway from her course as if in obedience to some unseen and mysteriouspressure.  There is not a breath of wind; and it needs all the pullingof the two men out there in the dingay and all the watchful steering ofCaptain John to keep her head straight.  Then a light breeze comes alongthe great gully; the red-capped men are summoned on board; the dingay isleft astern; the danger of being caught in an eddy and swirled ashore isover and gone.Suddenly the yacht stops as if she had run against a wall.  Then, justas she recovers, there is an extraordinary hissing and roaring in thedead silence around us, and close by the yacht we find a great circle ofboiling and foaming water, forced up from below and overlapping itselfin ever-increasing folds.  And then, on the perfectly glassy sea,another and another of those boiling and hissing circles appears, untilthere is a low rumbling in the summer air like the breaking of distantwaves. And the yachtthe wind having again died downis curiouslycompelled one way and then another, insomuch that John of Skye quicklyorders the men out in the dingay again; and once more the long cable istugging at her bows."It seems to me," says Dr. Sutherland to our skipper, "that we are inthe middle of about a thousand whirlpools.""Oh, it iss ferry quate this morning," says Captain John, with a shrewdsmile.  "It iss not often so quate as this.  Ay, it iss sometimes ferrybad herequite so bad as Corrievreckan; and when the flood-tide isrinnin, it will be rinnin likeshist like a race-horse."However, by dint of much hard pulling, and judicious steering, we manageto keep the White Dove pretty well in mid-current; and only onceandthat but for a second or twoget caught in one of those eddies circlingin to the shore.  We pass the white ferry-house; a slight breeze carriesus by the green shores and woods of Glenelg; we open out the wider seabetween Isle Ornsay and Loch Hourn; and then a silver tinkle tells usbreakfast is ready.That long, beautiful, calm summer day: Ferdinand and Miranda playingdraughts on deckhe having rigged up an umbrella to shelter her from thehot sun; the Laird busy with papers referring to the Strathgovan PublicPark; the hostess of these people overhauling the stores and meditatingon something recondite for dinner.  At last the Doctor fairly burst outa-laughing."Well," said he, "I have been in many a yacht; but never yet in onewhere everybody on board was anxiously waiting for the glass to fall."His hostess laughed too."When you come south again," she said, "we may be able to give you atouch of something different.  I think that, even with all your love ofgales, a few days of the equinoctials would quite satisfy you.""The equinoctials!" he said, with a surprised look."Yes," said she boldly.  "Why not have a good holiday while you areabout it?  And a yachting trip is nothing without a fight with theequinoctials.  Oh, you have no idea how splendidly the White Dovebehaves!""I should like to try her," he said, with a quick delight; but directlyafterwards he ruefully shook his head.  "No, no," said he, "such atremendous spell of idleness is not for me. I have not earned the rightto it yet.  Twenty years hence I may be able to have three months'continued yachting in the West Highlands.""If I were you," retorted this small person, with a practical air, "Iwould take it when I could get it.  What do you know about twenty yearshence?you may be physician to the Emperor of China.  And you haveworked very hard; and you ought to take as long a holiday as you canget.""I am sure," says Mary Avon very timidly, "that is very wise advice.""In the meantime," says he, cheerfully, "I am not physician to theEmperor of China, but to the passengers and crew of the White Dove.The passengers don't do me the honour of consulting me; but I am goingto prescribe for the crew on my own responsibility.  All I want is, thatI shall have the assistance of Miss Avon in making them take the dose."Miss Avon looked up inquiringly with the soft black eyes of her."Nobody has any control over them but herselfthey are like refractorychildren. Now," said he, rather more seriously, "this night-and-day workis telling on the men. Another week of it and you would see Insomniawritten in large letters on their eyes.  I want you, Miss Avon, to getCaptain John and the men to have a complete night's rest to-nightasound night's sleep from the time we finish dinner till daybreak.  Wecan take charge of the yacht."Miss Avon promptly rose to her feet."John!" she called.The big brown-bearded skipper from Skye came aftputting his pipe in hiswaistcoat-pocket the while."John," she said, "I want you to do me a favour now.  You and the menhave not been having enough sleep lately.  You must all go belowto-night as soon as we come up from dinner; and you must have a goodsleep till daybreak.  The gentlemen will take charge of the yacht."It was in vain that John of Skye protested he was not tired.  It was invain that he assured her that, if a good breeze sprung up, we might getright back to Castle Osprey by the next morning."Why, you know very well," she said, "this calm weather means to lastfor ever.""Oh, no!  I not think that, mem," said John of Skye, smiling."At all events we shall be sailing all night; and that is what I wantyou to do, as a favour to me."Indeed, our skipper found it was of no use to refuse.  The young ladywas peremptory.  And so, having settled that matter, she sate down toher draught-board again.But it was the Laird she was playing with now.  And this was aremarkable circumstance about the game: when Angus Sutherland playedwith Denny-mains, the latter was hopelessly and invariably beaten; andwhen Denny-mains in his turn played with Mary Avon, he was relentlesslyand triumphantly the victor; but when Angus Sutherland played with MissAvon, she, somehow or other, generally managed to secure two out ofthree games.  It was a puzzling triangular duel: the chief feature of itwas the splendid joy of the Laird when he had conquered the Englishyoung lady.  He rubbed his hands, he chuckled, he laughedjust as if hehad been repeating one of his own "good ones."However, at luncheon the Laird was much more serious; for he was showingto us how remiss the Government was in not taking up the great solanquestion.  He had a newspaper cutting which gave in figuresin rows offiguresthe probable number of millions of herrings destroyed every yearby the solan-geese.  The injuries done to the herring-fisheries of thiscountry, he proved to us, was enormous.  If a solan is known to eat onan average fifty herrings a day, just think of the millions on millionsof fish that must go to feed those nests on the Bass Rock!  The Lairdwaxed quite eloquent about it.  The human race were dearer to him farthan any gannet or family of gannets."What I wonder at is this," said our young Doctor with a curious grimsmile, that we had learned to know, coming over his face, "that thesolan, with that extraordinary supply of phosphorus to the brain, shouldhave gone on remaining only a bird, and a very ordinary bird, too.  Itsbrain-power should have been developed; it should be able to speak bythis time.  In fact, there ought to be solan schoolboards and parochialboards on the Bass Rock; and commissioners appointed to inquire whetherthe building of nests might not be conducted on more scientificprinciples. When I was a boyI am sorry to sayI used often to catch asolan by floating out a piece of wood with a dead herring on it: a wisebird, with its brain full of phosphorus, ought to have known that itwould break its head when it swooped down on a piece of wood."The Laird sate in dignified silence.  There was something occult anduncanny about many of this young man's sayingsthey savoured too much ofthe dangerous and unsettling tendencies of these modern days.  Besides,he did not see what good could come of likening a lot of solan-geese tothe Commissioners of the Burgh of Strathgovan.  His remarks on theherring-fisheries had been practical and intelligible; they had given nooccasion for jibes.We were suddenly startled by the rattling out of the anchor-chain.  Whatcould it mean?were we caught in an eddy?  There was a scurrying up ondeck, only to find that, having drifted so far south with the tide, andthe tide beginning to turn, John of Skye proposed to secure whatadvantage we had gained by coming to anchor.  There was a sort of shamedlaughter over this business.  Was the noble White Dove only a riverbarge, then, that she was thus dependent on the tides for her progress?But it was no use either to laugh or to grumble; two of us proposed torow the Laird away to certain distant islands that lie off the shorenorth of the mouth of Loch Hourn; and for amusement's sake we took sometowels with us.Look now how this long and shapely gig cuts the blue water.  The Lairdis very dignified in the stern, with the tiller-ropes in his hand; hekeeps a straight course enoughthough he is mostly looking over theside. And, indeed, this is a perfect wonder-hall over which we aremaking our waythe water so clear that we notice the fish darting hereand there among the great brown blades of the tangle and the long greensea-grass.  Then there are stretches of yellow sand, with shells andstar-fish shining far below.  The sun burns on our hands; there is adead stillness of heat; the measured splash of the oars startles thesea-birds in there among the rocks.Send the biorlinn on careering,Cheerily and all together,Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!Look out for the shallows, most dignified of coxswains: what if we wereto imbed her bows in the silver sand?Another cheer!  Our isle appearsOur biorlinn bears her on the faster!Ho, ro, clansmen!A long strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!"Hold hard!" calls Denny-mains; and behold! we are in among a network ofchannels and small islands lying out here in the calm sea; and the birdsare wildly calling and screaming and swooping about our heads, indignantat the approach of strangers.  What is our first duty, then, in comingto these unknown islands and straits?why, surely, to name them in theinterests of civilisation. And we do so accordingly.  Herelet it be forever knownis John Smith Bay.  There, Thorley's Food for Cattle Island.Beyond that, on the south, Brown and Poison's Straits. It is quite truethat these islands and bays may have been previously visited; but it wasno doubt a long time ago; and the people did not stop to bestow names.The latitude and longitude may be dealt with afterwards; meanwhile thediscoverers unanimously resolve that the most beautiful of all theislands shall hereafter, through all time, be known as the Island ofMary Avon.It was on this island that the Laird achieved his memorable capture of ayoung sea-birda huge creature of unknown species that fluttered andscrambled over bush and over scaur, while Denny-mains, quite forgettinghis dignity and the heat of the sun, clambered after it over the rocks.And when he got it in his hands, it lay as one dead.  He was sorry.  Heregarded the newly-fledged thing with compassion; and laid it tenderlydown on the grass; and came away down again to the shore.  But he hadscarcely turned his back when the demon bird got on its legs, andwith asuccession of shrill and sarcastic "yawps"was off and away over thehigher ledges.  No fasting girl had ever shammed so completely as thisscarcely-fledged bird.We bathed in Brown and Poison's Straits, to the great distress ofcertain sea-pyots that kept screaming over our heads, resenting theintrusion of the discoverers.  But in the midst of it, we were suddenlycalled to observe a strange darkness on the sea, far away in the north,between Glenelg and Skye.  Behold! the long-looked-for winda hurricaneswooping down from the northern hills!  Our toilette on the hot rockswas of brief duration; we jumped into the gig; away we went through theglassy water!  It was a race between us and the northerly breeze whichshould reach the yacht first; and we could see that John of Skye hadremarked the coming wind, for the men were hoisting the fore-staysail.The dark blue on the water spreads; the reflections of the hills and theclouds gradually disappear; as we clamber on board the first puffs ofthe breeze are touching the great sails.  The anchor has just been gotup; the gig is hoisted to the davits; slack out the main sheet, youshifty Hector, and let the great boom go out! Nor is it any mere squallthat has come down from the hills; but a fine, steady, northerly breeze;and away we go with the white foam in our wake.  Farewell to the greatmountains over the gloomy Loch Hourn; and to the lighthouse over thereat Isle Ornsay; and to the giant shoulders of Ard-na-Glishnich.  Are notthese the dark green woods of Armadale that we see in the west?  Andsouthward, and still southward we go with the running seas and the freshbrisk breeze from the north: who knows where we may not be tonightbefore Angus Sutherland's watch begins?There is but one thoughtful face on board. It is that of Mary Avon.  Forthe moment, at least, she seems scarcely to rejoice that we have at lastgot this grateful wind to bear us away to the south and to CastleOsprey.*CHAPTER XVI.**THROUGH THE DARK.*Ahead she goes! the land she knows!What though we see a sudden squall come tearing over from the shores ofSkye, whitening the waves as it approaches us?  The White Dove is notafraid of any squall.  And there are the green woods of Armadale, duskyunder the western glow; and here the sombre heights of Dun Bane; andsoon we will open out the great gap of Loch Nevis.  We are running withthe running waves; a general excitement prevails; even the Laird hasdismissed for the moment certain dark suspicions about FrederickSmethurst that have for the last day or two been haunting his mind.And here is a fine sight!the great steamer coming down from thenorthand the sunset is burning on her red funnelsand behold! she has aline of flags from her stem to her top-masts and down to her sternagain.  Who is on board?some great laird, or some gay wedding-party?"Now is your chance, Angus," says Queen T., almost maliciously, as thesteamer slowly gains on us.  "If you want to go on at once, I know thecaptain would stop for a minute and pick you up."He looked at her for a second in a quick, hurt way; then he saw that shewas only laughing at him."Oh, no, thank you," he said, blushing like a schoolboy; "unless youwant to get rid of me. I have been looking forward to sailing the yachtto-night.""Andand you said," remarked Miss Avon, rather timidly, "that we shouldchallenge them again after dinner this evening."This was a pretty combination: "we" referred to Angus Sutherland andherself.  Her elders were disrespectfully described as "them."  So theyounger people had not forgotten how they were beaten by "them" on theprevious evening.Is there a sound of pipes amid the throbbing of the paddles?  What acrowd of people swarm to the side of the great vessel!  And there is thecaptain on the paddle-boxout all handkerchiefs to return theinnumerable salutationsand good-bye, you brave Glencoe!you have noneed to rob us of any one of our passengers.Where does the breeze come from on this still evening?there is not acloud in the sky, and there is a drowsy haze of heat all along the land.But nevertheless it continues; and, as the White Dove cleaves her waythrough the tumbling sea, we gradually draw on to the Point of Sleat,and open out the great plain of the Atlantic, now a golden green, wherethe tops of the waves catch the light of the sunset skies.  And there,too, are our old friends Haleval and Haskeval; but they are so far away,and set amid such a bewildering light, that the whole island seems to beof a pale transparent rose-purple.  And a still stranger thing nowattracts the eyes of all on board. The setting sun, as it nears thehorizon-line of the sea, appears to be assuming a distinctly oblongshape.  It is slowly sinking into a purple haze, and becomes more andmore oblong as it nears the sea.  There is a call for all the glasseshung up in the companion-way; and now what is it that we find out thereby the aid of the various binoculars?  Why, apparently, a wall ofpurple; and there is an oblong hole in it, with a fire of gold light faraway on the other side.  This apparent golden tunnel through the hazegrows redder and more red; it becomes more and more elongated; then itburns a deeper crimson until it is almost a line. The next moment thereis a sort of shock to the eyes; for there is a sudden darkness all alongthe horizon-line: the purple-black Atlantic is barred against that luridhaze low down in the west.It was a merry enough dinner-party: perhaps it was the consciousnessthat the White Dove was still bowling along that brightened up ourspirits, and made the Laird of Denny-mains more particularly loquacious.The number of good ones that he told us was quite remarkableuntil hislaughter might have been heard through the whole ship.  And to whom nowdid he devote the narration of those merry anecdotesto whom but MissMary Avon, who was his ready chorus on all occasions, and who enteredwith a greater zest than any one into the humours of them.  Had she beenstudying the Lowland dialect, then, that she understood and laughed solightly and joyously at stories about a thousand years of age?"Oh, ay," the Laird was saying patronisingly to her, "I see ye can enterinto the peculiar humour of our Scotch stories; it is not every Englishperson that can do that.  And ye understand the language fine....Well," he added, with an air of modest apology, "perhaps I do not givethe pronunciation as broad as I might.  I have got out of the way oftalking the provincial Scotch since I was a boyindeed, ah'm generallytaken for an Englishman maselfbut I do my best to give ye the speeritof it.""Oh, I am sure your imitation of the provincial Scotch is mostexcellentmost excellentand it adds so much to the humour of thestories," says this disgraceful young hypocrite."Oh, ay, oh, ay," says the Laird, greatly delighted.  "I will admit thatsome o' the stories would not have so much humour but for the language.But when ye have both!  Did ye ever hear of the laddie who was called into his porridge by his mother?"We perceived by the twinkle in the Laird's eyes that a real good one wascoming.  He looked round to see that we were listening, but it was MaryAvon whom he addressed."A grumbling bit laddiea philosopher, too," said he.  "His motherthought he would come in the quicker if he knew there was a fly in themilk.  'Johnny,' she cried out, 'Johnny, come in to your parritch;there's a flee in the milk.'  'It'll no droon,' says he.  'What!'she says, 'grumblin again?  Do ye think there's no enough milk?''Plenty for the parritch,' says hekee! kee! kee!sharp, eh, wasn'teh?'Plenty for the parritch,' says heha! ha! ho! ho! ho!"and theLaird slapped his thigh, and chuckled to himself.  "Oh, ay, Miss Mary,"he added, approvingly, "I see you are beginning to understand the Scotchhumour fine."And if our good friend the Laird had been but twenty years youngerwithhis battery of irresistible jokes, and his great and obvious affectionfor this stray guest of ours, to say nothing of his dignity andimportance as a Commissioner of Strathgovan?  What chance would a poorScotch student have had, with his test-tubes and his scientificmagazines, his restless, audacious speculations and eager ambitions?  Onthe one side, wealth, ease, a pleasant facetiousness, and a comfortableacceptance of the obvious facts of the universeincluding water-ratesand steam fire-engines; on the other, poverty, unrest, the physicalstruggle for existence, the mental struggle with the mysteries of life:who could doubt what the choice would be?  However, there was no thoughtof this rivalry now.  The Laird had abdicated in favour of his nephew,Howard, about whom he had been speaking a good deal to Mary Avon oflate.  And Angusthough he was always very kind and timidly attentive toMiss Avonseemed nevertheless at times almost a little afraid of her; orperhaps it was only a vein of shyness that cropped up from time to timethrough his hard mental characteristics.  In any case, he was at thismoment neither the shy lover nor the eager student; he was full of theprospect of having sole command of the ship during a long night on theAtlantic, and he hurried us up on deck after dinner without a word aboutthat return-battle at bezique.The night had come on apace, though there was still a ruddy mist aboutthe northern skies, behind the dusky purple of the Coolin hills. Thestars were out overhead; the air around us was full of the soft cries ofthe divers; occasionally, amid the lapping of the water, we could hearsome whirring by of wings.  Then the red port light and the greenstarboard light were brought up from the forecastle, and fixed in theirplace; the men went below; Angus Sutherland took the tiller; the Lairdkept walking backwards and forwards as a sort of look-out; and the twowomen were as usual seated on rugs together in some invisiblecornercrooning snatches of ballads, or making impertinent remarks aboutpeople much wiser and older than themselves."Now, Angus," says the voice of one of themapparently from somewhereabout the companion, "show us that you can sail the yacht properly, andwe will give you complete command during the equinoctials.""You speak of the equinoctials," said he, laughing, "as if it was quitesettled I should be here in September.""Why not?" said she, promptly.  "Mary is my witness you promised.  Youwouldn't go and desert two poor lone women?""But I have got that most uncomfortable thing, a conscience," heanswered; "and I know it would stare at me as if I were mad if Iproposed to spend such a long time in idleness. It would be outragingall my theories, besides. You know, for years and years back I have beenlimiting myself in every wayliving, for example, on the smallestallowance of food and drink, and that of the simplest and cheapestsothat if any need arose, I should have no luxurious habits to abandon""But what possible need can there be?" said Mary Avon, warmly."Do you expect to spend your life in a jail?" said the other woman."No," said he, quite simply.  "But I will give you an instance of what aman who devotes himself to his profession may have to do.  A friend ofmine, who is one of the highest living authorities on Materia Medica,refused all invitations for three months, and during the whole of thattime lived each day on precisely the same food and drink, weighed out inexact quantities, so as to determine the effect of particular drugs onhimself.  Well, you know, you should be ready to do that""Oh, how wrong you are!" says Mary Avon, with the same impetuosity.  "Aman who works as hard as you do should not sacrifice yourself to atheory.  And what is it?  It is quite foolish!""Mary!" her friend says."It is," she says, with generous warmth.  "It is like a man who goesthrough life with a coffin on his back, so that he may be ready fordeath.  Don't you think that when death comes it will be time enough tobe getting the coffin?"This was a poser."You know quite well," she says, "that when the real occasion offered,like the one you describe, you could deny yourself any luxuries readilyenough; why should you do so now?"At this there was a gentle sound of laughter."Luxuriesthe luxuries of the White Dove!" says her hostess, mindfulof tinned meats."Yes, indeed," says our young Doctor, though he is laughing too.  "Thereis far too much luxurythe luxury of idlenesson board this yacht to bewholesome for one like me.""Perhaps you object to the effeminacy of the downy couches and thefeather pillows," says his hostess, who is always grumbling about thehardness of the beds.But it appears that she has made an exceedingly bad shot.  The man atthe wheelone can just make out his dark figure against the clearstarlit heavens, though occasionally he gets before the yellow light ofthe binnacleproceeds to assure her that, of all the luxuries ofcivilisation, he appreciates most a horse-hair pillow; and that heattributes his sound sleeping on board the yacht to the hardness of thebeds.  He would rather lay his head on a brick, he says, for a night'srest than sink it in the softest feathers."Do you wonder," he says, "that Jacob dreamed of angels when he had astone for his pillow?  I don't.  If I wanted to have a pleasant sleepand fine dreams that is the sort of pillow I should have."Some phrase of this catches the ear of our look-out forward; heinstantly comes aft."Yes, it is a singular piece of testimony," he says.  "There is no doubtof it; I have myself seen the very place."We were not startled; we knew that the Laird, under the guidance of awell-known Free Church minister, had made a run through Palestine."Ay," said he, "the further I went away from my own country the more Isaw nothing but decadence and meesery.  The poor craytures!living amongruins, and tombs, and decay, without a trace of public spirit or privateenergy.  The disregard of sanitary laws was something terrible to lookatas bad as their universal beggary.  That is what comes ofcentralisation, of suppressing local government. Would ye believe thatthere are a lot of silly bodies actually working to get our Burgh ofStrathgovan annexed to Glasgowswallowed up in Glasgow!""Impossible!" we exclaim."I tell ye it is true.  But no, no!  We are not ripe yet for thoseRadical measures.  We are constituted under an Act of Parliament. Beforethe House of Commons would dare to annex the free and flourishing Burghof Strathgovan to Glasgow, I'm thinking the country far and near wouldhear something of it!"Yes; and we think so, too.  And we think it would be better if thehamlets and towns of Palestine were governed by men of public spiritlike the Commissioners of Strathgovan; then they would be properlylooked after.  Is there a single steam fire-engine in Jericho?However, it is late; and presently the women say good-night and retire.And the Laird is persuaded to go below with them also; for how otherwisecould he have his final glass of toddy in the saloon?  There are but twoof us left on deck, in the darkness, under the stars.It is a beautiful night, with those white and quivering points overhead,and the other white and burning points gleaming on the black waves thatwhirl by the yacht.  Beyond the heaving plain of waters there is nothingvisible but the dusky gloom of the Island of Eigg, and away in the souththe golden eye of Ardnamurchan lighthouse, for which we are steering.Then the intense silencebroken only when the wind, changing a little,gybes the sails and sends the great boom swinging over on to the leetackle.  It is so still that we are startled by the sudden noise of theblowing of a whale; and it sounds quite close to the yacht, though it ismore likely that the animal is miles away."She is a wonderful creatureshe is indeed," says the man at the wheel;as if every one must necessarily be thinking about the same person."Who?""Your young English friend.  Every minute of her life seems to be anenjoyment to her; she sings just as a bird sings, for her own amusement,and without thinking.""She can think, too; she is not a fool.""Though she does not look very strong," continues the young Doctor, "shemust have a thoroughly healthy constitution, or how could she have sucha happy disposition?  She is always contented; she is never put out.  Ifyou had only seen her patience and cheerfulness when she was attendingthat old womanmany a time I regretted itthe case was hopelessa hirednurse would have done as well.""Hiring a nurse might not have satisfied the young lady's notions ofduty.""Well, I've seen women in sick-rooms, but never any one like her," saidhe, and then he added, with a sort of emphatic wonder, "I'm hanged ifshe did not seem to enjoy that, too! Then you never saw any one soparticular about following out instructions."It is here suggested to our steersman that he himself may be a littletoo particular about following out instructions.  For John of Skye'slast counsel was to keep Ardnamurchan light on our port bow.  That wasall very well when we were off the north of Eigg; but is Dr. Sutherlandaware that the south point of EiggEilean-na-Castlejuts pretty far out;and is not that black line of land coming uncommonly close on ourstarboard bow?  With some reluctance our new skipper consents to alterhis course by a couple of points; and we bear away down forArdnamurchan.And of what did he not talk during the long starlit nightthe person whoought to have been lookout sitting contentedly aft, a mute listener?ofthe strange fears that must have beset the people who first adventuredout to sea; of the vast expenditure of human life that must have beenthrown away in the discovery of the most common facts about currents andtides and rocks; and so forth, and so forth. But ever and again his talkreturned to Mary Avon."What does the Laird mean by his suspicions about her uncle?" he askedon one occasionjust as we had been watching a blue-white bolt flashdown through the serene heavens and expire in mid-air."Mr. Frederick Smethurst has an ugly face.""But what does he mean about those relations between the man with theugly face and his niece?""That is idle speculation.  Frederick Smethurst was her trustee, andmight have done her some mischiefthat is, if he is an out-and-outscoundrel; but that is all over.  Mary is mistress of her own propertynow."Here the boom came slowly swinging over; and presently there were allthe sheets of the head-sails to be looked aftertedious work enough foramateurs in the darkness of the night.Then further silence; and the monotonous rush and murmur of the unseensea; and the dark topmast describing circles among the stars. We get upone of the glasses to make astronomical observations, but the heaving ofthe boat somewhat interferes with this quest after knowledge.  Whoeverwants to have a good idea of forked lightning has only to take up abinocular on board a pitching yacht, and try to fix it on a particularplanet.The calm, solemn night passes slowly; the red and green lights shine onthe black rigging; afar in the south burns the guiding star ofArdnamurchan.  And we have drawn away from Eigg now, and passed the opensound; and there, beyond the murmuring sea, is the doom of the Island ofMuick.  All the people below are wrapped in slumber; the cabins aredark; there is only a solitary candle burning in the saloon.  It is astrange thing to be responsible for the lives of those sleeping folkouthere on the lone Atlantic, in the stillness of the night.Our young Doctor bears his responsibility lightly.  He hasfor awonderlaid aside his pipe; and he is humming a song that he has heardMary Avon singing of latesomething aboutO think na lang, lassie, though I gang awa',For I'll come and see ye in spite o' them a',and he is wishing the breeze would blow a bit harderand wonderingwhether the wind will die away altogether when we get under the lee ofArdnamurchan Point.But long before we have got down to Ardnamurchan, there is a pale greylight beginning to tell in the eastern skies; and the stars are growingfainter; and the black line of the land is growing clearer above thewrestling seas.  Is it a fancy that the first light airs of the morningare a trifle cold?  And then we suddenly see, among the dark riggingforward, one or two black figures; and presently John of Skye comes aft,rubbing his eyes.  He has had a good sleep at last.Go below, then, you stout-sinewed young Doctor; you have had your desireof sailing the White Dove through the still watches of the night.  Andsoon you will be asleep, with your head on the hard pillow of thatlittle state-room and though the pillow is not as hard as a stone, stillthe night and the sea and the stars are quickening to the brain; and whoknows that you may not perchance after all dream of angels, or hear somefaint singing far away?*      *      *      *      *There was Mary Beatonand Mary Seaton*      *      *      *      *Or is it only a sound of the waves?*CHAPTER I.**VILLANY ABROAD.*It is near mid-day; two late people are sitting at breakfast; theskylight overhead has been lifted, and the cool sea-air fills thesaloon."Dead calm again," says Angus Sutherland, for he can see the rose-redensign hanging limp from the mizen-mast, a blaze of colour against thestill blue.There is no doubt that the White Dove is quite motionless; and that aperfect silence reigns around her.  That is why we can hear sodistinctlythrough the open skylightthe gentle footsteps of two peoplewho are pacing up and down the deck, and the soft voice of one of themas she speaks to her friend.  What is all this wild enthusiasm about,then?"It is the noblest profession in the world!" we can hear so much as shepasses the skylight. "One profession lives by fomenting quarrels; andanother studies the art of killing in every form; but this one livesonly to healonly to relieve the suffering and help the miserable. Thatis the profession I should belong to, if I were a man!"Our young Doctor says nothing as the voice recedes; but he is obviouslylistening for the return walk along the deck.  And here she comes again."The patient drudgery of such a life is quite heroicwhether he is a manof science, working day and night to find out things for the good of theworld, nobody thanking him or caring about him, or whether he is aphysician in practice with not a minute that can be called hisownliable to be summoned at any hour"The voice again becomes inaudible.  It is remarked to this young manthat Mary Avon seems to have a pretty high opinion of the medicalprofession."She herself," he says hastily, with a touch of colour in his face, "hasthe patience and fortitude of a dozen doctors."Once more the light tread on deck comes near the skylight."If I were the Government," says Mary Avon, warmly, "I should be ashamedto see so rich a country as England content to take her knowledgesecond-hand from the German Universities; while such men as Dr.Sutherland are harassed and hampered in their proper work by having towrite articles and do ordinary doctor's visiting.  I should be ashamed.If it is a want of money, why don't they pack off a dozen or two of theyoung noodles who pass the day whittling quills in the ForeignOffice?"Even when modified by the distance, and by the soft lapping of the wateroutside, this seems rather strong language for a young lady.  Why shouldMiss Avon again insist in such a warm fashion on the necessity ofendowing research?But Angus Sutherland's face is burning red. Listeners are said to hearill of themselves."However, Dr. Sutherland is not likely to complain," she says, proudly,as she comes by again.  "No; he is too proud of his profession.  He doeshis work; and leaves the appreciation of it to others.  And wheneverybody knows that he will one day be among the most famous men in thecountry, is it not monstrous that he should be harassed by drudgery inthe meantime?  If I were the Government"But Angus Sutherland cannot suffer this to go on.  He leaves hisbreakfast unfinished, passes along the saloon, and ascends thecompanion."Good morning!" he says."Why, are you up already?" his hostess says.  "We have been walking aslightly as we could, for we thought you were both asleep. And Mary hasbeen heaping maledictions on the head of the Government because itdoesn't subsidise all you microscope-men.  The next thing she will wantis a licence for the whole of you to be allowed to vivisect criminals.""I heard something of what Miss Avon said," he admitted.The girl, looking rather aghast, glanced at the open skylight."We thought you were asleep," she stammered, and with her face somewhatflushed."At least, I heard you say something about the Government," he said,kindly.  "Well, all I ask from the Government is to give me a trip likethis every summer.""What," says his hostess, "with a barometer that won't fall?""I don't mind.""And seas like glass?""I don't mind.""And the impossibility of getting back to land?""So much the better," he says defiantly."Why," she reminds him, laughing, "you were very anxious about gettingback some days ago.  What has made you change your wishes?"He hesitates for a moment, and then he says"I believe a sort of madness of idleness has got possession of me.  Ihave dallied so long with that tempting invitation of yours to stay andsee the White Dove through the equinoctials thatthat I think I reallymust give in""You cannot help yourself," his hostess says, promptly.  "You havealready promised.  Mary is my witness."The witness seems anxious to avoid being brought into this matter; sheturns to the Laird quickly, and asks him some question about Ru-na-Gaullight over there.Ru-na-Gaul light no doubt it isshining white in the sun at the point ofthe great cliffs; and there is the entrance to Tobbermorry; and here isMingary Castlebrown ruins amid the brilliant greens of those slopingshoresand there are the misty hills over Loch Sunart. For the rest,blue seas around us, glassy and still; and blue skies overhead,cloudless and pale.  The barometer refuses to budge.But suddenly there is a brisk excitement. What though the breeze that isdarkening the water there is coming on right ahead?we shall be movingany way.  And as the first puffs of it catch the sails, Angus Sutherlandplaces Mary Avon in command; and she is nowby the permission of hertravelling physicianallowed to stand as she guides the course of thevessel.  She has become an experienced pilot: the occasional glance atthe leach of the top-sail is all that is needed; she keeps as accurately"full and by" as the master of one of the famous cuptakers."Now, Mary," says her hostess, "it all depends on you as to whetherAngus will catch the steamer this evening.""Oh, does it?" she says, with apparent innocence."Yes; we shall want very good steering to get within sight of CastleOsprey before the evening.""Very well, then," says this audacious person.At the same instant she deliberately puts the helm down.  Of course theyacht directly runs up to the wind, her sails flapping helplessly.Everybody looks surprised; and John of Skye, thinking that the newskipper has only been a bit careless, calls out"Keep her full, mem, if you please.""What do you mean, Mary?  What are you about?" cries Queen T."I am not going to be responsible for sending Dr. Sutherland away," shesays, in a matter-of-fact manner, "since he says he is in no hurry togo.  If you wish to drive your guest away, I won't be a party to it.  Imean to steer as badly as I can.""Then I depose you," says Dr. Sutherland promptly.  "I cannot have apilot who disobeys orders.""Very well," she says, "you may take the tiller yourself"and she goesaway, and sits down in high dudgeon, by the Laird.So once more we get the vessel under way; and the breeze is beginning toblow somewhat more briskly; and we notice with hopefulness that there isrougher water further down the Sound.  But with this slow process ofbeating, how are we to get within sight of Castle Osprey before thegreat steamer comes up from the South?The Laird is puzzling over the Admiralty Sailing Directions.  The younglady, deeply offended, who sits beside him, pays him great attention,and talks "at" the rest of the passengers with undisguised contempt."It is all haphazard, the sailing of a yacht," she says to him, thoughwe can all hear. "Anybody can do it.  But they make a jargon about it topuzzle other people, and pretend it is a science, and all that.""Well," says the Laird, who is quite unaware of the fury that fills herbrain, "there are some of the phrases in this book that are verraextraordinary.  In navigating this same Sound of Mull, they say you areto keep the 'weather shore aboard.'  How can ye keep the weather shoreaboard?""Indeed, if we don't get into a port soon," remarks our hostess andchief commissariat-officer, "it will be the only thing we shall have onboard.  How would you like it cooked, Mary?""I won't speak to any of you," says the disgraced skipper, with muchcomposure."Will you sing to us, then?""Will you behave properly if you are reinstated in command?" asks AngusSutherland."Yes, I will," she says, quite humbly; and forthwith she is allowed tohave the tiller again.Brisker and brisker grows the breeze; it is veering to the south, too;the sea is rising, and with it the spirits of everybody on board. Theordinarily sedate and respectable White Dove is showing herself atrifle frisky, moreover; an occasional clatter below of hairbrushes orcandlesticks tells us that people accustomed to calms fall into thehabit of leaving their cabins ill-arranged."There will be more wind, sir," says John of Skye, coming aft; and he islooking at some long and streaky "mare's tails" in the south-westernsky.  "And if there wass a gale o' wind, I would let her have it!"Why that grim ferocity of look, Captain John?  Is the poor old WhiteDove responsible for the too fine weather, that you would like to seeher driven, all wet and bedraggled, before a south-westerly gale?  Ifyou must quarrel with something, quarrel with the barometer; you mayadmonish it with a belaying-pin if you please.Brisker and brisker grows the breeze.  Now we hear the firstpistol-shots of the spray come rattling over the bows; and Hector ofMoidart has from time to time to duck his head, or shake the water fromhis jersey.  The White Dove breasts these rushing waves and a foam ofwhite water goes hissing away from either side of her.  Speine Mor andSpeine Beg we leave behind; in the distance we can descry the ruins ofAros Castle and the deep indentation of Salen Bay; here we are passingthe thick woods of Funeray.  "Farewell, farewell, to Funeray!"  Thesqually look in the south-west increases; the wind veers more and more.Commander Mary Avon is glad to resign the helm, for it is not easy toretain hold in these plunging seas."Why, you will catch the steamer after all, Angus!" says his hostess, aswe go tearing by the mouth of Loch Aline."This is a good one for the last!" he calls to her.  "Give her some moresheet, John; the wind is going round to the north!"Whence comes the whirling storm in the midst of the calm summer weather?The blue heavens are as blue as the petal of a crane'sbill: surely sucha sky has nothing to do with a hurricane.  But wherever it comes from,it is welcome enough; and the brave White Dove goes driving throughthose heavy seas, sometimes cresting them buoyantly, at other timesmeeting them with a dull shock, followed by a swish of water that rushesalong the lee scuppers.  And those two women-folkwithout ulsters orother covering: it is a merry game to play jack-in-the-box, and ducktheir heads under the shelter of the gig when the spray springs into theair.  But somehow the sea gets the best of it.  Laugh as they may, theymust be feeling rather damp about their hair; and as for Mary Avon'sfacethat has got a bath of salt-water at least a dozen times.  Shecares not.  Sun, wind and sea she allows to do their worst with hercomplexion.  Soon we shall have to call her the Nut-brown Maid.Brisker and brisker grows the breeze.  Angus Sutherland, with a roperound the tiller, has his teeth set hard: he is indeed letting theWhite Dove have it at last, for he absolutely refuses to have thetopsail down.  The main tack, then: might not that be hauled up? No; hewill have none of John of Skye's counsels.  The White Dove tears herway through the waterwe raise a cloud of birds from the rocks oppositeScallasdalewe see the white surf breaking in at Craignureahead of usis Lismore Lighthouse, perched over the whirling and struggling tides,shining white in the sunlight above the dark and driven sea.Ahead she goes; the land she knows!past the shadowy ruins of Duart, and out and through the turbulenttides off the lighthouse rocks.  The golden afternoon is not yet faradvanced; let but this brave breeze continue, and soon they will descrythe White Dove from the far heights of Castle Osprey!But there was to be no Castle Osprey for Angus Sutherland that evening,despite the splendid run the White Dove had made.  It was a race,indeed, between the yacht and the steamer for the quay; andnotwithstanding that Mary Avon was counselling everybody to give it upas impossible, John of Skye would hold to it in the hope of pleasing Dr.Sutherland himself.  And no sooner was the anchor let go in the bay,than the gig was down from the davits; the men had jumped in; thesolitary portmanteau was tossed into the stern; and Angus Sutherland washurriedly bidding his adieux.  The steamer was at this instant slowinginto the quay."I forbid any one to say good-bye to him," says our Admiral-in-chief,sternly.  "Au revoirauf Wiedersehenanything you likeno good-bye."Last of all he took Mary Avon's hand."You have promised, you know," she said, with her eyes cast down."Yes," said he, regarding her for an instant with a strange lookearnestperhaps, and yet timidas if it would ask a question, and dared not"Iwill keep my promise."  Then he jumped into the boat.That was a hard pull away to the quay; and even in the bay the water wasrough, so that the back-sweep of the oars sometimes caught the waves andsent the spray flying in the wind.  The Chevalier had rung her bells.We made sure he would be too late. What was the reason of thisgood-natured indulgence?  We lost sight of the gig in at thelanding-slip.Then the great steamer slowly steamed away from the quay: who was thaton the paddle-box waving good-bye to us?"Oh, yes, I can see him plainly," calls out Queen T., looking through aglass; and there is a general waving of handkerchiefs in reply to thestill visible signal.  Mary Avon waves her handkerchief, tooin a limpfashion.  We do not look at her eyes.And when the gig came back, and we bade good-bye for the time to thebrave old White Dove, and set out for Castle Osprey, she was rathersilent.  In vain did the Laird tell her some of the very best ones aboutHomesh; she seemed anxious to get into the house and to reach thesolitude of her own room.But in the meantime there was a notable bundle of letters, newspapers,and what not, lying on the hall-table.  This was the first welcome thatcivilisation gave us.  And although we defied these claimsanddetermined that not an envelope should be opened till after dinnerMaryAvon, having only one letter awaiting her, was allowed to read that. Shedid it mechanically, listlesslyshe was not in very good spirits.  Butsuddenly we heard her utter some slight exclamation; and then we turnedand saw that there was a strange look on her faceof dismay and dread.She was pale, too, and bewilderedlike one stunned.  Then without aword, she handed the letter to her friend."What is the matter, Mary?"But she read the letterand, in her amazement, she repeated the readingof it, aloud. It was a brief, business-like, and yet friendly letter,from the manager of a certain bank in London.  He said he was sorry torefer to painful matters; but no doubt Miss Avon had seen in the paperssome mention of the absconding of Mr. Frederick Smethurst, of .  Hehoped there was nothing wrong; but he thought it right to inform MissAvon that, a day or two before this disappearance, Mr. Smethurst hadcalled at the bank and received, in obedience to her writteninstructions, the securitiesU.S. Funded Stockwhich the bank held inher name. Mr. Smethurst had explained that these bonds were deliverableto a certain broker; and that securities of a like value would bedeposited with the bank in a day or two afterwards. Since then nothinghad been heard of him till the Hue and Cry appeared in the newspapers.Such was the substance of the letter."But it isn't true!" said Mary Avon, almost wildly.  "I cannot believeit.  I will not believe it.  I saw no announcement in the papers.  And Idid give him the letterhe was acting quite rightly.  What do they wantme to believe?""Oh, Mary!" cries her friend, "why did you not tell us?  Have you partedwith everything?""The money?" says the girlwith her white face, and frightened patheticeyes.  "Oh, I do not care about the money!  It has got nothing to dowith the money.  Butbuthewas my mother's only brother."The lips tremble for a moment; but she collects herself.  Her couragefights through the stun of this sudden blow."I will not believe it!" she says.  "How dare they say such things ofhim?  How is it we have never seen anything of it in the papers?"But the Laird leaves these and other wild questions to be answered atleisure.  In the meantime, his eyes are burning like coals of fire; andhe is twisting his hands together in a vain endeavour to repress hisanger and indignation."Tell them to put a horse to," he says in a voice the abruptness ofwhich startles every one.  "I want to drive to the telegraph-office.This is a thing for men to deal wi'not weemen."*CHAPTER II.**AN ULTIMATUM.*When our good friend the Laird of Denny-mains came back from thepost-office, he seemed quite beside himself with wrath.  And yet hisrage was not of the furious and loquacious sort; it was reticent, anddeep, and dangerous.  He kept pacing up and down the gravel-path infront of the house, while as yet dinner was not ready.  Occasionally hewould rub his hands vehemently, as if to get rid of some sort ofelectricity; and once or twice we heard him ejaculate to himself, "Thescoondrel!  The scoondrel!"  It was in vain that our gentle QueenTitania, always anxious to think the best of everybody, broke in onthese fierce meditations, and asked the Laird to suspend his judgment.How could he be sure, she asked, that Frederick Smethurst had really runaway with his niece's little property?  He had come to her andrepresented that he was in serious difficulties; that this temporaryloan of seven thousand pounds or so would save him; that he would repayher directly certain remittances came to him from abroad.  How could he,the Laird, know that Frederick Smethurst did not mean to keep hispromise?But Denny-mains would have none of these possibilities.  He saw thewhole story clearly.  He had telegraphed for confirmation; but alreadyhe was convinced.  As for Frederick Smethurst being a swindlerthat didnot concern him, he said.  As for the creditors, that was their ownlook-out: men in business had to take their chance.  But that thismiscreant, this ruffian, this mean hound should have robbed his ownniece of her last farthingand left her absolutely without resources orprotection of any kind in the worldthis it was that made the Laird'seyes burn with a dark fire.  "The scoondrel!the scoondrel!" he said;and he rubbed his hands as though he would wrench the fingers off.We should have been more surprised at this exhibition of rage on thepart of a person so ordinarily placid as Denny-mains, but that every onehad observed how strong had become his affection for Mary Avon duringour long days on the Atlantic.  If she had been twenty times his owndaughter he could not have regarded her with a greater tenderness. Hehad become at once her champion and her slave.  When there was anyplayful quarrel between the young lady and her hostess, he took the sideof Mary Avon with a seriousness that soon disposed of the contest.  Hestudied her convenience to the smallest particular when she wished topaint on deck; and so far from hinting that he would like to have TomGalbraith revise and improve her work, he now said that he would havepride in showing her productions to that famous artist.  And perhaps itwas not quite so much the actual fact of the stealing of the money asthe manner and circumstance of it that now wholly upset his equilibrium,and drove him into this passion of rage.  "The scoondrel!thescoondrel!" he muttered to himself, in these angry pacings to and fro.Then he surprised his hostess by suddenly stopping short, and utteringsome brief chuckle of laughter."I beg your pardon, ma'am," said he, "for the leeberty I have taken; butI was at the telegraph-office in any case; and I thought ye would notmind my sending for my nephew Howard.  Ye were so good as to say""Oh, we shall be most pleased to see him," said she promptly.  "I amsure he must have heard us talking about the yacht; he will not mind alittle discomfort""He will have to take what is given him, and be thankful," said theLaird, sharply. "In my opeenion the young people of the present day aretoo much given to picking and choosing.  They will not begin as theirparents began.  Only the best of everything is good enough for them."But here the Laird checked himself."No, no, ma'am," said he.  "My nephew Howard is not like that.  He is agood lada sensible lad.  And as for his comfort on board that yacht,I'm thinking it's not that, but the opposite, he has to fear most.  Yeare spoiling us allthe crew included.""Now we must go in to dinner," is the practical answer."Has she come down?" asks the Laird, in a whisper."I suppose so."In the drawing-room we found Mary Avon. She was rather pale, andsilentthat was all; and she seemed to wish to avoid observation. Butwhen dinner was announced the Laird went over to her, and took her hand,and led her into the dining-room, just as he might have led a child.And he arranged her chair for her; and patted her on the back as hepassed on, and said cheerfully"Quite rightquite rightdon't believe all the stories ye hear.  Nildesperandumwe're not beaten down yet!"She sate cold and white, with her eyes cast down.  He did not know thatin the interval her hostess had been forced to show the girl thatparagraph of the Hue and Cry."Nil desperandumthat's it," continued the good-hearted Laird, in hisblithest manner. "Keep your own conscience clear, and let other peopledo as they pleasethat is the philosophy of life.  That is what Dr.Sutherland would say to ye, if he was here."This chance reference to Angus Sutherland was surely made with the bestintentions; but it produced a strange effect on the girl. For an instantor two she tried to maintain her composurethough her lips trembled;then she gave way, and bent her head, and burst out crying, and coveredher face with her hands.  Of course her kind friend and hostess was withher in a moment, and soothed her, and caressed her, and got her to dryher eyes.  Then the Laird said, after a second or two of inwardstruggle"Oh, do you know that there is a steamer run on the rocks at the mouthof Loch Etive?""Oh, yes," his hostesswho had resumed her seatsaid cheerfully.  "Thatis a good joke.  They say the captain wanted to be very clever; andwould not have a pilot, though he knows nothing about the coast. So hethought he would keep mid-channel in going into the Loch!".The Laird looked puzzled: where was the joke?"Oh," said she, noticing his bewilderment, "don't you know that at themouth of Loch Etive the rocks are right in the middle, and the channelon each side?  He chose precisely the straight line for bringing hisvessel full tilt on the rocks!"So this was the joke, then: that a valuable ship should be sunk?  But itsoon became apparent that any topic was of profound interestwasexceedingly facetious eventhat could distract Mary Avon's attention.They would not let her brood over this thing.  They would have found ajoke in a coffin.  And indeed amidst all this talking and laughing MaryAvon brightened up considerably; and took her part bravely; and seemedto have forgotten all about her uncle and his evil deeds. You could onlyhave guessed from a certain preoccupation that, from time to time, thesewords must have been appearing before her mind, their commonplace andmatter-of-fact phraseology in no way detracting from their horribleimport: "Police-officers and others are requested to make immediatesearch and inquiry for the above named; and those stationed at seaporttowns are particularly requested to search outward-bound vessels."  Thedescription of Mr. Frederick Smethurst that preceded this injunction wasnot very flattering.But among all the subjects, grave and gay, on which the Laird touchedduring this repast, there was none he was so serious and pertinaciousabout as the duty owed by young people to their parents and guardians.It did not seem an opportune topic.  He might, for example, haveenlarged upon the duties of guardians towards their helpless andunprotected wards.  However, on this matter he was most decided.  Heeven cross-examined his hostess, with an unusual sternness, on thepoint.  What was the limitwas there any limitshe would impose on theduty which young folks owed to those who were their parents or who stoodto them in the relation of parents?  Our sovereign mistress, a littlebit frightened, said she had always found her boys obedient enough.  Butthis would not do.  Considering the care and affection bestowed onthemconsidering the hardly-earned wealth spent on themconsidering theeasy fortune offered to themwas it not bounden on young people toconsult and obey the wishes of those who had done so much for them?  Sheadmitted that such was the case. Pressed to say where the limit of suchduty should lie, she said there was hardly any.  So far good; and theLaird was satisfied.It was not until two days afterwards that we obtained full informationby letter of what was known regarding the proceedings of FrederickSmethurst, who, it appears, before he bolted, had laid hands on everyfarthing of money he could touch, and borrowed from the credulous amonghis friends; so that there remained no reasonable doubt that the storyhe had told his niece was among his other deceptions, and that she wasleft penniless.  No one was surprised.  It had been almost a foregoneconclusion.  Mary Avon seemed to care little about it; the loss of herfortune was less to her than the shame and dishonour that this scoundrelhad brought on her mother's name.But this further news only served to stir up once more the Laird'sslumbering wrath.  He kept looking at his watch."She'll be off Easdale now," said he to himself; and we knew he wasspeaking of the steamer that was bringing his nephew from the south.By and by"She'll be near Kerrara, now," he said, aloud.  "Is it nottime to drive to the quay?"It was not time, but we set out.  There was the usual crowd on the quaywhen we got there; and far off we could descry the red funnels and thesmoke of the steamer.  Mary Avon had not come with us."What a beautiful day your nephew must have had for his sail from theCrinan," said the Laird's gentle hostess to him.Did he not hear her?  Or was he absorbed in his own thoughts?  Hisanswer, at all events, was a strange one."It is the first time I have asked anything of him," he said almostgloomily.  "I have a right to expect him to do something for me now."The steamer slows in; the ropes are thrown across; the gangways run up;and the crowd begins to pour out.  And here is a tall and handsome youngfellow who comes along with a pleasant smile of greeting on his face."How do you do, Mr. Smith?" says Queen T., very graciouslybut she doesnot call him "Howard" as she calls Dr. Sutherland "Angus.""Well, uncle," says he, brightly, when he has shaken hands all round,"what is the meaning of it all?  Are you starting for Iceland in ahurry?  I have brought a rifle as well as my breechloader.  But perhapsI had better wait to be invited?"This young man with the clear, pale complexion, and the dark hair, anddark grey eyes, had good looks and a pleasant smile in his favour; hewas accustomed to be made welcome; he was at ease with himself.  He wasnot embarrassed that his uncle did not immediately answer; he merelyturned and called out to the man who had got his luggage.  And when wehad got him into the waggonette, and were driving off, what must heneeds talk about but the absconding of Mr. Frederick Smethurst, whom heknew to be the uncle of a young lady he had once met at our house."Catch him?" said he with a laugh. "They'll never catch him."His uncle said nothing at all.When we reached Castle Osprey, the Laird said in the hall, when he hadsatisfied himself that there was no one within hearing"Howard, I wish to have a few meenutes' talk with ye; and perhaps ourgood friends here will come into the room too"We followed him into the dining-room; and shut the door."just to see whether there is anything unreasonable in what I have gotto say to ye."The young man looked rather alarmed; there was an unusual coldness andausterity in the elder man's voice."We may as well sit down," he said; "it wants a little explanation."We sate down in silence, Howard Smith looking more concerned than ever.He had a real affection, as we knew, for this pseudo-uncle of his, andwas astounded that he should be spoken to in this formal and coldmanner.The Laird put one or two letters on the table before him."I have asked our friends here," said he, in a calm and measured voice,"to listen to what I have to say, and they will judge whether it isunreasonable.  I have a service to ask of ye.  I will say nothing of therelations between you and me before this timebut I may tell yefranklywhat doubtless ye have understoodthat I had intended to leaveye Denny-mains at my death.  I have neither kith nor kin of my ownblood; and it was my intention that ye should have Denny-mainsperhapseven before I was called away."The young man said nothing; but the manner in which the Laird spoke ofhis intentions in the past sense might have made the most disinterestedof heirs look frightened.  After ali, he had certainly been brought upon the understanding that he was to succeed to the property."Now," said he, slowly, "I may say I have shown ye some kindness""Indeed you have, sir!" said the other warmly."and I have asked nothing from ye in return.  I would ask nothing now,if I was your age.  If I was twenty years younger, I would not havetelegraphed for yeindeed no, I would have taken the matter into my ownhands"Here the Laird paused for a second or so to regain that coldness ofdemeanour with which he had started."Ay, just so.  Well, ye were talking about the man Smethurst as we werecoming along. His niece, as ye may be aware, is in this housea betterlass was never seen within any house."The Laird hesitated more and more as he came to the climax of hisdiscourse: it was obviously difficult for him to put this restraint onhimself."Yes," said he, speaking a little more hurriedly, "and thatscoondrelthat scoondrelhas made off with every penny that the poorlass hadevery penny of itand she is left an orphanwithout a farthingto maintain herself wi'and that infernal scoondrel"The Laird jumped from his seat; his anger was too much for him."I mean to stand by her," said he, pacing up and down the room, andspeaking in short ejaculations.  "She will not be left without afarthing.  I will reach him too, if I can.  Ay, ay, if I was but twentyyears younger, and had that man before me!"He stopped short opposite his nephew, and controlled himself so as tospeak quite calmly."I would like to see ye settled at Denny-mains, Howard," said he.  "Andye would want a wife.  Now if ye were to marry this young leddy, itwould be the delight of my old age to see ye both comfortable and wellprovided for.  And a better wife ye would not get within this country.Not a better!"Howard Smith stared."Why, uncle!" said he, as if he thought some joke was going forward.We, who had been aware of certain profound plans on the part ofDenny-mains, were less startled by this abrupt disclosure of them."That is one of two things," said the Laird, with forced composure,"that I wished to put before ye.  If it is impossible, I am sorelyvexed.  But there is another; and one or the other, as I have beenthinking, I am fairly entitled to ask of ye.  So far I have not thoughtof any return for what I have done; it has been a pleasure to me to lookafter your up-bringing.""Well, uncle," said the young man, beginning to look a little lessfrightened.  "I would rather hear of the other thing.  You knowehthatisa girl does not take anybody who is flung at her, as it wereit wouldbe an insultandand people's inclinations and affections""I knowI knowI know," said the Laird, impatiently.  "I have gone overall that.  Do ye think I am a fool?  If the lass will not have ye, thereis an end to it: do your best to get her, and that is enough for me.""There was another thing" the young man suggested timidly."Yes, there is," said the Laird, with a sudden change in his manner."It is a duty, sir, ye owe not to me, but to humanity.  Ye are young,strong, have plenty of time, and I will give ye the money.  Find outthat man Smethurst; get him face to face; and fell him! Fell him!"theLaird brought his fist down on the table with a bang that madeeverything jump, and his eyes were like coals of fire.  "None o' yourpistols or rapiers or trash like that!no, no!a mark on his face forthe rest of his lifethe brand of a scoondrel between his eyesthere!will ye do that for me?""But, uncle," cried the young man, finding this alternative about asstartling as the other, "how on earth can I find him?  He is off toBrazil, or Mexico, or California, long ere now, you may depend on it."The Laird had pulled himself together again."I have put two things before ye," said he, calmly.  "It is the firsttime I have asked ye for a service, after having brought ye up as fewlads have been brought up.  If you think it is unfair of me to make abargain about such things, I will tell ye frankly that I have moreconcern in that young thing left to herself than in any creature nowliving on earth; and I will be a friend to her as well as an old mancan.  I have asked our friends here to listen to what I had to say; theywill tell ye whether I am unreasonable.  I will leave ye to talk itover."He went to the door.  Then he turned for a moment to his hostess."I am going to see, ma'am, if Mary will go for a bit walk wi' medown tothe shore, or the like; but we will be back before the hour for denner."*CHAPTER III.**THE NEW SUITOR.*It is only those who have lived with her for a number of years who cantell when a certain person becomes possessed with the demon of mischief,and allows sarcasm and malignant laughter and other unholy delights torun riot in her brain.  The chief symptom is the assumption of anabnormal gravity, and a look of simple and confiding innocence thatappears in the eyes.  The eyes tell most of all.  The dark pupils seemeven clearer than is their wont, as if they would let you read themthrough and through; and there is a sympathetic appeal in them; thewoman seems so anxious to be kind, and friendly, and considerate.  Andall the timeespecially if it be a man who is hopelesslydumfounderedshe is revenging the many wrongs of her sex by covertlylaughing at him and enjoying his discomfiture.And no doubt the expression on Howard Smith's face, as he sat there in abewildered silence, was ludicrous enough.  He was inclined to laugh thething away as a joke, but he knew that the Laird was not given topractical jokes. And yetand yet"Do you really think he is serious?" he blurted out at length, and hespoke to this lady with the gentle innocent eyes."Oh, undoubtedly," she answered, with perfect gravity."Oh, no; it is impossible!" he said, as if arguing with himself.  "Why,my uncle, of all men in the world,and pretending it was seriousofcourse people often do wish their sons or daughters to marry aparticular personfor a sensible reason, to keep estates together, or tojoin the fortunes of a familybut thisno, no; this is a joke, or elsehe wants to drive me into giving that fellow a licking.  And that, youknow, is quite absurd; you might as well drag the Atlantic for apenknife.""I am afraid your uncle is quite serious," said she, demurely."But it was to be left to you," he answered quickly.  "You were to saywhether it was unreasonable.  Surely you must see it is not reasonable.Neither the one thing nor the other is possible"Here the young man paused for a moment."Surely," he said, "my uncle can't mean, by putting these impossiblethings before me, to justify his leaving his property to somebody else?There was no need for any such excuse; I have no claim on him; he has aright to do what he pleases.""That has nothing to do with it," said Queen T. promptly.  "Your uncleis quite resolved, I know, that you should have Denny-mains.""Yesand a wife," responded the young man, with a somewhat wry smile."Oh, but you know, it is quite absurd; you will reason him out of it,won't you?  He has such a high opinion of your judgment, I know."The ingenious youth!"Besides," said he warmly, "do you think it very complimentary to yourfriend Miss Avon that any one should be asked to come and marry her?"This was better; it was an artful thrust. But the bland sympathetic eyesonly paid him a respectful attention."I know my uncle is pretty firm when he has got a notion into his head,"said he, "andandno doubt he is quite right in thinking that the younglady has been badly treated, and that somebody should give the abscondera thrashing.  All that is quite right; but why should I be maderesponsible for it?  I can't do impossible things.""Well, you see," said his sage adviser, with a highly matter-of-factair, "your uncle may not regard either the one thing or the other asimpossible.""But they are impossible," said he."Then I am very sorry," said she, with great sweetness.  "BecauseDenny-mains is really a beautiful place.  And the house would lenditself splendidly to a thorough scheme of redecoration; the hall couldbe made perfectly lovely.  I would have the wooden dado painted a darkbottle-green, and the wall over it a rich Pompeian redI don't believethe colours of a hall can be too bold if the tones are good inthemselves.  Pompeian red is a capital background for pictures, too; andI like to see pictures in the hall; the gentlemen can look at them whilethey are waiting for their wives. Don't you think Indian matting makes avery nice, serviceable, sober-coloured dado for a dining-roomso long asit does not drive your pictures too high on the wall?"The fiendishness of this woman!  Denny-mains was being withdrawn fromhim at this very moment; and she was bothering him with questions aboutits decoration.  What did he think of Indian matting?"Well," said he, "if I am to lose my chance of Denny-mains through thispiece of absurdity, I can't help it.""I beg your pardon," said she most amiably; "but I don't think youruncle's proposal so very absurd.  It is the commonest thing in the worldfor people to wish persons in whom they are interested to marry eachother; and very often they succeed by merely getting the young people tomeet, and so forth.  You say yourself that it is reasonable in certaincases.  Well, in this case, you probably don't know how great aninterest your uncle takes in Miss Avon, and the affection that he hasfor her.  It is quite remarkable.  And he has been dwelling on thispossibility of a match between youof seeing you both settled atDenny-mainsuntil he almost regards it as already arranged.  'Putyourself in his place,' as Mr. Reade says.  It seems to him the mostnatural thing in the world, and I am afraid he will consider you veryungrateful if you don't fall in with his plan."Deeper and deeper grew the shadow of perplexity on the young man's brow.At first he had seemed inclined to laugh the whole matter aside, but thegentle reasoning of this small person had a ghastly aspect ofseriousness about it."Then his notion of my seeking out the man Smethurst and giving him athrashing: you would justify that, too?" he cried."No, not quite," she answered, with a bit of a smile.  "That is a littleabsurd, I admitit is merely an ebullition of anger.  He won't think anymore of that in a day or two I am certain.  But the otherthe other, Ifear, is a fixed idea."At this point we heard some one calling outside:"Miss Mary!  I have been searching for ye everywhere; are ye coming fora walk down to the shore?"Then a voice, apparently overhead at an open window"All right, sir; I will be down in a moment."Another second or two, and we hear some one singing on the stair, with afine air of bravadoA strong sou-wester's blowing, Billy; can't you hear it roar,now?the gay voice passes through the hallLord help 'em, how I pities all unthen the last phrase is heard outsidefolks on shore nowQueen Titania darts to the open window of the dining-room."Mary!  Mary!" she calls.  "Come here."The next instant a pretty enough picture is framed by the lower half ofthe window, which is open.  The background is a blaze of scarlet andyellow and greena mixture of sunlight and red poppies and nasturtiumsand glancing fuchsia leaves.  Then this slight figure that has appearedis dark in shadow; but there is a soft reflected light from the front ofthe house, and that just shows you the smile on Mary Avon's face and thefriendliness of her dark soft eyes."Oh, how do you do?" she says, reaching in her hand and shaking handswith him. There is not any timidity in her manner.  No one has beenwhispering to her of the dark plots surrounding her.Nor was Mr. Smith much embarrassed, though he did not show himself asgrateful as a young man might have done for so frank and friendly awelcome."I scarcely thought you would have remembered me," said he modestly.But at this moment Denny-mains interfered, and took the young lady bythe arm, and dragged her away.  We heard their retreating footsteps onthe gravel walk."So you remember her?" says our hostess, to break the awkward silence."Oh, yes, well enough," said he; and then he goes on to saystammeringly"Of course, II have nothing to say against her""If you have," it is here interposed, as a wholesome warning, "you hadbetter not mention it here.  Ten thousand hornets' nests would be a foolcompared to this house if you said anything in it against Mary Avon.""On the contrary," says he, "I suppose she is a very nice girlindeedveryI suppose there's no doubt of it.  And if she has beenrobbed like that, I am very sorry for her; and I don't wonder my uncleshould be interested in her, and concerned about her, andand all that'squite right.  But it is too badit is too badthat one should beexpected toto ask her to be one's wife, and a sort of penalty hangingover one's head, too.  Why, it is enough to set anybody against thewhole thing; I thought everybody knew that you can't get people to marryif you drive them to itexcept in France, I suppose, where the wholebusiness is arranged for you by your relatives.  This isn't France; andI am quite sure Miss Avon would consider herself very unfairly treatedif she thought she was being made part and parcel of any sucharrangement. As for mewell, I am very grateful to my uncle for his longkindness to me; he has been kindness itself to me; and it is quite true,as he says, that he has asked for nothing in return.  Well, what he asksnow is just a trifle too much.  I won't sell myself for any property.If he is really seriousif it is to be a compulsory marriage likethatDenny-mains can go.  I shall be able to earn my own livingsomehow."There was a chord struck in this brief, hesitating, but emphatic speechthat went straight to his torturer's heart.  A look of liking andapproval sprang to her eyes.  She would no longer worry him."Don't you think," said she gently, "that you are taking the matter tooseriously?  Your uncle does not wish to force you into a marriageagainst your will; he knows nothing about Adelphi melodramas.  What heasks is simple and natural enough.  He is, as you see, very fond of MaryAvon; he would like to see her well provided for; he would like to seeyou settled and established at Denny-mains. But he does not ask theimpossible. If she does not agree, neither he nor you can help it.Don't you think it would be a very simple matter for you to remain withus for a time, pay her some ordinary friendly attention, and then showyour uncle that the arrangement he would like does not recommend itselfto either you or her?  He asks no more than that; it is not much of asacrifice."There was no stammering about this lady's exposition of the case.  Herhead is not very big, but its perceptive powers are remarkable.Then the young man's face brightened considerably."Well," said he, "that would be more sensible, surely.  If you take awaythe threat, and the compulsion, and all that, there can be no harm in mybeing civil to a girl, especially when she is, I am sure, just the sortof girl one ought to be civil to.  I am sure she has plenty of commonsense-"It is here suggested once more that, in this house, negative praise ofMary Avon is likely to awake slumbering lions."Oh, I have no doubt," says he readily, "that she is a very nice girlindeed.  One would not have to pretend to be civil to some creaturestuffed with affectation, or a ghoul.  I don't object to this at all.If my uncle thinks it enough, very well.  And I am quite sure that agirl you think so much of would have more self-respect than to expectanybody to go and make love to her in the country-bumpkin style."Artful again; but it was a bad shot.  There was just a little asperityin Madame's manner when she said"I beg you not to forget that Mary does not wish to be made love to byanybody.  She is quite content as she is.  Perhaps she has quite otherviews, which you would not regret, I am sure. But don't imagine that sheis looking for a husband; or that a husband is necessary for her; orthat she won't find friends to look after her. It is your interests weare considering, not hers."Was the snubbing sufficient?"Oh, of course, of course," said he, quite humbly.  "But then, you know,I was only thinking thatthatif I am to go in and make believe aboutbeing civil to your young lady-friend, in order to please my uncle, toomuch should not be expected.  It isn't a very nice thingat least, foryou it may be very niceto look on at a comedy""And is it so very hard to be civil to a girl?" says his monitresssharply.  "Mary will not shock you with the surprise of her gratitude.She might have been married ere now if she had chosen.""Sheisn'tquite a school-girl, you know," he says timidly."I was not aware that men preferred to marry school-girls," says theother, with a gathering majesty of demeanour.Here a humble witness of this interview has once more to interpose tosave this daring young man from a thunderbolt.  Will he not understandthat the remotest and most round-about reflection on Mary Avon is inthis house the unpardonable sin?"Well," said he frankly, "it is exceedingly kind of you to show me how Iam to get out of this troublesome affair; and I am afraid I must leaveit to you to convince my uncle that I have done sufficient.  And it isvery kind of you to ask me to go yachting with you; I hope I shall notbe in the way.  Andandthere is no reason at all why Miss Avon and Ishould not become very good friendsin fact, I hope we shall become suchgood friends that my uncle will see we could not be anything else."Could anything be fairer than this?  His submission quite conquered hishostess.  She said she would show him some of Mary Avon's sketches inoil, and led him away for that purpose. His warm admiration confirmedher good opinion of him; henceforth he had nothing to fear.At dinner that evening he was at first a little shy; perhaps he had asuspicion that there were present one or two spectators of a certaincomedy which he had to play all by himself. But, indeed, our eyes andears were not for him alone.  Miss Avon was delighting the Laird withstories of the suggestions she had got about her pictures from thepeople who had seen themeven from the people who had bought theminLondon."And you know," said she quite frankly, "I must study popular taste asmuch as I fairly can now, for I have to live by it.  If people will havesea-pieces spoiled by having figures put in, I must put in figures.  Byand by I may be in a position to do my own work in my own way."The Laird glanced at his nephew: was it not for him to emancipate thisgreat and original artist from the fear of critics, and dealers, andpurchasers?  There was no response."I mean to be in London soon myself," the Laird said abruptly; "ye musttell me where I can see some of your pictures.""Oh, no," she said, laughing, "I shall not victimise my friends.  I meanto prey on the publicif possible.  It is Mr. White, in King Street, St.James's, however, who has taken most of my pictures hitherto; and so ifyou know of anybody who would like to acquire immortal works for a fewguineas apiece, that is the address.""I am going to London myself soon," said he, with a serious air, as ifhe had suddenly determined on buying the National Gallery.Then Howard Smith, perceiving that no one was watching him, or expectingimpossibilities of him, became quite cheerful and talkative; and toldsome excellent stories of his experiences at various shooting quartersthe previous winter. Light-hearted, good-natured, fairly humorous, hetalked very well indeed.  We gathered that during the last months of theyear the shooting of pheasants occupied a good deal more of his time andattention than the study of law.  And how could one wonder that sopleasant-mannered a young man was a welcome guest at those variouscountry-houses in the south?But it appeared that, despite all this careless talk, he had beenkeeping an eye on Mary Avon during dinner.  Walking down to the yachtafterwardsthe blood-red not quite gone from the western skies, a coolwind coming up from the seahe said casually to his uncle"Well, sir, whatever trouble that young lady may have gone through hasnot crushed her spirits yet.  She is as merry as a lark.""She has more than cheerfulnessshe has courage," said the Laird, almostseverely.  "Oh, ay, plenty of courage.  And I have no doubt she couldfight the world for herself just as well as any man I know.  But I meanto make it my business that she shall not have to fight the world forherselfnot as long as there is a stick standing on Denny-mains!"*CHAPTER IV.**CHASING A THUNDERSTORM.*"All on board thenall on board!" the summons comes ringing throughthe wonderland of dreams.  And then, amid the general hurry and scurrythroughout the house, certain half-bewildered people turn first of allto the windows of their rooms: a welcome sight! The glory of the summerdawn is shining over the mountains; the White Dove, with nearly allher sail set, is swinging there at her moorings; best of all, a strongbreezeapparently from the north-eastis ruffling the dark blue seas anddriving a line of white surf on the further shores.  The news comes thatMaster Fred, by darting about in the dingay since ever daylight began,has got the very last basket on board; the red caps are even nowbringing the gig in to the landing slip; John of Skye is all impatienceto take advantage of the favourable wind.  There is but little timelost; the happy-go-lucky processiondona ferentesset out for thebeach.  And if the Laird is pleased to find his nephew apparentlyfalling into his scheme with a good grace; and if the nephew thinks heis very lucky to get so easily out of an awkward predicament; and ifMary Avonunconscious of these secret designsis full of an eagerdelight at the prospect of being allowed to set to work againmay notall this account for a certain indecorous gaiety that startles thesilence of the summer morning? Or is it that mythical hero Homesh who isresponsible for this laughter?  We hear the Laird chuckling; we noticethe facetious wrinkles about his eyes; we make sure it must be Homesh.Then the final consignment of books, shawls, gun-cases, and what not istossed into the gig; and away we go, with the measured dash of the oars.And what does the bearded John of Skye think of the new hand we havebrought him? Has he his own suspicions?  Is his friend and sworn ally,Dr. Sutherland, to be betrayed and supplanted in his absence?"Good morning, sir," he says obediently, at the gangway; and the quickCeltic eyes glance at Howard Smith from top to toe."Good morning, captain," the young man says lightly; and he springs tooquickly up the steps, making a little bit of a stumble.  This is not anauspicious omen.Then on deck: the handsome figure and pleasant manner of this young manought surely to prepossess people in his favour. What if histightly-fitting garments and his patent-leather boots and white gaitersare not an orthodox yachting rig?  John of Skye would not judge of a manby his costume. And if he does not seem quite at homein this first lookroundevery one is not so familiar with boating life as Dr. Sutherland.It is true, an umbrella used as a walking-stick looks strange on board ayacht; and he need not have put it on the curved top of the companion,for it immediately rolls over into the scuppers. Nor does he seem to seethe wickedness of placing a heavy bundle of canvases on the raisedskylight of the ladies' cabin; does he want to start the glass?  Dr.Sutherland, now, would have given the men a hand in hauling up the gig.Dr. Sutherland would not have been in the way of the tiller, as theyacht is released from her moorings.Unaware of this rapid criticism, and unconcerned by all the bustle goingon around, our new friend is carelessly and cheerfully chatting with hishostess; admiring the yacht; praising the beauty of the summer morning;delighted with the prospect of sailing in such weather. He does notshare in the profound curiosity of his uncle about the various duties ofthe men. When John of Skye, wishing to leave the tiller for a minute tooverhaul the lee tackle, turns quite naturally to Mary Avon, who isstanding by him, and says with a grin of apology, "If ye please, mem,"the young man betrays but little surprise that this young lady should beentrusted with the command of the vessel."What!" he says, with a pleasant smilethey seem on very friendly termsalready"can you steer, Miss Avon?  Mind you don't run us against anyrocks."Miss Avon has her eye on the mainsail.  She answers, with abusiness-like air"Oh, there is no fear of that.  What I have to mind, with this wind, isnot to let her gybe, or I should get into disgrace.""Then I hope you won't let her gybe, whatever that is," said he, with alaugh.Never was any setting-out more auspicious. We seemed to have badefarewell to those perpetual calms.  Early as it was in the morning,there was no still, dream-like haze about the mountains; there was aclear greenish-yellow where the sunlight struck them; the great slopeswere dappled with the shadows of purple-brown; further away the tallpeaks were of a decided blue.  And then the windy, fresh, brisk morning;the White Dove running races with the driven seas; the white foamflying away from her sides.  John of Skye seemed to have no fear of thisgentle skipper. He remained forward, superintending the setting of thetopsail; the White Dove was to "have it" while the fresh breezecontinued to blow.And still the squally easterly wind bears her bravely onward, the puffsdarkening the water as they pass us and strike the rushing seas. Is thata shadow of Colonsay on the far southern horizon?  The lighthouse peoplehere have gone to bed; there is not a single figure along theyellow-white walls.  Look at the clouds of gulls on the rocks, restingafter their morning meal.  By this time the deer have retreated into thehigh slopes above Craignure; there is a white foam breaking along thebay of Innismore.  And still the White Dove spins along, withfoam-diamonds glittering in the sunlight at her bows; and we hear thecalling of the sea-swallows, and the throbbing of a steamer somewhere inamong the shadows of Loch Aline.  Surely now we are out of the reign ofcalms; the great boom strains at the sheets; there is a whirl of bluewaters; the White Dove has spread her wings at last."Ay, ay," says John of Skye, who has relieved Miss Avon at the helm; "itis a great peety.""Why, John?" says she, with some surprise; is he vexed that we should besailing well on this fine sailing day?"It iss a great peety that Mr. Sutherland not here," said John, "and hewass know so much about a yacht, and day after day not a breeze at ahl.There iss not many chentlemen will know so much about a yacht as Mr.Sutherland."Miss Avon did not answer, though her face seemed conscious in itscolour.  She was deeply engaged in a novel."Oh, that is the Mr. Sutherland who has been with you," said HowardSmith to his hostess, in a cheerful way.  "A doctor, I think you said?"At this Miss Avon looked up quickly from her book."I should have thought," said she with a certain dignity of manner,"that most people had heard of Dr. Angus Sutherland.""Oh, yes, no doubt," said he, in the most good-natured fashion.  "I knowabout him myselfit must be the same man.  A nephew of Lord Foyers,isn't he?  I met some friends of his at a house last winter; they hadhis book with themthe book about tiger-hunting in Nepaul, don't youknow?very interesting indeed it was, uncommonly interesting.  I read itright through one night when everybody else was in bed""Why, that is Captain Sutherland's book," said his hostess, with just atrace of annoyance. "They are not even related.  How can you imaginethat Angus Sutherland would write a book about tiger-hunting?he is oneof the most distinguished men of science in England.""Oh, indeed," says the young man, with the most imperturbable goodhumour.  "Oh, yes, I am sure I have heard of himthe GeographicalSociety, or something like that; really those evenings are most amusing.The women are awfully bored, and yet they do keep their eyes opensomehow.  But about those Indian fellows; it was only last winter that Iheard how the   manages to make those enormous bags, all to his owngun, that you see in the papers.  Haven't you noticed them?"Well, some of us had been struck with amazement by the reports of theenormous slaughter committed by a certain Indian prince; and hadwondered at one of the gentle natives of the East taking so thoroughlyand successfully to our robust English sports."Why," said this young man, "he has every covert laid out with netting,in small squares like a dice-board; and when he has done blazing away inthe air, the under-keepers come up and catch every pheasant, hare, andrabbit that has run into the netting, and kill them, and put them downto his bag.  Ingenious, isn't it?  But I'll tell you what I have seenmyself.  I have seen Lord Justice  deliberately walk down a line ofnetting and shoot every pheasant and rabbit that had got entangled.'Safer not to let them get away,' says he.  And when his host came up hesaid, 'Very good shooting; capital.  I have got four pheasants and sevenrabbits there; I suppose the beaters will pick them up.'"And so the Youth, as we had got to call him, rattled on, relating hispersonal experiences, and telling such stories as occurred to him.There was a good sprinkling of well-known names in this desultory talk;how could Miss Avon fail to be interested, even if the subject-matterwas chiefly composed of pheasant-shooting, private theatricals, billiardmatches on wet days, and the other amusements of country life?The Laird, when he did turn aside from that huge volume of MunicipalLondonwhich he had brought with him for purposes of edificationmusthave seen and approved.  If the young man's attentions to Mary Avon wereof a distinctly friendly sort, if they were characterised by an obviousfrankness, if they were quite as much at the disposal of Mr. Smith'shostess, what more could be expected? Rome was not built in a day.Meanwhile Miss Avon seemed very well pleased with her new companion.And if it may have occurred to one or other of us that Howard Smith'stalking, however pleasant and good-natured and bright, was on a somewhatlower level than that of another of our friends, what then?  Was it notbetter fitted for idle sailing among summer seas?  Now, indeed, our goodfriend the Laird had no need to fear being startled by the suddenpropounding of conundrums.He was startled by something else.  Coming up from luncheon, we foundthat an extraordinary darkness prevailed in the western heavensastrange bronze-purple gloom that seemed to contain within it the promiseof a hundred thunderstorms.  And as this fair wind had now brought uswithin sight of the open Atlantic, the question was whether we shouldmake for Skye or run right under this lurid mass of cloud that appearedto lie all along the western shores of Mull.  Unanimously the vote wasfor the latter course.  Had not Angus Sutherland been anxious all alongto witness a thunderstorm at sea?  Might it not be of inestimable valueto Miss Avon?  John of Skye, not understanding these reasons, pointedout that the wind had backed somewhat to the north, and that Mull wouldgive us surer shelter than Skye for the night.  And so we bore away pastQuinish, the brisk breeze sending the White Dove along in capitalstyle; past the mouth of Loch Cuan; past the wild Cailleach Point; pastthe broad Calgary Bay; and past the long headland of Ru-Treshanish. Itwas a strange afternoon.  The sun was hidden; but in the south and westthere was a wan, clear, silver glow on the sea; and in this white lightthe islands of Lunga, and Fladda, and Staffa, and the Dutchman were ofsombre purple.  Darker still were the islands lying towards thelandGometra, and Ulva, and Inch Kenneth; while the great rampart ofcliff from Loch-na-Keal to Loch Scridain was so wrapped in gloom thatmomentarily we watched for the first quivering flash of the lightning.Then the wind died away.  The sea grew calm.  On the glassy grey surfacethe first drops of the rain fellstriking black, and then widening outin small circles. We were glad of the cool rain, but the whispering ofit sounded strangely in the silence.Then, as we are still watching for the first silver-blue flash of thelightning, behold! the mighty black wall of the Bourg and Gribun cliffsslowly, mysteriously disappears; and there is only before us a vaguemist of grey. Colonsay is gone; Inch Kenneth is gone; no longer can wemake out the dark rocks of Erisgeir.  And then the whispering of the seaincreases; there is a deeper gloom over head; the rain-king is upon us!There is a hasty retreat down stairs; the hatches are shoved over; afterdinner we shall see what this strange evening portends."I hope we shall get into the Sound of Ulva before dark," says MissAvon."I wish Angus was on board.  It is a shame he should be cheated out ofhis thunderstorm.  But we shall have the equinoctials for him, at allevents," says Queen Titaniajust as if she had a series of squalls andtempests bottled, labelled, and put on a shelf.When we get on deck again we find that the evening, but not the WhiteDove, has advanced.  There is no wind; there is no rain; around usthere is the silent, glassy, lilac-grey sea, which, far away in thewest, has one or two gleams of a dull bronze on it, as if some afterglowwere struggling through the clouds at the horizon.  Along the Gribuncliffs, and over the islands, the gloom has surely increased; it werebetter if we were in some shelter for this night.Then a noise is heard that seems to impose a sudden silencethunder,low, distant, and rumbling.  But there is no splendid gleam through thegathering gloom of the night: the Gribun cliffs have not spoken yet.John of Skye has carelessly seated himself on one of the deck-stools;his arm hangs idly on the tiller; we guess, rather than hear, that he isregaling himself with the sad, monotonous Farewell to Fuineray.  Hehas got on his black oilskins, though there is not a drop of rain.By and by, however, it being now quite dark, he jumps to his feet, andappears to listen intently."Ay, do ye hear it?" he says, with a short laugh.  "And it iss off theland it iss coming!"He calls aloud"Look out boys! it is a squahl coming over, and we'll hevthe topsail down whatever!"Then we hear a distant roaring; and presently the headsails areviolently shaken, and the great boom swings over as John puts the helmup to get way on her.  The next instant we are racing in for the land,as if we mean to challenge the heavy squall that is tearing across fromthe unseen Gribun cliffs. And now the rain-clouds break in deluges; themen in their black oilskins go staggering this way and that along theslippery decks; the White Dove is wrestling with the sudden storm;another low murmur of thunder comes booming through the darkness.  Whatis that solitary light far in there towards the land?dare any steamerventure so near the shore on such a night?  And we, too; would it not besafer for us to turn and run out to sea rather than beat against asquall into the narrow and shallow channels of Ulva's Sound? But John ofSkye is not afraid.  The wind and sea cannot drown his strident voice;the rain deluge cannot blind the trained eyes; the men on thelook-outwhen the bow of the boat springs high on a wave, we can see theblack figures against the sombre skyknow the channels too; we are notafraid to make for Ulva's Sound.There is a wild cry from one of the women; she has caught sight, throughthe gloom, of white foam dashing on the rocks."It is all right, mem!" John calls aloud, with a laugh; but all the samethe order is shouted, "Ready about!""Ready about!" is the callcoming back to us from the darkness. "'Bout ship!" and then away shesheers from that ugly coast.We were after all cheated of our thunderstorm, but it was a wild and awet night nevertheless.  Taking in the mizen was no joke amid this furyof wind and rain, but that and the hauling up of the main-tack lessenedthe pressure on her.  John of Skye was in high spirits.  He was proud ofhis knowledge of the dangerous coast; where less familiar eyes saw onlyvague black masses looming out of the darkness he recognised every rockand headland."No, no, mem," he was calling out in friendly tones; "we not hef to runout to sea at ahl. We will get into the Sound of Ulva ferry well; andthere will not be any better anchorage as the Sound of Ulva, when youare acquaint. But a strangerI not ask a stranger to go into the Soundof Ulva on so dark a night."What is this we hear?"Down foresail, boys!" and there is a rattle onto the decks. The head of the yacht seems to sway round; there is a loudflapping of sails.  "Down chub!"and there are black figuresstruggling up there at the bowsprit; but vaguely seen against theblackness of the sky and the sea. Then, in a second or two, there is afiercer rattle than ever; the anchor is away with a roar.  Some furtherchain is paid out; then a strange silence ensues; we are anchored inUlva's Sound.Come down into the cabin, then, you women-folk, and dry your streamingfaces, and arrange your dishevelled hair.  Is not this a wonderfulstillness and silence after the whirl and roar of the storm outside?But then you must know that the waters are smooth in here; and the windsbecome gentleas gentle as the name of the island that is close to usnow in the dark.  It is a green-shored island.  The sailors call itOol-a-va.*CHAPTER V.**CHASING SEALS.*Next morning found the Laird in a most excellent humour.  All was goingwell. Though nothing had been said or promised by the Youth, was not hiscoming away with us into these remote solitudesto say nothing of thevery pleasant manner in which he sought to entertain Miss MaryAvonsufficient evidence that he had at least no great repugnance to hisuncle's scheme?  The Laird was disposed to chuckle privately over theanxiety that Mary displayed about her work.  The poor young thing: shedid not understand what higher powers were ordering her future for her."Let her work on," the Laird said, in great confidence, to his hostess,and there was a fine secret humour in his eyes.  "Ay, ay, let her workon: hard work never harmed anybody.  And if she brings her bit mailin tothe marriageye would call it her dowry in the southin the shape of abundle of picturesjust as a young Scotch lass brings a chest of drawersor a set of naperyshe will not be empty-handed.  She can hang them upherself at Denny-mains.""You are looking too far ahead, sir," says Queen T., with a quiet smile."Maybemaybe," says the Laird, rubbing his hands with a certain proudsatisfaction. "We'll see who's rightwe will see who is right, ma'am."Then, at breakfast, he was merry, complaisant, philosophical in turns.He told us that the last vidimus of the affairs of the Burgh ofStrathgovan was most satisfactory: assets about 35,000*l.*; liabilitiesnot over 20,000*l.*; there was thus an estimated surplus of no less than15,000*l*.  Why, then, he asked, should certain poor creatures on theFinance Committee make such a work about the merest trifles?  Life wasnot given to man that he should worry himself into a rage about a pennyfarthing."There is a great dale of right down common sense, ma'am," said he, "inthat verse that was written by my countryman, Welliam DunbaurBe merry man, and tak not sair in mindThe wavering of this wretched world of sorrow;To God be humble, to thy friend be kind,And with thy neighbours gladly lend and borrow;His chance to-night, it may be thine to-morrow;Be blythe in heart for any aventre,For oft with wise men it has been said aforow,Without Gladnsse availeth no Treasre."But we, who were in the secret, knew that this quotation had nothing inthe world to do with the Finance Committee of Strathgovan. The Laird hadbeen comforting himself with these lines.  They were a sort ofphilosophico-poetical justification of himself to himself for hisreadiness to make these two young people happy by giving up to themDenny-mains.And no doubt he was still chuckling over the simplicity of this poorgirl, when, after breakfast, he found her busily engaged in getting herpainting materials on deck."Beautifulbeautiful," said he, glancing around.  "Ye will make a finepicture out of those mountains, and the mist, and the still sea.  Whatan extraordinary quiet after last night's rain!"And perhaps he was thinking how well this picture would look in thedining-room at Denny-mains; and how a certain young hostessno longerpale and fragile, but robust and sun-browned with much driving in apony-carriagewould take her friends to the picture, and show them Ulva,and Loch-na-Keal, and Ben-More; and tell them how this strange quiet andbeauty had followed on a wild night of storm and rain.  The world aroundus was at this moment so quiet that we could hear the twittering of somesmall bird among the rocks in there at the shore.  And the pale, wan,dream-like sea was so perfect a mirror that an absolutely double picturewas producedof the gloomy mountain-masses of Ben-More, amid silvergleams of cloud and motionless wreaths of mist; of the basaltic pillarsof the coast nearer at handa pale reddish-brown, with here and there ascant sprinkling of grass; of that broad belt of rich orange-yellowseaweed that ran all along the rocks, marking the junction of the worldof the land with the water-world below.  An absolutely perfect mirror;except when some fish splashed; then the small circles widened out andgradually disappeared; and the surface was as glassy as before.The Laird was generous.  He would leave the artist undisturbed at herwork.  Would not his nephew be better amused if a bachelor expeditionwere fitted out to go in search of the seals that abound in the channelsaround Inch Kenneth?  Our hostess declined to go; but provided us withan ample lunch.  The gig was lowered; and everything ready for thestart."Bring your shot-gun, too, Howard," said the Laird.  "I want ye to shootsome skarts. I am told that the breasts of them are very close and finein the feathers; and I would like a muff or a bag made of them for aleddyfor a young leddy."Mary Avon was busy with her work: how could she hear?"And if the skin of the seals about here is not very fine, we will makesomething of it.  Oh, ay, we will make something of it in the way of apresent.  I know a man in Glasgow who is extraordinary clever at suchthings.""We have first to get the seal, uncle," said his nephew, laughing.  "Iknow any number of men who assure you they have shot seals; but notquite so many who have got the seals that were shot.""Oh, but we'll get the seal, and the skarts, too," said the Laird; andthen he added, grimly, "Man, if ye cannot do that, what can ye do?  Ifye cannot shoot well, what else are ye fit for?""I really don't know, uncle," the Youth confessed modestly, as he handeddown his rifle into the gig.  "The London solicitors are a blind race.If they only knew what a treasure of learning and sound judgment theymight have for the asking: but they don't.  And I can't get any of theScotch business you were talking about; because my name doesn't beginwith Mac.""Well, well, we must wait, and hope for the best," said the Laird,cheerfully, as he took his seat in the stern of the gig.  "We are notlikely to run against a solicitor in the Sound of Ulva.  Sufficient forthe day.  As I was saying, there's great common sense in what WelliamDunbaur wroteBe blythe in heart for any aventre,For oft with wise men it has been said aforow,Without Gladnsse availeth no Treasre.Bless me, look at that!"This sudden exclamation sent all eyes to the shore.  A large heron,startled by the rattling of the oars, had risen, with a sharp and loudcroak of alarm, from among the sea-weed, his legs hanging down, his longneck, and wings, and body apparently a grey-white against the shadow ofthe basaltic rocks. Then, lazily flapping, he rose higher and higher; hetucked up his legs; the great wings went somewhat more swiftly; andthen, getting above the low cliffs, and appearing quite black againstthe silver-clear sky, he slowly sailed away.The silence of this dream-like picture around us was soon broken.  Asthe men pulled away from the yacht, the lonely shores seemed to waken upinto life; and there were whistlings, and callings, and warnings allalong the cliffs; while the startled sea-birds whirred by in flashes ofcolour, or slowly and heavily betook themselves to some furtherpromontory.  And now, as we passed along the narrow Sound, and sawthrough the translucent water the wonder-land of seaweed belowwith thepatches of clear yellow sand interveningwe appreciated more and morehighly the skill of John of Skye in getting us into such a harbour onthe previous night.  It is not every one who, in pitch darkness and inthe midst of squalls, can run a yacht into the neck of a bottle.We emerged from the narrow channel, and got out into the open; but eventhe broad waters of Loch-na-Keal were pale and still: the reflection ofEorsa was scarcely marred by a ripple.  The long, measured throb of therowing was the only sound of life in this world of still water andoverhanging cloud.  There was no stroke-oar now to give the chorusA long strong pull together,Ho, ro, clansman.But still we made good way.  As we got further out, we came in sight ofLittle Colonsay; and further off still, Staffa, lying like a dark cloudon the grey sea.  Inch Kenneth, for which we were making, seemed almostblack; although, among the mists that lay along the Gribun and Bourgcliffs, there was a dull silver-yellow light, as though some sunlighthad got mixed up with the clouds."No, no," the Laird was saying, as he studied a scrap of paper, "it isnot a great property to admeenister; but I am strong in favour of localmanagement.  After reading that book on London, and its catalogue of theenormous properties there, our little bit Burgh appears to be only atoy; but the principle of sound and energetic self-government is thesame.  And yet it is no so small, mind ye. The Burgh buildings areestimated at nineteen thousand pounds odd; the furniture at twelvehunderd pounds; lamps near on two thousand five hunderd; sewers ninethousand pounds odd; and then debts not far from three thousandpoundsthat makes our assets just about thirty-five thousand.  And ifthe water-pipes in some places are rather too small for the steamfire-engine, we maun have them bigger.  It was quite rideeculous that athriving place like Strathgovan, when there was a big fire, should haveto run to Glesca for help. No, no; I believe in independence; and if yeshould ever live in our neighbourhood, Howard, I hope ye will stand outagainst the policy of annexation.  It is only a lot o' Radical bodiesthat are for upsetting institutions that have been tried by time and notfound wanting.""Oh, certainly, sir," Howard Smith said blithely.  "When you educatepeople to take an interest in small parochial matters, they are betterfitted to give an opinion about the general affairs of the country.""Small?" said the Laird, eyeing him severely.  "They are of as muchimportance as human life; is there anything of greater importance in theworld?  By abolishin' the Coulterburn nuisance, and insisting on greatercleanliness and ventilation, we have reduced the number of deaths frominfectious diseases in a most extraordinar' manner; and there will be nomore fear of accidents in the Mitherdrum Road, for we are going to havea conteenuous line of lamps that'll go right in to the Glesca lamps.  Ido not call these small matters.  As for the asphalting of the pavementin front of John Anderson's line of houses," continued the Laird, as heconsulted the memorandum in his hand, "that is a small matter, if yelike.  I am not disposed to pronounce an opinion on that matter: theycan settle it without my voice.  But it will make a great difference toJohn Anderson; and I would like to see him come forward with a biggersubscription for the new Park.  Well, well; we must fight through asbest we can."It was here suggested to the Laird that he should not let these weightymatters trouble him while he is away on a holiday."Trouble me?" said he, lightly.  "Not a bit, man!  People who have tomeddle in public affairs must learn how to throw off their cares.  I amnot troubled.  I am going to give the men a dram; for better pulling Inever saw in a boat!"He was as good as his word, too.  He had the luncheon-basket handed downfrom the bow; he got out the whisky bottle; there was a glass filled outfor each of the men, which was drunk in solemn silence."Now, boys," said he, as they took to their oars again, "haven't ye gota song or a chorus to make the rowing easy?"But they were too shy for a bit.  Presently, however, we heard at thebow a low, plaintive, querulous voice; and the very oars seemed torecognise the air as they gripped the water. Then there was a hum of achorusnot very musicaland it was in the Gaelicbut we knew what therefrain meant.batmn,  frewll t yu,batmn,  frewll t yu,Whrvr yu my b gng.That is something like the English of it: we had heard the Fhir aBhata in other days.The long, heavy pull is nearly over.  Here are the low-lying reefs ofrock outside Inch Kenneth; not a whisper is permissible as we creep intothe nearest bay.  And then the men and the boat are left there; and theYouthperhaps dimly conscious that his uncle means the seal-skin forMary Avongrasps his rifle and steals away over the undulating shelvesof rock; while his two companions, with more leisure but with not lesscircumspection, follow to observe his operations.  Fortunately there isno screaming sea-pyot or whistling curlew to give warning; stealthily,almost bent in two, occasionally crawling on all fours, he makes his wayalong the crannies in the reef, until, as we see, he must be nearlyapproaching the channel on his left.  There he pauses to take breath.He creeps behind a rock; and cautiously looks over.  He continues hisprogress."This is terrible woark," says the Laird, in a stage-whisper, as he,toowith a much heavier bulk to carryworms along.  From time to time hehas to stay to apply his handkerchief to his forehead; it is hot work onthis still, breathless day.And at last we, too, get down to the edge of a channelsome hundredyards lower than Howard Smith's postand from behind a rock we have apretty clear view of the scene of operations.  Apparently there is nosign of any living thingexcept that a big fish leaps into the air, somedozen yards off.  Thereafter a dead silence.After waiting about a quarter of an hour or so, the Laird seemed tobecome violently excited, though he would neither budge nor speak.  Andthere, between two islands right opposite young Smith, appeared twoshining black heads on the still water; and they were evidently comingdown this very channel.  On they cameturning about one way and another,as if to look that the coast was clear.  Every moment we expected tohear the crack of the rifle.  Then the heads silently disappeared.The Laird was beside himself with disappointment."Why did he no shoot?  Why did he no shoot?" he said, in an excitedwhisper.He had scarcely spoken when he was startled by an apparition.  Rightopposite to himnot more than twenty yards offa black thing appeared onthe waterwith a glistening smooth head, and large, soft eyes.  Thenanother.  We dared not move.  We waited for the whistle of therifle-bullet.  The next instant the first seal caught sight of theLaird; raised its head for an instant at least six inches higher; thensilently plunged along with its companion. They were gone, at allevents.The Youth came marching along the rocks, his rifle over his shoulder."Why didn't you fire?" his uncle said, almost angrily."I thought they were coming nearer," said he.  "I was just about to firewhen they dived.  Mind, it isn't very easy to get on to a thing that isbobbing about like that, with a rifle.  I propose we have luncheon, now,until the tide ebbs a bit; then there may be a chance of catching onelying on the rocks. That is the proper time for getting a shot at aseal."We had luncheon: there was no difficulty about securing that.  But asfor getting at the sealswhether we crawled over the rocks, or lay inhiding, or allowed the boat to drift towards some island, on the chanceof one of them rising in our neighbourhoodit was no use at all.  Therewere plenty of seals about: a snap shot now and again served to breakthe monotony of the day; but that present tor Mary Avon seemed as remoteas ever.  And when one is determined on shooting a seal, one is notlikely to waste one's attention, and cartridges, on such inferioranimals as skarts.The silver-grey day became more golden; there was a touch of warm purpleabout the shadows of Staffa."Come," said the Laird at last.  "We must go back.  It is no use.  Ihave often heard people say that if you miss the first chance at a sealit never gives ye another.""Better luck next time, uncle," said the Youth; but his uncle refused tobe comforted. And the first thing he said to Mary Avon when he got backto the yacht was"We have not got it.""Got what?" said she."The seal-skin I wanted to have dressed for ye.  No, nor the skarts Iwanted to have made into a muff or a bag for ye.""Oh," said she, promptly, "I am very glad. I hope you won't shoot any ofthose poor things on my account; I should be very sorry indeed."The Laird took this as one of the familiar protestations on the part ofwomen, who wouldn't for the world have poor things shot, but who don'tobject to wearing any amount of furs and feathers, to say nothing ofhaving innocent sheep sheared and harmless silkworms robbed in order todeck themselves out. She should have that dressed seal-skin, and thatmuff of skarts' breasts, all the same.Nothing of stupendous importance happened that evening except thatafterwe had caught three dozen of good-sized lithe and returned to the yachtwith this welcome addition to our storesthere was a general discussionof our plans for the next few days.  And our gentle hostess wasobviously looking forward to Angus Sutherland's coming back to us withgreat pleasure; and we were to make our return to suit his convenience;and she would write to him whenever we got near a post-office again.Mary Avon had sate silent during all this.  At last, she saidapparentlywith some effort and yet very deliberately"II think you are a little cruel to Dr. Sutherland.  You are forcinghim to come with you against his better judgmentfor you know, with hisprospects, and the calls on his time, he cannot afford such longidleness.  Do you think it is quite fair?"The woman stared at this girl, who spoke with some earnestness, thoughher eyes were downcast."He would do anything to please you," Mary Avon continued, as if shewere determined to get through with some speech that she had prepared,"and he is very fond of sailing: but do you think you should allow himto injure his prospects in this way? Wouldn't it be a greater kindnessto write and say that, if he really feels he ought to return to London,you would not hold him to his promise?  I am sure he would not beoffended: he would understand you at once. And I am sure he would dowhat is clearly right: he would go straight back to London, and resumehis workfor his own sake and for the sake of those who count on a greatfuture for him.  I, for one, should be very sorry to see him come backto idle away his time in sailing."And still Queen Tita stared at the girl, though their eyes did not meet.And she could scarcely believe that it was Mary Avon who had counselledthis cold dismissal.*CHAPTER VI.**"UNCERTAIN, COY, AND HARD TO PLEASE."*There are two people walking up and down the deck this beautifulmorning: the lazy ones are still below, dawdling over breakfast.  Andnow young Smith, though he is not much more than an acquaintance, talksquite confidentially to his hostess.  She has his secret; he looks toher for aid.  And when they do have a quiet moment like this togetherthere is usually but one person of whom they speak."I must say she has an extraordinary spirit," he observes, with somedecision.  "Why, I believe she is rather pleased than otherwise to havelost that money.  She is not a bit afraid of going up to London tosupport herself by her work.  It seems to amuse her on the whole!""Mary has plenty of courage," says the other quietly."I don't wonder at my uncle being so fond of her: he likes herindependent ways and her good humour.  I shouldn't be surprised if hewere to adopt her as his daughter, and cut me out.  There would be somesense in that.""I am glad you take it so coolly," says our governor-general, in amatter-of-fact way that rather startles him.  "More unlikely things havehappened."But he recovers himself directly."No, no," says he, laughing.  "There is one objection.  She could notsit on any of the parochial Boards of Strathgovan.  Now I know my unclelooks forward to putting me on the Police Committee and the LightingCommittee, and no end of other Committees. By the way, she might go onthe School Board.  Do they have women on the School Boards in Scotland?"On this point his hostess was no better informed than himself."Well," said he, after a bit, "I wouldn't call her pretty, you know; butshe has a singularly interesting face.""Oh, do you think so?" says the other, quite innocently."I do, indeed," answers the ingenuous Youth. "And the more you see ofher the more interesting it becomes.  You seem to get so well acquaintedwith her somehow; andand you have a sort of feeling that her presenceis sort of necessary."This was somewhat vague; but he made another wild effort to expresshimself."What I mean isthatthat suppose she were to leave the yacht, wouldn'tthe saloon look quite different?  And wouldn't the sailing be quitedifferent?  You would know there was something wanting.""I should, indeed," is the emphatic reply."I never knew any one," says the Youth, warming to his work of thoroughexplanation, "about whose presence you seem so consciouseven when sheisn't hereI don't mean that exactlyI mean that at this moment now, youknow she is on board the yachtand it would be quite different if shewere not.  I suppose most people wouldn't call her pretty.  There isnothing of the Book of Beauty about her.  But I call it a mostinteresting face.  And she has fine eyes.  Anybody must admit that.They have a beautiful, soft expression; and they can laugh even when sheis quite silent""My dear Mr. Smith," says his hostess, suddenly stopping short, and witha kind of serious smile on her face, "let me talk frankly to you.  Youacted very sensibly, I think, in coming with us to humour your uncle.He will come to see that this scheme of his is impracticable; and in themeantime, if you don't mind the discomfort of it, you have a holiday.That is all quite well.  But pray don't think it necessary that youshould argue yourself into falling in love with Mary.  I am not in herconfidence on such a delicate matter; but one has eyes; and I think Imight almost safely say to you that, even if you persuaded yourself thatMary would make an excellent wifeand be presentable to your friendsIsay even if you succeeded in persuading yourself, I am afraid you wouldonly have thrown that labour away.  Please don't try to convinceyourself that you ought to fall in love with her."This was plain speaking.  But then our admiral-in-chief was very quicklysensitive where Mary Avon was concerned; and perhaps she did not quitelike her friend being spoken of as though she were a pill that had to beswallowed.  Of course the Youth instantly disclaimed any intention ofthat kind.  He had a very sincere regard for the girl, so far as he hadseen her; he was not persuading himself; he was only saying how much sheimproved when you got better acquainted with her."And if," said he, with just a touch of dignity, "if Miss Avonisisengaged""Oh, I did not say that," his hostess quickly interposed.  "Oh,certainly not.  It was only a guess on my part""or likely to be engaged," he continued, with something of the samereserve, "I am sure I am very glad for her sake; and whoever marries herought to have a cheerful home and a pleasant companion."This was a generous sentiment; but there was not much of a"wish-you-may-be-happy" air about the young man.  Moreover, where wasthe relief he ought to have experienced on hearing that there was anobstacleor likelihood of an obstacleto the execution of his uncle'sscheme which would absolve him from responsibility altogether?However, the subject could not be continued just then; for at thismoment a tightly-brushed small head, and a narrow-brimmed felt hat, anda shapely neck surrounded by an upstanding collar and bit of ribbon ofnavy-blue, appeared at the top of the companion, and Mary Avon, lookingup with her black eyes full of a cheerful friendliness, said"Weil, John, are you ready to start yet?"And the great, brown-bearded John of Skye, looking down at this smallJack-in-the-box with a smile of welcome on his face, said"Oh, yes, mem, when the breakfast is over.""Do you think it is blowing outside, then?""Oh, no, mem, but there is a good breeze; and maybe there will be a bitof a rowl from the Atlantic.  Will Mr.  himself be for going now?""Oh, yes, certainly," she says, with a fine assumption of authority."We are quite ready when you are ready, John; Fred will have the thingsoff the table in a couple of minutes.""Very well, mem," says the obedient John of Skye, going forward to getthe men up to the windlass.Our young Doctor should have been there to see us getting under way.The Sound of Ulva is an excellent harbour and anchorage when you areonce in it; but getting out of it, unless with both wind and tide inyour favour, is very like trying to manoeuvre a man-of-war in a tea-cup.But we had long ago come to the conclusion that John of Skye could sailthe White Dove through a gas-pipe, with half a gale of wind dead inhis teeth; and the manner in which he got us out of this narrow andtortuous channel fully justified our confidence."Very prettily done, Captain John!" said the Lairdwho was beginning togive himself airs on nautical matterswhen we had got out into the open.And here, as we soon discovered, was the brisk fresh breeze that John ofSkye had predicted; and the running swell, too, that came sweeping in tothe mouth of Loch-na-Keal. Black indeed looked that far-reaching loch onthis breezy, changeful morningas dark as it was when the chief ofUlva's Isle came down to the shore with his runaway bride; and all alongBen-More and over the Gribun cliffs hung heavy masses of cloud, dark andthreatening as if with thunder.  But far away in the south there was amore cheerful outlook; the windy sea shimmering in light; some gleams ofblue in the sky; we knew that the sunshine must be shining on the greenclover and the beautiful sands of Iona.  The White Dove seemed tounderstand what was required of her.  Her head was set for the gleamingsouth; her white wings outspread; as she sprang to meet those rushingseas we knew we were escaping from the thunder-darkness that lay overLoch-na-Keal.And Ulva: had we known that we were now leaving Ulva behind us for thelast time, should we not have taken another look back, even though itnow lay under a strange and mysterious gloom?  Perhaps not.  We hadgrown to love the island in other days.  And when one shuts one's eyesin winter, it is not to see an Ulva of desolate rocks and leaden waves;it is a fair and shining Ulva, with blue seas breaking whitely along itsshores; and magical still channels, with mermaid's halls of seaweed; andan abundant, interesting lifeall manner of sea-birds, black rabbitsrunning among the rocks, seals swimming in the silent bays.  Then thepatch of civilisation under shelter of the hills; the yellowcorn-fields; the dots of human creatures and the red and tawny-greycattle visible afar in the meadow; the solitary house; the soft foliageof trees and bushes; the wild-flowers along the cliffs. That is thegreen-shored island: that is the Ool-a-va of the sailors; we know itonly in sunlight and among blue summer seas: it shines for us for ever!The people who go yachting are a fickle folk.  The scene changesandtheir interests changeevery few minutes.  Now it is the swooping downof a solan; again it is the appearance of another island far away;presently it is a shout of laughter forward, as some unlucky wight getsdrowned in a shower of sea-spray: anything catches their attention forthe moment.  And so the White Dove swings along; and the sea getsheavier and heavier; and we watch the breakers springing high over theblack rocks of Colonsay.  It is the Laird who is now instructing our newguest; pointing out to him, as they come in view, Staffa, the Dutchman,Fladda, and Lunga, and Cairnaburg.  Tiree is invisible at the horizon:there is too wild a whirl of wind and water.The gloom behind us increases; we know not what is about to happen toour beloved but now distant Ulvawhat sudden rumble of thunder is aboutto startle the silence of the dark Loch-na-Keal.  But ahead of us thesouth is still shining clear: blow, winds, that we may gain the quietshelter of Polterriv before the evening falls!  And is it not full moonto-night?to-night our new guest may see the yellow moon shining on thestill waters of Iona Sound.But the humiliating truth must be told.  The heavy sea has been tryingto one unaccustomed to life on board.  Howard Smith, though answeringquestions well enough, and even joining voluntarily in conversationoccasionally, wears a preoccupied air.  He does not take much interestin the caves of Bourg.  The bright look has gone from his face.His gentle hostesswho has herself had moments of gloom on the bosom ofthe deeprecognises these signs instantly; and insists on immediateluncheon.  There is a double reason for this haste.  We can now rununder the lee of the Erisgeir rocks, where there will be less danger toMaster Fred's plates and tumblers.  So we are all bundled down into thesaloon; the swell sensibly subsides as we get to leeward of Erisgeir;there is a scramble of helping and handing; and another explosion in thegalley tells us that Master Fred has not yet mastered the art ofreleasing effervescing fluids.  Half a tumblerful of that liquid putsnew life into our solemn friend. The colour returns to his face, andbrightness to his eyes.  He admits that he was beginning to long for afew minutes on firm landbut nowbut nowhe is even willing to join usin an excursion that has been talked of to the far Dubhartachlighthouse."But we must really wait for Angus," our hostess says, "before going outthere. He was always so anxious to go to Dubhartach.""But surely you won't ask him to come away from his duties again?" MaryAvon puts in hastily.  "You know he ought to go back to London at once.""I know I have written him a letter," says the other demurely.  "You canread it if you like, Mary.  It is in pencil, for I was afraid of theink-bottle going waltzing over the table."Miss Avon would not read the letter.  She said we must be past Erisgeirby this time; and proposed we should go on deck.  This we did; and theYouth was now so comfortable and assured in his mind that, by lying fulllength on the deck, close to the weather bulwarks, he managed to light acigar.  He smoked there in much content, almost safe from the spray.Mary Avon was seated at the top of the companion, reading.  Her hostesscame and squeezed herself in beside her, and put her arm round her."Mary," said she, "why don't you want Angus Sutherland to come back tothe yacht?""I!" said she, in great surprisethough she did not meet the look of theelder woman"IIdon't you see yourself that he ought to go back toLondon?  How can he look after that magazine while he is away in theHighlands?  Andandhe has so much to look forward toso much to dothatyou should not encourage him in making light of his work.""Making light of his work!" said the other. "I am almost sure that youyourself told him that he deserved and required a longa verylongholiday.""You did, certainly.""And didn't you?"The young lady looked rather embarrassed."When you saw him," said she, with flushed cheeks, "so greatly enjoyingthe sailingabsorbed in itandand gaining health and strength,toowell, of course you naturally wished that he should come back and goaway with you again.  But it is different on reflection.  You should notask him.""Why, what evil is likely to happen to him through taking another sixweeks' holiday? Is he likely to fall out of the race of life because ofa sail in the White Dove? And doesn't he know his own business?  He isnot a child.""He would do a great deal to please you.""I want him to please himself," said the other; and she added, with adeadly frown gathering on her forehead, "and I won't have you, MissDignity, interfering with the pleasures of my guests.  And there is tobe no snubbing, and no grim looks, and no hints about work, and London,and other nonsense, when Angus Sutherland comes back to us. You shallstand by the gangwaydo you hear?and receive him with a smiling face;and if you are not particularly kind, and civil, and attentive to him,I'll have you lashed to the yard-arm and painted bluekeel-haul me if Idon't."Fairer and fairer grew the scene around us as the brave White Dovewent breasting the heavy Atlantic rollers.  Blue and white overhead; thehot sunlight doing its best to dry the dripping decks; Iona shiningthere over the smoother waters of the Sound; the sea breaking white, andspouting up in columns, as it dashed against the pale red promontoriesof the Ross of Mull.  But then this stiff breeze had backed to the west;and there was many a long tack to be got over before we left behind theAtlantic swell and ran clear into the Sound.  The evening was drawing onapace as we slowly and cautiously steered into the little creek ofPolterriv.  No sooner had the anchor rattled out than we heard the cleartinkling of Master Fred's bell; how on earth had he managed to cookdinner amid all that diving and rolling and pitching?And then, as we had hoped, it was a beautiful evening; and the long gigwas got out, and shawls for the women-folk flung into the stern.  Thefishing did not claim our attention.  Familiar as some of us were withthe wonderful twilights of the north, which of us had ever seen anythingmore solemn, and still, and lovely than these colours of sea and shore?Half-past nine at night on the 8th of August; and still the west andnorth were flushed with a pale rose-red, behind the dark, rich,olive-green of the shadowed Iona.  But what was that to the magic worldthat lay before us as we returned to the yacht?  Now the moon hadarisen, and it seemed to be of a clear, lambent gold; and the cloudlessheavens and the still sea were of a violet huenot imaginatively, orrelatively, but positively and literally violet.  Then between theviolet-coloured sky and the violet-coloured sea, a long line of rock,jet black as it appeared to us.  That was all the picture: the yellowmoon, the violet sky, the violet sea, the line of black rock.  No doubtit was the intensity of the shadows along this line of rock that gavethat extraordinary luminousness to the still heavens and the still sea.When we got back to the yacht a telegram awaited us.  It had been sentto Bunessan, the nearest telegraph-station; but some kind friends there,recognising the White Dove as she came along by Erisgeir, and shrewdlyconcluding that we must pass the night at Polterriv, had been so kind asto forward it on to Fion-phort by a messenger."I thought so!" says Queen T. with a fine delight in her face as shereads the telegram.  "It is from Angus.  He is coming on Thursday.  Wemust go back to meet him at Ballahulish or Corpach."Then the discourtesy of this remark struck her."I beg your pardon, Mr. Smith," said she, instantly.  "Of course, I meanif it is quite agreeable to you.  He does not expect us, you see; hewould come on here""I assure you I would as soon go to Ballahulish as anywhere else," saysthe Youth promptly.  "It is quite the same to meit is all new, you see,and all equally charming."Mary Avon alone expressed no delight at this prospect of our going toBallahulish to meet Angus Sutherland; she sate silent; her eyes werethoughtful and distant; it was not of anything around her that she wasthinking.The moon had got whiter now; the sea and the sky blue-black in place ofthat soft warm violet colour.  We sate on deck till a late hour; theworld was asleep around us; not a sound disturbed the absolute stillnessof land and sea.And where was the voice of our singing bird?  Had the loss of a mere sumof money made her forget all about Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton, "andMary Carmichael and me?" Or was the midnight silence too much for her;and the thought of the dusky cathedral over there; with the gravestonespale in the moonlight; and all around a whispering of the lonely sea?She had nothing to fear. She might have crossed over to Iona and mighthave walked all by herself through the ruins, and in calmness regardedthe sculptured stones.  The dead sleep sound.*CHAPTER VII.**SECRET SCHEMES.*The delight with which John of Skye heard that his friend Dr. Sutherlandwas coming back to the yacht, and that we were now setting out forBallahulish or Corpach to meet him, found instant and practicalexpression on this fine, breezy, sunlit morning."Hector," says he, "we will put the gaff topsail on her!"What did he care though this squally breeze came blowing down the Soundin awkward gusts?"It is a fine wind, mem," says he to the Admiral, as we slowly leave thegreen waters and the pink rocks of Polterriv, and get into the open andbreezy channel.  "Oh, we will mek a good run the day.  And I beg yourpardon, mem, but it is a great pleasure to me that Mr. Sutherlandhimself is coming back to the yat.""He understands your clever sailing, John: is that it?""He knows more about a yat as any chentleman I will ever see, mem.  Andwe will try to get a good breeze for him this time, memand not to havethe calm weather."This is not likely to be a day of calm weather, at all events.  Tide andwind together take us away swiftly from the little harbour behind thegranite rocks.  And is Iona over there all asleep; or are there somefriends in the small village watching the White Dove bearing away tothe south?  We wave our handkerchiefs on chance.  We take a last look atthe gabled ruins over the sea; at the green corn-fields; and thescattered houses; and the beaches of silver sand. Good-byegood-bye!  Itis a last look for this summer at least; perhaps it is a last look forever.  But Iona tooas well as Ulvaremains in the memory a vision ofsunlight, and smooth seas, and summer days.Harder and harder blows this fresh breeze from the north; and we areracing down the Sound with the driven waves.  But for the rope round thetiller, Miss Avon, who is steering, would find it difficult to keep herfeet; and her hair is blown all about her face.  The salt water comesswishing down the scuppers; the churned foam goes hissing and boilingaway from the sides of the vessel; the broad Atlantic widens out.  Andthat small grey thing at the horizon?  Can that speck be a mass ofmasonry a hundred and fifty feet in height, wedged into the lonely rock?"No, no," says our gentle Queen Titania with an involuntary shudder,"not for worlds would I climb up that iron ladder, with the sea and therocks right below me.  I should never get half-way up.""They will put a rope round your waist, if you like," it is pointed outto her."When we go out, then," says this coward. "I will see how Mary gets on.If she does not die of fright, I may venture.""Oh, but I don't think I shall be with you," remarks the young ladyquite simply.At this there is a general stare."I don't know what you mean," says her hostess, with an ominouscurtness."Why, you know," says the girl, cheerfullyand disengaging one hand toget her hair out of her eyes"I can't afford to go idling much longer.I must get back to London.""Don't talk nonsense," says the other woman, angrily.  "You may try tostop other people's holidays, if you like; but I am going to look afteryours.  Holidays!  How are you to work, if you don't work now? Will youfind many landscapes in Regent Street?""I have a great many sketches," says Mary Avon, "and I must try to makesomething out of them, where there is less distraction of amusement.And really, you know, you have so many friendswould you like me tobecome a fixturelike the mainmast""I would like you to talk a little common sense," is the sharp reply."You are not going back to London till the White Dove is laid up forthe winterthat is what I know.""I am afraid I must ask you to let me off," she says, quite simply andseriously.  "Suppose I go up to London next week?  Then, if I get onpretty well, I may come back""You may come back!" says the other with a fine contempt.  "Don't try toimpose on me.  I am an older woman than you.  And I have enoughprovocations and worries from other quarters: I don't want you to beginand bother.""Is your life so full of trouble?" says the girl, innocently.  "What arethese fearful provocations?""Never mind.  You will find out in time. But when you get married, Mary,don't forget to buy a copy of Doddridge on Patience. That should beincluded in every bridal trousseau.""Poor thingis it so awfully ill-used?" replies the steersman, with muchcompassion.Here John of Skye comes forward."If ye please, mem, I will tek the tiller until we get round the Ross.The rocks are very bad here.""All right, John," says the young lady; and then, with much cautiousclinging to various objects, she goes below, saying that she means to doa little more to a certain slight water-colour sketch of Polterriv.  Weknow why she wants to put some further work on that hasty production.Yesterday the Laird expressed high approval of the sketch.  She meanshim to take it with him to Denny-mains, when she leaves for London.But this heavy sea: how is the artist getting on with her work amid suchpitching and diving?  Now that we are round the Ross, the White Dovehas shifted her course; the wind is more on her beam; the mainsheet hasbeen hauled in; and the noble ship goes ploughing along in splendidstyle; but how about water-colour drawing?Suddenly, as the yacht gives a heavy lurch to leeward, an awful sound isheard below. Queen T. clambers down the companion, and holds on by thedoor of the saloon; the others following and looking over her shoulders.There a fearful scene appears.  At the head of the table, in the regalrecess usually occupied by the carver and chief president of ourbanquets, sits Mary Avon, in mute and blank despair.  Everything hasdisappeared from before her.  A tumbler rolls backwards and forwards onthe floor, empty.  A dishevelled bundle of paper, hanging on to the edgeof a carpet-stool, represents what was once an orderly sketch-book.Tubes, pencils, saucers, spongesall have gone with the table-cloth. Andthe artist sits quite hopeless and silent, staring before her like amaniac in a cell."Whatever have you been and done?" calls her hostess.There is no answer: only that tragic despair."It was all bad steering," remarks the Youth.  "I knew it would happenas soon as Miss Avon left the helm."But the Laird, not confining his sympathy to words, presses by hishostess; and, holding hard by the bare table, staggers along to thescene of the wreck.  The others timidly follow. One by one the variousobjects are rescued, and placed for safety on the couch on the leewardside of the saloon.  Then the automaton in the presidential chair beginsto move.  She recovers her powers of speech.  She saysawaking from herdream"Is my head on?""And if it is, it is not of much use to you," says her hostess, angrily."Whatever made you have those things out in a sea like this? Come up ondeck at once; and let Fred get luncheon ready."The maniac only laughs."Luncheon!" she says.  "Luncheon in the middle of earthquakes!"But this sneer at the White Dove, because she has no swinging table,is ungenerous. Besides, is not our Friedrich d'or able to battle anypitching with his ingeniously bolstered couchso that bottles, glasses,plates, and what not, are as safe as they would be in a case in theBritish Museum?  A luncheon party on board the White Dove, when thereis a heavy Atlantic swell running, is not an imposing ceremony.  Itwould not look well as a coloured lithograph in the illustrated papers.The figures crouching on the low stools to leeward; the narrow cushionbolstered up so that the most enterprising of dishes cannot slide; thetable-cover plaited so as to afford receptacles for knives and spoons;bottles and tumblers plunged into hollows and propped; Master Fred,balancing himself behind these stooping figures, bottle in hand, andready to replenish any cautiously proffered wine-glass.  But it serves.And Dr. Sutherland has assured us that, the heavier the sea, the morenecessary is luncheon for the weaker vessels, who may be timid about theeffect of so much rolling and pitching.  When we get on deck again, whois afraid?  It is all a question as to what signal may be visible to thewhite house of Carsaigshining afar there in the sunlight, among thehanging woods, and under the soft purple of the hills.Behold!behold!the red flag run up to the top of the white pole! Is ita message to us, or only a summons to the Pioneer?  For now, throughthe whirl of wind and spray, we can make out the steamer that dailyencircles Mull, bringing with it white loaves, and newspapers, and otherluxuries of the mainland.She comes nearer and nearer; the throbbing of the paddles is heard amongthe rush of the waves; the people crowd to the side of the boat to havea look at the passing yacht; and one well-known figure, standing on thehurricane deck, raises his gilt-braided cap,for we happen to have onboard a gentle small creature who is a great friend of his.  And shewaves her white handkerchief, of course; and you should see what afluttering of similar tokens there is all along the steamer's decks, andon the paddle boxes.  Farewell!farewell!may you have a smooth landingat Staffa, and a pleasant sail down the Sound, in the quiet of theafternoon! The day wears on, with puffs and squalls coming tearing overfrom the high cliffs of southern Mull; and still the gallant WhiteDove meets and breasts those rolling waves, and sends the spray flyingfrom her bows. We have passed Loch Buy; Garveloch and the Island ofSaints are drawing nearer; soon we shall have to bend our coursenorthward, when we have got by Eilean-straid-ean.  And whether it isthat Mary Avon is secretly comforting herself with the notion that shewill soon see her friends in London again, or whether it is that she isproud of being again promoted to the tiller, she has quite recovered herspirits.  We hear our singing-bird once morethough it is difficult,amid the rush and swirl of the waters, to do more than catch chancephrases and refrains.  And then she is being very merry with the Laird,who is humorously decrying England and the English, and proving to herthat it is the Scotch migration to the south that is the very saving ofher native country."The Lord Chief Justice of England, the Archbishop of Canterbury, thePresident of the Royal Academythe heads and leading men everywhereallScotchall Scotch," says he."But the weak point about the Scotch, sir," says this philosopher in theulster, who is clinging on to the tiller rope, "is their modesty. Theyare so distrustful of their own merits. And they are always running downtheir own country.""Ha, ha!ho! ho! ho!" roars the Laird. "Verra good! verra good!  I oweye one for that.  I owe ye one.  Howard, have ye nothing to say indefence of your native country?""You are speaking of Scotland, sir?""Ay.""That is not my native country, you know.""It was your mother's, then."Somehow, when by some accidentand it but rarely happenedthe Lairdmentioned Howard Smith's mother, a brief silence fell on him.  It lastedbut a second or two.  Presently he was saying, with much cheerfulness"No, no, I am not one of those that would promote any rivalry betweenScotland and England.  We are one country now.  If the Scotch preservethe best leeterary Englishthe most pithy and characteristic forms ofthe languagethe English that is talked in the south is the mostgenerally received throughout the world.  I have even gone thelengthI'm no ashamed to admit itof hinting to Tom Galbraith that heshould exheebit more in London: the influence of such work as his shouldnot be confined to Edinburgh.  And jealous as they may be in the southof the Scotch school, they could not refuse to recognise itsexcellenceeh?  No, no; when Galbraith likes to exheebit in London,ye'll hear a stir, I'm thinking.  The jealousy of English artists willhave no effect on public opeenion.  They may keep him out o' theAcademythere's many a good artist has never been within the wallsbutthe public is the judge.  I am told that when his picture of StonebyresFalls was exheebited in Edinburgh, a dealer came all the way fromLondon to look at it.""Did he buy it?" asked Miss Avon, gently."Buy it!" the Laird said, with a contemptuous laugh.  "There are some ofus about Glasgow who know better than to let a picture like that get toLondon.  I bought it myself.  Ye'll see it when ye come to Denny-mains.Ye have heard of it, no doubt?""Nno, I think not," she timidly answers."No matterno matter.  Ye'll see it when ye come to Denny-mains."He seemed to take it for granted that she was going to pay a visit toDenny-mains: had he not heard, then, of her intention of at oncereturning to London?Once well round into the Frith of Lorn, the wind that had borne us downthe Sound of Iona was now right ahead; and our progress was but slow.As the evening wore on, it was proposed that we should run into LochSpeliv for the night.  There was no dissentient voice.The sudden change from the plunging seas without to the quiet waters ofthe solitary little loch was strange enough.  And then, as we slowlybeat up against the northerly wind to the head of the locha beautiful,quiet, sheltered little cup of a harbour among the hillswe found beforeus, or rather over us, the splendours of a stormy sunset among themountains above Glen More.  It was a striking spectaclethe vast andsilent gloom of the valleys below, which were of a cold and intensegreen in the shadow; then above, among the great shoulders and peaks ofthe hills, flashing gleams of golden light, and long swathes of purplecloud touched with scarlet along their edges, and mists of rain thatcame along with the wind, blotting out here and there those splendidcolours.  There was an absolute silence in this overshadowed baybut forthe cry of the startled wild-fowl.  There was no sign of any habitation,except perhaps a trace of pale blue smoke rising from behind a mass oftrees.  Away went the anchor with a short, sharp rattle; we were safefor the night.We knew, however, what that trace of smoke indicated behind the darktrees.  By and by, as soon as the gig had got to the land, there was aprocession along the solitary shorein the wan twilightand up the roughpathand through the scattered patches of birch and fir. And were youstartled, Madam, by the apparition of people who were so inconsiderateas to knock at your door in the middle of dinner, and whose eyes, grownaccustomed to the shadows of the valleys of Mull, must have lookedbewildered enough on meeting the glare of the lamps?  And what did youthink of a particular pair of eyesvery soft and gentle in their darklustreappealing, timid, friendly eyes, that had nevertheless a quiethappiness and humour in them?  It was at all events most kind of you totell the young lady that her notion of throwing up her holiday andsetting out for London was mere midsummer madness.  How could youor anyone elseguess at the origin of so strange a wish?*CHAPTER VIII.**BEFORE BREAKFAST.*Who is this who slips through the saloon, while as yet all on board areasleepwho noiselessly ascends the companion-way, and then finds herselfalone on deck?  And all the world around her is asleep too, though thegold and rose of the new day is shining along the eastern heavens.There is not a sound in this silent little loch: the shores and thewoods are as still as the far peaks of the mountains, where the mistsare touched here and there with a dusky fire.She is not afraid to be alone in this silent world.  There is a brightand contented look on her face.  Carefully and quietly, so as not todisturb the people below, she gets a couple of deck stools, and putsdown the large sketch-book from under her arm, and opens out a certainleather case.  But do not think she is going to attack that blaze ofcolour in the east, with the reflected glare on the water, and the barof dark land between.  She knows better. She has a wholesome fear ofchromo-lithographs. She turns rather to those great mountain masses,with their mysteriously moving clouds, and their shoulders touched hereand there with a sombre red, and their deep and silent glens a cold,intense green in shadow. There is more workable material.And after all there is no ambitious effort to trouble her.  It is only arough jotting of form and colour, for future use.  It is a pleasantoccupation for this still, cool, beautiful morning; and perhaps she isfairly well satisfied with it, for one listening intently might catchsnatches of songs and airsof a somewhat incoherent and inappropriatecharacter.  For what have the praises of Bonny Black Bess to do withsunrise in Loch Speliv?  Or the saucy Arethusa either?  But all the samethe work goes quietly and dexterously onno wild dashes and searchingsfor theatrical effect, but a patient mosaic of touches preciselyreaching their end.  She does not want to bewilder the world.  She wantsto have trustworthy records for her own use.  And she seems content withthe progress she is making.Here's a health to the girls that we loved long ago,this is the last air into which she has wanderedhalf humming and halfwhistlingWhere the Shannon, and Liffey, and Blackwater flow.when she suddenly stops her work to listen. Can any one be up already?The noise is not repeated; and she proceeds with her work.Here's a health to old Ireland: may she ne'er be dismayed;Then pale grew the cheeks of the Irish Brigade!The clouds are assuming substance now: they are no mere flat washes butaccurately drawn objects that have their fore-shortening like anythingelse.  And if Miss Avon may be vaguely conscious that had our youngDoctor been on board she would not have been left so long alone, thathad nothing to with her work. The mornings on which he used to join heron deck, and chat to her while she painted, seem far away now.  He andshe together would see Dunvegan no more.But who is this who most cautiously comes up the companion, bearing inhis hand a cup and saucer?"Miss Avon," says he, with a bright laugh, "here is the first cup of teaI ever made; are you afraid to try it?""Oh, dear me," said she, penitently, "did I make any noise in getting mythings below?""Well," he says, "I thought I heard you; and I knew what you would beafter; and I got up and lit the spirit-lamp.""Oh, it is so very kind of you," she saysfor it is really a prettylittle attention on the part of one who is not much given to shiftingfor himself on board.Then he dives below again and fetches her up some biscuits."By Jove," he says, coming closer to the sketch, "that is very good.That is awfully good.  Do you mean to say you have done all that thismorning?""Oh, yes," she says, modestly.  "It is only a sketch.""I think it uncommonly good," he says, staring at it as if he wouldpierce the paper.Then there is a brief silence, during which Miss Avon boldly adventuresupon this amateur's tea."I beg your pardon," he says, after a bit, "it is none of my business,you knowbut you don't really mean that you are going back to London?""If I am allowed," she answers with a smile."I am sure you will disappoint your friends most awfully," says he, inquite an earnest manner.  "I know they had quite made up their minds youwere to stay the whole time. It would be very unfair of you.  And myuncle: he would break his heart if you were to go.""They are all very kind to me," was her only answer."Look here," he says, with a most friendly anxiety.  "Ififit is onlyabout businessabout pictures I meanI really beg your pardon forintermeddling""Oh," said she, frankly, "there is no secret about it.  In fact, I wanteverybody to know that I am anxious to sell my pictures.  You see, as Ihave got to earn my own living, shouldn't I begin at once and find outwhat it is like?""But look here," he said eagerly, "if it is a question of sellingpictures, you should trust to my uncle.  He is among a lot of men in theWest of Scotland, rich merchants and people of that sort, who haven'tinherited collections of pictures, and whose hobby is to make acollection for themselves.  And they have much too good sense to buyspurious old masters, or bad examples for the sake of the name: theyprefer good modern art, and I can tell you they are prepared to pay forit too.  And they are not fools, mind you; they know good pictures. Youmay think my uncle is very prejudicedhe has his favouriteartistsandand believes in Tom Galbraith, don't you knowbut I canassure you, you won't find many men who know more about a good landscapethan he does; and you would say so if you saw his dining room atDenny-mains.""I quite believe that," said she, beginning to put up her materials: shehad done her morning's work."Well," he says, "you trust to him; there are lots of those Glasgow menwho would only be too glad to have the chance""Oh, no, no," she cried, laughing.  "I am not going to coerce peopleinto buying my pictures for the sake of friendship.  I think your unclewould buy every sketch I have on board the yacht; but I cannot allow myfriends to be victimised.""Oh, victimised!" said he, scornfully. "They ought to be glad to havethe chance. And do you mean to go on giving away your work for nothing?That sketch of the little creek we were inopposite Iona, don't youknowthat you gave my uncle, is charming. And they tell me you havegiven that picture of the rocks and sea-birdswhere is the place?""Oh, do you mean the sketch in the saloonof Canna?""Yes; why it is one of the finest landscapes I ever saw.  And they tellme you gave it to that doctor who was on board!""Dr. Sutherland," says she, hastilyand there is a quick colour in herface"seemed to like it asas a sort of reminiscence, you know""But he should not have accepted a valuable picture," said the Youth,with decision.  "No doubt you offered it to him when you saw he admiredit.  But nowwhen he must understand thatwell, in fact, thatcircumstances are alteredhe will have the good sense to give it youback again.""Oh, I hope not," she says, with her embarrassment not diminishing."II should not like that!  II should be vexed.""A person of good tact and good taste," says this venturesome young man,"would make a joke of itwould insist that you never meant itand wouldprefer to buy the picture."She answers, somewhat shortly"I think not.  I think Dr. Sutherland has as good taste as any one.  Hewould know that that would vex me very much.""Oh, well," says he, with a sort of carelessness, "every one to hisliking.  If he cares to accept so valuable a present, good and well.""You don't suppose he asked me for it?" she says, rather warmly.  "Igave it him.  He would have been rude to have refused it.  I was verymuch pleased that he cared for the picture.""Oh, he is a judge of art, also?  I am told he knows everything.""He was kind enough to say he liked the sketch; that was enough for me.""He is very lucky; that is all I have to say.""I dare say he has forgotten all about such a trifle.  He has moreimportant things to think about.""Well," said he, with a good-natured laugh, "I should not consider sucha picture a trifle if any one presented it to me.  But it is always thepeople who get everything they want who value things least.""Do you think Dr. Sutherland such a fortunate person?" says she.  "Well,he is fortunate in having great abilities; and he is fortunate in havingchosen a profession that has already secured him great honour, and thatpromises a splendid future to him. But that is the result of hard work;and he has to work hard now.  I don't think most men would like tochange places with him just at present.""He has one good friend and champion, at all events," he says, with apleasant smile."Oh," says she, hastily and anxiously, "I am saying what I hear.  Myacquaintance with Dr. Sutherland isis quite recent, I may say; though Ihave met him in London.  I only got to know something about him when hewas in Edinburgh, and I happened to be there too.""He is coming back to the yacht," observes Mr. Smith."He will be foolish to think of it," she answers, simply.At this stage the yacht begins to wake up. The head of Hector ofMoidart, much dishevelled, appears at the forecastle, and that wirymariner is rubbing his eyes; but no sooner does he perceive that one ofthe ladies is on deck than he suddenly ducks down againto get his facewashed, and his paper collar. Then there is a voice heard in the salooncalling:"Who has left my spirit-lamp burning?""Oh, good gracious!" says the Youth, and tumbles down the companionincontinently.Then the Laird appears, bringing up with him a huge red volume entitledMunicipal London; but no sooner does he find that Miss Avon is on deckthan he puts aside that mighty compendium, and will have her walk up anddown with him before breakfast."What?" he says, eyeing the cup and saucer, "have ye had your breakfastalready?""Mr. Smith was so kind as to bring me a cup of tea.""What," he says againand he is obviously greatly delighted.  "Of hisown making?  I did not think he had as much gumption.""I beg your pardon, sir?" said she.  She had been startled by thewhistling of a curlew close by, and had not heard him distinctly."I said he was a smart lad," said the Laird, unblushingly.  "Oh, ay, agood lad; ye will not find many better lads than Howard.  Will I tell yea secret?""Well, sirif you like," said she.There was a mysterious, but humorous look about the Laird; and he spokein a whisper."It is not good sometimes for young folk to know what is in store forthem.  But I mean to give him Denny-mains.  Whish!  Not a word.  I'llsurprise him some day.""He ought to be very grateful to you, sir," was her answer."That he isthat he is," said the Laird; "he's an obedient lad.  And Ishould not wonder if he had Denny-mains long before he expects it;though I must have my crust of bread, ye know.  It would be a fineoccupation for him, looking after the estate; and what is the use of hisliving in London, and swallowing smoke and fog?  I can assure ye thatthe air at Denny-mains, though it's no far from Glasgow, is as pure asit is in this very Loch Speliv.""Oh, indeed, sir."They had another couple of turns in silence."Ye're verra fond of sailing," says the Laird."I am now," she says.  "But I was very much afraid before I came; I havesuffered so terribly in crossing the Channel.  Somehow one never thinksof being ill herewith nice clean cabinsand no engines throbbing""I meant that ye like well enough to go sailing about these places?""Oh yes," says she.  "When shall I ever have such a beautiful holiday,again?"The Laird laughed a little to himself.  Then he said with abusiness-like air:"I have been thinking that, when my nephew came to Denny-mains, I wouldbuy a yacht for him, that he could keep down the Clyde somewhereatGourock, or Kilmun, or Dunoon, maybe.  It is a splendid ground foryachtinga splendid!  Ye have never been through the Kyles of Bute?""Oh, yes, sir; I have been through them in the steamer.""Ay, but a yacht; wouldn't that be better? And I am no sure I would notadvise him to have a steam-yachtye are so much more independent of windand tide; and I'm thinking ye could get a verra good little steam-yachtfor 3,000*l*.""Oh, indeed.""A great deal depends on the steward," he continues, seriously.  "A goodsteward that does not touch drink, is jist worth anything. If I couldget a first-class man, I would not mind giving him two pounds a week,with his clothes and his keep, while the yacht was being used; and Iwould not let him away in the winterno, no.  Ye could employ him atDenny-mains, as a butler-creature, or something like that."She did not notice the peculiarity of the little pronoun: if she had,how could she have imagined that the Laird was really addressing himselfto her?"I have none but weeman-servants indoors at Denny-mains," he continued,"but when Howard comes, I would prefer him to keep the house like otherpeople, and I will not stint him as to means.  Have I told ye whatWelliam Dunbaur saysBe merry, man, and tak not sair in mind""Oh, yes, I remember.""There's fine common sense in that.  And do not you believe the peoplewho tell ye that the Scotch are a dour people, steeped in Calvinism, andniggardly and grasping at the last farthing""I have found them exceedingly kind to me, and warm-hearted andgenerous" says she; but he interrupted her suddenly."I'll tell ye what I'll do," said he, with decision.  "When I buy thatyacht, I'll get Tom Galbraith to paint every panel in the saloonnomatter what it costs!""Your nephew will be very proud of it," she said."And I would expect to take a trip in her myself, occasionally," headded, in a facetious manner.  "I would expect to be invited""Surely, sir, you cannot expect your nephew to be so ungrateful""Oh," he said, "I only expect reasonable things.  Young people are youngpeople; they cannot like to be always hampered by grumbling old fogeys.No, no; if I present any one wi' a yacht, I do not look on myself as apiece of its furniture."The Laird seemed greatly delighted.  His step on the deck was firmer.In the pauses of the conversation she heard something abouttntar!  Sing tntar!"Will ye take your maid with ye?" he asked of her, abruptly.The girl looked up with a bewildered airperhaps with a trifle of alarmin her eyes."I, sir?""Ha, ha!" said he, laughing, "I forgot.  Ye have not been invited yet.No more have I. Butif the yacht were readyandand if ye were goingyewould take your maid, no doubt, for comfort's sake?"The girl looked reassured.  She said, cheerfully:"Well, sir, I don't suppose I shall ever go yachting again, after Ileave the White Dove. And if I were, I don't suppose I should be ableto afford to have a maid with me, unless the dealers in London shouldsuddenly begin to pay me a good deal more than they have done hitherto."At this point she was summoned below by her hostess calling.  The Lairdwas left alone on deck.  He continued to pace up and down, muttering tohimself, with a proud look on his face."A landscape in every panel, as I'm a living man! ... Tom 'll do itwell, when I tell him who it's for....  The leddies' cabin blue andsilvercool in the summerthe skylight pentedshe'll no be saying thatthe Scotch are wanting in taste when she sees that cabin!Sing tntar!  Sing tntar!* * * The Highland army ruesThat ere they came to Cromdale!And her maidif she will not be able to afford a maid, who will?French,if she likes!  Blue and silverblue and silverthat's it!"And then the Laird, still humming his lugubrious battle-song, comes downinto the saloon."Good morning, ma'am; good morning! Breakfast ready?  I'm just ravenous.That wild lassie has walked me up and down until I am like to faint.  Abeautiful morning againsplendid!splendid!  And do ye know where yewill be this day next year?""I am sure I don't," says his hostess, busy with the breakfast-things."I will tell ye.  Anchored in the Holy Loch, off Kilmun, in ascrew-yacht.  Mark my words now: this very day next year!"*CHAPTER IX.**A PROTECTOR.*"Oh, ay," says John of Skye, quite proudly, as we go on deck afterbreakfast, "there will be no more o' the dead calms.  We will give Mr.Sutherland a good breeze or two when he comes back to the yat."It is all Mr. Sutherland and Mr. Sutherland now!everything is to bedone because Mr. Sutherland is coming.  Each belaying pin is polished sothat one might see to shave in it; Hector of Moidart has spent about twohours in scraping and rubbing the brass and copper of the galleystove-pipe; and Captain John, with many grins and apologies, has gotMiss Avon to sew up a rent that has begun to appear in the red ensign.All that he wants now is to have the yacht beached for a couple of days,to have the long slender sea-grass scraped from her hull: then Mr.Sutherland will see how the White Dove will sail!"I should imagine," says the Youth, in an undertone, to his hostess, aswe are working out the narrow entrance to Loch Speliv, "that yourdoctor-friend must have given those men a liberal pour-boire when heleft.""Oh, I am sure not," said she, quickly, as if that was a seriousimputation.  "That is very unlikely.""They seem very anxious to have everything put right against hiscoming," he says; "at all events, your captain seems to think that everygood breeze he gets is merely thrown away on us.""Dr. Sutherland and he," she says, laughing, "were very good friends.And then Angus had very bad luck when he was on board: the glasswouldn't fall.  But I have promised to bottle up the equinoctials forhimhe will have plenty of winds before we have done with him. You muststay too, you know, Mr. Smith, and see how the White Dove rides out agale."He regarded herwith some suspicion.  He was beginning to know that thislady's speechdespite the great gentleness and innocence of hereyessometimes concealed curious meanings.  And was she now merelygiving him a kind and generous invitation to go yachting with us foranother month; or was she, with a cruel sarcasm, referring to theprobability of his having to remain a prisoner for that time, in orderto please his uncle?However, the conversation had to be dropped, for at this moment theLaird and his protge made their appearance; and, of course, adeck-chair had to be brought for her, and a foot-stool, and a sunshade,and a book.  But what were these attentions, on the part of her elderlyslave, compared with the fact that a young man, presumably enjoying asound and healthy sleep, should have unselfishly got up at an unholyhour of the morning, and should have risked blowing up the yacht withspirits of wine in order to get her a cup of tea?It was a fine sailing day.  Running before a light topsail breeze fromthe south-east, the White Dove was making for the Lynn of Morven, andbringing us more and more within view of the splendid circle ofmountains, from Ben Cruachan in the east to Ben Nevis in the north; fromBen Nevis down to the successive waves of the Morven hills.  And we knewwhy, among all the sunlit yellows and greensfaint as they were in thedistancethere were here and there on slope and shoulder stains of abeautiful rose-purple that were a new feature in the landscape.  Theheather was coming into bloomthe knee-deep, honey-scented heather, thehaunt of the snipe, and the muircock, and the mountain hare.  And ifthere was to be for us this year no toiling over the high slopes andcragslooking down from time to time on a spacious world of sunlit seaand islandwe were not averse from receiving friendly and substantialmessages from those altitudes.  In a day or two now the first crack ofthe breechloader would startle the silence of the morning air.  AndMaster Fred's larder was sorely in want of variety.Northward, and still northward, the light breeze tempering the scorchingsunlight that glares on the sails and the deck.  Each long ripple of therunning blue sea flashes in diamonds; and when we look to the south,those silver lines converge and converge, until at the horizon theybecome a solid blaze of light unendurable to the eye.  But it is to thenorth we turnto the land of Appin, and Kingairloch, and Lochaber: blow,light wind; and carry us onward, gentle tide; we have an appointment tokeep within shadow of the mountains that guard Glencoe.The Laird has discovered that these two were up early this morning: hebecomes facetious."Not sleepy yet, Miss Mary?" he says."Oh, nonot at all," she says, looking up from her book."It's the early bird that catches the first sketch.  Fine and healthy isthat early rising, Howard.  I'm thinking ye did not sleep sound lastnight: what for were ye up before anybody was stirring?"But the Laird does not give him time to answer.  Something has tickledthe fancy of this profound humourist."Kee! kee!" he laughs; and he rubs his hands.  "I mind a good one Iheard from Tom Galbraith, when he and I were at the Bridge of Allan;room to room, ye know; and Tom did snore that night.  'What,' said I tohim in the morning, 'had ye nightmare, or delirium tremens, that yemade such a noise in the night?'  'Did I snore?' said heI'm thinkingsomebody else must have complained before.  'Snore?' said I, 'twentygrampuses was nothing to it.'  And Tomhe burst out a-laughing.  'I'mvery glad,' says he.  'If I snored, I must have had a sound sleep!'  Asound sleepd'ye see?  Very sharpvery smarteh?"and the Lairdlaughed and chuckled over that portentous joke."Oh, uncle, uncle, uncle!" his nephew cried. "You used never to do suchthings.  You must quit the society of those artists, if they have such acorrupting influence on you.""I tell ye," he says, with a sudden seriousness, "I would just like toshow Tom Galbraith that picture o' Canna that's below.  No; I would notask him to alter a thing.  Very goodvery good it is.  AndandI thinkIwill admit itfor a plain man likes the truth to be toldthere is just abit jealousy among them against any English person that tries to paintScotch scenery.  No, no, Miss Marydon't you be afraid.  Ye can holdyour own. If I had that picture, nowif it belonged to meand if Tom wasstopping wi' me at Denny-mains, I would not allow him to alter it, notif he offered to spend a week's work on it."After thatwhat?  The Laird could say no more.Alas! alas! our wish to take a new route northward was all very well;but we had got under the lee of Lismore, and slowly and slowly the winddied away, until even the sea was as smooth as the surface of a mirror.It was but little compensation that we could lean over the side of theyacht, and watch the thousands of "sea-blubbers" far down in the water,in all their hues of blue, and purple, and pale pink. The heat of thesun was blistering; scorching with a sharp pain any nose or cheek thatwas inadvertently turned towards it.  As for the Laird, he could notstand this oven-like business any longer; he declared the saloon wasever so much cooler than the deck; and went down below, and lay atlength on one of the long blue cushions."Why, John," says Queen T., "you are bringing on those dead calms again.What will Dr. Sutherland say to you?"But John of Skye has his eye on the distant shore."Oh, no, mem," he says, with a crafty smile, "there will not be a deadcalm very long."And there, in at the shore, we see a dark line on the water; and itspreads and spreads; the air becomes gratefully cool to the face beforethe breeze perceptibly fills the sails; then there is a cheerful swingover of the boom and a fluttering of the as yet unreleased head-sails.A welcome breeze, surely, from the far hills of Kingairloch.  We thankyou, you beautiful Kingairloch, with your deep glens and yourrose-purple shoulders of hills: long may you continue to send freshwesterly winds to the parched and passing voyager!We catch a distant glimpse of the white houses of Port Appin; we bidadieu to the musically-named Eilean-na-Shuna; far ahead of us is thesmall white lighthouse at the mouth of the narrows of Corran.  But thereis to be no run up to Fort William for us to-night; the tide will turnsoon; we cannot get through the Corran narrows.  And so there is a talkof Ballahulish; and Captain John is trying hard to get Miss Avon topronounce this Bal-a-chaolish. It is not fair of Sandy from Islaywhothinks he is hidden by the foresailto grin to himself at these innocentefforts.Grander and grander grow those ramparts of mountains ahead of uswiththeir wine-coloured stains of heather on the soft and velvetyyellow-green.  The wind from the Kingairloch shores still carries us on;and Inversanda swells the breeze; soon we shall be running into thatwide channel that leads up to the beautiful Loch Leven.  The Lairdreappears on deck.  He is quite enchanted with the scene around him.  Hesays if an artist had placed that black cloud behind the great bulk ofBen Nevis, it could not have been more artistically arranged.  Hedeclares that this entrance to Loch Leven is one of the most beautifulplaces he has ever seen.  He calls attention to the soft green foliageof the steep hills; and to that mighty peak of granite, right in themiddle of the landscape, that we discover to be called the Pap ofGlencoe.  And here, in the mellow light of the afternoon, is the steamercoming down from the north: is it to be a race between us for theBal-a-chaolish quay?It is an unfair race.  We have to yield to brute strength and steamkettles.Four to one Argyle came on,as the dirge of Eric says.  But we bear no malice.  We salute our enemyas he goes roaring and throbbing by; and there is many a return signalwaved to us from the paddle-boxes."Mr. Sutherland is no there, mem, I think," says Captain John, who hasbeen scanning those groups of people with his keen eyes."I should think not; he said he was coming to-morrow," is the answer."Will he be coming down by the Chevalier in the morning, or by theMountaineer at night?" is the further question."I don't know.""We will be ashore for him in the morning, whatever," says John of Skyecheerfully; and you would have thought it was his guest, and not ours,who was coming on board.The roaring out of the anchor chain was almost immediately followed byMaster Fred's bell.  Mary Avon was silent and distraite at dinner; butnothing more was said of her return to London.  It was understood that,when Angus Sutherland came on board, we should go back to Castle Osprey,and have a couple of days on shore, to let the White Dove get rid ofher parasitic seaweed.Then, after dinner, a fishing excursion; but this was in a new loch, andwe were not very successful.  Or was it that most of us were watching,from this cup of water surrounded by the circle of great mountains, thestrange movings of the clouds in the gloomy and stormy twilight, longafter the sun had sunk?"It is not a very sheltered place," remarked the Laird, "if a squallwere to come down from the hills."But by and by something appeared that lent an air of stillness and peaceto this sombre scene around us.  Over one of those eastern mountains afaint, smoky, suffused yellow light began to show; then the outline ofthe mountainserrated with treesgrew dark; then the edge of the moonappeared over the black line of trees; and by and by the world wasfilled with this new, pale light, though the shadows on the hills weredeeper than ever. We did not hurry on our way back to the yacht.  It wasa magical nightthe black, overhanging hills, the white clouds crossingthe blue vaults of the heavens, the wan light on the sea.  What need forJohn of Skye to put up that golden lamp at the bow?  But it guided us onour way backunder the dusky shadows of the hills.Then below, in the orange-lit cabin, with cards and dominoes and chessabout, a curious thing overhead happens to catch the eye of one of thegamblers.  Through the skylight, with this yellow glare, we ought not tosee anything; but there, shining in the night, is a long bar of palephosphorescent green light. What can this be?  Why green?  And it isMary Avon who first suggests what this strangely luminous thing mustbethe boom, wet with the dew, shining in the moonlight."Come," says the Laird to her, "put a shawl round ye, and we will go upfor another look round."And so, after a bit, they went on deck, these two, leaving the others totheir bezique.  And the Laird was as careful about the wrapping up ofthis girl as if she had been a child of five years of age; and when theywent out on to the white deck, he would give her his arm that she shouldnot trip over any stray rope; and they were such intimate friends nowthat he did not feel called upon to talk to her.But by and by the heart of the Laird was lifted up within him because ofthe wonderful beauty and silence of this moonlight night."It is a great peety," said he, "that you in the south are not broughtup as children to be familiar with the Scotch version of the Psalms ofDavid.  It is a fountain-head of poetry that ye can draw from all yourlife long; and is there any poetry in the world can beat it?  And many atime I think that David had a great love for mountainsand that he musthave looked at the hills around Jerusalemand seen them on many a nightlike this.  Ye cannot tell, lassie, what stirs in the heart of aScotchman or Scotchwoman when they repeat the 121st Psalm:I to the hills will lift mine eyes,From whence doth come mine aid;My safety cometh from the LordWho heaven and earth hath made.Thy foot He'll not let slide, nor willHe slumber that thee keeps:Behold, He that keeps IsraelHe slumbers not nor sleeps.Ask your friend Dr. Sutherlandask him whether he has found anythingamong his philosophy, and science, and the new-fangled leeterature ofthe day that comes so near to his heart as a verse of the old Psalmsthat he learnt as a boy.  I have heard of Scotch soldiers in distantcountries just bursting out crying, when they heard by chance a bitrepeated o' the Psalms of David.  And the strength and reliance of them:what grander source of consolation can ye have?  'As the mountains areround about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about His people fromhenceforth, even for ever.'  What are the trials of the hour to themthat believe and know and hope?  They have a sure faith; the captivityis not for ever.  Do ye remember the beginning of the 126th Psalmitreminds me most of all of the Scotch phrase'laughin' maist like to greet''When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like themthat dream.  Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tonguewith singing; then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done greatthings for them.  The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we areglad.  Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south!'"The Laird was silent for a minute or two; there was nothing but thepacing up and down the moonlit deck."And you have your troubles too, my lass," said he, at length.  "Oh, Iknowthough ye put so brave a face on it.  But you need not be afraid;you need not be afraid.  Keep up your heart.  I am an old man now; I mayhave but few years to reckon on; but while I live ye will not want afriend....  Ye will not want a friend....  If I forget, or refuse what Ipromise ye this night, may God do so and more unto me!"But the good-hearted Laird will not have her go to sleep with thissolemnity weighing on her mind."Come, come," he says cheerfully, "we will go below now; and you willsing me a songthe Queen's Maries, if ye likethough I doubt but thatthey were a lot o' wild hizzies."*CHAPTER X.**"MARY, MARY!"*Is there any one awake and listeningperhaps with a tremor of theheartfor the calling out of "White Dove, ahoy!" from the shore? Oncethe ordinary loud noises of the morning are overthe brief working ofthe pump, the washing down of the deckssilence reigns once morethroughout the yacht.  One can only hear a whispering of the rain above.Then, in the distance, there is a muffled sound of the paddles of asteamer; and that becomes fainter and fainter, while the White Dovegradually loses the motion caused by the passing waves.  Again there isan absolute stillness; with only that whispering of the rain.But this sudden sound of oars? and the slight shock against the side ofthe vessel? The only person on board the yacht who is presentable whipsa shawl over her head, darts up the companion way, and boldly emergesinto the moist and dismal morning."Oh, Angus!" she cries, to this streaming black figure that has juststepped on deck, "what a day you have brought with you!""Oh, it is nothing!" says a cheerful voice from out of the drippingmacintoshperhaps it is this shining black garment that makes the wetface and whiskers and hair glow redder than ever, and makes the blueeyes look even bluer. "Nothing at all!  John and I have agreed it isgoing to clear.  But this is a fine place to be in, with a fallingglass!  If you get a squall down from Glencoe, you won't forget it.""A squall!" she says, looking round, in amazement.  Well might sheexclaim; for the day is still, and grey, and sombre; the mountains areswathed in mist; the smooth sea troubled only by the constant rain.However, the ruddy-faced Doctor, having divested himself of his drippinggarment, follows his hostess down the companion, and into the saloon,and sits down on one of the couches.  There is an odd, half patheticexpression on his face, as he looks around."It seems a long time ago," he says, apparently to himself."What does?" asks his hostess, removing her head-gear."The evenings we used to spend in this very saloon," says helookingwith a strange interest on those commonplace objects, the draughts anddominoes, the candlesticks and cigar-boxes, the cards and books"away upthere in the north.  It seems years since we were at Dunvegan, doesn'tit, and lying off Vaternish Point?  There never was as snug a cabin asthis in any yacht.  It is like returning to an old home to get into it.""I am very glad to hear you say so," says his hostess, regarding himwith a great kindliness. "We will try to make you forget that you haveever been away.  Although," she added frankly, "I must tell you you havebeen turned out of your state-roomfor a time.  I know you won't mindhaving a berth made up for you on one of those couches.""Of course not," he said; "if I am not in your way at all.  But"And his face asked the question."Oh! it is a nephew of Denny-mains who has come on boarda Mr. Smith, avery nice young fellow; I am sure you will like him."There was nothing said in reply to this.Then the new-comer inquired, rather timidly, "You are all well, I hope?""Oh, yes!""Andand Miss Avon, too?" said he."Oh, yes!  But Mary has suffered a great misfortune since you left."She looked up quickly.  Then she told him the story; and in telling himher indignation awoke afresh.  She spoke rapidly.  The old injury hadtouched her anew.But, strangely enough, although Angus Sutherland displayed a keeninterest in the matter, he was not at all moved to that passion of angerand desire for vengeance that had shaken the Laird.  Not at all.  He wasvery thoughtful for a time; but he only said, "You mean she has tosupport herself now?""Absolutely.""She will naturally prefer that to being dependent on her friends?""She will not be dependent on her friends, I know," is the answer;"though the Laird has taken such a great liking for her that I believehe would give her half Denny-mains."He started a little bit at this; but immediately said"Of course she will prefer independence. And, as you say, she is quitecapable of earning her own living.  Well, she does not worry about it?It does not trouble her mind?""That affair of her uncle wounded her very keenly, I imagine, though shesaid little; but as for the loss of her little fortune, not at all! Sheis as light-hearted as ever.  The only thing is that she is possessed bya mad notion that she should start away at once for London.""Why?""To begin work; I tell her she must work here.""But she is not anxious?  She is not troubled?""Not a bit!  The Laird says she has the courage of ten men; and Ibelieve him.""That is all right.  I was going to prescribe a course of MarcusAurelius; but if you have got philosophy in your blood, it is betterthan getting it through the brain."And so this talk ended; leaving on the mind of one of those two friendsa distinct sense of disappointment.  She had been under the impressionthat Angus Sutherland had a very warm regard for Mary Avon; and she hadformed certain other suspicions.  She had made sure that he, morequickly than any one else, would resent the injury done to this helplessgirl. And now he seemed to treat it as of no account.  If she was nottroubling herself; if she was not giving herself headaches about it:then, no matter!  It was a professional view of the case.  A dose ofMarcus Aurelius?  It was not thus that the warm-hearted Laird hadespoused Mary Avon's cause.Then the people came one by one in to breakfast; and our young Doctorwas introduced to the stranger who had ousted him from his state-room.Last of all came Mary Avon.How she managed to go along to him, and to shake hands with him, seeingthat her eyes were bent on the floor all the time, was a mystery.  Butshe did shake hands with him; and said, "How do you do?" in a somewhatformal manner; and she seemed a little paler than usual."I don't think you are looking quite as well as when I left," said he,with a great interest and kindness in his look."Thank you, I am very well," she said; and then she instantly turned tothe Laird and began chatting to him.  Angus Sutherland's face burnedred; it was not thus she had been used to greet him in the morning, whenwe were far away beyond the shores of Canna.And then, when we found that the rain was over, and that there was not abreath of wind in this silent, grey, sombre world of mountain and mist,and when we went ashore for a walk along the still lake, what must sheneeds do but attach herself to the Laird, and take no notice of herfriend of former days?  Angus walked behind with his hostess, but herarely took his eyes off the people in front.  And when Miss Avon,picking up a wild flower now and again, was puzzling over its name, hedid not, as once he would have done, come to her help with hisstudent-days' knowledge of botany.  Howard Smith brought her a bit ofwall rue, and said he thought they called it Asplenium marinum: therewas no interference.  The preoccupied Doctor behind only asked how farMiss Avon was going to walk with her lame foot.The Laird of Denny-mains knew nothing of all this occult business.  Hewas rejoicing in his occupation of philosopher and guide.  He wasassuring us all that this looked like a real Highland dayfar more sothan the Algerian blue sky that had haunted us for so long.  He pointedout, as we walked along the winding shores of Loch Leven, by the paththat rose, and fell, and skirted small precipices all hanging infoliage, how beautiful was that calm, slate-blue mirror beneath, showingevery outline of the sombre mountains, with their masses of Landseermist.  He stopped his companion to ask her if she had ever seen anythingfiner in colour than the big clusters of scarlet rowans among theyellow-green leaves?  Did she notice the scent of the meadow-sweet, inthe moist air of this patch of wood?  He liked to see those white starsof the grass-of-Parnassus; they reminded him of many a stroll among thehills about Loch Katrine."And this still Loch Leven," he said at length, and without the leastblush on his face, "with the Glencoe mountains at the end of it. I haveoften heard say was as picturesque a loch as any in Scotland, on agloomy day like this.  Gloomy I call it, but ye see there are finesilver glints among the mist; andand, in fact, there's a friend of minehas often been wishing to have a water-colour sketch of it.  If ye hadtime, Miss Mary, to make a bit drawing from the deck of the yacht, yemight name your own pricejust name your own price.  I will buy it forhim."A friend!  Mary Avon knew very well who the friend was."I should be afraid, sir," said she, laughing, "to meddle with anythingabout Glencoe.""Toots! toots!" said he; "ye have not enough confidence.  I know twentyyoung men in Edinburgh and Glasgow who have painted every bit ofGlencoe, from the bridge to the King's House inn, and not one of themable to come near ye.  Mind, I'm looking forward to showing yourpictures to Tom Galbraith; I'm thinking he'll stare!"The Laird chuckled again."Oh, ay! he does not know what a formidable rival has come from thesouth; I'm thinking he'll stare when he comes to Denny-mains to meet ye.Howard, what's that down there?"The Laird had caught sight of a pink flower on the side of a steeplittle ravine, leading down to the shore."Oh, I don't want it; I don't want it!" Mary Avon cried.But the Laird was obdurate.  His nephew had to go scrambling downthrough the alders and rowan-trees and wet bracken to get this bit ofpink crane's-bill for Miss Avon's bouquet. And of course she was muchpleased; and thanked him very prettily; and was it catch-fly, or herbrobert, or what was it?Then out of sheer common courtesy she had to turn to Angus Sutherland."I am sure Dr. Sutherland can tell us." she says, timidly; and she doesnot meet his eyes."It is one of the crane's-bills, any way," he says, indifferently."Don't you think you had better return now, Miss Avon, or you will hurtyour foot?""Oh, my foot is quite well now, thank you!" she says; and on she goesagain.We pass by the first cuttings of the slate-quarries; the men suspendedby ropes round their waists and hewing away at the face of the cliff.We go through the long straggling village; and the Laird remarks that itis not usual for a Celtic race to have such clean cottages, with pots offlowers in the window. We saunter idly onwards, towards those greatmountain-masses, and there is apparently no thought of returning."When we've gone so far, might we not go on to the mouth of the pass?"she asks. "I should like to have a look even at the beginning ofGlencoe.""I thought so," said the Laird, with a shrewd smile.  "Oh, ay! we may aswell go on."Past those straggling cottages, with the elder-bush at their doors tofrighten away witches; over the bridge that spans the brawling Cona;along the valley down which the stream rushes; and this gloom overheaddeepens and deepens.  The first of the great mountains appears on ourright, green to the summit, and yet so sheer from top to bottom that itis difficult to understand how those dots of sheep maintain theirfooting.  Then the marks on him; he seems to be a huge Behemoth, withgreat eyes, grand, complacent, even sardonic in his look.  But thefurther and further mountains have nothing of this mild, grand humourabout them; they are sullen and awful; they grasp the earth with theirmighty bulk below, but far away they lift their lurid peaks to thethreatening skies, up there where the thunder threatens to shake thesilence of the world."Miss Avon," Dr. Sutherland again remonstrates, "you have come five orsix miles now.  Suppose you have to walk back in the rain?""I don't mind about that," she says, cheerfully.  "But I am dreadfully,dreadfully hungry.""Then we must push on to Clachaig," says the Laird; "there is no helpfor it.""But wait a moment," she says.She goes to the side of the road, where the great grey boulders, andferns, and moist marsh-grass are, and begins to gather handfuls of"sourocks;" that is to say, of the smaller sheep's sorrel.  "Who willpartake of this feast to allay the pangs of hunger?""Is thy servant a baa-lamb that she should do this thing?" her hostesssays, and drives the girl forward.The inn is reached but in time; for behold there is a grey "smurr" ofmist coming down the glen; and the rain is beginning to darken the greyboulders.  And very welcome are those chairs, and the bread and cheeseand beer, and the humble efforts in art around the walls.  If the feastis not as the feasting of the Fishmongersif we have no pretty boxes tocarry home to the childrenif we have no glimpses of the pale blue riverand shipping through the orange light of the room, at least we are notamazed by the appearance of the Duke of Sussex in the garb of aHighlander.  And the frugal meal is substantial enough.  Then thequestion about getting back arises."Now, Mary," says her hostess, "you have got to pay for your amusement.How will you like walking seven or eight miles in a thunderstorm?"But here the Laird laughs."No, no," he says, going to the window. "That waggonette that has justcome up I ordered at the inn on passing.  Ye will not have to walk astep, my lass; but I think we had better be going, as it looks blackoverhead."Black enough, indeed, was it as we drove back in this silent afternoon,with a thunderstorm apparently about to break over our heads.  And itwas close and sultry when we got on board again, though there was as yetno wind.  Captain John did not like the look of the sky."I said you were going to bring a gale with you, Angus," his hostessremarked to him, cheerfully, at dinner."It begins to look like it," he answered, gravely; "and it is gettingtoo late to run away from here if the wind rises.  As soon as it beginsto blow, if I were John, I would put out the starboard anchor.""I know he will take your advice," she answers, promptly.We saw little of Angus Sutherland that evening; for it was raining hardand blowing hard; and the cabin below, with its lit candles, and booksand cards, and what not, was cheerful enough; while he seemed very muchto prefer being on deck.  We could hear the howling of the wind throughthe rigging, and the gurgling of the water along the sides of the yacht;and we knew by the way she was swaying that she was pulling hard at heranchor chain.  There was to be no beautiful moonlight for us that night,with the black shadows on the hills, and the lane of silver on thewater.A dripping and glistening figure comes down the companion; a gleamingred face appears at the door.  Mary Avon looks up from her draughts, butfor an instant."Well, Angus, what is the report?" says Queen Titania, brightly.  "Andwhat is all the noise on deck?  And why don't you come below?""They have been paying out more anchor chain," says the rough voice fromout of the macintosh; "it is likely to be a nasty night, and we aregoing to lower the topmast now. I want you to be so kind as to tell Fredto leave out some whisky and some bread and cheese; for John thinks ofhaving an anchor watch.""The bread and cheese and whisky Fred can get at any time," says she;and she adds with some warmth, "But you are not going to stay on deck onsuch a night?  Come in here at once.  Leave your macintosh on thesteps."Is it that he looks at that draught-board? It is Mr. Howard Smith who isplaying with Mary Avon.  The faithless Miranda has got another Ferdinandnow."I think I would rather take my turn like the rest," he says, absently."There may be some amusement before the morning."And so the black figure turned away and disappeared; and a strange thingwas that the girl playing draughts seemed to have been so bewildered bythe apparition that she stared at the board, and could not be got tounderstand how she had made a gross and gigantic blunder."Oh, yes; oh, certainly!" she said, hurriedly; but she did not know howto retrieve her obvious mistake.*CHAPTER XI.**AN UNSPOKEN APPEAL.*"What have I done?  Is she vexed? Have I offended her?" he asked thenext morning, in a rapid manner, when his hostess came on deck.  Thegale had abated somewhat, but gloom overspread earth and sky. It wasnothing to the gloom that overspread his usually frank and cheerfulface."You mean Mary?" she says, though she knows well enough."Yes; haven't you seen?  She seems to treat me as though we had nevermet beforeas though we were perfect strangersand I know she is tookind-hearted to cause any one pain"Here he looks somewhat embarrassed for a moment; but his customarystraightforwardness comes to his rescue."Yes; I will confess I am very much hurt by it.  Andand I should liketo know if there is any cause.  Surely you must have noticed it?"She had noticed it, sure enough; and, in contrast with that studiedcoldness which Mary Avon had shown to her friend of former days, she hadremarked the exceeding friendliness the young lady was extending to theLaird's nephew.  But would she draw the obvious conclusion?  Not likely;she was too staunch a friend to believe any such thing.  All the samethere remained in her mind a vague feeling of surprise, with perhaps atouch of personal injury."Well, Angus, you know," she said, evasively; "Mary is very muchpreoccupied just at present.  Her whole condition of life is changed,and she has many things to think of""Yes; but she is frank enough with her other friends.  What have I done,that I should be made a stranger of?"A pathetic answer comes to these idle frettings of the hour.  Far awayon the shore a number of small black figures emerge from the woods, andslowly pass along the winding road that skirts the rocks.  They arefollowing a carta common farmyard cart; but on the wooden planks isplaced a dark object that is touched here and there with silverorperhaps it is only the white cords.  Between the overhanging gloom ofthe mountains and the cold greys of the wind-swept sea the small blackline passes slowly on.  And these two on board the yacht watch it insilence.  Are they listening for the wail of the pipesthe wild dirge ofLord Lovat, or the cry of the Cumhadh na Cloinne?  But the winds areloud, and the rushing seas are loud; and now the rude farmyard cart,with its solemn burden, is away out at the point; and presently thewhole simple pageant has disappeared. The lonely burying-ground lies faraway among the hills.Angus Sutherland turns round again, with a brief sigh."It will be all the same in a few years," he says to his hostess; andthen he adds, indifferently, "What do you say about starting? The windis against us; but anything is better than lying here.  There were somebad squalls in the night."Very soon after this the silent loch is resounding with the rattle ofhalyards, blocks, and chains; and Angus Sutherland is seekingdistraction from those secret cares of the moment in the excitement ofhard work.  Nor is it any joke getting in that enormous quantity ofanchor chain.  In the midst of all the noise and bustle Mary Avonappears on deck to see what is going on, and she is immediately followedby young Smith."Why don't you help them?" she says, laughing."So I would, if I knew what to do," he says, good-naturedly.  "I'll goand ask Dr. Sutherland."It was a fatal step.  Angus Sutherland suggested, somewhat grimly, that,if he liked, he might lend them a hand at the windlass. A muscular youngEnglishman does not like to give in; and for a time he held his own withthe best of them; but long before the starboard anchor had been got up,and the port one hove short, he had had enough of it.  He did notvolunteer to assist at the throat halyards.  To Miss Avon, who wascalmly looking on, he observed that it would take him about a fortnightto get his back straight."That," said she, finding an excuse for him instantly, "is because youworked too hard at it at first.  You should have watched the Islay man.All he does is to call 'Heave!' and to make his shoulders go up as if hewere going to do the whole thing himself.  But he does not help a bit.I have watched him again and again.""Your friend, Dr. Sutherland," said he, regarding her for an instant ashe spoke, "seems to work as hard as any of them.""He is very fond of it," she said, simply, without any embarrassment;nor did she appear to regard it as singular that Angus Sutherland shouldhave been spoken of specially as her friend.Angus Sutherland himself comes rapidly aft, loosens the tiller rope, andjams the helm over. And now the anchor is hove right up; the reefedmainsail and small jib quickly fill out before this fresh breeze; and,presently, with a sudden cessation of noise, we are spinning awaythrough the leaden-coloured waters.  We are not sorry to get away fromunder the gloom of these giant hills; for the day still looks squally,and occasionally a scud of rain comes whipping across, scarcelysufficient to wet the decks.  And there is more life and animation onboard now; a good deal of walking up and down in ulsters, withinevitable collisions; and of remarks shouted against, or with, thewind; and of joyful pointing towards certain silver gleams of light inthe west and south.  There is hope in front; behind us nothing butdarkness and the threatenings of storm.  The Pap of Glencoe hasdisappeared in rain; the huge mountains on the right are as black as thedeeds of murder done in the glen below; Ardgour over there, and Lochaberhere, are steeped in gloom.  And there is less sadness now in the oldrefrain of Lochaber since there is a prospect of the South shiningbefore us. If Mary Avon is singing to herself aboutLochaber no more!  And Lochaber no more!We'll maybe return to Lochaber no more!it is with a light heart.But then if it is a fine thing to go bowling along with a brisk breezeon our beam, it is very different when we get round Ardshiel and findthe southerly wind veering to meet us dead in the teeth.  And there is agood sea running up Loch Linnhea heavy grey-green sea that the WhiteDove meets and breaks, with spurts of spray forward, and a line ofhissing foam in our wake.  The zig-zag beating takes us alternately toArdgour and Appin, until we can see here and there the cheerful patchesof yellow corn at the foot of the giant and gloomy hills; then "'Boutship" again, and away we go on the heaving and rushing grey-green sea.And is Mary Avon's oldest friendthe woman who is the staunchest ofchampionsbeing at last driven to look askance at the girl? Is it fairthat the young lady should be so studiously silent when our faithfulDoctor is by, and instantly begin to talk again when he goes forward tohelp at the jib or foresail sheets? And when he asks her, as in formerdays, to take the tiller, she somewhat coldly declines the offer he hasso timidly and respectfully made. But as for Mr. Smith, that is a verydifferent matter.  It is he whom she allows to go below for some wrapperfor her neck.  It is he who stands by, ready to shove over the top ofthe companion when she crouches to avoid a passing shower of rain.  Itis he with whom she jokes and talkswhen the Laird does not monopoliseher."I would have believed it of any girl in the world rather than of her,"says her hostess, to another person, when these two happen to be alonein the saloon below.  "I don't believe it yet.  It is impossible.  Ofcourse a girl who is left as penniless as she is might be pardoned forlooking round and being friendly with rich people who are well inclinedtowards her; but I don't believeI say it is impossiblethat she shouldhave thrown Angus over just because she saw a chance of marrying theLaird's nephew.  Why, there never was a girl we have ever known soindependent as she is!not any one half as proud and as fearless. Shelooks upon going to London and earning her own living as nothing at all!She is the very last girl in the world to speculate on making a goodmatchshe has too much prideshe would not speak another word to HowardSmith if such a monstrous thing were suggested to her.""Very well," says the meek listener.  The possibility was not of hissuggesting, assuredly: he knows better.Then the Admiral-in-chief of the White Dove sits silent and puzzledfor a time."And yet her treatment of poor Angus is most unfair.  He is deeply hurtby ithe told me so this morning""If he is so fearfully sensitive that he cannot go yachting and enjoyhis holiday because a girl does not pay him attention""Why, what do you suppose he came back here for?" she says, warmly.  "Togo sailing in the White Dove?  No; not if twenty White Doves werewaiting for him!  He knows too well the value of his time to stay awayso long from London if it were merely to take the tiller of a yacht.  Hecame back here, at great personal sacrifice, because Mary was on board.""Has he told you so?""He has not; but one has eyes.""Then suppose she has changed her mind: how can you help it?"She says nothing for a second.  She is preparing the table for MasterFred: perhaps she tosses the novels on to the couch with an impatiencethey do not at all deserve.  But at length she says"Well; I never thought Mary would have been so fickle as to go choppingand changing about within the course of a few weeks. However, I won'taccuse her of being mercenary; I will not believe that.  Howard Smith isa most gentlemanly young mangood-looking, too, and pleasant tempered.I can imagine any girl liking him."Here a volume of poems is pitched on to the top of the draught-board, asif it had done her some personal injury."And in any case she might be more civil to one who is a very old friendof ours," she adds.Further discourse on this matter is impossible; for our Freidrich d'orcomes in to prepare for luncheon.  But why the charge of incivility?When we are once more assembled together, the girl is quite the reverseof uncivil towards him.  She shows himwhen she is forced to speak tohiman almost painful courtesy; and she turns her eyes down, as if shewere afraid to speak to him.  This is no flaunting coquette, proud ofher wilful caprice.And as for poor Angus, he does his best to propitiate her.  They begintalking about the picturesqueness of various cities.  Knowing that MissAvon has lived the most of her life, if she was not actually born, inLondon, he strikes boldly for London.  What is there in Venice, what isthere in the world, like London in moonlightwith the splendid sweep ofher riverand the long lines of gas-lampsand the noble bridges?  Butshe is all for Edinburgh if Edinburgh had but the Moldau running throughthat valley, and the bridges of Prague to span it, what city in Europecould compare with it?  And the Laird is so delighted with her approvalof the Scotch capital, that he forgets for the moment his Glaswegianantipathy to the rival city, and enlarges no less on the picturesquenessof it than on its wealth of historical traditions.  There is not a stainof blood on any floor that he does not believe in.  Then the Sanctuaryof Holyrood: what stories has he not to tell about that famous refuse?"I believe the mysterious influence of that Sanctuary has gone out andcharmed all the country about Edinburgh," said our young Doctor.  "Isuppose you know that there are several plants, poisonous elsewhere,that are quite harmless in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh.  You rememberI told you, Miss Avon, that evening we went out to Arthur's Seat?"It was well done, Queen Titania must have thought, to expose thisgraceless flirt before her new friends.  So she had been walking out toArthur's Seat with him, in the summer afternoons?"Yyes," says the girl."Ay; that is a most curious thing," says the Laird, not noticing herdowncast looks and flushed cheeks.  "But what were they, did ye say?""Umbelliferous plants," replies Angus Sutherland, in quite amatter-of-fact manner.  "The nanthe crocata is one of them, Iremember; and I think the Cicuta virosathat is, the Water Hemlock.""I would jist like to know," says the Laird, somewhat pompously,"whether that does not hold good about the neighbourhood of Glesca also.There's nothing so particular healthy about the climate of Edinburgh, asfar as ever I heard tell of.  Quite the reversequite the reverse.  Eastwindsfogsno wonder the people are shilpit-looking creatures as ageneral rulelike a lot o' Paisley weavers.  But the ceety is a fineceety, I will admit that; and many's the time I've said to Tom Galbraiththat he could get no finer thing to paint than the view of the HighStreet at night from Prince's Streetespecially on a moonlight night.  Afine ceety: but the people themselves!" here the Laird shook his head."And their manner o' speech is most vexsomea long, sing-song kind o'yaumering as if they had not sufficient manliness to say outright whatthey meant.  If we are to have a Scotch accent, I prefer the accentthevery slight accentye hear about Glesca.  I would like to hear what MissAvon has to say upon that point.""I am not a very good judge, sir," says Miss Avon, prudently.Then on deck.  The leaden-black waves are breaking in white foam alongthe shores of Kingairloch and the opposite rocks of Eilean-na-Shuna; andwe are still laboriously beating against the southerly wind; but thosesilver-yellow gleams in the south have increased, over the softly-purplehills of Morvern and Duart.  Black as night are the vast ranges ofmountains in the north; but they are far behind us; we have now nolonger any fear of a white shaft of lightning falling from the gloomoverhead.The decks are dry now; camp-stools are in requisition; there is to be aconsultation about our future plans, after the White Dove has beenbeached for a couple of days.  The Laird admits that, if it had beenthree days or four days, he would like to run through to Glasgow and toStrathgovan, just to see how they are getting on with the gas-lamps inthe Mitherdrum Road; but, as it is, he will write for a detailed report;hence he is free to go wherever we wish.  Miss Avon, interrogated,answers that she thinks she must leave us and set out for London;whereupon she is bidden to hold her tongue and not talk foolishness.Our Doctor, also interrogated, looks down on the sitting parliamentheis standing at the tillerand laughs."Don't be too sure of getting to Castle Osprey to-night," he says,"whatever your plans may be.  The breeze is falling off a bit.  But youmay put me down as willing to go anywhere with you, if you will let mecome."This decision seemed greatly to delight his hostess.  She said we couldnot do without him. She was herself ready to go anywhere now; sheeagerly embraced the Youth's suggestion that there were, according toJohn of Skye's account, vast numbers of seals in the bays on the westernshores of Knapdale; and at once assured the Laird, who said heparticularly wanted a sealskin or two and some skarts' feathers for ayoung lady, that he should not be disappointed.  Knapdale, then, it wasto be.But in the meantime?  Dinner found us in a dead calm.  After dinner,when we came on deck, the sun had gone down; and in the pale, tenderblue-grey of the twilight, the golden star of Lismore lighthouse wasalready shining. Then we had our warning lights put upthe port redlight shedding a soft crimson glow on the bow of the dingay, thestarboard green light touching with a cold, wan colour the iron shrouds.To crown all, as we were watching the dark shadows of Lismore island, athin, white, vivid linelike the edge of a shillingappeared over thelow hill; and then the full moon rose into the partially clouded sky.It was a beautiful night.But we gave up all hope of reaching Castle Osprey.  The breeze had quitegone; the calm sea slowly rolled.  We went belowto books, draughts, andwhat not; Angus Sutherland alone remaining on deck, having his pipe forhis companion.It was about an hour afterwards that we were startled by sounds on deck;and presently we knew that the White Dove was again flying through thewater.  The women took some little time to get their shawls and thingsready; had they known what was awaiting them, they would have been morealert.For no sooner were we on deck than we perceived that the White Dovewas tearing through the water without the slightest landmark or light toguide her.  The breeze that had sprung up had swept before it a bank ofsea-foga most unusual thing in these windy and changeable latitudes;and so dense was this fog that the land on all sides of us haddisappeared, while it was quite impossible to say where Lismorelight-house was.  Angus Sutherland had promptly surrendered the helm toJohn of Skye; and had gone forward. The men on the look out at the bowwere themselves invisible."Oh, it is all right, mem!" called out John of Skye, through the densefog, in answer to a question.  "I know the lay o' the land very well,though I do not see it.  And I will keep her down to Duart, bekass ofthe tide."And then he calls out"Hector, do you not see any land yet?'"Cha n'eil!" answers Hector, in his native tongue."We'll put a tack on her now.  Ready about, boys!""Ready about!"Round slews her head, with blocks and sails clattering and flapping;there is a scuffle of making fast the lee sheets; then once more theWhite Dove goes plunging into the unknown.  The non-experts seenothing at all but the fog; they have not the least idea whether Lismorelighthousewhich is a solid object to run againstis on port orstarboard bow, or right astern, for the matter of that. They are huddledin a group about the top of the companion.  They can only listen, andwait.John of Skye's voice rings out again."Hector, can you not mek out the land yet?""Cha n'eil!""What does he say?" the Laird asks, almost in a whisper: he is afraid todistract attention at such a time."He says 'No,'" Angus Sutherland answers.  "He cannot make out the land.It is very thick; and there are bad rocks between Lismore and Duart.  Ithink I will climb up to the cross-trees and have a look round."What was this?  A girl's hand laid for an instant on his arm; a girl'svoicelow, quick, beseechingsaying "Oh, no!"It was the trifle of a moment."There is not the least danger," says he, lightly.  "Sometimes you cansee better at the cross-trees."Then the dim figure is seen going up the shrouds; but he is not quite upat the cross-trees, when the voice of John of Skye is heard again."Mr. Sutherland!"All right, John!" and the dusky figure comes stumbling down and acrossthe loose sheets on deck."If ye please, sir," says John of Skye; and the well-known formula meansthat Angus Sutherland is to take the helm.  Captain John goes forward tothe bow: the only sound around us is the surging of the unseen waves."I hope you are not frightened, Miss Avon," says Mr. Smith, quitecheerfully; though he is probably listening, like the rest of us, forthe sullen roaring of breakers in the dark."NoI am bewilderedI don't know what it is all about.""You need not be afraid," Angus Sutherland says to her, abruptly, for hewill not have the Youth interfere in such matters, "with Captain John onboard.  He sees better in a fog than most men in daylight.""We are in the safe keeping of one greater than any Captain John," saysthe Laird, simply and gravely: he is not in any alarm.Then a call from the bow."Helm hard down, sir!""Hard down it is, John!"Then the rattle again of sheets and sails; and as she swings round againon the other tack, what is that vague, impalpable shadow one seesorfancies one seeson the starboard bow?"Is that the land, John?" Angus Sutherland asks, as the skipper comesaft."Oh, ay!" says he, with a chuckle.  "I was thinking to myself it wassthe loom of Duart I sah once or twice.  And I wass saying to Hector ifit wass his sweetheart he will look, for he will see better in thenight."Then by and by this other object, to which all attention is summoned:the fog grows thinner and thinner; some one catches sight of a pale,glimmering light on our port quarter; and we know that we have leftLismore lighthouse in our wake.  And still the fog grows thinner, untilit is suffused with a pale blue radiance; then suddenly we sail out intothe beautiful moonlight, with the hills along the horizon all blackunder the clear and solemn skies.It is a pleasant sail into the smooth harbour on this enchanted night:the far windows of Castle Osprey are all aglow; the mariners are to restfor a while from the travail of the sea. And as we go up the moonlitroad, the Laird is jocular enough; and asks Mary Avon, who is hiscompanion, whether she was prepared to sing "Lochaber no more!" when wewere going blindly through the mist.  But our young Doctor remembersthat hour or so of mist for another reason.  There was something in thesound of the girl's voice he cannot forget. The touch of her hand wasslight; but his arm has not even yet parted with the thrill of it.*CHAPTER XII.**HIS LORDSHIP.*Miss Avon is seated in the garden in front of Castle Osprey, under theshade of a drooping ash.  Her book lies neglected beside her, on theiron seat; she is idly looking abroad on the sea and the mountains, nowall aglow in the warm light of the afternoon.There is a clanging of a gate below.  Presently, up the steep gravelpath, comes a tall and handsome young fellow, in full shootingaccoutrement, with his gun over his shoulder.  Her face instantly losesits dreamy expression.  She welcomes him with a cheerful "Good evening!"and asks what sport he has had.  For answer he comes across thegreensward; places his gun against the trunk of the ash; takes a seatbeside her; and puts his hands round one knee."It is a long story," says the Youth.  "Will it bore you to hear it?I've seen how the women in a country house dread the beginning of thetalk at dinner about the day's shooting; and yet give themselves up,like the martyrs and angels they are; andand it is very different fromhunting, don't you know, for there the women can talk as much asanybody.""Oh!  but I should like to hear, really," says she.  "It was so kind ofa stranger on board a steamer to offer you a day's shooting.""Well, it was," says he; "and the place has been shot over only onceonthe 12th.  Very well; you shall hear the whole story.  I met the keeperby appointment, down at the quay. I don't know what sort of a fellow heisHighlander or LowlanderI am not such a swell at those things as myuncle is; but I should have said he talked a most promising mixture ofDevonshire, Yorkshire, and Westmoreland""What was his name?""I don't know," says the other leisurely. "I called him Donald, onchance; and he took to it well enough.  I confess I thought it ratherodd he had only one dog with himan old retriever; but then, don't youknow, the moor had been shot over only once; and I thought we might getalong.  As we walked along to the hill, Donald says, 'Dinna tha mind,sir, if a blackcock gets up; knock un ower, knock un ower, sir.'"At this point Miss Avon most unfairly bursts out laughing."Why," she says, "what sort of countryman was he if he talked like that?That is how they speak in plays about the colliery districts.""Oh, it's all the same!" says the young man, quite unabashed.  "I gavehim my bag to carry, and put eight or ten cartridges in my pockets.  'Afew mower, sir; a few mower, sir,' says Donald; and crams my pocketsfull. Then he would have me put cartridges in my gun even before we leftthe road; and as soon as we began to ascend the hill I saw he was on theoutlook for a straggler or two, or perhaps a hare.  But he warned methat the shooting had been very bad in these districts this year; andthat on the 12th the rain was so persistent that scarcely anybody wentout. Where could we have been on the 12th? surely there was no such rainwith us?""But when you are away from the hills you miss the rain," remarks thisprofound meteorologist."Ah! perhaps so.  However, Donald said, 'His lordship went hout for anhour, and got a brace and a alf.  His lordship is no keen for a big bag,ye ken; but is just satisfied if he can get a brace or a couple of braceafore luncheon.  It is the exerceez he likes.'  I then discovered thatLord  had had this moor as part of his shooting last year; and Iassured Donald I did not hunger after slaughter.  So we climbed higherand higher.  I found Donald a most instructive companion.  He was verygreat on the ownership of the land about here; and the old families,don't you know; and all that kind of thine.  I heard a lot about theMacDougalls, and how they had all their possessions confiscated in 1745;and how, when the Government pardoned them, and ordered the land to berestored, the Campbells and Breadalbane, into whose hands it had fallen,kept all the best bits for themselves.  I asked Donald why they did notcomplain; he only grinned; I suppose they were afraid to make a row.Then there was one MacDougall, an admiral or captain, don't you know;and he sent a boat to rescue some shipwrecked men, and the boat wasswamped.  Then he would send another; and that was swamped, too.  TheGovernment, Donald informed me, wanted to hang him for his philanthropy;but he had influential friends; and he was let off on the payment of alarge sum of moneyI suppose out of what Argyll and Breadalbane had lefthim."The Youth calmly shifted his hands to the other knee."You see, Miss Avon, this was all very interesting; but I had to askDonald where the birds were.  'I'll let loose the doag now,' says he.Well; he did so.  You would have thought he had let loose a sky-rocket!It was off and awayup hill and down daleand all his whistling wasn'tof the slightest use.  'He's a bit wild,' Donald had to admit; 'but if Ihad kent you were agoin' shootin' earlier in the morning, I would havegiven him a run or two to take the freshness hoff.  But on a day likethis, sir, there's no scent; we will just have to walk them up; they'lllie as close as a water-hen.'  So we left the dog to look after himself;and on we pounded.  Do you see that long ridge of rugged hill?"He pointed to the coast-line beyond the bay."Yes.""We had to climb that, to start with; and not even a glimpse of a rabbitall the way up.  ''Ave a care, sir,' says Donald; and I took down my gunfrom my shoulder, expecting to walk into a whole covey at least. 'Hislordship shot a brace and a alf of grouse on this wery knoll the lastday he shot over the moor last year.'  And now there was less talking,don't you know; and we went cautiously through the heather, workingevery bit of it, until we got right to the end of the knoll.  'It's fineheather,' says Donald; 'bees would dae well here.'  On we went; andDonald's information began again.  He pointed out a house on somedistant island where Alexander III. was buried.  'But where are thebirds?' I asked of him, at last.  'Oh,' says he, 'his lordship was nevergreedy after the shootin'!  A brace or two afore luncheon was all hewanted.  He baint none o' your greedy ones, he baint.  His lordship shota hare on this very side last yeara fine long shot.'  We went on again:you know what sort of morning it was, Miss Avon?""It was hot enough even in the shelter of the trees.""Up there it was dreadful: not a breath of wind: the sun blistering.And still we ploughed through that knee-deep heather, with the retrieversometimes coming within a mile of us; and Donald back to his oldfamilies. It was the MacDonnells now; he said they had no right to thatname; their proper name was MacAlisterMack Mick Alister, I think hesaid.  'But where the dickens are the birds?' I asked.  'If we get abrace afore luncheon, we'll do fine,' said he; and then he added,'There's a braw cold well down there that his lordship aye stopped at.'The hint was enough; we had our dram.  Then we went on, and on, and on,and on, until I struck work, and sat down, and waited for the luncheonbasket.""We were so afraid Fred would be late," she said; "the men were all sobusy down at the yacht.""What did it matter?" the Youth said, resignedly.  "I was beinginstructed.  He had got further back still now, to the Druids, don't youknow, and the antiquity of the Gaelic language.  'What was the riverthat ran by Rome?'  'The Tiber,' I said.  'And what,' he asked, 'wasTober in Gaelic but a spring or fountain?'  And the Tamar inDevonshire was the same thing.  And the various Usksuska, it seems,is the Gaelic for water.  Well, I'm hanged if I know what that man didnot talk about!""But surely such a keeper must be invaluable," remarked the young lady,innocently."Perhaps.  I confess I got a little bit tired of it; but no doubt thepoor fellow was doing his best to make up for the want of birds.However, we started again after luncheon.  And now we came to placeafter place where his lordship had performed the most wonderful featslast year.  And, mind you, the dog wasn't ranging so wild now; if therehad been the ghost of a shadow of a feather in the whole district wemust have seen it.  Then we came to another well where his lordship usedto stop for a drink.  Then we arrived at a crest where no one who hadever shot on the moor had ever failed to get a brace or two. A brace ortwo!  What we flushed was a covey of sheep that flew like mad thingsdown the hill.  Well, Donald gave in at last.  He could not find wordsto express his astonishment. His lordship had never come along thathighest ridge without getting at least two or three shots.  And when Iset out for home, he still stuck to it; he would not let me take thecartridges out of my gun; he assured me his lordship never failed to geta snipe or a blackcock on the way home.  Confound his lordship!""And is that all the story?" says the young lady, with her eyes wideopen."Yes, it is," says he, with a tragic gloom on the handsome face."You have not brought home a single bird?""Not a feather!never saw one.""Nor even a rabbit?'"Nary rabbit!""Why, Fred was up here a short time ago, wanting a few birds for theyacht.""Oh, indeed," says he, with a sombre contempt.  "Perhaps he will go andask his lordship for them.  In the meantime, I'm going in to dress fordinner.  I suppose his lordship would do that, too, after having shothis thirty brace.""You must not, any way," she says.  "There is to be no dressing fordinner to-day; we are all going down to the yacht after.""At all events," he says, "I must get my shooting things off.  Much goodI've done with 'em!"So he goes into the house, and leaves her alone.  But this chat togetherseems to have brightened her up somewhat; and with a careless andcheerful air she goes over to the flower borders and begins culling anassortment of various-hued blossoms.  The evening is becoming cooler;she is not so much afraid of the sun's glare; it is a pleasant task; andshe is singing, or humming, snatches of songs of the most heterogeneouscharacter.Then fill up a bumper!what can I do lessThan drink to the health of my bonny Black Bess!this is the point at which she has arrived when she suddenly becomessilent, and for a second her face is suffused with a conscious colour.It is our young Doctor who has appeared on the gravel path.  She doesnot rise from her stooping position; but she hurries with her work."You are going to decorate the dinner-table, I suppose?" he says,somewhat timidly."Yes," she answers, without raising her head.  The fingers work nimblyenough: why so much hurry?"You will take some down to the yacht, too?" he says.  "Everything isquite ready now for the start to-morrow.""Oh, yes!" she says.  "And I think I have enough now for the table.  Imust go in.""Miss Avon," he says; and she stopswith her eyes downcast.  "I wantedto say a word to you.  You have once or twice spoken about going away.I wanted to ask youyou won't think it is any rudeness.  But if thereason wasif it was the presence of any one that was distasteful toyou""Oh, I hope no one will think that!" she answers, quickly; and for onesecond the soft, black, pathetic eyes meet his.  "I am very happy to beamongst such good friendstoo happy, I thinkI, I must think of otherthings"And here she seems to force this embarrassment away from her; and shesays to him, with quite a pleasant air"I am so glad to hear that the White Dove will sail so much betternow.  It must be so much more pleasant for you, when you understand allabout it."And then she goes into the house to put the flowers on the table.  He,left alone, goes over to the iron seat beneath the ash tree; and takesup the book she has been reading, and bends his eyes on the page.  It isnot the book he is thinking about.*CHAPTER XIII.**THE LAIRD'S PLANS.*Who is first up to thrust aside those delusive yellow blinds thatsuggest sunshine whether the morning be fair or foul?  But the firstglance through the panes removes all apprehensions: the ruffled bay, thefluttering ensign, the shining white wings of the White Dove are all asummons to the slumbering house.  And the mistress of Castle Osprey, assoon as she is dressed, is up stairs and down stairs like a furred flashof lightning.  Her cry and potent commanda reminiscence of certaintransatlantic experiencesis, "All aboard for Dan'ls!"  She will nothave so fine a sailing morning wasted, especially when Dr. AngusSutherland is with us.Strangely enough, when at last we stand on the white decks, and lookround on the shining brass and varnished wood, and help to stow away thevarious articles needed for our cruise, he is the least excited of allthose chattering people.  There is a certain conscious elation onstarting on a voyage, especially on a beautiful morning; but there alsomay be some vague and dim apprehension.  The beginning is here; but theend?  Angus walked about with Captain John, and was shown all that hadbeen done to the yacht, and listened in silence.But the rest were noisy enough, calling for this and that, handingthings down the companion, and generally getting in the way of thesteward."Well, Fred," says our facetious Laird, "have ye hung up all the gamethat Mr. Smith brought back from the moor yesterday?" and Master Fredwas so much tickled by this profound joke that he had to go down intothe forecastle to hide his grinning delight, and went covertly smilingabout his work for the next quarter of an hour.Then the hubbub gradually ceased; for the boats had been swung to thedavits, and the White Dove was gently slipping away from her moorings.A fine northerly breeze; a ruffled blue sea; and the south all shiningbefore her! How should we care whither the beautiful bird bore us?Perhaps before the night fell we should be listening for the singing ofthe mermaid of Colonsay.The wooded shores slowly drew away; the horizon widened; there was nostill blue, but a fine windy grey, on the vast plain of the sea that wasopening out before us."Oh, yes, mem!" says John of Skye to Miss Avon.  "I wass sure we wouldget a good breeze for Mr. Sutherland when he will come back to the yat."Miss Avon does not answer: she is looking at the wide sea, and at thefar islands, with somewhat wistful eyes."Would you like to tek the tiller, now, mem?" says the bearded skipper,in his most courteous tones.  "Mr. Sutherland was aye very proud to seeye at the tiller.""No, thank you, John," she says.And then she becomes aware that she hasin her absent mood-spokensomewhat curtly; so she turns and comes over to him, and says in aconfidential way"To tell you the truth, John, I never feel very safe in steering whenthe yacht is going before the wind.  When she is close-hauled I havesomething to guide me; but with the wind coming behind I know I may makea blunder without knowing why.""No, no, mem; you must not let Mr. Sutherland hear you say that: when hewas so prood o' learnin' ye; and there is no dancher at ahl of yourmaking a plunder."But at this moment our young Doctor himself comes on deck; and shequickly moves away to her camp-stool, and plunges herself into a book;while the attentive Mr. Smith provides her with a sunshade and afootstool. Dr. Sutherland cannot, of course, interfere with her diligentstudies.Meanwhile our hostess is below, putting a few finishing touches to thedecoration of the saloon; while the Laird, in the blue-cushioned recessat the head of the table, is poring over Municipal London.  At lengthhe raises his eyes, and says to his sole companion"I told ye, ma'am, he was a good lada biddable laddid I not?""You are speaking of your nephew, of course," she says.  "Well; it isvery kind of him to offer to turn out of his state-room in favour of Dr.Sutherland; but there is really no need for it.  Angus is much betteraccustomed to roughing it on board a yacht.""I beg your pardon, ma'am," says the Laird, with judicial gravity."Howard is in the right there too.  He must insist on it.  Dr.Sutherland is your oldest friend.  Howard is here on a kind ofsufferance.  I am sure we are both of us greatly obliged to ye."Here there was the usual deprecation."And I will say," observes the Laird, with the same profound air, "thathis conduct since I sent for him has entirely my approvalentirely myapproval.  Ye know what I mean. I would not say a word to him for theworldno, noafter the first intimation of my wishes, no coercion.Every one for himself: no coercion."She does not seem so overjoyed as might have been expected."Oh, of course not!" she says.  "It is only in plays and books thatanybody is forced into a marriage; at least you don't often find a mandriven to marry anybody against his will.  And indeed, sir," she adds,with a faint smile, "you rather frightened your nephew at first.  Hethought you were going to play the part of a stage guardian, anddisinherit him if he did not marry the young lady.  But I took theliberty of saying to him that you could not possibly be so unreasonable.Because, you know, if Mary refused to marry him, how could that be anyfault of his?""Precisely so," said the Laird, in his grand manner.  "A most judeeciousand sensible remark.  Let him do his part, and I am satisfied.  I wouldnot exact impossibeelities from any one, much less from one that I havea particular regard for.  And, as I was saying, Howard is a good lad."The Laird adopted a lighter tone."Have ye observed, ma'am, that things are not at all unlikely to turnout as we wished?" he said, in a half-whisper; and there was a secrettriumph in his look.  "Have ye observed? Oh, yes! young folks are veryshy; but their elders are not blind.  Did ye ever see two young peoplethat seemed to get on better together on so short an acquaintance?""Oh, yes!" she says, rather gloomily; "they seem to be very goodfriends.""Yachting is a famous thing for making people acquainted," says theLaird, with increasing delight.  "They know one another now as well asthough they had been friends for years on the land.  Has that struck yenow before?""Oh, yes!" she says.  There is no delight on her face."It will jist be the happiness of my old age, if the Lord spares me, tosee these two established at Denny-mains," says he, as if he werelooking at the picture before his very eyes.  "And we have a fine softair in the west of Scotland; it's no like asking a young English leddyto live in the bleaker parts of the north, or among the east winds ofEdinburgh.  And I would not have the children sent to any public school,to learn vulgar ways of speech and clipping of words.  No, no; I wouldwale out a young man from our Glasgow Universityone familiar with theproper tradeetions of the English language; and he will guard againstthe clipping fashion of the South, just as against the yaumering of theEdinburgh bodies.  Ah will wale him out maself.  But no too mucheducation: no, no; that is the worst gift ye can bestow upon bairns.  Asound constitution; that is first and foremost.  I would rather see alad out and about shooting rabbits than shut up wi' a pale face among alot of books.  And the boys will have their play, I can assure ye; Iwill send that fellow Andrew about his business if he doesna stopnetting and snaring. What do I care about the snipping at the shrubs?  Iwill put out turnips on the verra lawn, jist to see the rabbits runabout in the morning.  The boys shall have their play at Denny-mains, Ican assure ye; more play than school-hours, or I'm mistaken!"The Laird laughed to himself just as if he had been telling a good oneabout Homesh."And no muzzle-loaders," he continued, with a sudden seriousness.  "Nota muzzle-loader will I have put into their hands.  Many's the time itmakes me grue to think of my loading a muzzle-loader when I was aboyloading one barrel, with the other barrel on full-cock, and jistgaping to blow my fingers off.  I'm thinking Miss Marythough she'll nobe Miss Mary thenwill be sore put to when the boys bring in thrushesand blackbirds they have shot; for she's a sensitive bit thing; but whatI say is, better let them shoot thrushes and blackbirds than bring themup to have white faces ower books.  Ah tell ye this: I'll give them asovereign a-piece for every blackbird they shoot on the wing!"The Laird had got quite excited; he did not notice that MunicipalLondon was dangerously near the edge of the table."Andrew will not objeck to the shooting o' blackbirds," he said, with aloud laughas if there was something of Homesh's vein in that gardener."The poor crayture is just daft about his cherries.  That's anotherthing; no interference with bairns in a garden.  Let them steal whatthey like.  Green apples? bless ye, they're the life o' children!Nature puts everything to rights.  She kens better than books.  If Icatched the schoolmaster lockin' up they boys in their play-hours, myword but I'd send him fleein'!"He was most indignant with this school-master, although he was to be ofhis own "waling."  He was determined that the lads should have theirplay, lessons or no lessons. Green apples he preferred to Greek.  Thedominie would have to look out."Do you think, ma'am," he says, in an insidious manner; "do ye think shewould like to have a furnished house in London for pairt of the year?She might have her friends to see"Now at last this is too much.  The gentle, small creature has beenlistening with a fine, proud, hurt air on her face, and with tears nearto her eyes.  Is it thus that her Scotch student, of whom she is thefierce champion, is to be thrust aside?"Why," she says, with an indignant warmth; "you take it all for granted!I thought it was a joke.  Do you really think your nephew is going tomarry Mary?  And Angus Sutherland in love with her!""God bless me!" exclaimed the Laird, with such a start that the bulkyMunicipal London banged down on the cabin floor.Was it the picking up of that huge tome, or the consciousness that hehad been betrayed into an unusual ejaculation, that crimsoned theLaird's face?  When he sate upright again, however, wonder was the chiefexpression visible in his eyes."Of course I have no right to say so," she instantly and hurriedly adds:"it is only a guessa suspicion.  But haven't you seen it? And untilquite recently I had other suspicions, too.  Why, what do you thinkwould induce a man in Angus Sutherland's position to spend such a longtime in idleness?"But by this time the Laird had recovered his equanimity.  He was not tobe disturbed by any bogie.  He smiled serenely."We will see, ma'am; we will see.  If it is so with the young man, it isa peety.  But you must admit yourself that ye see how things are likelyto turn out?""I don't know," she said, with reluctance: she would not admit that shehad been grievously troubled during the past few days. "Very well,ma'am, very well," said the Laird, blithely.  "We will see who is right.I am not a gambler, but I would wager ye a gold ring, a sixpence, and asilver thimble that I am no so far out.  I have my eyes open; oh, aye!Now I am going on deck to see where we are."And so the Laird rose, and put the bulky volume by, and passed along thesaloon to the companion.  We heardSing tntara!  Sing tntara!as his head appeared.  He was in a gay humour.Meanwhile the White Dove, with all sail set, had come along at aspanking pace.  The weather threatened change, it is true; there was adeep gloom overhead; but along the southern horizon there was a blaze ofyellow light which had the odd appearance of being a sunset in themiddle of the day; and in this glare lay the long blue promontory knownas the Rhinns of Islay, within sight of the Irish coast.  And so we wentdown by Easdail, and past Colipoll and its slate-quarries; and we knewthis constant breeze would drive us through the swirls of the DorusMohrthe "Great Gate."  And were we listening, as we drew near in theafternoon to the rose-purple bulk of Scarba, for the low roar ofCorrievrechan?  We knew the old refrain:As you pass through Jura's SoundBend your course by Scarba's shore;Shun, oh, shun the gulf profoundWhere Corrievrechan's surges roar!But now there is no ominous murmur along those distant shores.  Silenceand a sombre gloom hang over the two islands.  We are glad to shun thisdesolate coast; and glad that the White Dove is carrying us away tothe pleasanter south, when, behold! behold! another sight!  As we openout the dreaded gulf, Corrievrechan itself becomes but an open laneleading out to the west; and there, beyond the gloom, amid the goldenseas, lies afar the music-haunted Colonsay!  It is the calm of theafternoon; the seas lie golden around the rocks; surely the sailors canhear her singing now for the lover she lost so long ago!  What is itthat thrills the brain so, and fills the eyes with tears, when we canhear no sound at all coming over the sea?It is the Laird who summons us back to actualities."It would be a strange thing," says he, "if Tom Galbraith were in thatisland at this very meenit.  Ah'm sure he was going there."And Captain John helps."I not like to go near Corrievrechan," he says, with a grin, "when thereis a flood tide and half a gale from the sou'-west.  It is an ahfu'place," he adds, more seriously, "an ahfu' place.""I should like to go through," Angus Sutherland says, quiteinadvertently."Aye, would ye, sir?" says Captain John, eagerly.  "If there wass onlyyou and me on board, I would tek you through ferry wellwith the windfrom the norrard and an ebb tide.  Oh, yes!  I would do that; and maybewe will do it this year yet!""I do not think I am likely to see Corrievrechan again this year," saidhe, quite quietlyso quietly that scarcely any one heard.  But Mary Avonheard.Well, we managed, after all, to bore through the glassy swirls of theDorus Mohrthe outlying pickets, as it were, of the fiercer whirlpoolsand currents of Corrievrechanand the light breeze still continuing wecrept along in the evening past Crinan, and along the lonely coast ofKnapdale, with the giant Paps of Jura darkening in the west.  Nightfell; the breeze almost died away; we turned the bow of the White Dovetowards an opening in the land, and the flood tide gently bore her intothe wide, silent, empty loch.  There did not seem to be any light on theshores.  Like a tall, grey phantom the yacht glided through the gloom;we were somewhat silent on deck.But there was a radiant yellow glow coming through the skylight; andMaster Fred had done his best to make the saloon cheerful enough.  Andwhere there is supper there ought to be other old-fashionedinstitutionssinging, for example; and how long was it since we hadheard anything about the Queen's Maries, or "Ho, ro, clansmen!" or theIrish Brigade?  Nobody, however, appeared to think of these things.This was a silent and lonely loch, and the gloom of night was over landand water; but we still seemed to have before our eyes the far islandamid the golden seas.  And was there not still lingering in the nightair some faint echo of the song of Colonsay?  It is a heart-breakingsong; it is all about the parting of lovers.*CHAPTER XIV.**A SUNDAY IN FAR SOLITUDES.*Mary Avon is seated all alone on deck, looking rather wistfully aroundher at this solitary Loch-na-Chillthat is, the Loch of the BuryingPlace.  It is Sunday morning, and there is a more than Sabbath peacedwelling over sea and shore.  Not a ripple on the glassy sea; a palehaze of sunshine on the islands in the south; a stillness as of deathalong the low-lying coast.  A seal rises to the surface of the calm sea,and regards her for a moment with his soft black eyes; then slowlysubsides.  She has not seen him; she is looking far away.Then a soft step is heard on the companion; and the manner of the girlinstantly changes.  Are these tears that she hastily brushes aside?  Buther face is all smiles to welcome her friend.  She declares that she ischarmed with the still beauty of this remote and solitary loch.Then other figures appear; and at last we are all summoned on deck formorning service. It is not an elaborate ceremony; there are no candles,or genuflexions, or embroidered altar-cloths.  But the Laird has put ona black frock coat, and the men have put aside their scarlet cowls andwear smart sailor-looking cloth caps.  Then the Laird gravely rises, andopens his book.Sometimes, it is true, our good friend has almost driven us to takenotice of his accent, and we have had our little jokes on board aboutit; but you do not pay much heed to these peculiarities when the strongand resonant voiceamid the strange silence of this Loch of the BuryingPlacereads out the 103rd Psalm: "Like as a father peetieth hischildren," he may say; but one does not heed that.  And who is to noticethat, as he comes to these words, he lifts his eyes from the book andfixes them for a moment on Mary Avon's downcast face?  "Like as a fatherpitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him.  For Heknoweth our frame; He remembereth that we are dust. As for man, his daysare as grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.  For the windpasseth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it nomore.  But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting uponthem that fear Him, and His righteousness unto children's children."Then, when he had finished the Psalm, he turned to the New Testament,and read in the same slow and reverent manner the 6th chapter ofMatthew.  This concluded the service; it was not an elaborate one.Then, about an hour afterwards, the Laird, on being appealed to by hishostess, gave it as his opinion that there would be no Sabbathdesecration at all in our going ashore to examine the ruins of whatappeared to be an ancient chapel, which we could make out by the aid ofour glasses on the green slope above the rocks.  And as our youngfriendsAngus and the Youthidly paddled us away from the yacht, theLaird began to apologise to his hostess for not having lengthened theservice by the exposition of some chosen text."Ye see, ma'am," he observed, "some are gifted in that way, and somenot.  My father, now, had an amazing power of expounding andexplainingI am sure there was nothing in Hutcheson's Exposeetion hehad not in his memory.  A very famous man he was in those days as anAnti-Liftervery famous; there were few who could argue with him on thatmemorable point.""But what did you call him, sir?" asks his hostess, with some vaguenotion that the Laird's father had lived in the days of body-snatchers."An Anti-Lifter: it was a famous controversy; but ye are too young toremember of it perhaps.  And now in these days we are more tolerant, andrightly so; I do not care whether the minister lifts the sacramentalbread before distribution or not, now that there is no chance of Poperygetting into our Presbyterian Church in disguise.  It is the speerit,not the form, that is of importance: our Church authoritatively declaresthat the efficacy of the sacraments depends not 'upon any virtue in themor in him that doth administer them.'  Aye; that is the cardinal truth.But in those days they considered it right to guard against Popery inevery manner; and my father was a prominent Anti-Lifter; and well wouldhe argue and expound on that and most other doctrinal subjects. But Ihave not much gift that way," added the Laird, modestly; quiteforgetting with what clearness he had put before us the chief featuresof the great Semple case."I don't think you have anything to regret, sir," said our young Doctor,as he carelessly worked the oar with one hand, "that you did not botherthe brains of John and his men with any exposition of the Sermon on theMount.  Isn't it an odd thing that the common fishermen and boatmen ofthe Sea of Galilee understood the message Christ brought them just atonce? and now a days, when we have millions of churches built, andmillions of money being spent, and tons upon tons of sermons beingwritten every year, we seem only to get further and further intoconfusion and chaos.  Fancy the great army of able-bodied men that go onexpounding and expounding; and the learning and time and trouble theybestow on their work; and scarcely any two of them agreed; while thepeople who listen to them are all in a fog. Simon Peter, and Andrew, andthe sons of Zebedee, must have been men of the most extraordinaryintellect.  They understood at once; they were commissioned to teach;and they had not even a Shorter Catechism to go by."The Laird looked at him doubtfully.  He did not know whether torecognise in him a true ally or not.  However, the mention of theShorter Catechism seemed to suggest solid ground; and he was just aboutentering into the question of the Subordinate Standards when anexclamation of rage on the part of his nephew startled us.  Thathandsome lad, during all this theological discussion, had been keeping awatchful and matter-of-fact eye on a number of birds on the shore; andnow that we were quite close to the sandy promontory, he had recognisedthem."Look! look!" he said, in tones of mingled eagerness and disappointment."Golden plovers, every one of them!  Isn't it too bad?  It's always likethis on Sunday.  I will bet you won't get within half a mile of themto-morrow!"And he refused to be consoled as we landed on the sandy shore; and foundthe golden-dusted, long-legged birds running along before us, orflitting from patch to patch of the moist greensward.  We had to leavehim behind in moody contemplation as we left the shore and scrambled upthe rugged and rocky slope to the ruins of this solitary little chapel.There was an air of repose and silence about these crumbling walls andrusted gates that was in consonance with a habitation of the dead.  Andfirst of all, outside, we came upon an upright Iona cross, elaboratelycarved with strange figures of men and beasts.  But inside the smallbuilding, lying prostrate among the grass and weeds, there was acollection of those memorials that would have made an antiquarian'sheart leap for joy.  It is to be feared that our guesses about themeaning of the emblems on the tombstones were of a crude and superficialcharacter.  Were these Irish chiefs, those stone figures with the longsword and the harp beside them?  Was the recurrent shamrock a nationalor religious emblem?  And why was the effigy of this ancient worthyaccompanied by a pair of pincers, an object that looked like atooth-comb, and a winged griffin?  Again, outside but still within thesacred walls, we came upon still further tombs of warriors, most of themhidden among the long grass; and here and there we tried to brush theweeds away.  It was no bad occupation for a Sunday morning, in thisstill and lonely burial-place above the wide seas.On going on board again we learned from John of Skye that there weremany traces of an ancient ecclesiastical colonisation about this coast;and that in especial there were a ruined chapel and other remains on oneof a small group of islands that we could see on the southern horizon.Accordingly, after luncheon, we fitted out an expedition to explore thatdistant island.  The Youth was particularly anxious to examine theseecclesiastical remains; he did not explain to everybody that he hadreceived from Captain John a hint that the shores of this sainted islandswarmed with seals.And now the gig is shoved off; the four oars strike the glassy water;and away we go in search of the summer isles in the south. The Lairdsettles himself comfortably in the stern; it seems but natural that heshould take Mary Avon's hand in his, just as if she were a little child."And ye must know, Miss Mary," he says, quite cheerfully, "that if everye should come to live in Scotland, ye will not be persecuted with ourtheology.  No, no; far from it; we respect every one's religion, if itis sincere; though we cling to our own.  And why should we not cling toit, and guard it from error? We have had to fight for our civil andreligious leeberties inch by inch, foot by foot; and we have won.  Theblood of the saints has not been shed in vain.  The cry of the dying andwounded on many a Lanarkshire moorwhen the cavalry were riding about,and hewing and slaughteringwas not wasted on the air! The Lord heard,and answered.  And we do well to guard what we have gained; and, if needwere, there are plenty of Scotsmen alive at this day who would freelyspend their lives in defending their own releegion.  But ye need notfear.  These are the days of great toleration.  Ye might live inScotland all your life, and not hear an ill word said of the EpiscopalChurch!"After having given this solemn assurance the Laird cast a glance of slyhumour at Angus Sutherland."I will confess," said he, "when Dr. Sutherland brought that up thismorning about Peter and Andrew, and James and John, I was a bit put out.But then," he added, triumphantly, "ye must remember that in those daysthey had not the inseedious attacks of Prelacy to guard against.  Therewas no need for them to erect bulwarks of the faith.  But in our time itis different, or rather it has been different.  I am glad to think thatwe of the Scotch Church are emancipated from the fear of Rome; and I amof opeenion that with the advancing times they are in the right whoadvocate a little moderation in the way of applying and exacting theStandards.  No, no; I am not for bigotry.  I assure ye, Miss Mary, yewill find far fewer bigots in Scotland than people say.""I have not met any, sir," remarks Miss Mary."I tell ye what," said he, solemnly; "I am told on good authority thatthere is a movement among the U. P. Presbytery to send up to the Synod asort of memorial with regard to the Subordinate Standardsthat is, yeknow, the Westminster Confession of Faith and the Larger and ShorterCatechismsjust hinting, in a mild sort of way, that these are of humancomposition, and necessarily imperfect; and that a little amountofof"The Laird could not bring himself to pronounce the word "laxity."  Hestammered and hesitated, and at last said"Well; a little judeecious liberality of constructiondo ye see?oncertain points is admissible, while clearly defining other points onwhich the Church will not admit of question. However, as I was saying,we have little fear of Popery in the Presbyterian Church now; and yewould have no need to fear it in your English Church if the Englishpeople were not so sorely wanting in humour.  If they had any sense offun they would have laughed those millinery, play-acting people out o'their Church long ago"But at this moment it suddenly strikes the Laird that a fair proportionof the people he is addressing are of the despised English race; and hehastily puts in a disclaimer."I meant the clergy, of course," says he, most unblushingly, "theEnglish clergy, as having no sense of humour at allnone at all.  Dearme, what a stupid man I met at Dunoon last year!  There were some peopleon board the steamer talking about Homeshye know, he was known to everyman who travelled up and down the Clydeand they told the Englishclergyman about Homesh wishing he was a stot.  'Wishing he was a what?'says he.  Would ye believe it, it took about ten meenutes to explain thestory to him bit by bit; and at the end of it his face was as blank as abannock before it is put on the girdle!"We could see the laughter brimming in the Laird's eyes; he was thinkingeither of the stot or some other story about Homesh.  But his reverencefor Sunday prevailed.  He fell back on the Standards; and was mostanxious to assure Miss Avon that, if ever she were to live in Scotland,she would suffer no persecution at all, even though she still determinedto belong to the Episcopal Church."We have none in the neighbourhood of Strathgovan," he remarked, quitesimply; "but ye could easily drive in to Glasgow"and he did not noticethe quick look of surprise and inquiry that Angus Sutherland immediatelydirected from the one to the other.  But Mary Avon was poking down.It was a long pull; but by and by the features of the distant islandbecame clearer; and we made out an indentation that probably meant acreek of some sort.  But what was our surprise, as we drew nearer andnearer to what we supposed to be an uninhabited island, to find thetopmast of a vessel appearing over some rocks that guard the entrance tothe bay?  As we pulled into the still waters, and passed the heavy blacksmack lying at anchor, perhaps the two solitary creatures in charge ofher were no less surprised at the appearance of strangers in theselonely waters.  They came ashore just as we landed.  They explained, inmore or less imperfect English, that they were lobster-fishers; and thatthis was a convenient haven tor their smack, while they pulled in theirsmall boat round the shores to look after the traps.  And ifwhen theLaird was not lookinghis hostess privately negotiated for the sale ofhalf-a-dozen live lobsters, and if young Smith also took a quietopportunity of inquiring about the favourite resorts of the seals; whatthen?  Mice will play when they get the chance.  The Laird was walkingon with Mary Avon; and was telling her about the Culdees.And all the time we wandered about the deserted island, and explored itsruins, and went round its bays, the girl kept almost exclusively withthe Laird, or with her other and gentle friend; and Angus had but littlechance of talking to her or walking with her. He was left pretty muchalone.  Perhaps he was not greatly interested in the ecclesiasticalremains.  But he elicited from the two lobster-fishers that the hayscattered on the floor of the chapel was put there by fishermen, whoused the place to sleep in when they came to the island.  And theyshowed him the curious tombstone of the saint, with its sculpturedelephant and man on horseback.  Then he went away by himself to traceout the remains of a former civilisation on the island; the witheredstumps of a blackthorn hedge, and the abundant nettle.  A big rat ranout; the only visible tenant of the crumbled habitation.Meanwhile the others had climbed to the summit of the central hill; andbehold! all around the smooth bays were black and shining objects, likethe bladders used on fishermen's nets.  But these moved this way andthat; sometimes there was a big splash as one disappeared.  The Youthsate and regarded this splendid hunting-ground with a breathlessinterest."I'm thinking ye ought to get your sealskin to-morrow, Miss Mary," saysthe Laird, for once descending to worldly things."Oh, I hope no one will be shot for me!" she said.  "They are suchgentle creatures.""But young men will be young men, ye know," said he, cheerfully.  "WhenI was Howard's age, and knew I had a gun within reach, a sight like thatwould have made my heart jump.""Yes," said the nephew; "but you never do have a sight like that whenyou have a rifle within reach.""Wait till to-morrowwait till to-morrow," said the Laird, cheerfully."And now we will go down to the boat.  It is a long pull back to theyacht."But the Laird's nephew got even more savage as we rowed back in thecalm, pale twilight. Those wild duck would go whirring by within easyshotapparently making away to the solitudes of Loch Swen.  Then thatgreyish-yellow thing on the rockscould it be a sheep? We watched it forseveral minutes, as the gig went by in the dusk; then, with a heavyplunge or two, the seal floundered down and into the water.  The splashechoed through the silence."Did you ever see the like of that?" the Youth exclaimed, mortifiedbeyond endurance. "Did you ever?  As big as a cow!  And as sure as youget such a chance, it is Sunday!""I am very glad," says Miss Avon.  "I hope no one will shoot a seal onmy account.""The seal ought to be proud to have such a fate," said the Laird,gallantly.  "Ye are saving him from a miserable and lingering death ofcold, or hunger, or old age.  And whereas in that case nobody would careanything or see anything more about him, ye give him a sort ofimmortality in your dining-room, and ye are never done admiring him.  Aproud fellow he ought to be.  And if the seals about here are no veryfine in their skins, still it would be a curiosity, and at present wehave not one at all at Denny-mains."Again this reference to Denny-mains: Angus Sutherland glanced from oneto the other; but what could he see in the dusk?Then we got back to the yacht: what a huge grey ghost she looked in thegloom! And as we were all waiting to get down the companion, AngusSutherland put his hand on his hostess's arm, and stayed her."You must be wrong," said he, simply.  "I have offended her somehow.She has not spoken ten words to me to-day."*CHAPTER XV.**HIDDEN SPRINGS.*"Well, perhaps it is better, after all," says a certain person, duringone of those opportunities for brief conjugal confidences that aresomewhat rare on board ship.  She sighs as she speaks.  "I thought itwas going to be otherwise.  But it will be all the better for Angus notto marry for some years to come. He has a great future before him; and awife would really be an encumbrance.  Young professional men shouldnever marry; their circumstances keep on improving, but they can'timprove their wives."All this is very clear and sensible.  It is not always that this persontalks in so matter-of-fact a way.  If, however, everything has turnedout for the best, why this sudden asperity with which she adds"But I did not expect it of Mary."And then again"She might at least be civil to him.""She is not uncivil to him.  She only avoids him.""I consider that her open preference for Howard Smith is just a littlebit too ostentatious," she says, in rather an injured way. "Indeed, ifit comes to that, she would appear to prefer the Laird to either ofthem.  Any stranger would think she wanted to marry Denny-mainshimself.""Has it ever occurred to you," is the respectful question, "that a youngwomansay once in a centurymay be in that state of mind in which shewould prefer not to marry anybody?"Abashed?  Not a bit of it!  There is a calm air of superiority on herface: she is above trifles and taunts."If unmarried women had any sense," she says, "that would be theirnormal state of mind."And she might have gone on enlarging on this text, only that at thismoment Mary Avon comes along from the ladies' cabin; and the morninggreetings take place between the two women.  Is it only a suspicion thatthere is a touch of coldness in the elder woman's manner? Is it possiblethat her love for Mary Avon may be decreasing by ever so little a bit?Then Angus comes down the companion: he has got some wild flowers; hehas been ashore.  And surely he ought to give them to the younger of thetwo women: she is of the age when such pretty compliments are a naturalthing.  But no.  The flowers are for his hostessfor the decoration ofher table; and Mary Avon does not look up as they are handed along.Then young Mr. Smith makes his appearance; he has been ashore too.  Andhis complaints and protests fill the air."Didn't I tell you?" he says, appealing more especially to thewomen-folk for sympathy.  "Didn't I tell you?  You saw all those goldenplover yesterday, and the wild duck further up the loch: there is not asign of one of them!  I knew it would be so.  As sure as Monday begins,you never get a chance! I will undertake to say that when we get tothose islands where all the seals were yesterday, we sha'n't see oneto-day!""But are we to stop here a whole day in order to let you go and shootseals?" says his hostess."You can't help it," says he, laughing. "There isn't any wind.""Angus," she saysas if nobody knew anything about the wind but theyoung Doctor"is that so?""Not a doubt of it," he says.  "But it is a beautiful day.  You mightmake up a luncheon-party, and have a pic-nic by the side of the Saint'sWelldown in the hollow, you know.""Much chance I shall have with the seals, then!" remarks the other youngman, good-naturedly enough.However, it is enough that the suggestion has come from AngusSutherland.  A pic-nic on the Island of the Saints is forthwithcommandedseals or no seals.  And while Master Fred, immediately afterbreakfast, begins his preparations, the Laird helps by carefully puttinga corkscrew in his pocket.  It is his invariable custom.  We are readyfor any emergency.And if the golden plover, and mergansers, and seals appear to know thatthe new, busy, brisk working-days have begun again, surely we ought toknow it too.  Here are the same silent shores; and the calm blue seasand blue sky; and the solitary islands in the southall just as theywere yesterday; but we have a secret sense that the lassitude andidleness of Sunday are over, and that there is something of freedom inthe air.  The Laird has no longer any need to keep a check on histongue: those stories about Homesh may bubble up to the surface of hismind just as they please.  And indeed he is exceedingly merry andfacetious as the preparations go on for this excursion.  When at lengthhe gets into the stern of the boat he says to his companion"There was Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton,And Mary Avon, and me.What ails ye, lass?  I have not heard much of your singing of late.""You would not have me sing profane songs on Sunday?" she says,demurely."No; but I mean long before Sunday. However," he says, cheerfully, andlooking at her, "there is a wonderful change in yewonderful!  Well do Imind the day I first saw ye, on the quay; though it seems a long timesince then.  Ye were a poor white bit thing then; I was astonished; andthe next day too, when ye were lame as well, I said to myself, 'Well;it's high time that bit lass had a breath o' the sea air.'  And nowwhyye just mind me o' the lasses in the Scotch songsthe country lasses, yeknowwith the fine colour on your face."And indeed this public statement did not tend to decrease the sun-brownthat now tinged Mary Avon's cheeks."These lads," said heno doubt referring to his nephew and to AngusSutherland, who were both labouring at the long oars"are much tooattentive to ye, putting ye under the shadow of the sails, and bringingye parasols and things like that.  No, no; don't you be afraid ofgetting sun-burned; it is a comely and wholesome thing: is it notreasonable that human beings need the sunlight as much as plants?  Justask your friend Dr. Sutherland that; though a man can guess as muchwithout a microscope.  Keep ye in the sun, Miss Mary; never mind thebrown on your cheeks, whatever the young men say: I can tell ye ye arelooking a great deal better now than when ye stepped on shorea shilpitpale bit thingon that afternoon."Miss Avon had not been in the habit of receiving lectures like thisabout her complexion, and she seemed rather confused; but fortunatelythe measured noise of the rowlocks prevented the younger men fromoverhearing."There was Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton,And Mary Avon, and me."continued the Laird, in his facetious way; and he contentedly patted thehand of the girl beside him.  "I fear I am growing very fond ofidleness.""I am sure, sir, you are so busy during the rest of the year," says thisbase flatterer, "that you should be able to enjoy a holiday with a clearconscience.""Well, perhaps soperhaps so," said the Laird, who was greatly pleased."And yet, let one work as hard as one can, it is singular how little onecan do, and what little thanks ye get for doing it.  I am sure thosepeople in Strathgovan spend half their lives in fault-finding; andexpect ye to do everything they can think of without asking them for afarthing. At the last meeting of the ratepayers in the Burgh Hall Iheckled them, I can tell ye.  I am not a good speakerno, no; far fromit; but I can speak plain.  I use words that can be driven into people'sheads; and I will say this, that some o' those people in Strathgovanhave a skull of most extraordinar' thickness. But said I to them, 'Do yeexpect us to work miracles?  Are we to create things out of nothing?  Ifthe rates are not to be increased, where are the new gas-lamps to comefrom? Do ye think we can multiply gas-lamps as the loaves and fisheswere multiplied?'  I'm thinking," added the Laird, with a burst ofhearty laughter, "that the thickest-skulled of them all understoodthateh?""I should hope so," remarked Miss Avon.Then the measured rattle of the oars: it wants hard pulling against thisfiercely running tide; indeed, to cheat it in a measure, we have to keepworking along the coast and across the mouth of Loch Swen."There was Mary Beaton, and Mary Seaton,And Mary Avon, and me"says the Laird, as a playful introduction to another piece of talking."I have been asking myself once or twice whether I know any one in thewhole kingdom of Scotland better than you.""Than me, sir?" she says, with a start of surprise."Yes," he says, sententiously.  "That is so.  And I have had to answermyself in the naygative.  It is wonderful how ye get to know a person onboard a yacht.  I just feel as if I had spent years and years with ye;so that there is not any one I know with whom I am better acquaint.When ye come to Denny-mains, I shall be quite disappointed if ye looksurprised or strange to the place. I have got it into my head that yemust have lived there all your life.  Will ye undertake to say," hecontinues, in the same airy manner, "that ye do not know the littlewinding path that goes up through the trees to the flag-staffeh?""I'm afraid I don't remember it," she says, with a smile."Wait till ye see the sunsets ye can see from there!" he says, proudly."We can see right across Glasgow to Tennants' Stalk; and in theafternoon the smoke is all turning red and brown with the sunsetmany'sand many's the time I have taken Tom Galbraith to the hill, and askedhim whether they have finer sunsets at Naples or Venice.  No, no; giveme fire and smoke and meestery for a strong sunset.  But just the besttime of the year, as ye'll find out"and here he looked in a kindly wayat the girl"where there is a bit wood near the house, is thespring-time. When ye see the primroses and the blue-bells about theroots of the treeswhen ye see them so clear and bright among the red ofthe withered leaveswell, ye cannot help thinking about some of our oldScotch songs, and there's something in that that's just like to bringthe tears to your een.  We have a wonderful and great inheritance inthese songs, as ye'll find out, my lass.  You English know only ofBurns; but a Scotchman, who is familiar with the ways and the feelingsand the speech of the peasantry, has a sort o' uncomfortable impressionthat Burns is at times just a bit artifeecial and leeteraryespeciallywhen he is masquerading in fine English; though at other times ye getthe real liltwhat a man would sing to himself when he was all alone atthe plough, in the early morning, and listening to the birds around him.But there are others that we are proud of, tooTannahill, and JohnMayne, that wrote about Logan Braes; and Hogg, and Motherwell: I'msure o' this, that when ye read Motherwell's Jeanie Morrison, ye'll nobe able to go on for greetin'.""I beg your pardon?" said Miss Avon.But the Laird is too intent on recalling some of the lines to noticethat she has not quite understood him."They were school-mates," he says, in an absent way.  "When school wasover, they wandered away like lad and lass; and he writes the poem inafter-life, and speaks to her he has never seen since."Oh, mind ye, love, how oft we leftThe deavin' dinsome toun,To wander by the green burn-side,And hear its water croon?The simmer leaves hung ower our heads,The flowers burst round our feet;And in the gloamin' o the woodThe throssil whistled sweet.*      *      *      *      *"And on the knowe aboon the burnFor hours thegither satIn the silentness o' joy, till baithWi' very gladness grat!Aye, aye, dear Jeanie Morrison,Tears trinkled down your cheek,Like dew-beads on a rose, yet naneHad ony power to speak!"The Laird's voice faltered for a moment; but he pretended he had greatdifficulty in remembering the poem, and confessed that he must havemixed up the verses.  However, he said he remembered the last one."O dear, dear Jeanie Morrison,Since we were sundered young,I've never seen your face, nor heardThe music of your tongue;But I could hug all wretchedness,And happy could I dee,Did I but ken your heart still dreamedO' bygane days and me!"Just as he finished, the old Laird turned aside his head.  He seemed tobe suddenly interested in something over at the mouth of Loch Swen.Then he quickly passed his red silk handkerchief across his face, andsaid, in a gay mannerthough he was still looking in that aliendirection"This is a desperate hard pull.  We had nothing like this yesterday.But it will do the lads good; it will take the stiffness out of theirbacks."However, one of the ladsto wit, the Laird's nephewadmitted at lengththat he had had quite enough of it, and gave up his oar to the man hehad relieved.  Then he came into the stern, and was very pleasant andtalkative; and said he had quite made up his mind to find all the sealsgone from the shores of the sacred island.So formidable, indeed, was the tide, that we had to keep well away tothe south of the island before venturing to make across for it; and whenat length we did put the bow straight for the little harbour, themid-channel current swept us away northward, as if the gig had been abit of cork.  But the four oars kept manfully to their work; and by dintof hard pulling and pertinacious steering we managed to run into thelittle bay.We found it quite deserted.  The two lobster-fishers had left in themorning; we were in sole possession of this lonely island, set amid thestill summer seas.But by this time it was nearly noon; and so it was arranged that the menof the party should content themselves with a preliminary expedition, tofind out, by stealthy crawlings out to the various bays, where the sealswere chiefly congregated; while the women were to remain by the Saints'Well, to help Fred to get luncheon spread out and arranged.  And thiswas done; and thus it happened that, after Master Fred had finished hiswork, and retired down to his mates in the gig, the two women-folk wereleft alone."Why, Mary," said the one of them, quite cheerfully (as we afterwardsheard), "it is quite a long time since you and I had a chat together.""Yes, it is.""One gets so often interfered with on board, you know.  Aren't you goingto begin now and make a sketch?"She had brought with her her sketching materials; but they were lyingunopened on a rock hard by."No, I think not," she said, listlessly."What is the matter with you?" said her kind friend, pretending to laughat her.  "I believe you are fretting over the loss of the money, afterall.""Oh, no: I hope you do not think I am fretting!" said she, anxiously."No one has said that?  I am really quite contentI am veryhappy."She managed to say the word."I am very glad to hear it," said her friend; "but I have a great mindto scold you all the same."The girl looked up.  Her friend went over to her, and sate down besideher, and took her hand in hers."Don't be offended, Mary," she said, good-naturedly.  "I have no rightto interfere; but Angus is an old friend of mine.  Why do you treat himlike that?"The girl looked at her with a sort of quick, frightened, inquiringglance; and then saidas if she were almost afraid to hear herselfspeak"Has he spoken to you?""Yes.  Now don't make a mole-hill into a mountain, Mary.  If he hasoffended you, tell him.  Be frank with him.  He would not vex you forthe world: do you think he would?"The girl's hand was beginning to tremble a good deal; and her face waswhite, and piteous."If you only knew him as well as I do, you would know he is as gentle asa child: he would not offend any one.  Now, you will be friends with himagain, Mary?"The answer was a strange one.  The girl broke into a fit of wild crying,and hid her face in her friend's bosom, and sobbed there so that herwhole frame was shaken with the violence of her misery."Mary, what is it?" said the other, in great alarm.Then, by and by, the girl rose, and went away over to her sketchingmaterials for a minute or two.  Then she returned: her face still ratherwhite, but with a certain cold and determined look on it."It is all a mistake," said she, speaking very distinctly.  "Dr.Sutherland has not offended me in the least: please tell him so if hespeaks again.  I hope we shall always be good friends."She opened out her colour-box."And then," said she, with an odd laugh, "before you think I have gonecrazed, please remember it isn't every day one loses such an enormousfortune as mine."She began to get her other sketching things ready.  And she was verycheerful about it, and very busy; and she was heard to be singing toherselfThen fill up a bumper: what can I do lessThan drink to the health of my bonny Black Bess?But her friend, when by chance she turned her head a little bit,perceived that the pale and piteous face was still wet with tears; andthe praises of Black Bess did not wholly deceive her.*CHAPTER I.**A CONFESSION.*What could the solitary scouts, coming back from the various points ofthe island, know of this quick, unwilling cry of pain, and of the forcedcalm that followed it?  They had their own sorrows.  There was a gloomupon their faces.  One and all bore the same storynot a seal, not awild duck, not even a rock pigeon anywhere."But it is a fine thing to be able to straighten one's back," says theLaird, who always seizes on the cheerful side; "and we have not given uphope of your getting the sealskin yet, Miss Maryno, no.  The Doctorsays they are away hunting just now; when the tide gets low again theywill come up on the rocks.  So the best thing we can do is to spendplenty of time over our luncheon, and cross the island again in theafternoon.  Aye; begun already?" adds the Laird, as he goes up to thecanvas, and regards the rough outlines in charcoal with a critical air."Very good! very good!" he says, following the lines with his thumb, andapparently drawing in the air.  "Excellent!  The composeetion veryclever indeedsimple, bold, striking. And a fine blaze of colour ye'llhave on a day like this; and then the heavy black hull of the smack bangin the foreground: excellent, excellent!  But if I were you, I wouldleave out that rock there; ye would get a better sweep of the sea.Don't distract the eye in sea pieces; bold linesfirm, sound colour: andthere ye are.  Well, my lass, ye have the skill of constructing apicture. Tom Galbraith himself would admit that, I know"But here the Laird is called away by his hostess."I would advise you, sir," says she, "to have some luncheon while youcan get it.  It is a very strange thing, with all you gentlemen onboard, and with all those guns lying about, but we are drawing nearerand nearer to starvation.  I wish you would give up hunting seals, andshoot something useful."Here our young Doctor appears with certain bottles that have beencooling in the water."There must be plenty of rock pigeons in the caves we passed thismorning, on the other island," he says."Oh, not those beautiful birds!" says she of the empty larder.  "Wecannot have Hurlingham transported to the Highlands.""Whoever trys to shoot those pigeons won't find it a Hurlinghambusiness," he remarks.But the Laird has a soul above luncheons, and larders, andpigeon-shooting.  He is still profoundly absorbed in thought."No," he says, at length, to the young lady who, as usual, is by hisside.  "I am wrong!"She looks up at him with some surprise."Yes, I am wrong," he says, decisively. "Ye must keep in that island.Ye must sacrifice picturesqueness to truth.  Never mind the picture:keep the faithful record.  In after life ye will be able to get plentyof pictures; but ye may not be able to get an exact record of the thingsye saw when ye were sailing with the White Dove.""Well, you know, sir," observes Miss Avon, with a somewhat embarrassedsmile, "you don't give me much encouragement.  You always speak as if Iwere to be compelled to keep those sketches.  Am I to find nobody sillyenough to buy them?"Now, somehow or other of late, the Laird has been more and more inclinedto treat the sale of Mary Avon's pictures as a most irresistible joke.He laughs and chuckles at the mere mention of such a thing, just as ifHomesh were somewhere about."Sell them!" he says, with another deep chuckle.  "Ye will never sellthem.  Ye could not have the heart to part with them.""The heart has to be kept in proper subjection," says she, lightly,"when one has to earn one's living."Queen Titania glances quickly at the girl; but apparently there is noprofound meaning concealed in this speech.  Miss Avon has taken her seaton a shelving piece of grey rock; and, if she is concerned aboutanything, it is about the safety of certain plates and knives and suchthings.  Her hand is quite steady as she holds out her tumbler for theYouth to pour some water into the claret.Luncheon over, she returns to her work; and the band of seal-hunters,taking to cigars and pipes, sit and watch the tide slowly ebb away fromthe golden-brown seaweed.  Then, with many a caution as to patience andsilence, they rise and get their guns and set out. Already there is adisposition to slouch the head and walk timidly; though as yet there isno need of any precaution."Glckliche Reise!" says Miss Avon, pleasantly, as we pass.Angus Sutherland starts, and turns his head. But the salutation was notfor him; it was meant for the Youth, who is understood to be the mosteager of the seal-hunters.  And Mr. Smith, not having his answer pat,replies, "I hope so;" and then looks rather confused as he passes on,carefully stooping his head though there is no occasion whatever.Then, by following deep gullies and crawling over open ledges, we reachpoints commanding the various bays; and with the utmost caution peerover or round the rocks.  And whereas yesterday, being Sunday, the bayswere alive with seals, disporting themselves freely in full view of alarge party of people who were staring at them, to-day, being Monday,finds not a seal visible anywhere, though every one is in hiding, andabsolute silence must have reigned in the island, ever since the lobsterfishers left in the morning.  No matter; the tide is still ebbing; thetrue hunter must possess his soul.And yet this lying prone for hours on a ledge of exceedingly rough rockmust have been monotonous work for our good friend the Laird. Under hisnose nothing to look at but scraps of orange lichen and the strayfeathers of sea birds; abroad nothing but the glassy blue sea, with thepale mountains of Jura rising into the cloudless sky.  At last it seemedto become intolerable.  We could see him undergoing all sorts ofcontortions in the effort to wrest something out of his coat-pocketwithout raising any portion of his body above the line of cover. Hehimself was not unlike a grey seal in the shadow of the rock, especiallywhen he twisted and turned himself about without rising an inch from thesurface.  And in time he succeeded. We could see him slowly andcarefully unfold that newspaperprobably not more than a week oldjustbeneath his face.  He had no need of spectacles: his eyes were almosttouching the page.  And then we knew that he was at rest; and the hardrock and the seals all forgotten.  For we took it that this local paperwas one which had written a most important leading article about theproposed public park for Strathgovan, calling upon the ratepayers toarise and assert their rights and put a check on the recklessextravagance of the Commissioners. The Laird himself was openly pointedat as one who would introduce the luxury of the later Romans into asober Scotch community; and there were obscure references to those whoseemed to consider that a man's dwelling-house should become nothingmore nor less than a museum of pictures and statues, while they wouldapply taxes raised from a hard-working population in the adornment ofplaces of recreation for the idle.  But do you think that the Laird wasappalled by this fierce onslaught? Not a bit of it.  He had read andre-read it to us with delight.  He had triumphantly refuted the writer'ssophistries; he had exposed his ignorance of the most elementary factsin political economy; he was always rejoiced to appear before TomGalbraith and Mary Avon as one who was not afraid to suffer for hischampionship of art.  And then, when he had triumphed over his enemy, hewould fold the paper with a sort of contented sigh; and would say with acompassionate air, "Poor crayture! poor crayture!" as if the poorcrayture could not be expected to know any better.At lastat last!  The Laird makes frantic gestures with hisnewspaperall the more frantic that they have to be strictly lateral,and that he dare not raise his hand.  And behold! far away out there onthe still, blue surface, a smooth round knob, shining and black.Without a muscle moving, eager eyes follow that distant object.  Theseal is not alarmed or suspicious; he sails evenly onward, seldomlooking to right or left.  And when he disappears there is no splash; hehas had enough of breathing; he is off for his hunting in the deep seas.What is more, he remains there.  We catch no further trace of him, norof any other living thing around those deserted bays.  Human naturegives in.  The Youth gets up, and boldly displays himself on apromontory, his gun over his shoulder.  Then the Laird, seeing thateverything is over, gets up too, yawning dreadfully, and folds hisnewspaper, and puts it in his pocket."Come along!" he calls out.  "It is no use. The saints have taught theseals tricks.  They know better than to come near on a working day."And so presently the sombre party sets out again for the other side ofthe island, where the gig awaits us.  Not a word is said.  Cartridgesare taken out; we pick our way through the long grass and the stones.And when it is found that Miss Avon has roughed in all that she requiresof her present study, it is gloomily suggested that we might go back byway of the other island, that so haply we might secure the materials fora pigeon pie before returning to the yacht.The evening sun was shining ruddily along the face of the cliffs as wedrew near the other island; and there was no sign of life at all aboutthe lonely shores and the tall caves.  But there was another story totell when, the various guns having been posted, the Youth boldly walkedup to the mouth of the largest of the caves, and shouted.  Presentlythere were certain flashes of blue things in the mellow evening light;and the sharp bang! bang! of the gun, that echoed into the greathollows. Hurlingham?  That did not seem much of a Hurlinghamperformance.  There were no birds standing bewildered on the fallentrap, wondering whether to rise or not; but there were things comingwhizzing through the air that resembled nothing so much as rifle bulletswith blue wings.  The Youth, it is true, got one or two easy shots atthe mouth of the cave; but when the pigeons got outside and cameflashing over the heads of the others, the shooting was, on the whole, ahaphazard business.  Nevertheless, we got a fair number for MasterFred's larder, after two of the men had acted as retrievers forthree-quarters of an hour among the rocks and bushes.  Then away againfor the solitary vessel lying in the silent loch, with the pale mistsstealing over the land, and the red sun sinking behind the Jura hills.Again, after dinner, amid the ghostly greys of the twilight, we wentforth on another commissariat excursion, to capture fish. Strange tosay, however, our Doctor, though he was learned on the subject of fliesand tackle, preferred to remain on board: he had some manuscript to sendoff to London. And his hostess said she would remain too; she always hasplenty to do about the saloon. Then we left the White Dove and rowedaway to the rocks.But the following conversation, as we afterwards heard, took place inour absence:"I wished very much to speak to you," said Angus Sutherland, to hishostess, without making any movement to bring out his desk."I thought so," said she; not without a little nervous apprehension.And then she said quickly, before he could begin"Let me tell you at once, Angus, that I have spoken to Mary.  Of course,I don't wish to interfere; I wouldn't interfere for the world; butbut Ionly asked her, lest there should be any unpleasant misapprehension,whether she had any reason to be offended with you.  'None in theleast,' she said. She was most positive.  She even seemed to be deeplypained by the misunderstanding; andand wished me to let you know; soyou must dismiss that from your mind any way."He listened thoughtfully, without saying anything.  At last he said"I have determined to be quite frank with you.  I am going to tell you asecretif it is a secret""I have guessed it," she said, quickly, to spare him pain."I thought so," he said, quite quietly. "Well; I am not ashamed of it.I have no reason to be ashamed of it.  But, since you know, you will seethat it would be very embarrassing for me to remain longer on board theyacht ifif there was no hope"He turned over the leaves of a guide-book rapidly, without looking atthem; the hard-headed Doctor had not much command over himself at thismoment."If you have guessed, why not she?" he said, in a somewhat hurried andanxious manner.  "Andandif I am to go, better that I should know atonce.  II have nothing to complain ofI mean I have nothing to reproachher withif it is a misfortune, it is a misfortunebutbut she used tobe more friendly towards me."These two were silent.  What was passing before their minds?  The longsummer nights in the far northern seas, with the glory dying in thewest; or the moonlight walks on the white deck, with the red star ofUshinish lighthouse burning in the south; or the snug saloon below, withits cards, and candles, and laughter, and Mary Avon singing to herselfthe song of Ulva?  She sang no song of Ulva now."Mary and I are very intimate friends," says the other deliberately.  "Iwill say nothing against her.  Girls have curious fancies about suchthings sometimes.  But I must admitfor you are my friend toothat I amnot surprised you should have been encouraged by her manner to you atone time, or that you should wonder a little at the change."But even this mild possibility of Mary Avon's being in the wrong shefeels to be incompatible with her customary championship of her friend;and so she instantly says"Mind, I am certain of thisthat whatever Mary does, she believes to beright. Her notion of duty is extraordinarily sensitive and firm.  Onceshe has put anything before her as the proper thing to be done, she goesstraight at it; and nothing will turn her aside. And although there issomething about it I can't quite understand, how am I to interfere?Interference never does any good. Why do not you ask her yourself?""I mean to do so, when I get the chance," said he, simply.  "I merelywished to tell you that, if her answer is 'No,' it will be better for meto leave you.  Already I fancy my being on board the yacht is a troubleto her.  I will not be a trouble to her.  I can go.  If it is amisfortune, there is no one to blame.""But if she says 'Yes!'" cried his friend; and there was a wonderfuljoy in her eyes, and in her excess of sympathy she caught his hand for amoment.  "Oh, Angus, if Mary were to promise to be your wife! What atrip we should have thenwe should take the White Dove to Stornoway!"That was her ultimate notion of human happinesssailing the White Doveup to Stornoway!"I don't think there is much hope," said he, rather absently, "from hermanner of late. But anything is better than suspense.  If it is amisfortune, as I say, there is no one to blame.  I had not the leastnotion that she knew Mr. Howard Smith in London.""Nor did she."He stared rather."They may have met at our house; but certainly not more than once.  Yousee, living in a country house, we have to have our friends down in astaccato fashion, and always by arrangement of a few at a time. Thereis no general dropping in to afternoon tea.""He never met her in London?" he repeated."I should think not.""His uncle, then: did she never see him before?""Certainly not.""Then what does he mean by treating her as a sort of familiar friend whowas likely to turn up any time at Denny-mains?"His companion coloured somewhat; for she had no right to betrayconfidences."The Laird is very fond of Mary," she said, evasively.  "It is quitebeautiful to see those two together."He sate for a little time in silence; and then begged to be excusedhewould go on deck to smoke.  But when, some little time thereafter, wereturned from our brief fishing, the dark figure walking up and down thedeck was not smoking at all.  He paused as the gig was hauled fast tothe gangway."What luck?""About two dozen.""All lithe?""About half-a-dozen mackerel."And then he assisted Mary Avon to ascend the small wooden steps.  Shesaid "Thank you!" as she withdrew her hand from his; but the words wereuttered in a low voice; and she instantly crossed to the companion andwent below.  He stayed on deck, and helped to swing the gig up to thedavits.Now something had got into the head of our Admiral-in-chief that night.She was very merry; and very affectionate towards Mary. She made lightof her foolish wish to go away to the south.  She pointed out that thiscontinuous fine weather was only hoarding up electricity for theequinoctials; and then we should have a spin!"We are not going to let you go, Mary; that is the long and the short ofit.  And we are going to keep hold of Angus, too.  He is not going awayyetno, no.  We have something for him to do.  We shall not restsatisfied until we see him sail the White Dove into Stornowayharbour!"*CHAPTER II.**ONLY A HEADACHE.*Stornoway harbour, indeed!  The weather was laughing at us.  The glasshad steadily fallen until it had got about as low as it could go withdecency; and yet this next morning was more beautiful, and bright, andcalm than ever!  Were we to be for ever confined in this remote Loch ofthe Burying Place?"Angus!  Angus! where are you?" the Admiral calls out, as she comes upon deck."Here I am," calls out a voice in return, from the cross-trees.She raises her head, and perceives the ruddy-faced Doctor hanging on bythe ratlines."Where is the fine sailing weather you were to bring useh?""I have been looking for it," he replies, as he comes down the rigging;"and there is not a breath anywhere.""Very well," she says, promptly; "I'll tell you what you must do.  Youmust get everybody who can handle a gun into the gig and go away up tothe head of the loch there, and shoot every living thing you can see.Do you understand?  We are on the brink of starvation!  We areperishing!  Do you want us to boil tarred rope into soup?""No," he says, humbly."Very well.  Away you go.  If you can't bring us any wind to take usinto a civilised place, you must provide us with food; is that clearenough?"Here Captain John comes aft, touching his cap."Good morning mem!  I was never seeing the like of this weather, mem.""I don't want to see any more of it," she says, sharply.  "Did you bringus in here because there was a convenient place to bury us in?  Do youknow that we are dying of starvation?""Oh, no, mem!" says Captain John, with a grin; but looking ratherconcerned all the same.However, her attention is quickly called away by the sound of oars.  Sheturns and regards this small boat approaching the yacht; and the moreshe looks the more do her eyes fill with astonishment."Well, I declare!" she says, "this is about the coolest thing I haveseen for ages."For it is Miss Mary Avon who is rowing the dingay back to the yacht; andher only companion is the Youth, who is contentedly seated in the stern,with his gun laid across his knees."Good morning, Mr. Smith!" she says, with the most gracious sarcasm."Pray don't exert yourself too much.  Severe exercise before breakfastis very dangerous."The Youth lays hold of the rope; there is a fine blush on his handsomeface."It is Miss Avon's fault," he says; "she would not let me row.""I suppose she expected you to shoot? Where are the duck, and the snipe,and the golden plover?  Hand them up!""If you want to see anything in the shape of game about this coast,you'd better wait till next Sunday," says he, somewhat gloomily.However, after breakfast, we set out for the shallow head of the loch;and things do not turn out so badly after all.  For we have only leftthe yacht some few minutes when there is a sudden whirring of wingsacall of "Duck! duck!"and the Doctor, who is at the bow, and who is theonly one who is ready, fires a snap-shot at the birds.  Much toeverybody's amazement, one drops, and instantly dives. Then begins anexciting chase.  The biorlinn is sent careering with a vengeance; themen strain every muscle; and then another cry directs attention to thepoint at which the duck has reappeared.  It is but for a second.  Thoughhe cannot fly, he can swim like a fish; and from time to time, as thehard pulling enables us to overtake him, we can see him shooting thisway or that through the clear water.  Then he bobs his head up, somethirty or forty yards off; and there is another snap-shotthe chargerattling on the water the fifth part of an instant after hedisappears."Dear me!" says the Laird; "that bird will cost us ten shillings incartridges."But at last he is bagged.  A chance shot happens to catch him before hedives; he is stretched on the water, with his black webbed feet in theair; and a swoop of Captain John's arm brings him dripping into the gig.And then our natural history is put to the test. This is no gay-plumagedsheldrake, or blue-necked mallard, or saw-toothed merganser. It is abroad-billed duck, of a sooty black and grey; we begin to regret ourexpenditure of cartridges; experiments on the flavour of unknown seabirds are rarely satisfactory.  But Captain John's voice isauthoritative and definite.  "It is a fine bird," he says.  And MasterFred has already marked him for his own.Then among the shallows at the head of the loch there is many a wildpull after broods of flappers, and random firing at the circling curlew.The air is filled with the calling of the birds; and each successiveshot rattles away with its echo among the silent hills. What is theresult of all this noise and scramble?  Not much, indeed; for right inthe middle of it we are attracted by a strange appearance in the south.That dark line beyond the yacht: is it a breeze coming up the loch?Instantly the chase after mergansers ceases; cartridges are taken out;the two or three birds we have got are put out of the way; and theLaird, taking the tiller ropes, sits proud and erect.  Away go the fouroars with the precision of machinery; and the long sweep sends the gigahead at a swinging pace. Behold! behold! the dark blue on the waterwidening!  Is it a race between the wind and the gig as to which willreach the White Dove first? "Give me your oar, Fred!" says the Doctor,who is at the bow.There is but a momentary pause.  Again the shapely boat swings along;and with the measured beat of the oars comes the old familiar chorus... Cheerily, and all together!Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!Soon the flowing breeze will blow;We'll show the snowy canvas on herHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!Wafted by the breeze of mornWe'll quaff the joyous horn together!Ho, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!"We'll beat! we'll beat!" cries the Laird, in great delight.  "Give ither, boys!  Not one halfpennyworth o' that wind will we lose!"The bow cleaves the blue water; the foam hisses away from her rudder.It is a race of the North against the South.  Then the chorus againHo, ro, clansmen!A long, strong pull together!Ho, ro, clansmen!Hurrah! hurrah!  As the gig is run alongside, and guns and birds handedup, that spreading blue has not quite reached the yacht; there is noappreciable stir of the lazy ensign.  But there is little time to belost. The amateurs swing the gig to the davits, while the men aregetting in the slack of the anchor chain; the women are incontinentlybundled below, to be out of the way of flapping sheets.  Then, all handsat the halyards! And by the time the great White Wings are beginning tospread, the breeze stirs the still air around us; and the peak swaysgently this way and that; and they who are hard at work at the windlassare no doubt grateful for this cool blowing from the south.  Then thereis a cessation of noise; we become vaguely aware that we are moving.  Atlast the White Dove has spread her wings; her head is turned towardsthe south.  Good-bye! you lonely loch, with the silent shores and thesilent tombsa hundred farewells to you, wherever we may be going!And slowly we beat down the loch, against this light southerly breeze.But as we get further and further into the open, surely there issomething in the air and in the appearance of the southern sky thatsuggests that the glass has not been falling for nothing.  The sea issmooth; but there is a strange gloom ahead of us; and beyond the islandsthat we visited yesterday nothing is visible but a wan and sultry glare.Then, afar, we can hear a noise as of the approach of some storm; butperhaps it is only the low sound of the swirling of the tides round theshores.  Presently another sound attracts attentiona murmured hissing,and it comes nearer and nearer; dark spots, about the size of athreepenny-piece, appear on the white decks.  The women have scarcelytime to send below for their sunshades when the slight shower passesbythe decks are not even left damp.  Then further and further we creepaway towards the south; but where we expected to catch some far glimpseof the Irish coastthe blue line of Rathlin or the Antrim cliffsthereis only that dim, sultry haze.Then another sounda dull flop! flop!in the distance; and thestragglers who have remained below after luncheon are hastily summonedon deck.  And there, far away in the haze, we can dimly descry thesuccessive curved forms of a school of dolphins, racing each other, andspringing twenty or thirty feet in the air before they come down withthat heavy thud on the water.  Those of us who have watched thebeautiful lithe fish racing and chasing by the side of an Atlanticvessel, would fain have been somewhat nearer; but we can only see thedim forms springing into the haze. Then the dull pistol-shots in thesouth slowly cease, and we are left alone on the low murmuring sea."But where is Miss Mary?" says the Laird, suddenly becoming aware of theabsence of his chief companion."Oh, she is in the saloon!" says his hostess, quickly and anxiously."She is doing something to one of her water-colours.  I suppose we mustnot disturb her.""No, no; certainly not," returns the Laird, lightly; and then he adds,with a smile which is meant to be very significant, "There is never anyharm in hard work.  Let her go on; she will have a fine collection ofsketches before she leaves the White Dove."But our Queen Tita does not respond to that careless joke.  There is acurious, constrained look on her face; and she quite peremptorilynegatives a suggestion of the Youth that he should go below for thedraught-board.  Then one of us perceives that Angus Sutherland is not ondeck.Has the opportunity come at last, then, for the clearing away of allsecret troubles?  What end is there to be to this momentous interview?Is it Stornoway harbour?  Is our frank-eyed young Doctor to come up witha silent wonder and joy on his facea message that needs no speechamessage that only says, "About with the yacht, and let us run away tothe northern seas and Stornoway?"  The friend of these two young peoplecan hardly conceal her anxiety.  She has got hold of the case of anopera glass, and opens and shuts it quickly and aimlessly.  Then thereis a step on the companion way; she does not look; she only knows thatAngus Sutherland comes on deck, and then goes forward to the bow of thegig, and stands by himself, and looks out to sea.There is silence on board; for a low rumble of thunder has been heardonce or twice, and we are listening.  The mountains of Jura are darknow, and the sultry mist in the south is deeper in its gloom.  Thiscondition of the atmosphere produces a vague sense of something about tohappen, which is in itself uncomfortable; one would almost like to see aflash of lightning, or hear the thunderous advance of a storm breakingin upon the oppressive calm.The Laird goes forward to Angus Sutherland."Well, Doctor, and what think ye of the weather now?"The younger man starts and turns round, and for a second looks at theLaird as if he had not quite comprehended the question."Oh, yes!" he says.  "You are quite right. It does look as if we weregoing to have a dirty night."And with that he turns to the sea again."Aye," says the Laird, sententiously.  "I am glad we are in a boat weneed have no fear ofnone!  Keep her away from the shore, and we are allright.  Butbut I suppose we will get into some harbour to-night, afterall?""It does not matter," he says, absently; and then he goes away up to thebow.  He is alone there; for the men have gone below for dinnerwith theexception of John of Skye, who is at the helm.Presently the special friend of the young man puts aside thatopera-glass case, and walks timidly forward to the bow of the yacht.She regards him somewhat anxiously; but his face is turned away fromherlooking over to the gloomy Jura hills."Angus," she says, briskly, "are we not going very near Jura, if it isWest Loch Tarbert we are making for?"He turned to her then, and she saw by his face that something hadhappened."You have spoken to her, Angus?" she said, in a low voice; and herearnest, kind eyes regarded the young man as if to anticipate hisanswer."Yes."For a second or so he seemed disinclined to say more; but presently headded, scarcely looking at her"I am sorry that I must leave you the first time we get near land.""Oh, Angus!"It was almost a cryuttered in that low, piteous voice.  Then he lookedat her."You have been very kind to me," said he, so that no one should hear."It is only a misfortune.  But I wish I had never seen the WhiteDove.""Oh, Angus; don't say that!""It is my own fault.  I should never have come from Edinburgh.  I knewthat.  I knew I was hazarding everything.  And she is not to blame"He could say no more, for one or two of the men now came up from theforecastle.  His hostess left him and went aft, with a hurt andindignant look on her face.  When the Laird asked why Miss Mary did notcome on deck, she said, "I don't know," with an air which said she hadceased to take any further care in Mary Avon's actions.  And at dinner,what heed did she pay to the fact that Mary Avon was rather white, andsilent, and pained-looking? She had been disappointed.  She had notexpected the friend of her bosom to act in this heartless manner.  Andas for Howard Smith, she treated that young gentleman with a coldcourtesy which rather astonished him.After dinner, when the men folk had gone on deck, and when she waspreparing to go too, a timid, appealing hand was laid on her arm."I would like to speak to you," said the low voice of Mary Avon.Then she turnedonly for a second."I think I know enough of what has happened, Mary," said she; "and itwould not be right for me to intermeddle.  Young people are the bestjudges of their own affairs."The appealing hand was withdrawn; the girl retired to the saloon, andsate down alone.But here, on deck, an eager council of war was being held; and AngusSutherland was as busy as any one with the extended chartthe soundingsbarely visible in the waning lightand proposals and counter proposalswere being freely bandied about.  Night was coming on; dirty-lookingweather seemed to be coming up from the south; and the mouth of WestLoch Tarbert is narrow and shallow in parts, and studded with rocksanasty place to enter in the dark.  Moreover, when should we get there,beating against this south-easterly wind? What if we were to put herhead round, and run for some improvised harbour among the small islandsunder the shadow of the Jura hills, and wait there for daylight to showus across the Sound?There was but one dissentient.  Angus Sutherland seemed oddly anxious toget to West Loch Tarbert.  He would himself take the helm all night; ifonly the men would take their turn at the look-out, one at a time. Hewas sure he could make the channel, if we reached the mouth of the lochbefore daylight. What! with nothing shallower on the chart than fourfathoms!  How could there be any danger?But the more prudent counsels of John of Skye at length prevail, andthere is a call to the men forward to stand by.  Then down goes thehelm; her head slews round with a rattling of blocks and cordage; thesheets of the head-sails are belayed to leeward; and then, with the boomaway over the starboard davits, we are running free before thisfreshening breeze.But the night is dark as we cautiously creep in under the vast shadowsof the Jura hills. Fortunately in here the wind is light; the WhiteDove seems to feel her way through the gloom.  All eyes are on thelook-out; and there is a general shout as we nearly run on a buoy set tomark a sunken ship.  But we glide by in safety; and in due course oftime the roar of the anchor chain tells us that we are snug for thenight."But where is Miss Mary?" says the Laird, in the cheerfully-lit saloon.He looks around him in an uncomfortable and unsettled way. The saloon isnot the saloon when Mary Avon is out of it; here is her chair next tohis as usual, but it is vacant.  How are we to spend the last happy hourof chatting and joking without the pleased, bright face, and the timid,gentle, shy, dark eyes?"Mary has gone to her cabin," says her hostess.  "I suppose she has aheadache."She supposes the girl has a headache, and has not asked!  And can it bereally Mary Avon that she is speaking of in that cold, hurt, offendedway?*CHAPTER III.**IN THE DARK.*And then the next morning the Laird is infinitely distressed."What! not better yet?" he says.  "Dear me!  I wish I could be a womanfor a while, to take some tea in to her, and read to her, and coax herinto better spirits.  What a bad headache it must be!"But this generous sympathy on the part of one who is little more than anacquaintance touches the heart of Mary Avon's particular friend.  Shereproaches herself for her cruelty. She not only gets the tea and takesit into the cabin, but she adopts a domineering tone, and declares thatuntil the young lady begins her breakfast she will not leave the place.And then she looks at the timid, worn face; and her hand is placedgently on the hand of her friend, and she says in a lower voice"Mary, don't think I am angry.  I am only a little bit disappointed.But I don't blame youyou could not help it.  It is a pity; that isall."The girl's face remains rather sad; but she is quite self-possessed."You will let me go away," she says, looking down, "when we get to someharbour?""There is no need," says her friend, regarding her.  "Angus will leaveus to-day, as soon as we get across to Cantyre.""Oh!" she said, quickly, and looking tip with a brief appeal in hereyes.  "I hope not! Why should he go away?  I must go; I would rathergo.""Oh, no, Mary!" her friend said.  "If there is any 'must' in the matter,it is on his side; for you know his time is very valuable, and you musthave guessed why he has already far exceeded what he proposed to himselfas his holiday.  No, no, Mary; let us forget what has happened as soonas we can, and make the best of the rest of our sailing.  The Lairdwould have a fit if you seriously threatened to go.  And I am sure youare not to blame."So she kissed her on the cheek, by way of reconciliation, and left.  Andshe told the Laird that Mary had been dutiful, and had taken somebreakfast, and would be up on deck in course of time.Meanwhile, those who had gone on deck had found the White Dove lyingin a dead calm, some three miles away from her anchorage of the previousnight; her sails hanging limp; a scorching sun on the white decks, and aglare of light coming from the blue sky and the glassy blue sea."Well, Angus," says his hostess, very merrilyfor she does not wish tolet the others guess the reason of his sudden departure; "you see theweather does not approve of your leaving us.  What has become of yourthunderstorm?  Where is the gale from the south, John?""I was never seeing the like of this weather, mem," said the beardedskipper.  Then he added, anxiously, "And is Dr. Sutherland himself goingaway from the yat?""He would like to," she says; "but how is he ever to see land again ifyou banish the wind so?""But it will no be like this long!" says Captain John, eagerlyfor heappears to think that Dr. Sutherland has got tired of the fine weather."Oh, no, mem!  I will answer for it.  If Dr. Sutherland will waitanother day, or two days, I am sure there will be plenty of wind.  Andwe can lie in West Loch Tarbert for one day, or two days""And starve?" she says, abruptly.But now it appears that one or two of the men have heard of a mysteriousvillage lying somewhere inland from the mouth of the loch; and from acomparison of these vague rumours we gather that we may not be so farfromcivilisation after all.  Perhaps we may once again behold loaf-bread.Visions of cutlets, fowls, grouse, and hares arise.  We shall once morehear some echo of the distant world if perchance there be in the place aworn and ancient newspaper."Ay," said the Laird, hastily.  "I would like to see a Glasgownewspaper!  I'm thinking they must have got the steam fire-engine bynow; and fine games the bairns will have when they begin to practisewith it, skelping about in the water.  It would be a grand thing to tryit in the public garden when we get it; it would keep the shrubs and theborders fine and weteh?""And it would be quite as interesting as any plaster fountain," says hishostess, encouragingly."As handsome every bit," says the Laird, laughing heartily at his playof imagination, "as any bit laddie done up in stucco, standing on oneleg, and holding up a pipe!  It's a utilitarian age, ma'ama utilitarianage; we will have instead of a fountain a steam fire-enginevery good!very good!and they bodies who are always crying out against expenditureon decoration will be disappointed for once."The Laird had at last discovered the whereabouts of the mysteriousvillage on the Admiralty chart."But what newspaper will we get in a place hidden away like that?out ofthe reach of all communication wi' the world.  They'll be a centurybehind, mark my words.  It is when ye live within a reasonable distanceof a great centre of ceevilisation, like Glasgow, that ye feel the lifeof it stirring your own place too; and ye must keep up with the times;ye must be moving.  Conservative as I am, there is no supersteetiousobstinacy about me; movingmovingthat's the word.  The more importantthe matter in the interest of the public, the more necessary is it thatwe should have an impartial mind.  If ye show me a new sort of asphalte,do ye think I would not examine it, jist because I recommended Jamiesonand MacGregor's patent?"He appealed boldly to his hostess."Oh, certainly; certainly you would!" she says, with an earnestness thatmight have made Jamieson and MacGregor quail."For three weeks," says the Laird, solemnly, "I was on that committee,until it seemed that my breakfast, and my dinner, and my supper everyday was nothing but tar-smoke.  What wi' the experiments without andwithin, I was just filled with tar-smoke.  And would ye believe it,ma'am, one o' they Radical newspapers went as far as to say there weresecret influences at work when Jamieson and MacGregor was decided on.My friends said, 'Prosecute the man for libel;' but I said, 'No; let thepoor crayture alone; he has got to earn his living!'"That was very wise of you, sir," says his hostess."Bless me!  If a man in public life were to heed everything that's saidabout him," observes the Laird, with a fine air of unconcern, "whatwould become of his time?  No, no; that is not the principle on which apublic man should found his life.  Do your best for yourfellow-creatures, and let the squabblers say what they like.  As ah say,the poor wretches have to earn their living."Here Mary Avon appeared, somewhat pale and tired-looking; and the Lairdinstantly went to condole with her, and to get her a deck chair, andwhat not.  At the same moment, too, our young Doctor came alongperhapswith a brave desire to put an end to her embarrassment at onceand shookhands with her, and said "Good morning; I hope your headache is better."Her hand was trembling as it fell away from his; and her " Yes, thankyou," was almost inaudible.  Then she sate down, and the Laird resumedhis discourse."I was once taken," said he, "by a fellow commissioner of mine to a sortof singing place, or music hall, in Glasgow.""What?""They wanted to have some such place in Strathgovan," continued theLaird, paying no heed; "and I was asked to go and see what sort ofentertainment was provided in such places.  It was a sorrowful sight,ma'ama sorrowful sight; the wretched craytures on the stage laughing attheir own songs, and the people not laughing at all, but given over totobacco smoking, and whisky, and talking amongst themselves.  No glintof humourstupid, senseless stuff.  But there was one young man sung asong that had a better sound in itI cannot remember the wordsbut Isometimes think there was common sense in them: it was about mindingyour own business, and doing your own work, and letting fools say orthink of ye what they please.  Aye, I think there was something in thatyoung man; though I doubt, by the look of his eyes, but he was adrinker."He turned to Mary Avon, who had been content to be a mute and unobservedlistener."Well, Miss Mary," said he, brightly, "and the headache is going?  Andare ye looking forward to getting letters and newspapers when we getback to the world?  There is a post-office at that village of Clachan,John?""Oh, aye, sir!" said John; "there will be a post-office."The Laird looked up at him reproachfully."But why cannot ye learn the English pronunciation, man?  What's thenecessity for ye to say posht offus?  Cannot ye pronounce the plainEnglishpost oafficc?""I am not very good at the English, sir," said Captain John, with agrin."Ye'll never learn younger."Then he went to Mary Avon, and suggested that a walk up and down thedeck might do her headache good; and when she rose he put her hand onhis arm."Now," said he, as they started off, "I do not like headaches in youngpeople; they are not natural.  And ye may think I am very inqueesitive;but it is the privilege of old men to be talkative and inqueesitiveandI am going to ask you a question."There was certainly no effort at keeping a secret on the part of theLaird; every one might have heard these two talking as they quietlywalked up and down."I am going to ask ye, plump and plain, if ye are not anxious aboutgoing to London, and worrying yourself about the selling of yourpictures?  There now; answer me that.""Not very much, sir," she says, in a low voice."Listen to me," he said, speaking in a remarkably emphatic way.  "Ifthat is on your mind, dismiss it.  I tell you what: I will undertake, onmy own responsibeelity, that every painting in oil, and every sketch inoil, and every water-colour drawing, and every sketch in water-colourthat ye have on board this yacht, will be sold within one fortnight ofyour leaving the yacht.  Do ye understand that?""You are very kind, sir.""I am not bletherin'," said he; "no man ever knew me draw back from myword.  So put that anxiety away from your mind altogether, and let ushave no more troubles.  I could sellI could sell four times as many forye in a fortnight!  Bless ye, lassie, ye do not know the people in theWest of Scotland yetye'll know them better by and by.  If there's onethino- thev understand better than another it is a good picture; andthey are ready to put their hand in their pocket.  Oh! they Edinburghbodies are very fine creeticsthey have what they believe to be anelegant society in Edinburghand they talk a great deal about pictures;but do they put their hand in their pocket?  Ask Tom Galbraith. Ask himwhere he sets three-fourths of his income.  He lives in Edinburgh; buthe gets his income from the West of Scotland.  Tom's a wise lad.  Heknows how to feather his nest.  And when he has become independent ofthe picture-dealers, then he'll go to London, and fight the men there ontheir own ground.""I should like to see some of Mr. Galbraith s work," she said, "before Ireturn to England.""You will have plenty of leisure to look at them by and by," replied theLaird, quite simply.  "I have some of Tom's very best things atDenny-mains."It was not until the cool of the afternoon that a light breeze sprung upto fill the sails of the White Dove, and press her gently on towardsthe coast of Cantyre.  By this time every one on board knew that AngusSutherland was leaving, and leaving for good."I hope ye will come and see me at Denny-mains, Dr. Sutherland," saidthe Laird, good-naturedly, "when ye happen to be in Scotland. I have aneighbour there ye would be glad to meeta man who could talk to ye onyour own subjectsMr. Stoney."Our Doctor paid but little heed.  He was silent, and distraught.  Hiseyes had an absent and heavy look in them."A most distinguished man," the Laird continued.  "I am told hisreputation in England is just as great as it is in this country.  A verydistinguished man indeed. He read a paper before the British Associationnot many years ago.""About what, do you remember?" said the other, at last."H'm!" said the Laird, apparently puzzling his memory.  "Ye see, a manin my poseetion has so much to do with the practical business of life,that perhaps he does not pay just attention to the speculations ofothers.  But Mr. Stoney is a remarkable man; I am astonished ye shouldhave forgotten what the paper was about.  A most able man, and a fine,logical mind; it is just beautiful to hear him point out the closefitness between the charges in the major proposeetion in the Semplecase, and the averments and extracts in the minor.  Ye would be greatlydelighted and instructed by him, Doctor.  And there's another thing."Here the Laird looked slyly at Mary Avon."There's a young leddy here who has a secret of mine; and I'm thinkingshe has not said much about it.  But I will make a public confessionnow: it has been on my mind for some time back that I might buy a screwyacht."The Laird looked triumphantly around; he had forgotten that it was avery open secret."And wouldn't it be a strange thing if this very party, just as we aresitting now, were to be up at this very spot next year, on board thatyacht?wouldn't that be a strange thing?""It would be a jolly pleasant thing," said the Youth."You are very kind to include me in the invitation," said AngusSutherland; "but I doubt whether I shall ever be in Scotland again.  Myfather is a very old man now; that is the only thing that would call menorth. But I think I could q-et on better with my own work by goingabroad for some years to Naples, probably.  I have to go to Italy beforelong, any way."He spoke in a matter-of-fact way; we did not doubt that he might pursuehis researches better in Naples.It was in the dusk of the evening that we slowly sailed into West LochTarbertpast a series of rocks and islands on which, as we were given tounderstand, seals were more abundant than limpets.  But whereas the lasthaunt of the seals we had visited had introduced us to a solitary anddesolate loch, with sterile shores and lonely ruins, this loch, so faras we could see, was a cheerful and in- habited place, with one or twohouses shining palely white amid the dark woods.  And when v/e had cometo anchor, and sent ashore, although there were no provisions to be got,the men returned with all the necessary information for AngusSutherland.  By getting up very early next morning, and walking acertain distance, he would catch a certain coach, which would take himon to Tarbert on Loch Fyne in time to catch the steamer. And so thatnicrht, before we turned in to our respective cabins, the Doctor bade usall formally good-bye; and Mary Avon among the rest.  No one could havenoticed the least difference in his manner.But in the middle of the night, in the ladies' cabin, a sound of stifledsobbing.  And the other woman goes over to the berth of her companion,and bends her head down, and whispers"Mary, why are you crying?  Tell me!"She cannot speak for a time; her whole frame is shaken with thebitter-sobs.  And then she says, in a low, trembling, broken voice"He has not forgiven me.  I saw it in his face."*CHAPTER IV.**TO ABSENT FRIENDS!*Next morning, however, every one perceived an extraordinary change inthe appearance and manner of the girl.  Mary Avon had come back to usagain, with all the light and life of her face, and the contentedgentleness of the soft black eyes. What had wrought the transformation?Certain confidential assurances in the silence of the night that AngusSutherland, so far from not forgiving her, had insisted that she was notto blame at all.  Or the natural reaction after a long strain ofanxiety?  Or merely the welcome fresh breeze of the morning, with thecheerful, wooded shores, and the white houses shining in the sunlight?Any how there was quite a new expression in her face; and we heard thelow, sweet laugh again.  It is true that, once or twice, as she walkedup and down the deck with the Laird, her eyes grew pensive as she lookedaway along the hills on the southern shores of the loch.  That was thedirection in which Angus had left in the morning.  And these hills weresomewhat overcast; it seemed to be raining inland.Moreover, there was something else to make our breakfast party a gladone.  The two men who had rowed our young Doctor across the loch atbreak of day had had the curiosity to pierce inland as far as thevillage of Clachan; and the scouts had brought back the most glowingaccounts of the Promised Land which they had discovered.  They hadpenetrated a fertile and deeply-wooded valley; and they had at lengthcome upon a centre of the highest civilisation.  There was apost-office. There was a telegraph-office.  There was a church, theclock of which struck the hours."Just fancy that!" exclaimed our hostess. "A clock that strikes thehours!and a telegraph-office!  We might send a telegram to ask whetherthe country has been invaded anywhere, or whether the Prime Minister hascommitted suicide.""I would like to hear about the steam fire-engine," said the Lairdalmost to himself."However, breeze or no breeze, seals or no seals," she says, withdecision, "we must stay over a day here, to have the yacht thoroughlyprovisioned.  We cannot go on skating on the edge of tinned meats.  Wemust have a plentiful supply of fresh vegetables, and fresh milk, andeggs and butter; and then two or three joints are always soserviceablecold, I mean, for luncheon; and if Fred cannot get any game,at least he must get us some fowls. What do you say, Mary?  Shall wewalk over to this place, and clear the way for Fred?""Oh, no!" says the other, lightly; "you and I are going with the sealshooters.  They never get near anything; so we cannot be in the way.  Iassure you, sir, we shall be as quiet as mice," she adds, addressing theLaird."Ye will come with us, and ye will speak just as much as ye please,"said the Laird, dogmatically.  "What signifies a seal?  The crayture isgood for nothing!  And the idea of you two going away by yourselves intothe country!  Nono; come away and get ready, Howard.  If ye cannotshoot a seal with the two leddies in the boat, ye will never do itwithout.  And the sea breezes, Miss Mary," he added, with an approvingair, "are better for ye than the land breezes.  Oh, aye; ye are lookingjust fine this morning."A short time thereafter he was on deck, looking around him at thepleasant trees and the blue waters, when Miss Avon joined him, fullyequipped for the expedition; and just at this moment they began to heara sound of music in the stillness of the morning air. And then theyperceived a rude old rowing-boat, pulled by a small boy of twelve or so,coming nearer and nearer; while another small boy of about the same agewas peacefully reclining in the stern, his head thrown back so that itmet the full glare of the morning sun, while he played vigorously butrather inaccurately "The Campbells are coming" on a tin whistle."Look at that!" said the Laird with delight; "is not that perfecthappiness?  Look at his pride and lazinesshaving another boy to pullhim about, while he shows off on the penny whistle.  Dear me, I wish Iwas that young rascal!""He seems happy enough," she said, with a sigh."That is because he does not know it," remarked the Laird, profoundly."If you proved to him that he was happy, it would immediately vanish.""You cannot be consciously happy; but you may be consciouslyunhappythat is rather hard," said she, absently.However, these two philosophers were withdrawn from this occult point bya summons from the Youth, who had already got the rifles and cartridgesinto the bow of the gig.  And, indeed, as we rowed away from the yacht,in the direction of the rocks at the mouth of the loch, Miss Avon seemeddetermined to prove that, consciously or unconsciously, she was happyenough.  She would not even allow that Angus Sutherland could have feltany pang of regret at leaving the White Dove and his friends."Poor chap!" said the Laird, with some compassion, as he turned his headand looked away towards those gloomy hills; "it must have been alonesome journey for him this morning.  And he so fond of sailing too;I'm thinking when he saw what a nice breeze there was, he was rathersorry to go away. I should not wonder if it was wi' a heavy heart thathe went on board the steamer.""Oh, no, sir! why should you think that?" said Mary Avon, quickly andanxiously.  "If Dr. Sutherland had nothing to consider but yachting, hemight have been sorry to go away.  But think what lies before him; thinkwhat calls him!  Look at the position he has won for himself already,and what is expected of him! and you would have him throw away hissplendid opportunities in yachting?  There is not a University in Europewhere he is not known; there is not a man of science in Europe who doesnot expect great things of him; andandhow proud his father must be ofhim!"She spoke eagerly and almost breathlessly; there was a pink flush in hercheek, but it was not from shamefacedness.  She seemed desperatelyanxious to convince the Laird that our Doctor ought to have left theyacht, and must have left the yacht, and could not do anything else butleave the yacht.  Meanwhile, her friend and hostess regarded hercuriously."A man with such capacities as he has," continued the girl, warmly,"with such a great future before him, owes it to himself that he shouldnot give way to mere sentiment.  The world could not get on at all ifpeopleI mean if the great people, from whom we expect muchwere alwaysto be consulting their feelings.  Perhaps he was sorry to leave theyacht.  He does like sailing; andand I think he liked to be amongfriends.  But what is that when he knows there is work in the world forhim to do?  If he was sorry at leaving the yacht, you may depend on itthat that had passed away before he stepped on board the steamer.  Forwhat was that trifling sentiment compared with the consciousness that hehad acted rightly?"Something about the precision of these phrasesfor the girl but rarelygave way to such a fit of earnest talkingseemed to suggest to thesilent person who was watching her, that this was not the first time thegirl had thought of these things."Idle people," said this youthful controversialist, "can afford toindulge in sentiment; but not those who have to do great things in theworld.  And it is not as ifDr. Sutherland"she always faltered theleast bit just before pronouncing the name"were only working for hisown fame or his own wealth.  It is for the good of mankind that he isworking; and if he has to make this or that sacrifice, he knows that heis doing right.  What other reward does a man need to have?""I am thinking of the poor old man in Banffshire," said her friend toher, thoughtfully. "If Angus goes away to Italy for some years, they maynot see each other again."At this the girl turned strangely pale, and remained silent; but she wasunnoticed, for at this moment all attention was attracted towards theseals.There they were, no doubt, and in large numbers.  We could see theoccasionally moving forms, scarcely distinguishable from the brownsea-weed, on the long projecting points of the low rocks; while here andthere one of the animals could be made out, poising himself in asemi-circlehead and tail in the airlike a letter O with the upperfour-fifths cut off.  But the problem was, how to get anywhere withinshot.  The rocks, or small islands, had no doubt certain eminences inthe middle; but they were low and shallow all round.  Obviously it wasno use bearing straight down on them from our present position; so itwas resolved to give them a wide berth, to pull away from the islandsaltogether, and then approach them from the south, if haply there mightin this wise be some possibility of shelter.  It was observed that QueenTitania, during these whispered and eager consultations, smiled gravelyand was silent.  She had been in the Highlands before.Seals are foolish animals.  We were half a mile away from them; and wewere going still farther away.  The rocking of the water made itimpossible for us to try a haphazard shot even if we had had a riflethat would have carried anything like 800 yards with precision. Therewas not the least reason for their being alarmed.  But all the same, aswe silently and slowly paddled away from themactually away fromthemthe huge bodies one by one flopped and waddled and dropped into thewater with a splash.  In about a minute or so there was not a sealvisible through our best binoculars.  And Queen Titania calmly smiled.But, as everybody knows, there are two sides to an island, as toeverything else.  So we boldly bore down on the shores nearest us, andresolved, on getting close, on a cautious and silent landing.  Aftermany a trial we found a creek where the stern of the gig could be backedinto fairly deep water, along a ledge of rock, and then two of us gotout. The ladies produced their knitting materials.With much painful stooping and crawling, we at length reached the middleridge, and there laid down our rifles to have a preliminary peep round.That stealthy glance revealed the fact that, on the other side also, theseals had been alarmed and had left the rocks; but still they were notfar away.  We could see here and there a black and glistening headmoving among the lapping waters.  Of course it would have been madnessto have risked our all on a random shot at sea.  Hit or miss, thechances were about equal we should not get the seal; so we quietlyretired again behind the ridge, and sate down.  We could see the gig andits occupants.  It seemed to one of us at least that Queen Titania wasstill amused.A dead silence: while we idly regard the washed-up stores of sea-shellsaround us, and patiently await the return of the seals to the rocks.Then a sudden noise that makes one's heart jump: a couple of terns havediscovered us, and the irate birds go wheeling and shrieking overheadwith screams that would have aroused the Sleeping Beauty and all herhousehold.  In their fright and wrath they come nearer and nearer; attimes they remain motionless overhead; but ever continues the shrill andpiercing shriek.  The face of the Youth is awful to see.  Again andagain he puts up his rifle; and there is no doubt that, if he were tofire, he might accomplish that feat which is more frequently heard of innovels than elsewhereshooting a bird on the wing with a rifle.  Butthen he is loth to throw away his last chance.  With a gesture ofdespair, he lowers his weapon, and glances towards the gig.  QueenTitania has caught his eye, and he hers.  She is laughing.At length we venture to hazard everything. Furtively each rifle isprotruded over the ledge of rock; and furtively each head creeps up bythe stock, the hand on the trigger-guard.  The caution is unnecessary.There is not a sign of any living thing all around the shores.  Even thetwo sea-swallows, alarmed by our moving, have wheeled away into thedistance; we are left in undisturbed possession of the island. Then theYouth clambers up to the top of the rocks and looks around.  A skart,perched on a far ledge, immediately takes flightstriking the water withhis heavy wings before he can get well on his way: thereafter a deadsilence."It was the tern that did that," says the Youth, moodily, as we returnto the gig.  "The seals must have known well enough.""They generally do contrive to know somehow," is the answer of one whois not much disappointed, and who is still less surprised.But this wicked woman all a-laughing, when we return to the gig!"Come, children," says she, "we shall barely be back in time for lunch;and we shall be all the longer that Angus is not here to sing his 'Ho,ro, clansmen!'  But the quicker the sooner, as the Highlandman said.Jump in!""It was all owing to those sea-swallows," remarks the Youth, gloomily."Never mind," says she, with great equanimity.  "Mary and I knew youwould not shoot anything, or we should not have come. Let us hasten backto see what Fred has shot for us, with his silver sixpences."And so we tumble into the gig; and push away, and have a long swingingpull back to the White Dove.There is still some measure of justice meted out upon the earth.  Theface of this fiend who has been laughing at us all the morning becomes atrifle more anxious when she draws near the yacht.  For there is MasterFred idling up at the bow, instead of being below looking after the vaststores he has got on board; and moreover as we draw near, and as hecomes along to the gangway, any one can perceive that our good Frederickd'or is not in a facetious frame of mind."Well, Fred, have you got a good supply at last?" she cries, taking holdof the rope, and putting her foot on the step.Fred mumbles something in reply."What have you got?" she says, when she is on deck.  "Any game?""No, mem.""Oh, never mind; the fowls will do very well."Fred is rather silent, until he explains that he could not get anyfowls."No fowls?  What butcher's meat, then?" says she, somewhat indignantly."None?  Nothing?" says she; and a low titter begins to prevail among theassembled crowd.  "Have you not got a joint of any sort?"Fred is almost unwilling to confesshe is ashamed, angry, disconcerted.At last he blurts out"I could get nothing at all, mem, but fower loaves."At this there was a roar of laughter.  What had become of all her freshmilk, and butter, and eggs; her mutton, and fowls, and cutlets; hergrouse, and snipe, and hares?  We did not care for our privation; weonly rejoiced in her discomfiture."That is just like a Scotch village," says she, savagely; "spending allits money on a church bell, and not able to keep a decent shop open!  Doyou mean to say you could not get a carrot, or a cabbage, or apennyworth of milk?""No, mem.""John," she says, in a domineering way, "why don't you get the sailsup?  What is the use of staying in a place like this?"John comes forward timidly, and stroking his great beard: he halfbelieves in these furious rages of hers."Oh, yes, mem, if ye please, mem, I will get the sail setbutbut thetide will be turning soon, mem, and the wind, she will be against us assoon as we get out of the loch; and it will be a long, long time beforewe get to Crinan.  I not well aquent with this place, mem: if we were upin our own part of the Highlands, do you think the people would let theWhite Dove be so long without the fresh cabbage and the milk?  No; Inot think that, mem.""But we are not in our own part of the Highlands," says she,querulously; "and do you think we are going to starve?  However, Isuppose Fred can give us a biscuit.  Let us go below."Our lunch was, in truth, simple enough; but perhaps it was this indirectappeal to Fred that determined that worthy to surprise us at dinner thatevening.  First of all, after we had returned from another ineffectualseal-hunt, we found he had decorated the dinner-table in an elaboratemanner.  There was a clean cloth, shining with the starch in it.  Therewas a great dish of scarlet rowans in the middle of the table; and therowans had a border of white heatherfathered at Loch-na-Chill: therowans were for lovely colour, the heather was for luck.  Then, notcontent with that, he had put all our available silver on the table,including the candlesticks and the snuffer-tray, though the sun had notyet sunk behind the Jura hills.  But the banquet defies description. Thevast basin of steaming kidney soup, the boiled lithe, the friedmackerel, the round of tongue, the corned beef, the tomatoes, thepickles, the sardines, the convolutions of pudding and apricot jam: whatFishmonger or Drysalter or Gunmaker could have wanted more?  Nor wasthere any Apemantus at the feast; there was the smiling and benigncountenance of the Laird, who again and again made facetious remarksabout the kirk bell of Clachan.  Then he said more formally"Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to ask ye to drink a toast.""Oh, uncle!" said the Youth deprecatingly; "we are not at acommissioners' meeting at Strathgovan.""And I will thank ye to fill your glasses," said the Laird, taking noheed of Young England and his modern want of manners.  "I have to askye, ladies and gentlemen, to drink the health of one who is an old andvalued friend of some of us, who is admired and respected by us all.  Itwould ill become us, now that he has been separated from us but by aday, that we should forget him in his absence. We have come in closecontact with him; we have seen his fine qualities of temper andcharacter; and I am sure no one present will contradict me when I saythat, great as are his abeelities, they are not more remarkable than hismodesty, and his good humour, and his simple, plain, frank ways.  With aman of less solid judgment, I might be afraid of certain dangeroustendencies of these times; but our friend has a Scotch head on hisshoulders; he may be dazzled by their newfangled speculations, but notconvincednot convinced.  It is a rare thingI will say it, though I ambut a recent acquaintance, and do not know him as well as some now atthis hospitable boardto find such powers of intellect united with sucha quiet and unassuming manliness.  Ladies and gentlemen, I give ye thehealth of Dr. Angus Sutherland.  We regret that he has gone from us; butwe know that duty calls, and we honour the man who stands to his guns.It may be that we may see him in these waters once more; it may be thatwe may not; but whatever may be in store for him or for us, we know hewill be worthy of the hopes we build on him, and we drink his health nowin his absence, and wish him God-speed!""Hear! hear!" cried the Youth, who was greatly amused by this burst ofold-fashioned eloquence.  But Mary Avon sate white and trembling, andquite forgot to put the glass to her lips.  It was her hostess who spokenext, with a laugh."I think, sir," said she, "I might give you a hint.  If you were to goup on deck and ask the men whether they would like to drink Angus'shealth, I don't think they would refuse.""It is a most capital suggestion," said the Laird, rising to take downhis wideawake.*CHAPTER V.**SUSPICIONS.*It was handsomely done on the part of the Laird to pay that tribute tohis vanquished and departed enemy.  But next morning, as we were gettingunder weigh, he got a chance of speaking to his hostess alone; and hecould not quite forego a little bit of boasting over his superiorastuteness and prescience."What did I say, ma'am," he asked, with a confident chuckle, "when yemade a communication to me on the subject of our friend who has justleft us?  Did I not offer to make ye a wager, though I am but little ofa gambler?  A gold ring, a sixpence, and a silver thimble: did I notoffer to wager ye these three articles that your guesses were not quitecorrect?  And what has become of Dr. Sutherland now?"His hostess is not in this gay humour.  She answers with a touch ofreserve"If I made any mistake, it was about Mary. And I had no right to suspectanything, for she never took me into her confidence; and I do notapprove of elderly people prying into the affairs of young people.""Pry?" says the Laird, loftily and graciously.  "No, no; no prying.  Butjudgment?is there any harm in one keeping one's eyes open?  And did notI tell ye, ma'am, to be of good heartthat everything would go properlyand smoothly?""And has it?" she says, sharply, and looking up with a glance ofindignation.The Laird, however, is so wrapped up in his own thoughts that he doesnot notice this protest."She is a fine lass, that," he says, with decision.  "Did ye ever hear ayoung girl speak such clear common sense as she spoke yesterday, aboutthat very Doctor?  There is no affected sentimentthere is nothing ofyour Clarinda and Philander noavel-writingabout that lass: did ye everhear such good, sound, clear common sense?""I heard her," says his hostess, shortly.By this time we had weighed anchor, and the White Dove was slowlysailing down the loch, before a light northerly breeze.  Then Mary Avoncame on deck, followed by the attentive Youth.  And while everybody onboard was eagerly noticing things aheadthe seals on the rocks at themouth of the loch, the windy grey sea beyond, and the blue mountains ofJuraMary Avon alone looked backward, to the low lines of hills we wereleaving.  She sate silent and apart.The Laird stepped over to her."We have just been talking about the Doctor," says he, cheerfully.  "Andwe were saying there was plenty of good common sense in what ye saidyesterday about his duties and his prospects.  Oh, ay!  But then ye ken,Miss Mary, even the busiest and the wisest of men must have theirholiday at times; and I have just been thinking that, if we can get Dr.Sutherland to come with us next year, we will, maybe, surprise him bywhat ye can do wi' a steam yacht.  Why, during the time we have beenlying here, we might have run across to Ireland and back in a steamyacht!  It is true there would be less enjoyment for him in the sailing;but still there are compensations."His hostess has overheard all this.  She says, in her gentle way, butwith a cold and cruel clearness"You know, sir, that is quite impossible. Angus will not be in Scotlandfor many a day to come."The girl's face is hidden; apparently she is still gazing back on thoseslowly receding hills."Toots! toots!" says the Laird, briskly. "The lad is not a fool.  Hewill make an occasion if he considers it desirable: there is nocompulsion that he must remain in Eetaly.  I think I would even lay awager that we will have just the same party, and the Doctor included, onthat steam yacht next year, and in this very place: is it a wager,ma'am?""I am afraid you must leave us out," she remarks, "at all events.  Andas for Angus Sutherland, I shall be surprised if ever he sees West LochTarbert again."Why had not Mary Avon spoken?  The Laird went a step nearer her, and puthis hand gently on her shoulder."Well, Miss Mary," said he; "what are we to do to show these peopletheir lolly and wickednesseh?  I think I will leave it to you.""Oh, no, sir!"  This, or something like this, she was understood to say,in a low voice; but at the same moment she rose quickly, crossed thedeck, put a trembling hand on the companion way, and went below. Just asshe disappeared, she could not quite conceal her face; and there was alook on it that startled the Laird.  Had the girl been stealthily cryingall the time she had been looking back at those distant hills?The Laird was greatly disturbed.  He said nothing, for he would not haveit understood that anything had happened; but any one could see by hispreoccupied manner that he was seriously troubled.  He had directed aquick, sharp glance of surprise and inquiry at his hostess; but justthen she was stepping aside to get out of the way of Captain John. TheLaird sate down by himself, and remained in a profound silence.  Heseemed to pay no attention to what was going on.But there was brisk work enough all over the yacht.  For now we had gotclear of the long promontory and its islands; and out here in the openthere was a pretty heavy sea running, while the wind began to freshen upa bit.  There was a squally look about the sea and sky; it wasconsidered prudent to lower the topsail.  Now and again there was aheavy shock at the bows, and then a dipping of heads to dodge the flyingshreds of spray. In the midst of all this Miss Avon appeared again."I thought we should catch it," said she, in the blithest of tones; andshe addressed herself particularly to the Laird.  "And it is better tobe prepared.  But, oh dear me! what a nuisance a waterproof is!"And indeed the wind was blowing that hooded and caped garment all abouther head, so that her dark hair was becoming considerably dishevelled.The Youth came to her assistance; put a cushion and a shawl for her justbeside her hostess, under the lee of the weather bulwarks; then shesnugly ensconced herself there, and seemed to be very merry and happyindeed."Don't you often wish you were a fish, when the weather is wet?" shesays, gaily, to her friend; "so that you might be perfectlyindifferent?"  And here she cries "Oh!" again, because a drop or two ofspray has come flying past the keel of the gig and just caught her onthe crown of her waterproof.Nothing can exceed her talk, her laughter, her cheerfulness.  Shenestles close to her friend; she is like a spoiled child; she makes funof the Youth's attempts to steer.  And the Laird is regarding her with agrave wonderperhaps with some dark suspicionwhen she lightly addressesherself to him again:"But what about that strong man, sir? You were going to tell us thestory yesterday, when you were interrupted."It was a cunning device.  How could a professed story-teller refuse torise to the bait?  The watchfulness disappeared from the face of theLaird: in its place a sort of anticipatory laughter began to shine."But it was Tom Galbraith heard of that man," said he, in a deprecatingway.  "Did I not tell ye?  Oh, ay! it was Tom Galbraith heard of himwhen he was in Rossshire; and it was he told me of the wonderful thingsthat man could do, according to the natives.  Did not I tell ye of hisrolling an enormous stone up a hill, and of the stone being split intonine pieces; yet not any one man could roll up one of the nine pieces?But I was going to tell ye of his being in Prince's Street, Edinburgh;and a coach and four was coming whirling along; the horses had run away,and no one could stop them. M'Kinlay was walking along the street, whenthe people called to him to look out, for the four horses were runningmad; but the Rossshire Samson was not afraid.  No, no"Here a wisp of spray somewhat disconcerted the Laird; but only for amoment.  He wiped the salt water from the side of his neck, andcontinued, with suppressed laughter bubbling up in his eyes."The man that told Tom Galbraith," said he, "was a solemn believer, andspoke with reverence.  'M'Kinlay,' says he, 'he will turn to the street,and he will grab at the four horses and the coach, and he will took themup in his two handsshist like a mice.'""Shist like a mice."  The Laird preserved a stern silence.  The humourof this story was so desperately occult that he would leave the coarseapplause to us.  Only there was an odd light in his eyes; and we knewthat it was all he could do to prevent his bursting out into a roar oflaughter.  But Mary Avon laugheduntil John of Skye, who had not heard aword, grinned out of pure sympathy."He must have been the man," said Miss Avon, diffidentlyfor she did notlike to encroach on the Laird's province"whom Captain John told meabout, who could drink whisky so strong that a drop of it would burn awhite mark on a tarred rope."But the Laird was not jealous."Very goodvery good!" he cried, with extreme delight.  "Excellentareal good one!  'Deed I'll tell that to Tom Galbraith!"And the high spirits and the facetiousness of these two childrencontinued through lunch. That was rather a wild meal, considering thatwe were still sawing across the boisterous Sound of Jura, in the teethof a fresh northerly breeze.  However, nothing could exceed the devotionof the Youth, who got scarcely any luncheon at all in his efforts tocontrol the antics of pickle jars and to bolster up bottles. Then wheneverything was secure, there would be an ominous call overhead, "Standby forrard, boys!" followed by a period of frantic revolution andpanic."Yes," continued the Laird, when we got on deck again; "a sense ofhumour is a great power in human affairs.  A man in public life withoutit is like a ship without a helm: he is sure to go and do somethingredeeclous that a smaller man would have avoided altogether.  Ay, myfather's sense of humour was often said by people to be quiteextraordinar'quite extraordinar'.  I make no pretensions that waymyself."Here the Laird waved his hand, as if to deprecate any courteous protest."No, no; I have no pretensions that way; but sometimes a bit joke comesin verra well when ye are dealing with solemn and pretentious asses.There is one man in Strathgovan"But here the Laird's contempt of this dull person could not find vent inwords.  He put up both hands, palm outwards, and shook them, andshrugged his shoulders."A most desperately stupid ass, and as loquacious as a parrot.  I mindfine when I was giving my earnest attention to the subject of our policesystem.  I may tell ye, ma'am, that our burgh stretches over about amile each way, and that it has a population of over 8,000 souls, with avast quantity of valuable property.  And up till that time we had buttwo policemen on duty at the same time during the night.  It was myopeenion that that number was quite inahdequate; and I stated myopeenion at a meeting of the commissioners convened for that purpose.Well, would ye believe it, this meddlesome body, Johnny Guthrie, got upon his legs and preached and preached away; and all that he had to tellus was that we could not add to the number of police without the consentof the Commissioners of Supply and the Home Secretary.  Bless me! whatbairn is there but knows that?  I'll be bound Miss Mary there, thoughshe comes from England, would know as much about public affairs asthat?""II am afraid not, sir," said she."No matterno matter.  Live and learn. When ye come to Strathgovan,we'll begin and teach ye.  However, as I was saying, this bletherin'poor crayture went on and on, and it was all about the one point, untilI got up and, 'Mr. Provost,' says I, 'there are some human beings itwould be idle to answer. Their loquacity is a sort of function; theyperspire through their tonguelike a doag.'  Ye should have seen JohnnyGuthrie's face after that!"And here the Laird laughed and laughed again at Johnny Guthrie'sdiscomfiture."But he is a poor bletherin' crayture," he continued, with a kind ofcompassion. "Providence made him what he is: but sometimes I thinkJohnny tries to make himself even more rideeklous than Providence couldfairly and honestly have intended.  He attacked me most bitterly becauseI got a committee appointed to represent to the Postmaster that weshould have a later delivery at night.  He attacked me most bitterly;and yet I think it was one of the greatest reforms ever introduced intoour Burgh.""Oh, indeed, sir?" says his hostess, with earnest attention."Yes, indeed.  The Postmaster is a most civil, worthy, and respectableman, though it was a sore blow to him when his daughter took to going tothe Episcopal Church in Glasgow. However, with his assistance we now getthe letters that used to be delivered in the forenoon delivered late thenight before; and we have a mail made up at 10 P.M., which is a greatconvenience.  And that man Johnny Guthrie gabbling away as if the FrenchRevolution were coming back on us!  I am a Conservative myself, as yeknow, ma'am; but I say that we must march with the times.  No standingstill in these days.  However, ye will get Johnny Guthries everywhere;poor bletherin' craytures who have no capacity for taking a large viewof public affairsbats and blindworms as it were: I suppose there is ause for them, as it has pleased Providence to create them; but it wouldpuzzle an ordinary person to find it out."With much of the like wise discourse did the Laird beguile our northwardvoyage; and apparently he had forgotten that little incident about MaryAvon in the morning.  The girl was as much interested as any one;laughed at the "good ones;" was ready to pour her contempt on the JohnnyGuthries who opposed the projects of the Laird's statesmanship. And inthis manner we fought our way against the stiff northerly breeze, untilevening found us off the mouth of Loch Crinan.  Here we proposed to runin for the night, so that we should have daylight and a favourable tideto enable us to pass through the Dorus Mor.It was a beautiful, quiet evening in this sheltered bay; and afterdinner we were all on deck, reading, smoking, and what not.  The Lairdand Mary Avon were playing chess together.  The glow of the sunset wasstill in the western sky, and reflected on the smooth water around us;though Jura and Scarba were of a dark, soft, luminous rose-purple.Chess is a silent game; the Laird was not surprised that his companiondid not speak to him.  And so absorbed was he with his knights andbishops that he did not notice that, in the absolute silence of thisstill evening, one of the men forward was idly whistling to himself thesad air of Lochaber.Lochaber no more!  And Lochaber no more!We'll maybe return to Lochaber no more!It was the old and familiar refrain: Hector of Moidart was probably notthinking of Lochaber at all.But suddenly the Laird, staring down at the board, perceived some littletiny thing drop on the farther edge from him; and he quickly looked up.The girl was crying.  Instantly he put out his great hand and took hers,and said, in a low voice, full of gentleness and a tender sympathy"Dear me, lassie, what is the matter?"But Mary Avon hastily pulled out her handkerchief, and passed it acrossher eyes, and said hurriedly"Oh, I beg your pardon! it is nothing: II was thinking of somethingelse.  And is it your move or mine, sir?"The Laird looked at her; but her eyes were cast down.  He did not pay somuch attention to the game after that.*CHAPTER VI.**CERTAINTY.*Next morning there is a lively commotion on board.  The squally,blustering-looking skies, the glimpses of the white horses out there onthe driven green sea, and the fresh northerly breeze that comes in gustsand swirls about the riggingall tell us that we shall have some hardwork before we pierce the Dorus Mor."You won't want for wind to-day, Captain John," says the Youth, who iswaiting to give the men a hand at the windlass."'Deed, no," says John of Skye, with a grim smile.  "This is the kind ofday that Dr. Sutherland would like, and the White Dove through theDorus Mor too!"However, the Laird seems to take no interest in what is going forward.All the morning he has been silent and preoccupied; occasionallyapproaching his hostess, but never getting an opportunity of speakingwith her alone.  At last, when he observes that every one is on deck,and eagerly watching the White Dove getting under weigh, he covertlyand quietly touches our Admiral on the arm."I would speak to ye below for a moment, ma'am," he says, in a whisper.And so, unnoticed amid all this bustle, she follows him down into thesaloon, wondering not a little.  And as soon as he has shut the door, heplunges in medias res."I beg your pardon, ma'am; but I must speak to ye.  It is about yourfriend, Miss Mary: have ye not observed that she is sorely troubledabout somethingthough she puts a brave face on it and will notacknowledge it? Have ye not seen ithave ye not guessed that she isgrievously troubled about some matter or other?""I have guessed it," said the other."Poor lass! poor lass!" said the Laird; and then he added, thoughtfully,"It is no small matter that can affect so light-hearted a creature: thatis what I want to ask ye.  Do ye know?  Have ye guessed?  Surely it issomething that some of us can help her wi'.  Indeed, it just distressesme beyond measure to see that trouble in her face; and when I see hertry to conceal itand to make believe that everything is well with herIfeel as if there was nothing I would not do for the poor lass.""But I don't think either you or I can help. Young people must managetheir affairs for themselves," says his hostess, somewhat coldly."But what is it?what is it?  What is troubling her?"Queen Titania regards him for a moment, apparently uncertain as to howfar she should go.  At last she says"Well; I am not revealing any confidence of Mary's; for she has told menothing about it. But I may as well say at once that when we were inWest Loch Tarbert, Dr. Sutherland asked her to be his wife; and sherefused him. And now I suppose she is breaking her heart about it.""Dear me! dear me!" says the Laird, with eyes opened wide."It is always the way with girls," says the other, with a cruelcynicism.  "Whether they say 'Yes' or 'No' they are sure to cry over it.And naturally; for whether they say 'Yes' or 'No,' they are sure to havemade an irretrievable blunder."The Laird is slowly recovering from his first shock of surprise."But if she did refuse him, surely that is what any one would haveexpected?  There is nothing singular in that.""Pardon me; I think there is something very singular," she says, warmly."I don't see how any one could have been with these two up in the north,and not perceived that there was an understanding between them.  If anygirl ever encouraged a man, she did.  Why, sir, when you proposed thatyour nephew should come with us, and make love to Mary, I said 'Yes'because I thought it would be merely a joke!  I thought he would pleaseyou by consenting, and not harm anybody else.  But now it has turned outquite different; and Angus Sutherland has gone away."And at this there was a return of the proud and hurt look into her eyes:Angus was her friend; she had not expected this idle boy would havesupplanted him.The Laird was greatly disturbed.  The beautiful picture that he had beenpainting for himself during this summer idleness of oursfilling in thedetails with a lingering and loving careseemed to fade away intoimpalpable mist; and he was confronted by blank chaos.  And this, too,just at the moment when the departure of the Doctor appeared to renderall his plans doubly secure.He rose."I will think over it, ma'am," he said, slowly. "I am obliged to ye foryour information: perhaps I was not as observant as I should have been."Then she sought to stay him for a moment."Don't you think, sir," said she, timidly, "it would be better forneither you nor me to interfere?"The Laird turned."I made a promise to the lass," said he, quite simply, "one night wewere in Loch Leven, and she and I were walking on the deck, that whenshe was in trouble I would try to help her; and I will not break mypromise through any fear of being called an intermeddler.  I will go tothe girl myselfwhen I have the opportunity; and if she prefers to keepher own counselif she thinks I am only an old Scotch fool who should beminding my own businessI will not grumble."And again he was going away, when again she detained him."I hope you do not think I spoke harshly of Mary," said she,penitentially.  "I own that I was a little disappointed.  And it seemedso certain.  But I am sure she has sufficient reason for whatever shehas doneand that she believes she is acting rightly""Of that there is no doubt," said he, promptly.  "The girl has just awonderful clear notion of doing what she ought to do; and nothing wouldmake her flinch."  Then he added, after a second, "But I will think overit; and then go to herself.  Perhaps she feels lonely, and does not knowthat there is a home awaiting her at Denny-mains."So both of them went on deck again; and found that the White Dove wasalready sailing away from the Trossachs-like shore of Loch Crinan, andgetting farther out into this squally green sea.  There were bursts ofsunlight flying across the rocks and the white-tipped waves; butordinarily the sky was overcast, masses of grey and silvery cloud comingswinging along from the north.Then the Laird showed himself discreet "before folk."  He would notappear to have any designs on Mary Avon's confidences.  He talked in aloud and confident fashion to John of Skye, about the weather, and theDorus Mor, and Corrievrechan.  Finally, he suggested, in a facetiousway, that as the younger men had occasionally had their turn at thehelm, he might have his now, for the first time."If ye please, sir," said Captain John, relinquishing the tiller to himwith a smile of thanks, and going forward to have a quiet pipe.But the Laird seemed a little bit confused by the rope which John hadconfided to him. In a light breeze, and with his hand on the tiller, hemight have done very well; but this looped rope, to which he had tocling so as to steady himself, seemed puzzling.  And almost at the sametime the White Dove began to creep up to the wind; and presently thesails showed an ominous quiver."Keep her full, sir!" called John of Skye, turning round.But instead of that the sails flapped more and more; there was arattling of blocks; two men came tumbling up from the forecastle,thinking the yacht was being put about."Shove your hand from ye, sir!" called out the skipper to the distressedsteersman; and this somewhat infantine direction soon put the vessel onher course again.In a few minutes thereafter John of Skye put his pipe in his waistcoatpocket."We'll let her about now, sir," he called to the Laird.The two men who happened to be on deck went to the jib-sheets; Johnhimself leisurely proceeding to stand by the weather fore-sheet. Then,as the Laird seemed still to await further orders, he called out"Helm hard down, sir, if ye please!"But this rope bothered the Laird.  He angrily untwisted it, let it dropon the deck, and then with both hands endeavoured to jam the tillertowards the weather bulwarks, which were certainly nearer to him thanthe lee bulwarks."The other way, sir!" Mary Avon cried to him, anxiously."Bless me! bless me!  Of course!" he cried, in return; and then he letthe tiller go, and just managed to get out of its way as it swung toleeward.  And then as the bow sheered round, and the White Dove madeaway for the mouth of Loch Craignish on the port tack, he soondiscovered the use of the weather tiller rope, for the wind was nowblowing hard, and the yacht pitching a good deal."We are getting on, Miss Mary!" he cried to her, crushing his wideawakedown over his forehead.  "Have ye not got a bit song for us?  What aboutthe two sailors that pitied all the poor folk in London?"She only cast down her eyes, and a faint colour suffused her cheeks: oursinging-bird had left us."Howard, lad!" the Laird called out again, in his facetious manner, "yeare not looking well, man.  Is the pitching too much for you?"The Youth was certainly not looking very brilliant; but he managed toconjure up a ghastly smile."If I get ill," said he, "I will blame it on the steering.""'Deed, ye will not," said the Laird, who seemed to have been satisfiedwith his performances.  "I am not going to steer this boat through theDorus Mor.  Here, John, come back to your post!"John of Skye came promptly aft; in no case would he have allowed anamateur to pilot the White Dove through this narrow strait with itsswirling currents.  However, when the proper time came we got throughthe Dorus Mor very easily, there being a strong flood tide to help us;and the brief respite under the lee of the land allowed the Youth tosummon back his colour and his cheerfulness.The Laird had ensconced himself beside Mary Avon; he had a little circleof admiring listeners; he was telling us, amid great shouts of laughter,how Homesh had replied to one tourist, who had asked for something toeat, that that was impossible, "bekass ahl the plates was cleaned;" andhow Homesh had answered another tourist, who represented that the towelin the lavatory was not as it should be, that "more than fifty or sixtypeople was using that towel this very day, and not a complaint from anyone of them;" and how Homesh, when his assistant stumbled and threw aleg of mutton on to the deck, called out to him in his rage, "Ye youngteffle, I will knock the stairs down your head!"  We were more and moredelighted with Homesh and his apocryphal adventures.But now other things than Homesh were claiming our attention.  Oncethrough the Dorus, we found the wind blowing harder than ever, and aheavy sea running.  The day had cleared, and the sun was gleaming on thewhite crests of the waves; but the air was thick with whirled spray, andthe decks were running wet.  The White Dove listed over before theheavy wind, so that her scuppers were a foot deep in water; whileopening the gangway only relieved the pressure for a second or two; thenext moment a wave would surge in on the deck.  The jib andfore-staysail were soaked half-mast high.  When we were on the port tackthe keel of the gig ploughed the crests of those massive and rollingwaves.  This would, indeed, have been a day for Angus Sutherland.On one tack we ran right over to Corrievrechan; but we could see nowaterspouts or other symptoms of the whirling currents; we could onlyhear the low roar all along the Scarba coast, and watch the darting ofthe white foam up the face of the rocks.  And then away again on theport tack; with the women clinging desperately to the weather bulwarks,lest perchance they should swiftly glide down the gleaming decks intothe hissing water that rolled along the lee scuppers. Despite the factof their being clad from top to toe in waterproofs, their faces werestreaming with the salt water; but they were warm enough, for the sunwas blazing hot, and the showers of spray were like showers of gleamingdiamonds.Luncheon was of an extremely pantomimic character; until, in the midstof it, we were alarmed by hearing quick tramping overhead, and noise andshouting.  The Youth was hastily bidden to leave his pickle jars, and goon deck to see what was happening.  In a second or two hereturnedsomewhat gruefulhis hair wildhis face wet."They are only taking in the mizen," says he; "but my cap has beenknocked overboard, and I have got about a quart of water down my neck.""It will do ye good, lad," observed the Laird, in the most heartlessmanner; "and I will now trouble ye to pass me the marmalade."Patiently, all day long, we beat up against that inexorable north wind,until, in the afternoon, it veered a point or two to the east, whichmade an appreciable difference in our rate of progress.  Then, thefarther the wind veered, the more it became a land wind; and the seaabated considerably: so that long before we could make out Castle Ospreyon the face of the hill, we were in fairly calm waters, with a lightbreeze on our starboard beam. The hot sun had dried the decks; there wasa possibility of walking; some went below to prepare for going ashore.We were returning to the world of telegrams, and letters, andnewspapers; we should soon know what the Commissioners of Strathgovanwere doing, and whether Johnny Guthrie had been fomenting sedition.  Butit was not these things that troubled the Laird.  He had been somewhatmeditative during the afternoon.  At last, finding an occasion on whichnearly everybody was below but his hostess, he said to her, in a lowvoice"The more I reflect on that matter we spoke of this morning, the more Iam driven to a conclusion that I would fain avoid.  It would be a sadblow to me.  I have built much on the scheme I was telling ye of:perhaps it was but a toy; but old people have a fondness for their toysas well as young people.""I don't quite understand you, sir," said the other."We will soon learn whether I am right," said the old Laird, with asigh; and then he turned to her and regarded her."I doubt whether ye see this girl's character as clearly as I do," saidhe.  "Gentle, and soft, and delicate as she seems to be, she is of thestuff the martyrs in former days were made of: if she believes a thingto be right, she will do it, at any cost or sacrifice.  Do ye mind thefirst evening I met her at your househow she sate and talked, andlaughed, with her sprained ankle swollen and black all the time, justthat she might not interfere with the pleasure of others?"The Laird paused for a moment or two."I have been putting things together," he continuedbut he did not seemproud or boastful of his perspicacity: perhaps he would rather havefought against the conclusion forced on him.  "When she was up in thenorth, it seemed to you as if she would have married the young manSutherland?""Most undoubtedly.""The lass had her bit fortune then," said the Laird, thoughtfully.  "Notmuch, as ye say; but it would have been an independence.  It would havehelped him in the world; it would have left him free.  And she is proudof what he has done, and as ambeetious as himself that he should becomea great man.  Ay?"The Laird seemed very anxious about the varnishing of the gig; he keptsmoothing it with his forefinger."And when he came to her the other dayit is but a guess of mine,ma'amshe may have said to herself beforehand that she would not be adrag on him, that she would leave him free to become great and famous,that the sentiment of the moment was a trifling thing compared to whatthe world expected from Dr. Sutherland.  Ye will not forget what shesaid on that point only the other day.  And she may have sent himawaywith her own heart just like to break.  I have just been puttingone or two possibeelities together, ma'am"The colour had forsaken the cheeks of the woman who stood by his side."Andandif she was so crueland, and heartlessand, and monstroussheought to be horsewhipped!" she exclaimed quite breathlessly, andapparently not knowing what she was saying.But the Laird shook his head."Poor lass! poor lass!" he said, gently; "she has had her troubles.  Nodoubt the loss of her bit fortune seemed a desperate thing to her; andyou know her first anxiety is conteenually for other peopleparticularlythem that have been kind to herand that she thinks no more of herselfthan if she had no feelings at all.  Well, ma'am, if what I am guessingat is trueit is only a speculation o' mine, and I am far from sure; butif that is all that has to be put right, I'm thinking it might be putright.  We should thank God that we are now and again able to put somesmall matter straight in the world."The Laird was more busy than ever with the varnish, and he went nearerthe boat.  His fingers were nervous, and there was a strange, sad lookin the sunken grey eyes."Poor lass! if that is all her trouble, it might not be difficult tohelp her," said he; and then he added slowlyand the woman beside himknew, rather than saw, that the sad grey eyes were somehow wet"But Ihad thought to see her living at Denny-mains: it wasit was a sort oftoy of my old age."*CHAPTER VII.**A PARABLE.*Now we had not been five minutes within the walls of Castle Osprey whengreat shouts of laughter were heard in the direction of the library; andpresently the Laird came quickly into the room where the two women werestanding at the open window.  He was flourishing a newspaper in hishand; delight, sarcasm, and desperate humour shone in his face.  Hewould not notice that Queen Titania looked very much inclined to cry, asshe gazed out on the forlorn remains of what had once been arose-garden; he would pay no heed to Mary Avon's wan cheek and pensiveeyes."Just listen to this, ma'am, just listen to this," he called outbriskly; and all the atmosphere of the room seemed to wake up intocheerfulness and life.  "Have I not told ye often about thatextraordinary body, Johnny Guthrie?  Now just listen!"It appeared that the Laird, without even bestowing a glance on the pileof letters lying waiting for him, had at once dived into the mass ofnewspapers, and had succeeded in fishing out the report of the lastmeeting of the Strathgovan Police Commissioners.  With a solemnity thatscarcely veiled his suppressed mirth, he said"Just listen, ma'am: 'The fortnightly meeting of the Strathgovan PoliceCommissioners was held on Monday, Provost McKendrick in the chair.  Mr.Robert Johnstone said he had much pleasure in congratulating thechairman and the other gentlemen assembled on the signal and able mannerin which the fire brigade had done their duty on the previous Saturdayat the great conflagration in Coulterside buildings; and he referredespecially to the immense assistance given by the new fire enginerecently purchased by the commissioners. (Hear! hear!)  He could assurethe meeting that but for the zealous and patriotic ardour of thebrigadeaided, no doubt, by the efficient working of the steam-engineamost valuable property would have been devoted holus bolus to theflames.'"The Laird frowned at this phrase."Does the crayture think he is talking Latin?" he asked, apparently ofhimself.However, he continued his reading of the report"'Provost McKendrick, replying to these observations, observed that itwas certainly a matter for congratulation that the fire brigade shouldhave proved their efficiency in so distinct a manner, considering theoutlay that had been incurred; and that now the inhabitants of the Burghwould perceive the necessity of having more plugs.  So far all the moneyhad been well spent.  Mr. J. Guthrie'"but here the Laird could notcontain his laughter any longer."That's the Johnny, ma'am," he cried, in explanation, "that's the JohnnyGuthrie I was telling ye aboutthe poor, yaumering, pernickity,querulous crayture!  'Mr. J. Guthrie begged to say he could not join inthese general felicitations. They were making a great deal of noiseabout nothing.  The fire was no fire at all; a servant-girl could haveput it out with a pail. He had come from Glasgow by the eleven o'clock'bus, and there was then not a trace of a fire to be seen.  The realdamage done to the property was not done by the fire, but by the dirtywater drawn by the fire brigade from the Coulter-burn, which dirty waterhad entirely destroyed Mrs. MacInnes's best bedroom furniture."The Laird flourished the newspaper, and laughed aloud in his joy; themere reading of the extract had so thoroughly discomfited his enemy."Did ye ever hear the like o' that body?" he cried.  "A snarlin',quarlin', gruntin', growlin', fashious crayture!  He thinks there couldnot be any fire, just because he was not in time to see it.  Oh, Johnny,Johnny, Johnny, I'm just fair ashamed o' ye."But at this point the Laird seemed to become aware that he had given waytoo much to his love of pure and pithy English.  He immediately said, ina more formal manner"I am glad to perceive, ma'am, that the meeting paid no heed to thesestrictures, but went on to consider whether the insurance companiesshould not share the expense of maintaining the fire brigade.  That wasmost propermost judeecious.  I'm thinking that after dinner I could notdo better than express my views upon that subject, in a letter addressedto the Provost.  It would be in time to be read at the monthlysederunt.""Come along, then, Mary, and let us get through our letters," said hishostess, turning away with a sigh from the dilapidated rose-garden.As she passed the piano, she opened it."How strange it will sound!" she said.She played a few bars of Mary Avon's favourite song; somehow the chordsseemed singularly rich and full and beautiful after our long listeningto the monotonous rush of the sea.  Then she put her hand within thegirl's arm and gently led her away, and said to her as they passedthrough the hall"'Oh, little did my mither thinkWhen first she cradled me'that ever I should have come back to such a picture of desolation.  Butwe must put a brave face on it.  If the autumn kills the garden, itglorifies the hills.  You will want all your colour-tubes when we showyou Loch Hourn.""That was the place the Doctor was anxious to veesit," said the Laird,who was immediately behind them.  "Ay.  Oh, yes, we will show Miss MaryLoch Hourn; she will get some material for sketches there, depend on't.Just the finest loch in the whole of the Highlands. When I can get TomGalbraith first of all persuaded to see Bunessan"But we heard no more about Tom Galbraith. Queen Titania had uttered aslight exclamation as she glanced over the addresses of the lettersdirected to her."From Angus!" she said, as she hurriedly opened one of the envelopes,and ran her eye over the contents.Then her face grew grave, and inadvertently she turned to the Laird."In three days," she said, "he was to start for Italy."She looked at the date."He must have left London already!" said she, and then she examined theletter further. "And he does not say where he is going."The Laird looked grave toofor a second. But he was an excellent actor.He began whistling the air that his hostess had been playing.  He turnedover his letters and papers carelessly.  At length he said, with an airof fine indifference"The grand thing of being away at sea is to teach ye the comparateevelytrifling importance of anything that can happen on land."He tossed the unopened letters about, only regarding the addresses."What care I what the people may have been saying about me in myabsence?the real thing is that we got food to eat and were not sweptinto Corrievrechan.  Come, Miss Mary, I will just ask ye to go for astroll through the garden wi' me, until dinner-time; our good friendswill not ask us to dress on an evening like this, just before we havegot everything on shore.  Twenty-five meenutes, ma'am?  Very well.  Ifanybody has been abusing me in my absence, we'll listen to the poorfellow after dinner, when we can get the laugh made general, and so makesome good out of him; but just now we'll have the quiet of the sunset toourselves.  Dear, dear me! we used to have the sunset after dinner whenwe were away up about Canna and Uist."Mary Avon seemed to hesitate."What! not a single letter for ye?  That shows very bad taste on thepairt of the young men about England.  But I never thought much o' them.From what I hear, they are mostly given over to riding horses, andshooting pheasants, and what not.  But never mind. I want ye to come outfor a stroll wi' me, my lass: ye'll see some fine colour about theMorven hills presently, or I'm mistaken.""Very well, sir," said she, obediently; and together they went out intothe garden.Now it was not until some minutes after the dinner-gong had sounded thatwe again saw these two, and then there was nothing in the manner ofeither of them to suggest to any one that anything had happened.  It wasnot until many days afterwards that we obtained, bit by bit, an accountof what had occurred, and even then it was but a stammering, anddisjointed, and shy account.  However, such as it was, it had betterappear here, if only to keep the narrative straight.The Laird, walking up and down the gravel path with his companion, saidthat he did not so much regret the disappearance of the roses, for therewere plenty of other flowers to take their place.  Then he thought heand she might go and sit on a seat which was placed under a drooping ashin the centre of the lawn, for from this point they commanded a fineview of the western seas and hills.  They had just sat down there whenhe said"My girl, I am going to take the privilege of an old man, and speakfrankly to ye.  I have been watching ye, as it wereand your mind is notat ease."Miss Avon hastily assured him that it was quite, and begged to draw hisattention to the yacht in the bay, where the men were just lowering theensign, at sunset.The Laird returned to the subject; entreated her not to take it ill thathe should interfere; and then reminded her of a certain night on LochLeven, and of a promise he had then made her.  Would he be fulfillingthat solemn undertaking if he did not, at some risk of vexing her, andof being considered a prying, foolish person, endeavour to help her ifshe was in trouble?Miss Avon said how grateful she was to him for all his kindness to her;and how his promise had already been amply fulfilled.  She was not introuble.  She hoped no one thought that.  Everything that had happenedwas for the best.  And hereas was afterwards admittedshe burst into afit of crying, and was very much mortified, and ashamed of herself.But at this point the Laird would appear to have taken matters into hisown hand. First of all he began to speak of his nephewof his brightgood nature, and so forthof his professed esteem for herof certainpossibilities that he, the Laird, had been dreaming about with the fondfancy of an old man.  And rather timidly he asked herif it were truethat she thought everything had happened for the bestwhether, afterall, his nephew Howard might not speak to her?  It had been the dream ofhis old age to see these two together at Denny-mains, or on board thatsteam yacht he would buy for them on the Clyde.  Was that not possible?Here, at least, the girl was honest and earnest enougheven anxiouslyearnest.  She assured him that that was quite impossible.  It washopeless.  The Laird remained silent for some minutes, holding her hand."Then," said he, rather sadly, but with an affectation of grave humour,"I am going to tell you a story.  It is about a young lass, who was veryproud, and who kept her thoughts very much to herself, and would notgive her friends a chance of helping her.  And she was very fond of aayoung Prince we will call himwho wanted to go away to the wars, andmake a great name for himself.  No one was prouder of the Prince thanthe girl, mind ye, and she encouraged him in everything, and they weregreat friends, and she was to give him all her diamonds, and pearls, andnecklacesshe would throw them into his treasury, like a Romanmatronjust that he might go away and conquer, and come back and marryher.  But lo, and behold! one night all her jewels and bracelets werestolen!  Then what does she do?  Would ye believe it?  She goes andquarrels with that young Prince, and tells him to go away and fight hisbattles for himself, and never to come back and see her any morejust asif any one could fight a battle wi' a sore heart.  Oh, she was a wicked,wicked lass, to be so proud as that, when she had many friends thatwould willingly have helped her....  Sit down, my girl, sit down, mygirl, never mind the dinner; they can wait for us....  Well, ye see, thestory goes on that there was an old mana foolish old manthey used tolaugh at him, because of his fine fishing-tackle, and the very few fishhe caught wi' the tackleand this doited old body was alwaysintermeddling in other people's business.  And what do you think he doesbut go and say to the young lass: 'Ha, have I found ye out?  Is it leftfor an old man like meand me a bachelor too, who should know but littleof the quips and cranks of a young lass's waysis it left for an old manlike me to find out that fine secret o' yours?'  She could not say aword. She was dumbfounded.  She had not the face to deny it: he hadfound out what that wicked girl, with all her pride, and her martyrdom,and her sprained ankles, had been about. And what do you think he didthen?  Why, as sure as sure can be, he had got all the young lass'sproperty in his pocket; and before she could say Jack Robinson, he tellsher that he is going to send straight off for the Princethis verynighta telegram to London"The girl had been trembling, and struggling with the hand that heldhers.  At last she sprang to her feet, with a cry of entreaty."Oh, no, no, no, sir!  You will not do that! You will not degrade me!"And thenthis is her own account, mindthe Laird rose too, and stillheld her by the hand, and spoke sternly to her."Degrade you?" said he.  "Foolish lass! Come in to your dinner."When these two did come in to dinnernearly a quarter of an hourlatetheir hostess looked anxiously from one to the other.  But whatcould she perceive?  Mary Avon was somewhat pale, and she was silent:but that had been her way of late.  As for the Laird, he came inwhistling the tune of the Queen's Maries, which was a strange gracebefore meat, and he looked airily around him at the walls."I would just like to know," said he lightly, "whether there is a singlehouse in all Scotland where ye will not find an engraving of one orother of Mr. Thomas Faed's pictures in some one of the rooms?"And he preserved this careless and indifferent demeanour during dinner.After dinner he strolled into the library.  He would venture upon asmall cigar.  His sole companion was the person whose humble duty inthis household is to look after financial matters, so that other folksmay enjoy themselves in idleness.The Laird lay back in an easy chair, stretched out his legs, lit hiscigar, and held it at arm's length, as if it were something that oughtto be looked at at a distance."You had something to do with the purchase of Miss Mary's Americanstock, eh?" said he, pretending to be concerned about the end of thecigar."Yes.""What was it?""Funded Five per Cent.""What would be about the value of it now?""Just now?  Oh, perhaps 106, or 107.""No, no, no.  I mean, if the bonds that that ill-faured scoondrelcarried away with him were to be sold the now, what money, what Englishmoney, would they fetch?"But this required some calculation."Probably about 7,300*l*.""I was asking," said the Laird, "because I was wondering whether therewas any chance of tracing them.""Not the least.  They are like bank-notesmore useful indeed, to aswindler than even bank-notes.""Ay, is that so?" said the Laird; and he seemed to be so charmed withhis whistling of the air of Queen's Maries that he returned to thatperformance.  Oddly enough, however, he never ventured beyond the firstline: perhaps he was afraid of missing the tune."Seven thousand, three hundred," said he, meditatively.  "Man, that's astrong cigarlittle, and black, and strong.  Seven thousand, threehundred.  Girls are strange craytures. I remember what that young Doctorwas saying once about weemen being better able to bear pain than men,and not so much afraid of it either"And here the Queen's Maries came in again."It would be a strange thing," said the Laird, with a sort of ruefullaugh, "if I were to have a steam yacht all to myself, and cruise aboutin search of company, eh?  No, no; that will not do.  My neighbours inStrathgovan will never say that I deserted them, just when greatimprovements and serious work have to be looked forward to.  I will nothave it said that I ran away, just to pleasure myself.  Howard, my lad,"he added, imaginatively addressing his absent nephew, "I doubt but ye'llhave to whistle for that steam yacht."The Laird rose."I think I will smoke in the garden now: it is a fine evening."He turned at the door, and seemed suddenly to perceive a pair of stag'shorns over the chimney-piece."That's a grand set o' horns," said he; and then he added carelessly,"What bank did ye say they American bonds were in?""The London and Westminster.""They're just a noble pair o' horns," said he emphatically.  "I wonderye do not take them with ye to London."  And then he left.*CHAPTER VIII.**A RELEASE.*We had a long spell ashore at this time, for we were meditating aprotracted voyage, and everything had to be left ship-shape behind us.The Laird was busy from morning till night; but it would appear that allhis attention was not wholly given to the affairs of Strathgovan.Occasionally he surprised his hostess by questions which had not theleast reference to asphalte pavements or gymnasium chains.  He kept hisown counsel, nevertheless.By and by his mysterious silence so piqued and provoked her that sheseized a favourable opportunity for asking him, point-blank, whether hehad not spoken to Mary Avon.  They were in the garden at the time, heseated on an iron seat, with a bundle of papers beside him; she standingon the gravel-path with some freshly-cut flowers in her hand.  There wasa little colour in her face, for she feared that the question might bedeemed impertinent; yet, after all, it was no idle curiosity thatprompted her to ask it.  Was she not as much interested in the girl'shappiness as any one could be?"I have," said he, looking up at her calmly.Well, she knew that.  Was this all the answer she was to get?"I beg your pardon, ma'am," said he, after a second, "if I seem to bemaking a mystery where there is no mystery.  I hate all foolishness likethat.  I do not myself believe there is anything of the kind; but I willjust ask ye to wait for a day or two before speaking to the lassherself.  After that, I will leave it all in your hands.  I trust yewill consider that I have done my part.""Oh, I am sure of that, sir," said she: though how could she be sure?"There is not much I would not do for that lass," said he, somewhatabsently.  "She has a wonderful way of getting a grip of one's heart, asit were.  And if I could have wished that things had turned outotherwise"The Laird did not finish the sentence.  He seemed to rouse himself."Toots! toots!" said he, frowning.  "When we are become men, we have toput away childish things.  What is the use of crying for the moon?There, ma'am, is something serious and practical to considersomethingbetter worth considering than childish dreams and fancies."And then, with much lucidity and with a most dispassionate parade ofarguments on both sides, he put before her this knotty question: whetherit was a fit and proper thing for a body like the StrathgovanCommissioners to own public-house property? That was the generalquestion.  The immediate question was whether the "William Wallace"public-house, situated in the Netherbiggins road, should be re-let orsummarily closed?  On the one hand it was contended that the closing ofthe "William Wallace" would only produce a greater run on the otherlicensed houses; on the other hand, it was urged that a body like thecommissioners should set an example and refuse to encourage amischievous traffic.  Now the Laird's own view of the liquorquestionwhich he always put forward modestly, as subject to the opinionof those who had had a wider legislative and administrative experiencethan himselfwas, that the total suppression of the liquor traffic was achimera; and that a practical man should turn to see what could be donein the way of stringent police regulations.  He was proceeding toexpound these points when he suddenly caught sight of the Youth, who hadappeared at the gate, with two long fishing rods over his shoulder.  Hedropped his voice."That just reminds me, ma'am," said he. "I am greatly obliged to yemynephew equally sofor your great kindness to him. I think it will not benecessary for him to trespass on your forbearance any longer.""I don't quite understand you.""I think I will let him go back to his own pursuits now," said theLaird."Oh, no," she said.  "By all means let him come with us to Stornoway.He has been very good in not grumbling over any inconvenience.  Youwould not send him awayjust as we are going to start on our longestcruise?"She could not say anything further at the moment, for the Youth came upthe gravel-path and threw the two huge rods on to the lawn."Look there, uncle!" he cried.  "I don't care what size of lithe you geton the line, I'll bet those rods won't break, any way.  Sutherland usedto be lamenting over the big fish you lost up in the north: try themwith those things!"Here their hostess passed on and into the house with her flowers.  Uncleand nephew were left by themselves."Howard, lad," said the elder of the two men, "bring that chair over,and sit opposite me, I do not want my papers to be disturbed. There areone or two matters of business I would like to put before ye."The Youth did as he was bid.  The Laird paused for a second or two; thenhe began"When I asked ye to come to the Highlands," said he, slowly, "I put analternative before ye, with certain consequences.  There were twothings, one of which I wanted ye to do.  Ye have done neither."Howard Smith looked somewhat alarmed: his hostess was not there to put ajocular air over that bargain."Well, sir," he stammered, "II could not do what was impossible.  IIhave done my best.""Nevertheless," said the Laird, in a matter-of-fact way, "neither hasbeen done.  I will not say it has been altogether your fault.  So far asI have seen, ye have been on very good terms with the young leddy;andandyes, paid her what attention was expected of ye; and""Well, you see, uncle," he interposed, eagerly, "what was the use of myproposing to the girl only to be snubbed?  Don't I know she cares nomore about me than about the man in the moon?  Why, anybody could seethat.  Of course, you know, if you insist on itif you drive me to itifyou want me to go in and get snubbedI'll do it.  I'll take my chance.But I don't think it's fair.  I mean," he added hastily, "I don't thinkit is necessary.""I do not wish to drive ye to anything," said the Lairdon any otheroccasion he might have laughed at the Youth's ingenuousness, but now hehad serious business on hand.  "I am content to take things as they are.Neither of the objects I had in view has been accomplished; perhaps bothwere impossible; who can tell what lies in store for any of us, when webegin to plan and scheme?  However, I am not disposed to regard it asyour fault.  I will impose no fine or punishment, as if we were playingat theatre-acting.  I have neither kith nor kin of my own; and it is mywish that, at my death, Denny-mains should go to you"The Youth's face turned red; yet he did not know how to express hisgratitude.  It did not quite seem a time for sentiment; the Laird wastalking in such a matter-of-fact way."Subject to certain conditions," he continued.  "First of all, I spokesome time ago of spending a sum of 3,000*l.* on a steam yacht. Dismissthat from your mind.  I cannot afford it; neither will you be able."The young man stared at this.  For although he cared very little aboutthe steam yachthaving a less liking for the sea than some of ushe wassurprised to hear that a sum like 3,000*l.* was even a matter forconsideration to a reputedly rich man like his uncle."Oh, certainly, sir," said he.  "I don't at all want a steam yacht.""Very well, we will now proceed."The Laird took up one of the documents beside him, and began to drawcertain lines on the back of it."Ye will remember," said he, pointing with his pencil, "that where theestate proper of Denny-mains runs out to the Coulter-burn Road, there isa piece of land belonging to me, on which are two tenements, yieldingtogether, I should say, about 300*l.* a year.  By and by, if a roadshould be cut soacross to the Netherbiggins roadthat land will be morevaluable; many a one will be wanting to feu that piece then, mark mywords.  However, let that stand by.  In the meantime I have occasion fora sum of ten thousand three hundred pounds"The Youth looked still more alarmed: had his uncle been speculating?"and I have considered it my duty to ask you, as the future proprietorof Denny-mains in all human probability, whether ye would rather havethese two tenements sold, with as much of the adjoining land as wouldmake up that sum, or whether ye would have the sum made a charge on theestate generally, and take your chance of that land rising in value?What say ye?"The Laird had been prepared for all this; but the Youth was not.  Helooked rather frightened."I should be sorry to hear, sir," he stammered, "thatthatyou werepressed for money""Pressed for money!" said the Laird severely; "I am not pressed formoney. There is not a square yard of Denny-mains with a farthing ofmortgage on it.  Come, let's hear what ye have to say.""Then," said the young man, collecting his wits, "my opinion is, that aman should do what he likes with his own.""That's well said," returned the Laird, much mollified.  "And I'm nosure but that if we were to roup[#] that land, that quarrelsome bodyJohnny Guthrie might not be trying to buy it; and I would not have himfor a neighbour on any consideration.  Well, I will write to Todd andBuchanan about it at once."[#] To roup, to sell by public auction.The Laird rose and began to bundle his papers together.  The Youth laidhold of the fishing-rods, and was about to carry them off somewhere,when he was suddenly called back."Dear me!" said the Laird, "my memory's going.  There was another thingI was about to put before ye, lad.  Our good friends here have been verykind in asking ye to remain so long.  I'm thinking ye might offer togive up your state-room before they start on this long trip.  Is thereany business or occupation ye would like to be after in the south?"The flash of light that leapt to the young man's face!"Why, uncle!" he exclaimed eagerly, diving his hand into his pocket, "Ihave twice been asked by old Barnes to go to his placethe bestpartridge shooting in Bedfordshire"But the Youth recollected himself."I mean," said he seriously, "Barnes, the swell solicitor, don't youknowHughes, Barnes, and Barnes.  It would be an uncommonly good thingfor me to stand well with them.  They are just the making of a youngfellow at the bar when they take him up.  Old Barnes's son was atCambridge with me; but he doesn't do anythingan idle fellowcares fornothing but shooting and billiards.  I really ought to cultivate oldBarnes."The Laird eyed him askance."Off ye go to your pairtridge-shooting, and make no more pretence," saidhe; and then he added, "And look here, my lad, when ye leave this houseI hope ye will express in a proper form your thanks for the kindness yehave received.  No, no; I do not like the way of you English in thatrespect.  Ye take no notice of anything.  Ye receive a man's hospitalityfor a week, a fortnight, a month; and then ye shake hands with him atthe door; and walk outas if nothing had happened! These may be goodmanners in England; they are not here.""I can't make a speech, uncle," said the Youth slyly.  "They don't teachus those things at the English public schools.""Ye gowk," said the Laird severely, "do ye think I want ye to make aspeech like Norval on the Grampian Hills?  I want ye to express inproper language your thankfulness for the attention and kindness thathave been bestowed on ye.  What are ye afraid of?  Have ye not got amouth?  From all that I can hear the English have a wonderful fluency ofspeech, when there is no occasion for it at all: bletherin' away liketwenty steam-engines, and not a grain of wheat to be found when a' thestour is laid."*CHAPTER IX.**"WHILE THE RIPPLES FOLD UPON SANDS OF GOLD."*The days passed, and still the Laird professed to be profoundly busy;and our departure for the north was further and further postponed.  TheYouth had at first expressed his intention of waiting to see us off;which was very kind on his part, considering how anxious he was tocultivate the acquaintance of that important solicitor.  His patience,however, at last gave out; and he begged to be allowed to start on acertain morning.  The evening before we walked down to the shore withhim, and got pulled out to the yacht, and sate on deck while he wentbelow to pack such things as had been left in his state-room."It will be a strange thing," said our gentle Admiral-in-chief, "for usto have a cabin empty.  That has never happened to us in the Highlands,all the time we have been here.  It will be a sort of ghost's room; weshall not dare to look into it for fear of seeing something to awakenold memories."She put her hand in her pocket, and drew out some small object."Look," said she, quite sentimentally.It was only a bit of pencil: if it had been the skull of Socrates shecould not have regarded it with a greater interest."It is the pencil Angus used to mark our games with.  I found it in thesaloon the day before yesterday;" and then she added, almost to herself,"I wonder where he is now."The answer to this question startled us."In Paris," said the Laird.But no sooner had he uttered the words than he seemed somewhatembarrassed."That is, I believe so," he said hastily.  "I am not in correspondencewith him.  I do not know for certain.  I have heardit has been statedto methat he might perhaps remain until the end of this week in Parisbefore going on to Naples."He appeared rather anxious to avoid being further questioned.  He beganto discourse upon certain poems of Burns, whom he had once or twicesomewhat slightingly treated. He was now bent on making ample amends. Inespecial, he asked whether his hostess did not remember the beautifulverse in "Mary Morison," which describes the lover looking on at thedancing of a number of young people, and conscious only that his ownsweetheart is not there?"Do ye remember it, ma'am?" said he; and he proceeded to repeat it forher'Yestreen, when to the trembling stringThe dance gaed through the lighted ha',To thee my fancy took its wing,I sat, but neither heard nor saw.'Though this was fair, and that was braw,And yon the toast of a' the town,I sighed and said amang them a',"Ye are na Mary Morison."'Beautiful, beautiful, is it not?  And that is an extraordinarybusinessand as old as the hills tooof one young person waling[#] outanother as the object of all the hopes of his or her life; and nothingwill do but that one.  Ye may show them people who are better to lookat, richer, cleverer; ye may reason and argue; ye may make plans, andwhat not: it is all of no use.  And people who have grown up, and whoforgot what they themselves were at twenty or twenty-five, may say whatthey like about the foolishness of a piece of sentiment; and they mayprove to the young folks that this madness will not last, and that theyshould marry for more substantial reasons; but ye are jist talking tothe wind!  Madness or not madness, it is human nature; and ye might jistas well try to fight against the tides.  I will say this, too,"continued the Laird, and as he warmed to his subject, he rose, and beganto pace up and down the deck, "if a young man were to come and tell methat he was ready to throw up a love-match for the sake of prudence andworldly advantage, I would say to him: 'Man, ye are a poor crayture.  Yehave not got the backbone of a mouse in ye.'  I have no respect for ayoung man who has prudence beyond his years; not one bit.  If it ishuman nature for a man of fifty years to laugh at sentiment and romance,it is human nature for a man at twenty-five to believe in it; and he whodoes not believe in it then, I say is a poor crayture.  He will nevercome to anything. He may make money; but he will be a poor stupid assall his days, just without those experiences that make life a beautifulthing to look back on."[#] Walingchoosing.He came and sate down by Mary Avon."Perhaps a sad thing, too," said he, as he took her hand in his; "buteven that is better than a dull causeway, with an animal trudging alongand sorely burdened with the world's wealth.  And now, my lass, have yegot everything tight and trim for the grand voyage?""She has been at it again, sir," says his hostess, interposing.  "Shewants to set out for the south to-morrow morning.""It would be a convenient chance for me," said the girl simply.  "Mr.Smith might be good enough to see me as far as Greenockthough, indeed,I don't at all mind travelling by myself.  I must stop at Kendalis thatwhere the junction is?for I promised the poor old woman who died inEdinburgh that I would call and see some relations of hers who live nearWindermere.""They can wait, surely?" said the Laird, with frowning eyebrows, as ifthe poor people at Windermere had attempted to do him some deadlyinjury."Oh, there is no hurry for them," said she.  "They do not even know I amcoming. But this chance of Mr. Smith going by the steamer to-morrowwould be convenient.""Put that fancy out of your head," said he with decision.  "Ye are goingto no Greenock, and to no Kendal, at the present time.  Ye are goingaway with us to the north, to see such things as ye never saw before inyour life.  And if ye are anxious to get on with your work, I'll tell yewhat I'll do.  There's our Provost M'Kendrick has been many a timetelling me of the fine salmon-fishing he got at the west side of LewisIthink he said at a place called Gometra""Grimersta," is here suggested."The very place.  Ye shall paint a picture of Grimersta, my lass, oncommission for the Provost.  I authorise ye: if he will not take it, Iwill take it myself.  Never mind what the place is likethe Provost hasno more imagination than a boiled lobster; but he knows when he has goodfriends, and good fishing, and a good glass of whisky; and, depend onit, he'll be proud to have a picture of the place, on your own terms.  Itell ye I authorise ye."Here the Youth came on deck, saying he was now ready to go ashore."Do you know, sir," said his hostess, rising, "what Mary has been tryingto get me to believe?that she is afraid of the equinoctials!"The Laird laughed aloud."That is a good onethat is a good one!" he cried.  "I never heard abetter story about Homesh.""I know the gales are very wild here when they begin," said Miss Avonseriously. "Every one says so."But the Laird only laughs the more, and is still chuckling to himself ashe gets down into the gig: the notion of Mary Avon being afraid ofanythingof fifteen dozen of equinoctial gales, for examplewas to himsimply ludicrous.But a marked and unusual change came over the Laird's manner when we gotback to Castle Osprey.  During all the time he had been with us,although he had had occasionally to administer rebukes, with more orless of solemnity, he had never once lost his temper.  We should haveimagined it impossible for anything to have disturbed his serene dignityof demeanour.  But nowwhen he discovered that there was no letterawaiting any one of ushis impatience seemed dangerously akin tovexation and anger.  He would have the servants summoned andcross-examined.  Then he would not believe them; but must needs searchthe various rooms for himself.  The afternoon post had really broughtnothing but a newspaperaddressed to the Lairdand that he testily threwinto the waste-paper basket, without opening it.  We had never seen himgive way like this before.At dinner, too, his temper was no better. He began to deride thebusiness habits of the English peoplewhich was barely civil. He saidthat the English feared the Scotch and the Germans just as the Americansfeared the Chinesebecause the latter were the more indefatigableworkers.  He declared that if the London men had less Amontillado sherryand cigarettes in their private office-rooms, their business would beconducted with much greater accuracy and dispatch.  Then another thoughtstruck him: were the servants prepared to swear that no registeredletter had been presented in the afternoon, and taken away again becausethere was no one in the house to sign the receipt? Inquiry being made,it was found that no such letter had been presented.  But finally, whenthe turmoil about this wretched thing was at its height, the Laird waspressed to say from which part of the country the missive was expected.From London, he said.  It was then pointed out to him that the Londonletters were usually sent along in the eveningsometimes as late aseight or nine o'clock. He went on with his dinner, grumbling.Sure enough, before he had finished dinner, a footstep was heard on thegravel outside. The Laird, without any apology, jumped up and went tothe window."There's the postman," said he, as he resumed his seat.  "Ye might givehim a shilling, ma'am: it is a long climb up the hill."It was the postman, no doubt; and he had brought a letter, but it wasnot for the Laird. We were all apprehensive of a violent storm when theservant passed on and handed this letter to Mary Avon.  But the Lairdsaid nothing.  Miss Avon, like a properly-conducted school-girl, put theletter in her pocket.There was no storm.  On the contrary, the Laird got quite cheerful.When his hostess hoped that no serious inconvenience would result fromthe non-arrival of the letter, he said, "Not the least!"  He began andtold us the story of the old lady who endeavoured to engage thepractical Homeshwhile he was collecting ticketsin a disquisition onthe beauties of Highland scenery, and who was abruptly bidden to "mindher own pussness"; we had heard the story not more than thirty-eighttimes, perhaps, from various natives of Scotland.But the letter about which the Laird had been anxious hadas some of ussuspectedactually arrived, and was then in Mary Avon's pocket.  Afterdinner the two women went into the drawing-room.  Miss Avon sate down tothe piano, and began to play, idly enough, the air called Heimweh.  Ofwhat home was she thinking thenthis waif and stray among the winds ofthe world?Tea was brought in.  At last the curiosity of the elder woman could nolonger be restrained."Mary," said she, "are you not going to read that letter?""Dear me!" said the girl, plunging into her pocket.  "I had forgotten Ihad a letter to read."She took it out and opened it, and began to read.  Her face lookedpuzzled at first, then alarmed.  She turned to her friend."What is it?  What can it mean?" she said, in blank dismay; and thetrembling fingers handed her the letter.Her friend had less difficulty in understanding; although, to be sure,before she had finished this perfectly plain and matter-of-factcommunication, there were tears in her eyes. It was merely a letter fromthe manager of a bank in London, begging to inform Miss Avon that he hadjust received, through Messrs. Todd and Buchanan, of Glasgow, a sum of10,300*l.* to be placed to her credit.  He was also desired to say, thatthis sum was entirely at her own free disposal; but the donor wouldpreferif she had no objectionthat it should be invested in some homesecurity, either in a good mortgage, or in the Metropolitan Board ofWorks Stock.  It was a plain and simple letter."Oh, Mary, don't you understanddon't you understand?" said she.  "Hemeant to have given you a steam yacht, ifif you married Howard Smith.He has given you all the money you lost; and the steam yacht too. Andthere is not a word of regret about all his plans and schemes beingdestroyed.  And this is the man we have all been making fun of."In her conscious self-abasement she did not perceive how bewilderedhowabsolutely frightenedthis girl was.  Mary Avon took back the lettermechanically; she stood silent for a second or two; then she said,almost in a whisper"Giving me all that money!  Oh, I cannot take itI cannot take it!  Ishould not have stayed hereI should not have told him anythingIIwishto go away"But the common sense of the elder woman came to her rescue.  She tookthe girl's hand firmly, and said"You shall not go away.  And when it is your good fortune to meet withsuch a friend as that, you shall not wound him and insult him byrefusing what he has given to you.  No; but you will go at once andthank him.""I cannotI cannot," she said, with both her hands trembling.  "Whatshall I say?  How can I thank him?  If he were my own father or brother,how could I thank him?"Her friend left the room for a second, and returned."He is in the library alone," said she.  "Go to him.  And do not be soungrateful as to even speak of refusing."The girl had no time to compose any speech. She walked to the librarydoor, timidly tapped at it, and entered.  The Laird was seated in aneasy-chair, reading.When he saw her come inhe had been expecting a servant with coffee,probablyhe instantly put aside his book."Well, Miss Mary?" said he cheerfully.She hesitated.  She could not speak; her throat was choking.  And then,scarcely knowing what she did, she sank down before him, and put herhead and her hands on his knees, and burst out crying and sobbing.  Andall that he could hear of any speech-making, or of any gratitude, orthanks, was only two words"My father!"He put his hand gently on the soft black hair."Child," said he, "it is nothing.  I have kept my word."*CHAPTER X.**BACKWARD THOUGHTS.*That was a beautiful morning on which we got up at an unearthly hour tosee the Youth departall of us, that is to say, except Mary Avon.  Andyet she was not usually late.  The Laird could not understand it.  Hekept walking from one room to another, or hovering about the hall; andwhen the breakfast-gong sounded, he refused to come in and take hisplace without his accustomed companion.  But just at this moment whomshould he behold entering by the open door but Mary Avon herselfladenwith her artistic impedimenta?  He pounced on her at once, and seizedthe canvas."Bless me, lassie, what have ye been about? Have ye done all this thismorning?  Ye must have got up in the middle of the night!"It was but a rough sketch, after allor the beginnings of a sketch,ratherof the wide, beautiful sea and mountain view from the garden ofCastle Osprey."I thought, sir," said she, in a somewhat hesitating way, "that youmight perhaps be so kind as to accept from me those sketches I have madeon board the White Doveandand if they were at Denny-mains, I shouldlike to have the series completeandand it would naturally begin with asketch from the garden here"He looked at her for a moment, with a grave, perhaps wistful, kindnessin his face."My lass, I would rather have seen you at Denny-mains."That was the very last word he ever uttered concerning the dream thathad just been destroyed.  And it was only about this time, I think, thatwe began to recognise the simple, large, noble nature of this man.  Wehad been too much inclined to regard the mere husks and externals of hischaracterto laugh at his assumption of parochial importance, his solemndiscussions of the Semple case, his idiotic stories about Homesh.  Andit was not a mere freak of generosity that revealed to us something ofthe finer nature of this old Scotchman.  People as rich as he have oftenpaid bigger sums than 10,300*l.* for the furtherance of a hobby.  But itwas to put away his hobbyit was to destroy for ever the "dream of hisold age"that he had been thus munificent towards this girl.  And therewas no complaint or regret.  He had told us it was time for him to putaway childish things. And this was the last word said"My lass, I wouldrather have seen you at Denny-mains."The Laird was exceedingly facetious at this breakfast-party, and hisnephew had a bad time of it.  There were mysterious questions aboutMessrs. Hughes, Barnes, and Barnes; as to whether consultations werebest held in stubble or in turnips; or whether No. 5 shot was the bestfor bringing down briefs; and so forth."Never mind, uncle," said the Youth good-naturedly. "I will send yousome partridges for the larder of the yacht.""You need not do anything of the kind," said the Laird; "before you arein Bedfordshire the White Dove will be many a mile away from thecourse of luggage steamers.""Oh, are you ready to start, then, sir?" said his hostess."This very meenute, if it pleases you," said he.She looked rather alarmed, but said nothing. In the meantime thewaggonette had come to the door.By and by there was a small party assembled on the steps to see theYouth drive off.  And now the time had come for him to make that speechof thanks which his uncle had pointed out was distinctly due from him.The Laird, indeed, regarded his departure with a critical air; and nodoubt waited to see how his nephew would acquit himself.Perhaps the Youth had forgotten.  At all events, having bidden good-byeto the others, he shook hands last of all with his hostess, and saidlightly"Thank you very much.  I have enjoyed the whole thing tremendously."Then he jumped into the waggonette, and took off his cap as a partingsalute; and away he went.  The Laird frowned.  When he was a young manthat was not the way in which hospitality was acknowledged.Then Mary Avon turned from regarding the departing waggonette."Are we to get ready to start?" said she."What do you say, sir?" asks the hostess of the Laird."I am at your service," he replies.And so it appeared to be arranged.  But still Queen Titania lookedirresolute and uneasy.  She did not at once set the whole house in anuproar; or send down for the men; or begin herself to harry the garden.She kept loitering about the door; pretending to look at the signs ofthe weather.  At last Mary said"Well, in any case, you will be more than an hour in having the thingscarried down; so I will do a little bit more to that sketch in themeantime."The moment she was gone, her hostess says in a hurried whisper to theLaird"Will you come into the library, sir, for a moment?"He obediently followed her; and she shut the door."Are we to start without Angus Sutherland?" she asked, withoutcircumlocution."I beg your pardon, ma'am," said the wily Laird.Then she was forced to explain, which she did in a somewhat nervousmanner."Mary has told me, sir, of your very, very great generosity to her.  Ihope you will let me thank you too.""There is not another word to be said about it," he said simply.  "Ifound a small matter wrong in the world that I thought I could putright; and I did it; and now we start fresh and straight again.  That isall.""But about Angus Sutherland," said she still more timidly.  "You werequite right in your conjecturesat least, I imagine soindeed, I am sureof it.  And now, don't you think we should send for him?""The other day, ma'am," said he slowly, "I informed ye that when Iconsidered my part done I would leave the matter in your hands entirely.I had to ask some questions of the lass, no doubt, to make sure of myground; though I felt it was not a business fit for an old bachelor likeme to intermeddle wi'.  I am now of opinion that it would be better, asI say, to leave the matter in your hands entirely."The woman looked rather bewildered."But what am I to do?" said she.  "Mary will never allow me to send forhimand I have not his address in any case"The Laird took a telegram from his breast-pocket."There it is," said he, "until the end of this week, at all events."She looked at it hesitatingly; it was from the office of the magazinethat Angus Sutherland edited; and was in reply to a question of theLaird's.  Then she lifted her eyes."Do you think I might ask Mary herself?""That is for a woman to decide," said he; and again she was thrown backon her own resources.Well, this midge of a woman has some courage too.  She began to reflecton what the Laird had adventured, and done, for the sake of this girl;and was she not prepared to risk something also?  After all, if thesetwo had been fostering a vain delusion, it would be better to have itdestroyed at once.And so she went out into the garden, where she found Miss Avon againseated at her easel. She went gently over to her; she had the telegramin her hand.  For a second or two she stood irresolute; then she boldlywalked across the lawn, and put her hand on the girl's shoulder.  Withthe other hand she held the telegram before Mary Avon's eyes."Mary," said she, in a very low and gentle voice, "will you write to himnow and ask him to come back?"The girl dropped the brush she had been holding on to the grass, and herface got very pale."Oh, how could I do that?" said she, in an equally lowandfrightenedvoice."You sent him away."There was no answer.  The elder woman waited; she only saw that MaryAvon's fingers were working nervously with the edge of the palette."Mary," said she at length, "am I right in imagining the cause of yoursending him away?  May I write and explain, if you will not?""Oh, how can you explain?" the girl said, almost piteously.  "It isbetter as it is.  Did you not hear what the kindest friend I ever foundin the world had to say of me yesterday, about young people who were tooprudent, and were mercenary; and how he had no respect for young peoplewho thought too much about money""Mary, Mary!" the other said, "he was not speaking about you.  Youmercenary!  He was speaking about a young man who would throw over hissweetheart for the sake of money.  You mercenary!  Well, let me appealto Angus!  When I explain to him, and ask him what he thinks of you, Iwill abide by his answer.""Well, I did not think of myself; it was for his sake I did it," saidthe girl, in a somewhat broken voice; and tears began to steal down hercheeks, and she held her head away."Well then, I won't bother you anymore, Mary," said the other, in herkindliest way. "I won't ask you to do anything, except to get ready toget down to the yacht.""At once?" said the girl, instantly getting up, and drying her eyes.She seemed greatly relieved by this intimation of an immediate start."As soon as the men have the luggage taken down.""Oh, that will be very pleasant," said she, immediately beginning to putaway her colours. "What a fine breeze!  I am sure I shall be ready infifteen minutes."Then the usual bustle began; messages flying up and down, and the gigand dingay racing each other to the shore and back again. By twelveo'clock everything had been got on board.  Then the White Dove gentlyglided away from her moorings; we had started on our last and longestvoyage.It seemed innumerable ages since we had been in our sea-home.  And thatfirst glance round the saloonas our absent friend the Doctor hadremarkedcalled up a multitude of recollections, mostly converging to ageneral sense of snugness, and remoteness, and good fellowship.  TheLaird sank down into a corner of one of the couches, and said"Well, I think I could spend the rest of my days in this yacht.  Itseems as if I had lived in it for many, many years."But Miss Avon would not let him remain below; it was a fine sailing day;and very soon we were all on deck.  A familiar scene?this expanse ofblue sea, curling with white here and there; with a dark blue skyoverhead, and all around the grand panorama of mountains in their richSeptember hues?  The sea is never familiar.  In its constant and movingchange, its secret and slumbering power, its connection with the greatunknown beyond the visible horizon, you never become familiar with thesea.  We may recognise the well-known landmarks as we steal away to thenorththe long promontory and white lighthouse of Lismore, the ruins ofDuart, the woods of Scallasdale, the glimpse into Loch Alineand we mayuse these things only to calculate our progress; but always around us isthe strange life, and motion, and infinitude of the sea, which neverbecomes familiar.We had started with a light favourable wind, of the sort that we hadcome to call a Mary-Avon-steering breeze; but after luncheon this diedaway, and we lay icily for a long time opposite the dark green woods ofFuinary. However, there was a wan and spectral look about the sunshineof this afternoon, and there were some long, ragged shreds of cloud inthe southern heavensjust over the huge round shoulders of the Mullmountainsthat told us we were not likely to be harassed by anyprotracted calms.  And, in fact, occasional puffs and squalls came overfrom the south which, if they did not send us on much farther, at leastkept everybody on the alert.And at length we got it.  The gloom over the mountains had deepened, andthe streaks of sunlit sky that were visible here and there had a curiouscoppery tinge about them. Then we heard a hissing in towards the shore,and the darkening band on the sea spread rapidly out to us; then therewas a violent shaking of blocks and spars, and, as the White Dove bentto the squall, a most frightful clatter was heard below, showing thatsome careless people had been about.  Then away went the yacht like anarrow!  We cared little for the gusts of rain that came whipping acrossfrom time to time.  We would not even go down to see what damage hadbeen done in the cabins.  John of Skye, with his savage hatred of thelong calms we had endured, refused to lower his gaff topsail.  At lasthe was "letting her have it."We spun along, with the water hissing away from our wake; but the squallhad not had time to raise anything of a sea, so there was but littleneed for the women to duck their heads to the spray.  Promontory afterpromontory, bay after bay was passed, until far ahead of us, through thedriving mists of rain, we could make out the white shaft of Ru-na-Gaullighthouse.  But here another condition of affairs confronted us.  Whenwe turned her nose to the south, to beat in to Tobermory harbour, thesquall was coming tearing out of that cup among the hills with anexceeding violence.  When the spray sprang high at the bows, the flyingshreds of it that reached us bore an uncommon resemblance to the thongof a whip.  The topsail was got down, the mizen taken in, and then weproceeded to fight our way into the harbour in a series of tacks thatseemed to last only a quarter of a second. What with the howling of thewind, that blew back his orders in his face; and what with the wetdecks, that caused the men to stumble now and again; and what with thenumber of vessels in the bay, that cut short his tacks at every turn,Captain John of Skye had an exciting time of it.  But we knew him ofold. He "put on" an extra tack, when there was no need for it, andslipped though between a fishing-smack and a large schooner, merely forthe sake of "showing off."  And then the White Dove was allowed to goup to the wind, and slowly slackened her pace, and the anchor went outwith a roar.  We were probably within a yard of the precise spot wherewe had last anchored in the Tobermory bay.It blew and rained hard all that evening, and we did not even think ofgoing on deck after dinner.  We were quite content as we were.  Somehowa new and secret spirit of cheerfulness had got possession of certainmembers of this party, without any ostensible cause.  There was nolonger the depression that had prevailed about West Loch Tarbert.  WhenMary Avon played bezique with the Laird, it was to a scarcely audibleaccompaniment of "The Queen's Maries."Nor did the evening pass without an incident worthy of some briefmention.  There is, in the White Dove, a state-room which really actsas a passage, during the day, between the saloon and the forecastle; andwhen this state-room is not in use, Master Fred is in the habit ofconverting it into a sort of pantry, seeing that it adjoins his galley.Now, on this evening, when our shifty Friedrich d'or came in withsoda-water and such like things, he took occasion to say to theRear-Admiral of the Fleet on board"I beg your pardon, mem, but there is no one now in this state-room, andwill I use it for a pantry?""You will do nothing of the kind, Fred," said she quite sharply.*CHAPTER XI.**A TOAST.*"I am almost afraid of what I have done; but it is past recall now:"this is the mysterious sentence one hears on climbing up the companionnext morning.  It is Queen Titania and the Laird who are talking; but assoon as a third person appears they become consciously and guiltilysilent.  What does it matter?  We have other work on hand than pryinginto twopenny-halfpenny secrets.For we have resolved on starting away for the north in spite of thisfractious weather.  A more unpromising-looking morning indeed forsetting out could not well be imaginedwindy, and wet, and squally; thedriven green sea outside springing white where it meets the line of thecoast; Loch Sunart and its mountains hidden away altogether behind themists of rain; wan flashes of sunlight here and there only serving toshow how swiftly the clouds are flying.  But the White Dove has beendrying her wings all the summer; she can afford to face a shower now.And while the men are hoisting the sail and getting the anchor hoveshort, our two women-folk array themselves in tightly-shaped ulsters,with hoods drawn over their heads; and the Laird appears in a waterproofreaching to his heels; and even the skylights have their tarpaulinsthrown over.  Dirty weather or no, we mean to start.There are two or three yachts in the bay, the last of the summer-fleetall hastening away to the south.  There is no movement on the decks ofany one of them.  Here and there, however, in sheltered placesunder abit of awning, or standing by the doors of deck-saloonswe can make outhuddled groups of people, who are regarding, with a pardonablecuriosity, the operations of John of Skye and his merry men."They take us for maniacs," says Queen Titania from out of her hood, "tobe setting out for the north in such weather."And we were nearly affording those amiable spectators a pretty sight.The wind coming in variable gusts, the sails failed to fill at theproper moment, and the White Dove drifted right on to the bows of agreat schooner, whose bowsprit loomed portentous overhead.  There was awild stampede for boat-hooks and oars; and then with arms, and feet, andpolesaided by the swarming crew of the schoonerwe managed to clear herwith nothing more serious than an ominous grating along the gig.  Andthen the wind catching her, she gradually came under the control ofCaptain John; and away we went for the north, beating right in the teethof the gusts that came tearing over from the mouth of Loch Sunart."It's a bad wind, mem, for getting up to Isle Ornsay," says John of Skyeto the Admiral.  "Ay, and the sea pretty coorse, too, when we getoutside Ardnamurchan.""Now, listen to me, John," she says severely, and with an air ofauthorityas much authority, that is to say, as can be assumed by amidge enclosed in an ulster.  "I am not going to have any of that.  Iknow you of old.  As soon as you get out of Tobermory, you immediatelydiscover that the wind is against our going north; and we turn round andrun away down to Iona and the Bull-hole.  I will not go to theBull-hole.  If I have to sail this yacht myself, night and day, I willgo to Isle Ornsay.""If ye please, mem," says John of Skye, grinning with great delight overher facetiousness. "Oh, I will tek the yat to Isle Ornsay very well, ifthe leddies not afraid of a little coorse sea.  And you will not need tosail the yat at all, mem.  But I not afraid to let you sail the yat.You will know about the sailing now shist as much as Mr. Sutherland."At the mention of this name, Queen Titania glanced at Mary Avon,perceived she was not listening, and went nearer to John of Skye, andsaid something to him in a lower voice.  There was a quick look ofsurprise and pleasure on the handsome, brown-bearded face."Oh, I ferry glad of that, mem," said he."Hush, John!  Not a word to anybody," said she.By this time we had beat out of the harbour, and were now getting longertacks; so that, when the sheets were properly coiled, it was possiblefor the Laird and Miss Avon to attempt a series of short promenades onthe wet decks.  It was an uncertain and unstable performance, to besure; for the sea was tumultuous; but it served."Mutual helpthat's the thing," said the Laird to his companion, astogether they staggered along, or stood steady to confront aparticularly fierce gust of wind.  "We are independent of the worldthissolitary vessel out in the waste of watersbut we are not independent ofeach other.  It just reminds me of the small burghs outside Glasgow; wewish to be independent of the great ceety lying near us; we prefer tohave a separate existence; but we can help each other for all that in amost unmistakeable way"Here the Laird was interrupted by the calling out of CaptainJohn"Ready about!" and he and his companion had to get out of the wayof the boom.  Then they resumed their promenade, and he his discourse."Do ye think, for example," said this profound philosopher, "that anyone burgh would have been competent to decide on a large question likethe clauses of the Police Act that refer to cleansing and lighting?""I am not sure," Miss Avon admitted."No, no," said he confidently, "large questions should be considered incommon councilwith every opportunity of free discussion. I do not muchlike to speak about local matters, or of my own share in them, but Imust take credit for this, that it was myself recommended to theCommissioners to summon a public meeting.  It was so, and the meetingwas quite unanimous.  It was Provost McKendrick, ye must understand, whoformally made the proposal that the consideration of those clausesshould be remitted to the clerks of the various burghs, who were toreport; but the suggestion was really mineI make no scruple in claimingit.  And then, see the result!  When the six clerks were agreed, andsent in their report, look at the authority of such a document!  Who butan ass would make freevolous objections?"The Laird laughed aloud."It was that crayture, Johnny Guthrie," said he, "as usual!  I am notsure that I have mentioned his name to ye before?""Oh, yes, I think so, sir," remarked Miss Avon."It was that crayture, Johnny Guthriein the face of the unanimousreport of the whole six clerks!  Why, what could be more reasonable thanthat the lighting of closes and common stairs should fall on thelandlords, but with power to recover from the tenants; while thecleansing of back-courtsbeing a larger and more general measureshouldbe the work of the commissioners and chargeable in the police rates?  Itis a great sanitary work that benefits every one; why should not allhave a hand in paying for it?"Miss Avon was understood to assent; but the fact was that the smallportion of her face left uncovered by her hood had just then received anunexpected bath of salt water; and she had to halt for a moment to getout a handkerchief from some sub-ulsterian recess."Well," continued the Laird, as they resumed their walk, "what does thisbody Guthrie do but rise and propose that the landlordsmind ye, thelandlords aloneshould be rated for the expense of cleaning theback-courts!  I declare there are some folk seem to think that alandlord is made of nothing but money, and that it is everybody'sbusiness to harry him, and worry him, and screw every farthing out ofhim.  If Johnny Guthrie had half a dozen lands of houses himself, whatwould he say about the back-courts then?"This triumphant question settled the matter; and we haled the Lairdbelow for luncheon. Our last glance round showed us the Atlantic of asilvery grey, and looking particularly squally; with here and there agleam of pale sunshine falling on the long headland of Ardnamurchan.There was evidently some profound secret about."Well, ma'am, and where will we get to the night, do ye think?" said theLaird, cheerfully, as he proceeded to carve a cold fowl."It is of no consequence," said the other, with equal carelessness."You know we must idle away a few days somewhere."Idle away a few days?and this White Dove bent on a voyage to the farnorth when the very last of the yachts were fleeing south!"I mean," said she hastily, in order to retrieve her blunder, "thatCaptain John is not likely to go far away from the chance of a harbouruntil he sees whether this is the beginning of the equinoctials or not.""The equinoctials?" said the Laird, anxiously."They sometimes begin as early as this; but not often.  However, therewill always be some place where we can run in to."The equinoctials, indeed!  When we went on deck again we found not onlythat those angry squalls had ceased, but that the wind had veered veryconsiderably in our favour, and we were now running and plunging pastArdnamurchan Point.  The rain had ceased too; the clouds had gatheredthemselves up in heavy folds; and their reflected blackness lay over thedark and heaving Atlantic plain.  Well was it for these two women thatluncheon had been taken in time.  What one of them had dubbed theArdnamurchan Wobblewhich she declared to be as good a name for a waltzas the Liverpool Lurchhad begun in good earnest; and the White Dovewas dipping, and rolling, and springing in the most lively fashion.There was not much chance for the Laird and Mary Avon to resume theirpromenade; when one of the men came aft to relieve John of Skye at thewheel, he had to watch his chance, and come clambering along by holdingon to the shrouds, the rail of the gig, and so forth.  But Dr.Sutherland's prescription had its effect. Despite the ArdnamurchanWobble and all its deeds, there was no ghostly and silent disappearance.And so we ploughed on our way during the afternoon, the Atlanticappearing to grow darker and darker, as the clouds overhead seemed toget banked up more thickly.  The only cheerful bit of light in thisgloomy picture was a streak or two of sand at the foot of the sheer androcky cliffs north of Ardnamurchan Light; and those we were rapidlyleaving behind as the brisk breezewith a kindness to which we werewholly strangerskept steadily creeping round to the south.The dark evening wore on, and we were getting well up towards Eigg, whena strange thing became visible along the western horizon.First the heavy purple clouds showed a tinge of crimson, and then a sortof yellow smoke appeared close down at the sea.  This golden vapourwidened, cleared, until there was a broad belt of lemon-coloured sky allalong the edge of the world; and in this wonder of shining lightappeared the island of Rumto all appearance as transparent as a bit ofthe thinnest gelatine, and in colour a light purple rose.  It was reallya most extraordinary sight. The vast bulk of this mountainous island,including the sombre giants Haleval and Haskeval, seemed to have lessthan the consistency of a cathedral window; it resembled more a pale,rose-coloured cloud; and the splendour of it, and the glow of the goldensky beyond, were all the more bewildering by reason of the gloom of theoverhanging clouds that lay across like a black bar."Well!" said the Lairdand here he paused, for the amazement in his facecould not at once find fitting words.  "That beats a'!"And it was a cheerful and friendly light too, that now came streamingover to us from beyond the horizon-line.  It touched the sails and thevarnished spars with a pleasant colour. It seemed to warm and dry theair, and tempted the women to put aside their ulsters.  Then began aseries of wild endeavours to achieve a walk on deck, interrupted everysecond or two by some one or other being thrown against the boom, orhaving to grasp at the shrouds in passing.  But it resulted in exercise,at all events; and meanwhile we were still making our way northward,with the yellow star of Isle Ornsay lighthouse beginning to be visiblein the gathering dusk.That evening at dinner the secret came out. There cannot be theslightest doubt that the disclosure of it had been carefully planned bythese two conspirators; and that they considered themselves amazinglyprofound in giving to it a careless and improvised air."I never sit down to dinner now, ma'am," observed the Laird, in a lightand graceful manner, "without a feeling that there is something wantingin the saloon.  The table is not symmetrical.  That should occur to MissMary's eye at once.  One at the head, one my side, two yours; no, thatis not as symmetrical as it used to be.""Do you think I do not feel that too?" says his hostess.  "And that isnot the only time at which I wish that Angus were back with us."No one had a word to say for poor Howard Smith, who used to sit at thefoot of the table, in a meek and helpful capacity.  No one thought ofsummoning him back to make the arrangement symmetrical.  Perhaps he wasbeing consoled by Messrs. Hughes, Barnes, and Barnes."And the longer the nights are growing, I get to miss him more andmore," she says, with a beautiful pathos in her look.  "He was always sofull of activity and cheerfulnessthe way he enjoyed life on board theyacht was quite infectious; and then his constant plans and suggestions.And how he looked forward to this long trip! though, to be sure, hestruggled hard against the temptation.  I know the least thing wouldhave turned the scale, Italy or no Italy.""Why, ma'am," says the Laird, laughing prodigiously, "I should notwonder, if you sent him a message at this minute, to find him comingalong post-haste and joining us, after all.  What is Eetaly?  I havebeen in Eetaly myself.  Ye might live there a hundred years, and neversee anything so fine in colour as that sunset we saw this very evening.And if it is business he is after, bless me! cannot a young man be ayoung man sometimes, and have the courage to do something imprudent?Come now, write to him at once!  I will take the responsibility myself.""To tell you the truth, sir," said the other timidlybut she pretendsshe is very anxious about the safety of a certain distant wine-glass"Itook a sudden notion into my head yesterday morning, and sent him amessage.""Dear me!" he cries.  The hypocrite!And Mary Avon all the while sits mute, dismayed, not daring to turn herface to the light.  And the small white hand that holds the knife: whydoes it tremble so?"The fact is," says Queen Titania carelessly, just as if she werereading a bit out of a newspaper, "I sent him a telegram, to save time.And I thought it would be more impressive if I made it a sort ofround-robin, don't you knowas far as that can be done on atelegraph-formand I said that each and all of us demanded his instantreturn, and that we should wait about Isle Ornsay or Loch Hourn until hejoined us.  So you see, sir, we may have to try your patience for a dayor two.""Ye may try it, but ye will not find it wanting," said the Laird, withserious courtesy. "I do not care how long I wait for the young man, solong as I am in such pleasant society. Ye forget, ma'am, what life oneis obliged to live at Denny-mains, with public affairs worrying one fromthe morning till the night. Patience?  I have plenty of patience.  Butall the same I would like to see the young man here.  I have a greatrespect for him, though I consider that some of his views may not bequite soundthat will mendthat will mend; and now, my good friends, Iwill take leave to propose a toast to ye."We knew the Laird's old-fashioned ways, and had grown to humour them.There was a pretence of solemnly filling glasses."I am going," said the Laird, in a formal manner, "to propose to ye thequick and safe return of a friend.  May all good fortune attend him onhis way, and may happiness await him at the end of his journey!"There was no dissentient; but there was one small white hand somewhatunsteady, as the girl, abashed and trembling and silent, touched theglass with her lips.*CHAPTER XII.**EXPECTATIONS.*It was a fine piece of acting.  These two continued to talk about thecoming of our young Doctor as if it were the most simple and ordinaryaffair possible.  All its bearings were discussed openly, to give you tounderstand that Mary Avon had nothing in the world to do with it.  Itwas entirely a practical arrangement for the saving of time.  By runningacross to Paris he would jump over the interval between our leaving WestLoch Tarbert and this present setting-out for the north.  Mary Avon wasasked about this point and that point: there was no reason why sheshould not talk about Angus Sutherland just like any other.And, indeed, there was little call for any pale apprehension on the faceof the girl, or for any quick look round when a sudden sound was heard.It was not possible for Angus to be anywhere in our neighbourhood asyet. When we went on deck next morning, we found that we had been idlydrifting about all night, and that we were now far away from any land.The morning sun was shining on the dark green woods of Armadale, and onthe little white sharp point of Isle Ornsay lighthouse, and on the vastheather-purpled hills in the north; while over there the mountains aboveLoch Hourn were steeped in a soft mysterious shadow.  And then, by andby, after breakfast, some light puffs of westerly wind began to rufflethe glassy surface of the sea; and the White Dove almost insensiblydrew nearer and nearer to the entrance of that winding loch thatdisappeared away within the dusky shadows of those overhanging hills.Late on as it was in the autumn, the sun was hot on the sails and thedeck; and these cool breezes were welcome in a double sense.We saw nothing of the accustomed gloom of Loch Hourn.  The sheer sidesof the great mountains were mostly in shadow, it is true; but then theridges and plateaus were burning in the sunlight; and the waters of theloch around us were blue, and lapping, and cheerful.  We knew only thatthe place was vast, and still, and silent; we could make out scarcelyany sign of habitation.Then, as the White Dove still glided on her way, we opened out alittle indentation of the land behind an island; and there, nestled atthe foot of the hill, we descried a small fishing-village.  Thecottages, the nets drying on the poles, the tiny patches of cultivatedground behind, all seemed quite toy-like against the giant andoverhanging bulk of the hills.  But again we drew away from CamusBanthat is, the White Bayand got further and further into thesolitudes of the mountains, and away from any traces of human life.When about mid-day we came to anchor, we found ourselves in a sort ofcup within the hills, apparently shut off from all the outer world, andin a stillness so intense that the distant whistle of a curlew was quitestartling.  A breath of wind that blew over from the shore brought us ascent of honeysuckle.At luncheon we found to our amazement that a fifth seat had been placedat table, and that plates, glasses, and what not had been laid for aguest.  A guest in these wilds?there was not much chance of such athing, unless the King of the Seals or the Queen of the Mermaids were tocome on board.But when we had taken our seats, and were still regarding the vacantchair with some curiosity, the Laird's hostess was pleased to explain.She said to him, with a shy smile,"I have not forgotten what you said; and I quite agree with you that itbalances the table better.""But not an empty chair," said the Laird, severely; perhaps thinking itwas an evil omen."You know the German song," said she, "and how the last remaining of thecomrades filled the glasses with wine, and how the ghosts rattled theglasses.  Would you kindly fill that glass, sir?"She passed the decanter."I will not, begging your pardon," said the Laird, sternly, for he didnot approve of these superstitions.  And forthwith he took the deckchair and doubled it up, and threw it on the couch.  "We want the youngman Sutherland here, and not any ghost.  I doubt not but that he hasreached London by now."After that a dead silence.  Were there any calculations about time; orwere we wondering whether, amid the roar and whirl and moving life ofthe great city, he was thinking of the small floating-home far away,amid the solitude of the seas and the hills?  The deck-chair was putaside, it is true, for the Laird shrank from superstition; but the emptyglass, and the plates and knives, and so forth, remained; and theyseemed to say that our expected guest was drawing nearer and nearer."Well, John," said Queen Titania, getting on deck again, and lookinground, "I think we have got into Fairyland at last."John of Skye did not seem quite to understand, for his answer was"Oh, yes, mem, it is a fearful place for squahls.""For squalls!" said she.No wonder she was surprised.  The sea around us was so smooth that theonly motion visible on it was caused by an exhausted wasp that hadfallen on the glassy surface and was making a series of small ripples intrying to get free again.  And then, could anything be more soft andbeautiful than the scene around usthe great mountains clad to thesummit with the light foliage of the birch; silver waterfalls that madea vague murmur in the air; an island right ahead with picturesquelywooded rocks; an absolutely cloudless sky abovealtogether a wonder ofsunlight and fair colours?  Squalls?  The strange thing was, not that wehad ventured into a region of unruly winds, but that we had got enoughwind to bring us in at all.  There was now not even enough to bring usthe scent of the honeysuckle from the shore.In the afternoon we set out on an expedition, nominally after wild-duck,but in reality in exploration of the upper reaches of the loch. We founda narrow channel between the island and the mainland, and penetratedinto the calm and silent waters of Loch Hourn Beg.  And still less didthis offshoot of the larger loch accord with that gloomy namethe Lakeof Hell.  Even where the mountains were bare and forbidding, the warmevening light touched the granite with a soft rose-grey; and reflectionsof this beautiful colour were here and there visible amid the clear blueof the water.  We followed the windings of the narrow and tortuous loch;but found no wild-duck at all.  Here and there a seal stared at us as wepassed.  Then we found a crofter's cottage, and landed, to theconsternation of one or two handsome wild-eyed children.  A purchase ofeggs ensued, after much voluble Gaelic.  We returned to the yacht.That evening, as we sate on deck, watching the first stars beginning totremble in the blue, some one called attention to a singular light thatwas beginning to appear along the summits of the mountains just overusa silvery-grey light that showed us the soft foliage of the birches,while below the steep slopes grew more sombre as the night fell.  Andthen we guessed that the moon was somewhere on the other side of theloch, as yet hidden from us by those black crags that pierced into thecalm blue vault of the sky.  This the Lake of Hell, indeed!  By and bywe saw the silver rim appear above the black line of the hills; and apale glory was presently shining around us, particularly noticeablealong the varnished spars.  As the white moon sailed up, this solitarycup in the mountains was filled with the clear radiance, and the silenceseemed to increase.  We could hear more distinctly than ever the variouswaterfalls.  The two women were walking up and down the deck; and eachtime that Mary Avon turned her profile to the light the dark eyebrowsand dark eyelashes seemed darker than ever against the pale, sensitive,sweet face.But after a while she gently disengaged herself from her friend, andcame and sate down by the Laird: quite mutely, and waiting for him tospeak.  It is not to be supposed that she had been in any way moredemonstrative towards him since his great act of kindness; or that therewas any need for him to have purchased her affection.  That was of olderdate.  Perhaps, if the truth were told, she was rather lessdemonstrative now; for we had all discovered that the Laird had anervous horror of anything that seemed to imply a recognition of what hehad done.  It was merely, he had told us, a certain wrong thing he hadput right: there was no more to be said about it.However, her coming and sitting down by him was no unusual circumstance;and she meekly left him his own choice, to speak to her or not as hepleased.  And he did speakafter a time."I was thinking," said he, "what a strange feeling ye get in living onboard a yacht in these wilds: it is just as if ye were the onlycraytures in the world.  Would ye not think, now, that the moon therebelonged to this circle of hills, and could not be seen by any oneoutside it?  It looks as if it were coming close to the topmast; how canye believe that it is shining over Trafalgar Square in London?""It seems very close to us on so clear a night," says Mary Avon."And in a short time now," continued the Laird, "this little world ofoursI mean the little company on board the yachtmust be dashed intofragments, as it were; and ye will be away in London; and I will be atDenny-mains: and who knows whether we may ever see each other again?  Wemust not grumble. It is the fate of the best friends.  But there is onegrand consolationthink what a consolation it must have been to many ofthe poor people who were driven away from these Highlandsto Canada, andAustralia, and elsewherethat after all the partings and sorrows of thisworld there is the great meeting-place at last. I would just ask thisfavour frae ye, my lass, that when ye go back to London, ye would get abook of our old Scotch psalm-tunes, and learn the tune that is calledComfort.  It begins 'Take comfort, Christians, when your friends.'  Itis a grand tune that: I would like ye to learn it.""Oh, certainly I will," said the girl."And I have been thinking," continued the Laird, "that I would get TomGalbraith to make ye a bit sketch of Denny-mains, that ye might hang upin London, if ye were so minded.  It would show ye what the place waslike; and after some years ye might begin to believe that ye really hadbeen there, and that ye were familiar with it, as the home of an oldfriend o' yours.""But I hope to see Denny-mains for myself, sir," said she, with somesurprise.A quick, strange look appeared for a moment on the old Laird's face.But presently he said"No, no, lass, ye will have other interest and other duties.  That isbut proper and natural.  How would the world get on at all if we werenot to be dragged here and there by diverse occupations?"Then the girl spoke, proudly and bravely"And if I have any duties in the world, I think I know to whom I owethem.  And it is not a duty at all, but a great pleasure; and youpromised me, sir, that I was to see Denny-mains; and I wish to pay you along, long, long visit.""A long, long, long visit?" said the Laird cheerfully.  "No, no, lass.I just couldna be bothered with ye.  Ye would be in my way. Whatinterest could ye take in our parish meetings, and the church soires,and the like? No, no.  But if ye like to pay me a short, short, shortvisitat your own convenienceat your own convenience, mindI will getTom Galbraith through from Edinburgh, and I will get out some of theyounger Glasgowmen; and if we do not, you and me, show them something inthe way of landscape-sketching, that will just frighten them out oftheir very wits, why then I will give ye leave to say that my name isnot Mary Avon."He rose then and took her hand, and began to walk with her up and downthe moonlit deck.  We heard something about the Haughs o' Cromdale.  TheLaird was obviously not ill-pleased that she had boldly claimed thatpromised visit to Denny-mains.*CHAPTER XIII.**"YE ARE WELCOME, GLENOGIE!"*When, after nearly three months of glowing summer weather, the heavensbegin to look as if they meditated revenge; when, in a dead calm, adarkening gloom appears behind the further hills, and slight puffs ofwind, come down vertically, spreading themselves out on the glassywater; when the air is sultry, and an occasional low rumble is heard,and the sun looks white; then the reader of these pages may thank hisstars that he is not in Loch Hourn.  And yet it was not altogether ourfault that we were nearly caught in this dangerous cup among the hills.We had lain in these silent and beautiful waters for two or three days,partly because of the exceeding loveliness of the place, partly becausewe had to allow Angus time to get up to Isle Ornsay, but chiefly becausewe had not the option of leaving.  To get through the narrow and shallowchannel by which we had entered we wanted both wind and tide in ourfavour; and there was scarcely a breath of air during the long,peaceful, shining days.  At length, when our sovereign mistress madesure that the young Doctor must be waiting for us at Isle Ornsay, sheinformed Captain John that he must get us out of this place somehow."'Deed, I not sorry at all," said John of Skye, who had never ceased torepresent to us, that, in the event of bad weather coming on, we shouldfind ourselves in the lion's jaws.Well, on the afternoon of the third day, it became very obvious thatsomething serious was about to happen.  Clouds began to bank up behindthe mountains that overhung the upper reaches of the loch, and anintense purple gloom gradually spread along those sombre hillsall themore intense that the little island in front of us, crossing the loch,burned in the sunlight a vivid strip of green. Then little puffs of windfell here and there on the blue water, and broadened out in a silverygrey.  We noticed that all the men were on deck.As the strange darkness of the loch increased, as these vast mountainsoverhanging the inner cup of the loch grew more and more awful in thegloom, we began to understand why the Celtic imagination had called thisplace the Lake of Hell.  Captain John kept walking up and down somewhatanxiously, and occasionally looking at his watch.  The question waswhether we should get enough wind to take us through the narrows beforethe tide turned.  In the meantime mainsail and jib were set, and theanchor hove short.At last the welcome flapping and creaking and rattling of blocks!  Whatalthough this brisk breeze came dead in our teeth?  John of Skye, as hecalled all hands to the windlass, crave us to understand that he wouldrather beat through the neck of a bottle than lie in Loch Hourn thatnight.And it was an exciting piece of business when we got further down theloch, and approached this narrow passage.  On the one side sharp andsheer rocks; on the other shallow banks that shone through the water;behind us the awful gloom of gathering thunder; ahead of us a breezethat came tearing down from the hills in the most puzzling and varyingsqualls.  With a steady wind it would have been bad enough to beatthrough those narrows; but this wind kept shifting about anyhow.  Sharpwas the word indeed.  It was a question of seconds as we sheered awayfrom the rocks on the one side, or from the shoals on the other.  Andthen, amidst it all, a sudden cry from the women"John!  John!"John of Skye knows his business too well to attend to the squealing ofwomen."Ready about!" he roars; and all hands are at the sheets, and evenMaster Fred is leaning over the bows, to watch the shallowness of thewater."John, John!" the women cry."Haul up the main tack, Hector!  Ay, that'll do.  Ready about, boys!"But this starboard tack is a little bit longer, and John manages to castan impatient glance behind him.  The sailor's eye in an instant detectsthat distant object.  What is it?  Why, surely some one in the stern ofa rowing-boat, standing up and violently waving a white handkerchief,and two men pulling like mad creatures."John, John!  Don't you see it is Angus Sutherland!" cries the olderwoman pitifully.By this time we are going bang on to a sandbank; and the men, standingby the sheets, are amazed that the skipper does not put his helm down.Instead of thatand all this happens in an instanthe eases the helm up,the bows of the yacht fall away from the wind, and just clear the bank.Hector of Moidart jumps to the mainsheet and slacks it out, and then,behold! the White Dove is running free, and there is a sudden silenceon board."Why, he must have come over from the Caledonian Canal!" says QueenTitania, in great excitement.  "Oh, how glad I am!"But John of Skye takes advantage of this breathing space to have anotherglance at his watch."We'll maybe beat the tide yet," he says confidently.And who is this who comes joyously clambering up, and hauls hisportmanteau after him, and throws a couple of half-crowns into thebottom of the black boat?"Oh, Angus!" his hostess cries to him, "you will shake hands with us allafterwards.  We are in a dreadful strait.  Never mind ushelp John ifyou can."Meanwhile Captain John has again put the nose of the White Dove atthese perilous narrows; and the young Doctorperhaps glad enough toescape embarrassment among all this clamourhas thrown his coat off tohelp; and the men have got plenty of anchor-chain on deck, to let go theanchor if necessary; and then again begins that manoeuvring between theshallows and the rocks.  What is this new sense of completenessof addedlifeof briskness and gladness?  Why do the men seem more alert? and whythis cheeriness in Captain John's shouted commands?  The women are nolonger afraid of either banks or shoals; they rather enjoy the danger;when John seems determined to run the yacht through a mass ofconglomerate, they know that with the precision of clock-work she willbe off on the other tack; and they are laughing at these narrow escapes.Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that only one of them laughs.Mary Avon is somewhat silent, and she holds her friend's hand tight.Tide or no tide, we get through the narrow channel at last; and everyone breathes more freely when we are in the open.  But we are still farfrom being out of Loch Hourn; and now the mountains in the south,tooone of them apparently an extinct volcanohave grown black as night;and the wind that comes down from them in jerks and squalls threatens toplunge our bulwarks under water. How the White Dove flees away fromthis gathering gloom!  Once or twice we hear behind us a roar, andturning we can see a specially heavy squall tearing across the loch; buthere with us the wind continues to keep a little more steady, and we gobowling along at a whirling pace.  Angus Sutherland comes aft, puts onhis coat, and makes his formal entry into our society."You have just got out in time," says he, laughing somewhat nervously,to his hostess. "There will be a wild night in Loch Hourn to-night.""And the beautiful calm we have had in there!" she says.  "We werebeginning to think that Loch Hourn was Fairyland.""Look!" he said.And indeed the spectacle behind us was of a nature to make us thankfulthat we had slipped out of the lion's jaws.  The waters of the loch werebeing torn into spindrift by the squalls; and the black clouds overheadwere being dragged into shreds as if by invisible hands; and in thehollows below appeared a darkness as if night had come on prematurely.And still the White Dove flew and flew, as if she knew of the dangerbehind her; and by and by we were plunging and racing across the Soundof Sleat.  We had seen the last of Loch Hourn.The clear golden ray of Isle Ornsay lighthouse was shining through thedusk as we made in for the sheltered harbour.  We had ran the dozenmiles or so in a little over the hour; and now dinner-time had arrived;and we were not sorry to be in comparatively smooth water.  The men weresent ashore with some telegramthe sending off of which was the mainobject of our running in here; and then Master Fred's bell summoned usbelow from the wild and windy night.How rich and warm and cheerful was this friendly glow of the candles,and how compact the table seemed now, with the vacant space filled atlast!  And every one appeared to be talking hard, in order to show thatAngus Sutherland's return was a quite ordinary and familiar thing; andthe Laird was making his jokes; and the young Doctor telling his hostesshow he had been sending telegrams here and there until he had learned ofthe White Dove having been seen going in to Loch Hourn.  Even MissAvon, though she said but little, shared in this general excitement andpleasure.  We could hear her soft laughter from time to time.  But hereyes were kept away from the corner where Angus Sutherland sate."Well, you are lucky people," said he.  "If you had missed getting outof that hole by half an hour, you might have been shut up in it afortnight.  I believe a regular gale from the south has begun.""It is you who have brought it then," said his hostess.  "You are thestormy petrel.  And you did your best to make us miss the tide.""I think we shall have some sailing now," said he, rubbing his hands ingreat delighthe pretends to be thinking only of the yacht. "John talksof going on to-night, so as to slip through the Kyle Rhea narrows withthe first of the flood-tide in the morning.""Going out to-night!" she exclaimed.  "Is it you who have put thatmadness into his head?  It must be pitch dark already.  And a galeblowing!""Oh, no!" he said, laughing.  "There is not much of a gale.  And itcannot be very dark with the moon behind the clouds."Here a noise above told us the men had come back from the small village.They brought a telegram too; but it was of no consequence.  Presentlyinfact, as soon as he decently couldAngus left the dinner-table, and wenton deck.  He had scarcely dared to glance at the pale sensitive faceopposite him.By and by Queen Titania said, solemnly:"Listen!"There was no doubt about it; the men were weighing anchor."That madman," said she, "has persuaded Captain John to go to seaagainat this time of night!""It was Captain John's own wish.  He wishes to catch the tide in themorning," observed Miss Avon, with her eyes cast down."That's right, my lass," said the Laird. "Speak up for them who areabsent.  But, indeed, I think I will go on deck myself now, to seewhat's going on."We all went on deck, and there and then unanimously passed a vote ofapproval on Captain John's proceedings, for the wind had moderated veryconsiderably; and there was a pale suffused light telling of the moonbeing somewhere behind the fleecy clouds in the south-east.  With muchcontent we perceived that the White Dove was already moving out of thedark little harbour.  We heard the rush of the sea outside without muchconcern.It was a pleasant sailing night after all. When we had stolen by theglare of the solitary lighthouse, and got into the open, we found therewas no very heavy sea running, while there was a steady serviceablebreeze from the south.  There was moonlight abroad too, though the moonwas mostly invisible behind the thin drifting clouds.  The women,wrapped up, sate hand-in-hand, and chatted to each other; the Doctor wasat the tiller; the Laird was taking an occasional turn up and down,sometimes pausing to challenge general attention by some profoundremark.And very soon we began to perceive that Angus Sutherland had by someinscrutable means got into the Laird's good graces in a most markeddegree.  Denny-mains, on this particular night, as we sailed awaynorthward, was quite complimentary about the march of modern science,and the service done to humanity by scientific men.  He had not even anill word for the Vestiges of Creation.  He went the length of sayingthat he was not scholar enough to deny that there might be various waysof interpreting the terms of the Mosaic chronology; and expressed agreat interest in the terribly remote people who must have lived in thelake-dwellings."Oh, don't you believe that!" said our steersman good-naturedly.  "Thescientifics are only humbugging the public about those lake-dwellings.They were only the bath-houses and wash-houses of a comparatively modernand civilised race, just as you see them now on the Lake of a ThousandIslands, and at the mouths of the Amazon, and even on the Rhine.  Surelyyou know the bath-houses built on piles on the Rhine?""Dear me!" said the Laird, "that is extremely interesting.  It is anovel viewa most novel view.  But then the remainswhat of the remains?The earthen cups and platters: they must have belonged to a verypreemitive race?""Not a bit," said the profound scientific authority, with a laugh."They were the things the children amused themselves with, when theirnurses took them down there to be out of the heat and the dust.  Theywere a very advanced race indeed.  Even the children could make earthencups and saucers, while the children now-a-days can only make mud-pies.""Don't believe him, sir!" their hostess called out; "he is only making afool of us all.""Ay, but there's something in itthere's something in it," said theLaird seriously; and he took a step or two up and down the deck, in deepmeditation.  "There's something in it.  It's plausible.  If it is notsound, it is an argument.  It would be a good stick to break over anignorant man's head."Suddenly the Laird began to laugh aloud."Bless me," said he, "if I could only inveigle Johnny Guthrie into anargument about that! I would give it him!  I would give it him!"This was a shocking revelation.  What had come over the Laird'sconscience that he actually proposed to inveigle a poor man into acontroversy and then to hit him over the head with a sophisticalargument?  We could not have believed it.  And here he was laughing andchuckling to himself over that shameful scheme.Our attention, however, was at this moment suddenly drawn away frommoral questions. The rapidly driving clouds just over the wild mountainsof Loch Hourn parted, and the moon glared out on the tumbling waves.But what a curious moon it was!pale and watery, with a white haloaround it, and with another faintly-coloured halo outside that againwhenever the slight and vapoury clouds crossed. John of Skye came aft."I not like the look of that moon," said John of Skye to the Doctor, butin an undertone, so that the women should not hear."Nor I either," said the other, in an equally low voice.  "Do you thinkwe are going to have the equinoctials, John?""Oh no, not yet.  It is not the time for the equinoctials yet."And as we crept on through the night, now and again from amid the wildand stormy clouds above Loch Hourn the wan moon still shone out; andthen we saw something of the silent shores we were passing, and of theawful mountains overhead, stretching far into the darkness of the skies.Then preparations were made for coming to anchor; and by and by theWhite Dove was brought round to the wind.  We were in a bayif bay itcould be calledjust south of Kyle Rhea narrows.  There was nothingvisible along the pale moonlit shore."This is a very open place to anchor in, John," our young Doctorventured to remark."But it is a good holding-ground; and we will be away early in themorning whatever."And so, when the anchor was swung out, and quiet restored over thevessel, we proceeded to get below.  There were a great many things to behanded down; and a careful search had to be made that nothing wasforgottenwe did not want to find soaked shawls or books lying on thedeck in the morning.  But at length all this was settled too, and wewere assembled once more in the saloon.We were assembledall but two."Where is Miss Mary?" said the Laird cheerfully: he was always the firstto miss his companion."Perhaps she is in her cabin," said his hostess somewhat nervously."And your young Doctorwhy does he not come down and have his glass oftoddy like a man?" said the Laird, getting his own tumbler.  "The youngmen now-a-days are just as frightened as children.  What with theirchemistry, and their tubes, and their percentages of alcohol: there wasnone of that nonsense when I was a young man.  People took what theyliked, so long as it agreed with them; and will anybody tell me there isany harm in a glass of good Scotch whisky?"She does not answer; she looks somewhat preoccupied and anxious."Ay, ay," continues the Laird, reaching over for the sugar; "if peoplewould only stop there, there is nothing in the world makes such anexcellent night-cap as a single glass of good Scotch whisky.  Now,ma'am, I will just beg you to try half a glass of my brewing."She pays no attention to him.  For first of all she now hears a lightstep on the companion-way, and then the door of the ladies' cabin isopened, and shut again.  Then a heavy step on the companion-way, and Dr.Sutherland comes into the saloon.  There is a strange look on hisfacenot of dejection; but he tries to be very reticent and modest, andis inordinately eager in handing a knife to the Laird for the cutting ofa lemon."Where is Mary, Angus?" said his hostess, looking at him."She has gone into your cabin," said he, looking up with a sort ofwistful appeal in his eyes.  As plainly as possible they said, "Won'tyou go to her?"The unspoken request was instantly answered; she got up and quietly leftthe saloon."Come, lad," said the Laird.  "Are ye afraid to try a glass of Scotchwhisky?  You chemical men know too much: that is not wholesome; and youa Scotchman tootake a glass, man!""Twelve, if you like," said the Doctor, laughing; "but one will do formy purpose. I'm going to follow your example, sir; I am going to proposea toast.  It is a good old custom."This was a proposal after the Laird's own heart.  He insisted on thewomen being summoned; and they came.  He took no notice that Mary Avonwas rose-red, and downcast of face; and that the elder woman held herhand tightly, and had obviously been crying a little bitnot tears ofsorrow.  When they were seated, he handed each a glass.  Then he calledfor silence, waiting to hear our Doctor make a proper and courtly speechabout his hostess, or about the White Dove, or John of Skye, oranything.But what must have been the Laird's surprise when he found that it washis own health that was being proposed!  And that not in the manner ofthe formal oratory that the Laird admired, but in a very simple andstraightforward speech, that had just a touch of personal and earnestfeeling in it.  For the young Doctor spoke of the long days and nightswe had spent together, far away from human ken; and how intimatelyassociated people became on board ship; and how thoroughly one couldlearn to know and love a particular character through being brought intosuch close relationship.  And he said that friendships thus formed in aweek or a month might last for a lifetime.  And he could not say much,before the very face of the Laird, about all those qualities which hadgained for him something more than our esteemqualities especiallyvaluable on board shipgood humour, patience, courtesy,light-heartedness"Bless me," cried the Laird, interrupting the speaker in defiance of allthe laws that govern public oratory, "I maun stop thisI maun stop this!Are ye all come together to make fun of meeh?  Have a carehave acare!"He looked round threateningly; and his eye lighted with a darker warningon Mary Avon."That lass, too," said he; "and I thought her a friend of mine; and shehas come to make a fool of me like the rest!  And so ye want to make methe Homesh o' this boat? Well, I may be a foolish old man; but my eyesare open.  I know what is going on.  Come here, my lass, until I tell yesomething."Mary Avon went and took the seat next him; and he put his hand gently onher shoulder."Young people will have their laugh and their joke," said he."It was no joke at all!" said she warmly."Whisht, now.  I say young people will have their laugh and their jokeat a foolish old man; and who is to prevent them?  Not me. But I'll tellye what: ye may have your sport of me, on one condition."He patted her once or twice on the shoulder, just as if she was a child."And the condition is this, my lassthat ye have the wedding atDenny-mains."*CHAPTER XIV.**THE EQUINOCTIALS AT LAST.*There was no dreaming of weddings at Denny-mains, or elsewhere, for someof us that night.  It had been blowing pretty hard when we turned in;but towards two or three o'clock the wind increased to half a gale,while heavy showers kept rattling along the decks. Then there were othersounds.  One of the men was heard to clamber up the iron ladder of theforecastle; and as soon as he had put his head out, his contentedexclamation was, "Oh, ferry well; go on!"  Then he came below and rousedhis companions.  Presently there was a loud commotion on deck.  This wasenough for our Doctor.  One could hear him rapidly dressing in hislittle state-roomthen staggering through the saloon, for the wind wasknocking about the White Dove considerablythen groping his way up thedark companion.  For some time there was a fine turmoil going on above.Another anchor was thrown out.  The gig and dingay were brought in ondeck.  All the skylights were fastened down, and the tarpaulins putover.  Then a woman's voice"Angus!  Angus!"The Doctor came tumbling down the companion; by this time we had got acandle lit in the saloon."What is it?" was heard from the partly opened door of the ladies'cabin."Nothing at all.  A bit of a breeze has sprung up.""Mary says you must stay below.  Never mind what it is.  You are not togo on deck again.""Very well."He came into the saloonall wet and dripping, but exceedingly pleased tohave been thus thought ofand then he said in a tragic whisper:"We are in for it at last.""The equinoctials?""Yes."So we turned in again, leaving the White Dove to haul and strain ather cables all through the nightswaying, pitching, groaning, creaking,as if she would throw herself free of her anchors altogether, and sweepaway over to Glenelg.Then, in the early morning, the gale had apparently increased.  Whilethe women-folk remained in their cabin, the others of us adventured upthe companion-way, and had a look out.  It was not a cheerful sight.All around the green sea was being torn along by the heavy wind; thewhite crests of the waves being whirled up in smoke; the surge springinghigh on the rocks over by Glenelg; the sky almost black overhead; themountains that ought to have been quite near us invisible behind theflying mists of the rain.  Then how the wind howled!  Ordinarily thesound was a low, moaning basseven lower than the sound of the waves;but then again it would increase and rise into a shrill whistle, mostlyheard, one would have said, from about the standing rigging and thecrosstrees.  But our observation of these phenomena was brief,intermittent, and somewhat ignominious.  We had to huddle in thecompanion-way like Jacks-in-the-box; for the incautiously protruded headwas liable to be hit by a blast of rain that came along like a charge ofNo. 6 shot.  Then we tumbled below for breakfast, and the scaredwomen-folk made their appearance."The equinoctials, Angus?" said Queen Titania, with some solemnity offace."Oh, I suppose so," said he cheerfully."Well, I have been through them two or three times before," said she,"but never in an exposed place like this.""We shall fight through it first-rate," said heand you should have seenMary Avon's eyes; she was clearly convinced that fifteen equinoctialgales could not do us the slightest harm so long as this young Doctorwas on board.  "It is a fine stroke of luck that the gale is from thesouth-west.  If it had come on from the east, we should have been in abad way.  As it is, there is not a rock between here and the oppositeshore at Glenelg, and even if we drag our anchors, we shall catch upsomewhere at the other side.""I hope we shall not have to trust to that," says Queen Titania, who inher time has seen something of the results of vessels dragging theiranchors.As the day wore on, the fury of the gale still increased: the windmoaning and whistling by turns, the yacht straining at her cables, androlling and heaving about.  Despite the tender entreaties of the women,Dr. Angus would go on deck again; for now Captain John had resolved onlowering the topmast, and also on getting the boom and mainsail fromtheir crutch down on to the deck.  Being above in this weather was farfrom pleasant. The showers occasionally took the form of hail; and sofiercely were the pellets driven by the wind that they stung where theyhit the face.  And the outlook around was dismal enoughthe green seaand its whirling spindrift; the heavy waves breaking all along theGlenelg shores; the writhing of the gloomy sky.  We had a companion, bythe way, in this exposed placea great black schooner that heavilyrolled and pitched as she strained at her two anchors.  The skipper ofher did not leave her bows for a moment the whole day, watching for thefirst symptom of dragging.Then that night.  As the darkness came over, the wind increased inshrillness until it seemed to tear with a scream through the rigging;and though we were fortunately under the lee of the Skye hills, we couldhear the water smashing on the bows of the yacht. As night fell thatshrill whistling and those recurrent shocks grew in violence, until webegan to wonder how long the cables would hold."And if our anchors give, I wonder where we shall go to," said QueenTitania, in rather a low voice."I don't care," said Miss Avon, quite contentedly.She was seated at dinner; and had undertaken to cut up and mix somesalad that Master Fred had got at Loch Hourn.  She seemed whollyengrossed in that occupation. She offered some to the Laird, veryprettily; and he would have taken it if it had been hemlock.  But whenshe said she did not care where the White Dove might drift to, we knewvery well what she meant.  And some of us may have thought that a timewould perhaps arrive when the young lady would not be able to haveeverything she cared for in the world within the compass of the saloonof a yacht.Now it is perhaps not quite fair to tell tales out of school; but stillthe truth is the truth. The two women were on the whole very bravethroughout this business; but on that particular night the storm grewmore and more violent, and it occurred to them that they would escapethe risk of being rolled out of their berths if they came along into thesaloon and got some rugs laid on the floor.  This they did; and thenoise of the wind and the sea was so great that none of the occupants ofthe adjoining state-rooms heard them.  But then it appeared that nosooner had they lain down on the floorit is unnecessary to say thatthey were dressed and ready for any emergencythan they were mightilyalarmed by the swishing of water below them."Mary!  Mary!" said the one, "the sea is rushing into the hold."The other, knowing less about yachts, said nothing; but no doubt, withthe admirable unselfishness of lovers, thought it was not of muchconsequence, since Angus Sutherland and she would be drowned together.But what was to be clone?  The only way to the forecastle was throughthe Doctor's state-room.  There was no help for it; they first knockedat his door, and called to him that the sea was rushing into the hold;and then he bawled into the forecastle until Master Fred, the first toawake, made his appearance, rubbing his knuckles into his eyes andsaying, "Very well, sir; is it hot water or cold water ye want?" andthen there was a general commotion of the men getting on deck to try thepumps.  And all this brave uproar for nothing.  There was scarcely agallon of water in the hold; but the women, by putting their heads closeto the floor of the saloon, had imagined that the sea was rushing in onthem.  Such is the story of this night's adventures as it wassubsequentlyand with some shamefacednessrelated to the writer of thesepages.  There are some people who, when they go to sleep, sleep, andrefuse to pay heed to twopenny-halfpenny tumults.Next morning the state of affairs was no better; but there was thispoint in our favour, that the White Dove, having held on so long, wasnot now likely to drag her anchors and precipitate us on the Glenelgshore.  Again we had to pass the day below, with the runningaccompaniment of pitching and groaning on the part of the boat, and ofthe shrill clamour of the wind, and the rattling of heavy showers. Butas we sat at luncheon, a strange thing occurred.  A burst of sunlightsuddenly came through the skylight and filled the saloon, movingbackwards and forwards on the blue cushions as the yacht swayed, anddelighting everybody with the unexpected glory of colour. You maysuppose that there was little more thought of luncheon.  There was aninstant stampede for waterproofs and a clambering up the companion-way.Did not this brief burst of sunlight portend the passing over of thegale?  Alas! alas! when we got on deck, we found the scene around us aswild and stormy as ever, with even a heavier sea now racing up the Soundand thundering along Glenelg. Hopelessly we went below again.  The onlycheerful feature of our imprisonment was the obvious content of thosetwo young people. They seemed perfectly satisfied with being shut up inthis saloon; and were always quite surprised when Master Fred's summonsinterrupted their draughts or bezique.On the third day the wind came in intermittent squalls, which wassomething; and occasionally there was a glorious burst of sunshine thatwent flying across the grey-green driven sea.  But for the most part itrained heavily; and the Ferdinand and Miranda business was continuedwith much content. The Laird had lost himself in Municipal London.  OurAdmiral-in-chief was writing voluminous letters to two youths at schoolin Surrey, which were to be posted if ever we reached land again.That night about ten o'clock a cheering incident occurred.  We heard thebooming of a steam-whistle.  Getting up on deck, we could make out thelights of a steamer creeping along by the Glenelg shore.  That was theClydesdale going north.  Would she have faced Ardnamurchan if theequinoctials had not moderated somewhat?  These were friendly lights.Then on the fourth day it became quite certain that the gale wasmoderating.  The bursts of sunshine became more frequent; patches ofbrilliant blue appeared in the sky; a rainbow from time to time appearedbetween us and the black clouds in the east.  With what an intoxicationof joy we got out at last from our long imprisonment, and felt the warmsunlight around us, and watched the men get ready to lower the gig so asto establish once more our communications with the land.  Mary Avonwould boldly have adventured into that tumbling and rocking thingsheimplored to be allowed to go; if the Doctor were going to pull stroke,why should she not be allowed to steer?  But she was forciblyrestrained. Then away went the shapely boat through the plungingwatersshowers of spray sweeping her from stem to sternuntil itdisappeared into the little bight of Kyle Rhea.The news brought back from the shore of the destruction wrought by thisgalethe worst that had visited these coasts for three-and-twentyyearswas terrible enough; and it was coupled with the most earnestwarnings that we should not set out.  But the sunlight had got into thebrain of these long-imprisoned people, and sent them mad.  They imploredthe doubting John of Skye to get ready to start.  They promised that ifonly he would run up to Kyle Akin, they would not ask him to go further,unless the weather was quite fine.  To moveto movethat was their onlydesire and cry.John of Skye shook his head; but so far humoured them as to weigh one ofthe anchors.By and by, too, he had the topmast hoisted again: all this looked morepromising.  Then, as the afternoon came on, and the tide would soon beturning, they renewed their entreaties. John, still doubting, at lengthyielded.Then the joyful uproar!  All hands were summoned to the halyards, forthe mainsail, soaked through with the rain, was about as stiff as asheet of iron.  And the weighing of the second anchorthat was acheerful sound indeed.  We paid scarcely any heed to this white squallthat was coming tearing along from the south.  It brought both rain andsunlight with it: for a second or two we were enveloped in a sort ofglorified mistthen the next minute we found a rainbow shining betweenus and the black hull of the smack; presently we were in glowingsunshine again. And then at last the anchor was got up, and the sailsfilled to the wind, and the mainsheet slackened out.  The White Dove,released once more, was flying away to the northern seas!*CHAPTER XV.**"FLIEH!  AUF!  HINAUS!"*This splendid sense of life, and motion, and brisk excitement!  We flewthrough the narrows like a bolt from a bow; we had scarcely time toregard the whirling eddies of the current. All hands were on the alerttoo, for the wind came in gusts from the Skye hills, and this tortuousstrait is not a pleasant place to be taken unawares in.  But thewatching and work were altogether delightful, after our longimprisonment.  Even the grave John of Skye was whistling "Fhir a bhata"to himselfsomewhat out of tune.The wild and stormy sunset was shining all along the shores of Loch Alshas we got out of the narrows and came in sight of Kyle Akin.  And herewere a number of vessels all storm-stayed, one of them, in the distance,with her sail set.  We discovered afterwards that this schooner haddragged her anchors and run ashore at Balmacara; she was more fortunatethan many others that suffered in this memorable gale, and was at themoment we passed returning to her former anchorage.The sunlight and the delight of moving had certainly got into the headsof these people.  Nothing would do for them but that John of Skye shouldgo on sailing all night. Kyle Akin? they would not hear of Kyle Akin.And it was of no avail that Captain John told them what he had heardashorethat the Glencoe had to put back with her bulwarks smashed;that here, there, and everywhere vessels were on the rocks; thatStornoway harbour was full of foreign craft, not one of which would puther nose out.  They pointed to the sea, and the scene around them. Itwas a lovely sunset.  Would not the moon be up by eleven?"Well, mem," said John of Skye, with a humorous smile, "I think if we goon the night, there not mich chance of our rinning against anything."And indeed he was not to be outbraved by a couple of women.  When we gotto Kyle Akin, the dusk beginning to creep over land and sea, he showedno signs of running in there for shelter.  We pushed through the narrowstraits, and came in view of the darkening plain of the Atlantic,opening away up there to the north, and as far as we could see there wasnot a single vessel but ourselves on all this world of water.  The gloomdeepened; in under the mountains of Skye there was a darkness as ofmidnight.  But one could still make out ahead of us the line of theScalpa shore, marked by the white breaking of the waves.  Even when thatgrew invisible we had Rona light to steer by.The stormy and unsettled look of the sunset had prepared us forsomething of a dirty night, and as we went on both wind and seaincreased considerably.  The south-westerly breeze that had brought usso far at a spanking rate began to veer round to the north, and came inviolent squalls, while the long swell running down between Raasay andScalpa and the mainland caused the White Dove to labour heavily.Moreover, the night got as black as pitch, the moon had not arisen, andit was lucky, in this laborious beating up against the northerlysqualls, that we had the distant Rona light by which to judge of ourwhereabouts.The two women were huddled together in the companion-way; it was thesafest place for them; we could just make out the two dark figures inthe ruddy glow coming up from the saloon."Isn't it splendid to be going like this," said Miss Avon, "after lyingat anchor so long?"Her friend did not answer.  She had been chiefly instrumental inpersuading Captain John to keep on during the night, and she did notquite like the look of things.  For one thing, she had perceived thatthe men were all now clad from head to foot in oilskins, though as yetthere was nothing but spray coming on board.Our young Doctor came aft, and tried to get down the companion-waywithout disturbing the two women."I am going below for my waterproof and leggings," said he, with aslight laugh. "There will be some fun before this night is over."The tone of the girl altered in a moment."Oh, Angus," said she, grasping him by the arm.  "Pray don't do that!Leave the men to work the boat.  If there is any danger, why don't theymake away for the land somewhere?""There is no danger," said he, "but there will be a little water by andby."The volume of the great waves was certainly increasing, and a beautifulsight it was to mark the red port-light shining on the rushing masses offoam as they swept by the side of the vessel. Our whereabouts by thistime had become wholly a matter of conjecture with the amateurs, for thenight was quite black; however, Rona light still did us good service.When Angus Sutherland came on deck again, she was on the port tack, andthe wind had moderated somewhat.  But this proved to be a lull of evilomen.  There was a low roar heard in the distance, and almost directly aviolent squall from the east struck the yacht, sending the boom flyingover before the skipper could get hold of the mainsheet.  Away flew theWhite Dove like an arrow, with the unseen masses of water smashingover her bows!"In with the mizen, boys!" called out John of Skye, and there was ahurried clatter and stamping, and flapping of canvas.But that was not enough, for this unexpected squall from the east showedpermanence, and as we were making in for the Sound of Scalpa we were nowrunning free before the wind."We'll tek the foresail off her, boys!" shouted John of Skye again, andpresently there was another rattle down on the deck.Onwards and onwards we flew, in absolute darkness but for that red lightthat made the sea shine like a foaming sea of blood.  And the pressureof the wind behind increased until it seemed likely to tear the canvasoff her spars."Down with the jib, then!" called out John of Skye; and we heard, butcould not see, the men at work forward.  And still the White Dove flewonwards through the night, and the wind howled and whistled through therigging, and the boiling surges of foam swept away from her side.  Therewas no more of Rona light to guide us now; we were tearing through theSound of Scalpa; and still this hurricane seemed to increase in fury.As a last resource, John of Skye had the peak lowered.  We had nownothing left but a mainsail about the size of a pocket-handkerchief.As the night wore on, we got into more sheltered waters, being under thelee of Scalpa; and we crept away down between that island and Skye,seeking for a safe anchorage.  It was a business that needed a sharplook-out, for the waters are shallow here, and we discovered one or twosmacks at anchor, with no lights up.  They did not expect any vessel torun in from the open on a night like this.And at last we chose our place for the night, letting go both anchors.Then we went below, into the saloon."And how do you like sailing in the equinoctials, Mary?" said ourhostess."I am glad we are all round this table again, and alive," said the girl."I thought you said the other day you did not care whether the yachtwent down or not?""Of the two," remarked Miss Avon shyly, "it is perhaps better that sheshould be afloat."Angus was passing at the moment.  He put his hand lightly on hershoulder, and said, in a kind way"It is better not to tempt the unknown, Mary.  Remember what the Frenchproverb says, 'quand on est mort, c'est pour longtemps.'  And you knowyou have not nearly completed that great series of White Dove sketchesfor the smoking-room at Denny-mains.""The smoking-room!" exclaimed the Laird, indignantly.  "There is not oneof her sketches that will not have a placean honoured placein mydining-room: depend on that.  Ye will seeboth of yewhat I will do withthem; and the sooner ye come to see the better."We this evening resolved that if, by favour of the winds and the valourof John of Skye, we got up to Portree next day, we should at oncetelegraph to the island of Lewis (where we proposed to cease thesesummer wanderings) to inquire about the safety of certain friends ofours whom we meant to visit there, and who are much given to yachting;for the equinoctials must have blown heavily into Loch Roag, and thelittle harbour at Borva is somewhat exposed.  However, it was not likelythat they would allow themselves to be caught.  They know somethingabout the sea, and about boats, at Borva.*CHAPTER XVI.**AFTER THE GALE.*"Well, indeed!" exclaimed the Laird, on putting his head out nextmorning.  "This is wonderfulwonderful!"Was it the long imprisonment in the darkness of the equinoctials thatmade him welcome with so much delight this spectacle of fair skies andsapphire seas, with the waves breaking white in Scalpa Sound, and thesunlight shining along the Coolins?  Or was it not rather our longisolation from the ordinary affairs of the world that made him greetwith acclamation this picture of brisk and busy human life, now visiblefrom the deck of the yacht?  We were no longer alone in the world.  Overthere, around the big black smacksthat looked like so many hens withbroods of chickensswarmed a fleet of fishing-boats; and as rapidly ashands could manage it, both men and women were shaking out the brownnets and securing the glittering silver treasure of the sea.  It was apicturesque sightthe stalwart brown-bearded men in their yellowoilskins and huge boots; the bare-armed women in their scarletshort-gowns; the masses of ruddy brown nets; the lowered sails.  Andthen the Laird perceived that he was not alone in regarding this busyand cheerful scene.Along there by the bulwarks, with one hand on the shrouds and the otheron the gig, stood Mary Avon, apparently watching the boats passing toand fro between the smacks and the shore.  The Laird went gently up toher, and put his hand on her shoulder.  She started, turned roundsuddenly, and then he saw, to his dismay, that her eyes were full oftears."What, what?" said he, with a quick doubt and fear coming over him.  Hadall his plans failed, then?  Was the girl still unhappy?"What is it, lass?  What is the matter?" said he, gripping her hand soas to get the truth from her.By this time she had dried her eyes."Nothingnothing," said she, rather shame-facedly.  "I was only thinkingabout the song of 'Caller Herring;' and how glad those women must be tofind their husbands come back this morning.  Fancy their being out onsuch a night as last night.  What it must be to be a fisherman'swifeand alone on shore""Toots, toots, lass!" cried the Laird, with a splendid cheerfulness; forhe was greatly relieved that this was all the cause of the wet eyes."Ye are jist giving way to a sentiment. I have observed that people areapt to be sentimental in the morning, before they get their breakfast.What! are ye peetying these folk?  I can tell ye this is a proud day forthem, to judge by they heaps o' fish.  They are jist as happy as kings;and as for the risk o' their trade, they have to do what is appointed tothem.  Why, does not that Doctor friend o' yours say that the happiestpeople are they who are hardest worked?"This reference to the Doctor silenced the young lady at once."Not that I have much right to talk about work," said the Laird,penitently.  "I believe I am becoming the idlest crayture on the face ofthis world."At this point a very pretty little incident occurred.  A boat waspassing to the shore; and in the stern of her was a young fishermanahandsome young fellow, with a sun-tanned face and yellow beard.  As theywere going by the yacht, he caught a glimpse of Miss Avon; then whenthey had passed, he said something in Gaelic to his two companions, whoimmediately rested on their oars.  Then he was seen rapidly to fill atin can with two or three dozen herrings; and his companions backedtheir boat to the side of the yacht. The young fellow stood up in thestern, and with a shy laughbut with no speech, for he was doubtlessnervous about his Englishoffered this present to the young lady.  Shewas very much pleased; but she blushed quite as much as he did.  And shewas confused, for she could not summon Master Fred to take charge of theherrings, seeing this compliment was so directly paid to herself.However, she boldly gripped the tin can, and said, "Oh, thank you verymuch;" and by this time the Laird had fetched a bucket, into which theglittering beauties were slipped. Then the can was handed back, withfurther and profuse thanks, and the boat pushed off.Suddenly, and with great alarm, Miss Avon remembered that Angus hadtaught her what Highland manners were."Oh, I beg your pardon!" she called out to the bearded young fisherman,who instantly turned round, and the oars were stopped.  "I beg yourpardon," said she, with an extreme and anxious politeness, "but wouldyou take a glass of whisky?""No, thank ye, mem," said the fisherman, with another laugh offriendliness on the frank face; and then away they went.The girl was in despair.  She was about to marry a Highlander, andalready she had forgotten the first of Highland customs.  But unexpectedrelief was at hand.  Hearing something going on, John of Skye hadtumbled up from the forecastle, and instantly saw that the young ladywas sorely grieved that those friendly fishermen had not accepted thisreturn compliment.  He called aloud, in Gaelic, and in a severe tone.The three men came back, looking rather like schoolboys who would fainescape from an embarrassing interview.  And then at the same momentCaptain John, who had asked Fred to bring up the whisky-bottle, said ina low voice to the young lady"They would think it ferry kind, mem, if you would pour out the whiskywith your own hand."And this was done, Miss Mary going through the ceremony withoutflinching; and as each of the men was handed his glass, he rose up inthe boat, and took off his cap, and drank the health of the young lady,in the Gaelic.  And Angus Sutherland, when he came on deck, was greatlypleased to hear of what she had done; though the Laird took occasion toremark at breakfast that he hoped it was not a common custom among theyoung ladies of England to get up early in the morning to haveclandestine flirtations with handsome young fishermen.Then all hands on deck: for now there are two anchors to be got in, andwe must not lose any of this pleasant sailing breeze.  In thesesheltered and shining waters there are scarcely any traces of the recentrough weather, except that the wind still comes in variable puffs, andfrom all sorts of unexpected directions.  In the main, however, it is N.by E., and so we have to set to work to leisurely beat up the Sound ofRaasay."Well, this is indeed like old times, Mary!" Queen Titania cries, as shecomfortably ensconces herself in a camp-chair: for Miss Avon is at thehelm, and the young Doctor, lying at full length on the sunlit deck, iswatching the sails and criticising her steering; and the Laird isdemonstrating to a humble listener the immeasurable advantages enjoyedby the Scotch landscape-painters, in that they have within so small acompass every variety of mountain, lake, woodland, and ocean scenery.He becomes facetious, too, about Miss Mary's sketches. What if he wereto have a room set apart for them at Denny-mains, to be called theWhite Dove Gallery?  He might have a skilled decorator out fromGlasgow to devise the furniture and ornamentation, so that both shouldsuggest the sea, and ships, and sailors.Here John of Skye comes aft."I think," says he to Miss Avon, with a modest smile, "we might put thegaff topsail on her.""Oh, yes, certainly," says this experienced mariner; and the Doctor,seeing an opportunity for bestirring himself, jumps to his feet.And so, with the topsail shining white in the suna thing we have notseen for some timewe leave behind us the gloomy opening into LochSligachan, and beat up through the Raasay narrows, and steal by thepleasant woods of Raasay House.  The Laird has returned to that projectof the Marine Gallery, and he has secured an attentive listener in theperson of his hostess, who prides herself that she has a sure instinctas to what is "right" in mural decoration.This is indeed like old times come back again.  The light, cool breeze,the warm decks, the pleasant lapping of the water, and our steerswomanpartly whistling and partly humming"They'll put a napkin round my e'en,They'll no let me see to dee;And they'll never let on to my faither and mither,But I am awa' o'er the sea."And this she is abstractedly and contentedly doing, without any noticeof the fact that the song is supposed to be a pathetic one.Then our young Doctor: of what does he discourse to us during thisdelightful daydreaming and idleness?  Well, it has been remarked by morethan one of us that Dr. Angus has become tremendously practical of late.You would scarcely have believed that this was the young F.R.S. who usedto startle the good Laird out of his wits by his wild speculations aboutthe origin of the world and similar trifles.  Now his whole interestseemed to be centred on the commonest things: all the Commissioners ofthe Burgh of Strathgovan put together could not have been more fiercethan he was about the necessity of supplying houses with pure water, forexample.  And the abuse that he heaped on the Water Companies of London,more especially, and on the Government which did not interfere, was sodistinctly libellous that we are glad no alien overheard it.Then as to arsenic in wall-papers: he was equally dogmatic and indignantabout that; and here it was his hostess, rather than the Laird, who wasinterested.  She eagerly committed to her note-book a recipe for testingthe presence of that vile metal in wall-papers or anything else; andsome of us had mentally to thank Heaven that she was not likely to gettest-tubes, and zinc filings, and hydrochloric acid in Portree.  Thewoman would have blown up the ship.All this and much more was very different from the kind of conversationthat used so seriously to trouble the Laird.  When he heard Angus talkwith great common sense and abundant information about the variousclimates that suited particular constitutions, and about the best soilsfor building houses on, and about the necessity for strict municipalsupervision of drainage, he was ready to believe that our young Doctorhad not only for his own part never handled that dangerous book theVestiges of Creation, but that he had never even known any one who hadglanced at its sophistical pages except with a smile of pity. Why, allthe time that we were shut up by the equinoctials, the only profound andmysterious thing that Angus had said was this: "There is surelysomething wrong when the man who takes on himself all the trouble ofdrawing a bottle of ale is bound to give his friend the first tumbler,which is clear, and keep the second tumbler, which is muddy, forhimself."  But if you narrowly look into it, you will find that there isreally nothing dangerous or unsettling in this sayingno grumblingagainst the ways of Providence whatsoever. It is mysterious, perhaps;but then so would many of the nice points about the Semple case havebeen, had we not had with us an able expositor.And on this occasion, as we were running along for Portree, our F.R.S.was chiefly engaged in warning us against paying too serious heed tocertain extreme theories about food and drink which were then being putput forward by a number of distinguished physicians."For people in good health, the very worst adviser is the doctor," hewas saying; when he was gently reminded by his hostess that he must notmalign his own calling, or destroy a superstition that might in itselfhave curative effects."Oh, I scarcely call myself a doctor," he said, "for I have no practiceas yet.  And I am not denying the power of a physician to help nature incertain casesof course not; but what I say is that for healthy peoplethe doctor is the worst adviser possible.  Why, where does he get hisexperience?from the study of people who are ill.  He lives in anatmosphere of sickness; his conclusions about the human body are drawnfrom bad specimens; the effects that he sees produced are produced ontoo sensitive subjects.  Very likely, too, if he is himself adistinguished physician, he has gone through an immense amount oftraining and subsequent hard work; his own system is not of thestrongest; and he considers that what he feels to be injurious to himmust be injurious to other people. Probably so it might beto peoplesimilarly sensitive; but not necessarily to people in sound health.Fancy a man trying to terrify people by describing the awful appearanceproduced on one's internal economy when one drinks half a glass ofsherry!  And that," he added, "is a piece of pure scientificsensationalism; for precisely the same appearance is produced if youdrink half a glass of milk.""I am of opinion," said the Laird, with the gravity befitting such atopic, "that of all steemulants nothing is better or wholesomer than adrop of sound, sterling whisky.""And where are you likely to get it?""I can assure ye, at Denny-mains""I mean where are the masses of the people to get it?  What they get isa cheap white spirit, reeking with fusel-oil, with just enough whiskyblended to hide the imposture.  The decoction is a certain poison.  Ifthe Government would stop tinkering at Irish franchises, and Irishtenures, and Irish Universities, and would pass a law making it penalfor any distiller to sell spirits that he has not had in bond for atleast two years, they would do a good deal more service to Ireland, andto this country too.""Still, these measures of amelioration must have their effect," observedthe Liard, sententiously.  "I would not discourage wise legislation.  Wewill reconcile Ireland sooner or later, if we are prudent andconseederate.""You may as well give them Home Rule at once," said Dr. Angus, bluntly."The Irish have no regard for the historical grandeur of England; howcould they?they have lost their organ of veneration.  The coronalregion of the skull has in time become depressed, through frequentshillelagh practice."For a second the Laird glanced at him: there was a savour of GeorgeCombe about this speech.  Could it be that he believed in that monstrousand atheistical theory?But no.  The Laird only laughed; and said:"I would not like to have an Irishman hear ye say so."It was now abundantly clear to us that Denny-mains could no longersuspect of anything heterodox and destructive this young man who wassound on drainage, pure air, and a constant supply of water to thetanks.Of course, we could not get into Portree without Ben Inivaig having atussle with us. This mountain is the most inveterate brewer of squallsin the whole of the West Highlands, and it is his especial delight tocatch the unwary, when all their eyes are bent on the safe harbourwithin.  But we were equal with him.  Although he tried to tear ourmasts out and frighten us out of our senses, all that he reallysucceeded in doing was to put us to a good deal of trouble and break atumbler or two below.  We pointed the finger of scorn at Ben Inivaig.We sailed past him, and took no more notice of him. With a favouringbreeze, and with our topsail still set, we glided into the open andspacious harbour.But that first look round was a strange one. Was this really PortreeHarbour, or were we so many Rip Van Winkles?  There were the shiningwhite houses, and the circular bay, and the wooded cliffs; but wherewere the yachts that used to keep the place so bright and busy?  Therewas not an inch of white canvas visible.  We got to anchor near a coupleof heavy smacks; the men looked at us as if we had dropped from theskies.We went ashore and walked up to the telegraph office to see whether theadjacent islands of great Britain and Irelandas the Cumbrae ministercalled themhad survived the equinoctials; and learned only tooaccurately what serious mischief had been done all along these coasts bythe gale.  From various points, moreover, we subsequently receivedcongratulations on our escape, until we almost began to believe that wehad really been in serious peril. For the rest, our friends at Borvawere safe enough; they had not been on board their yacht at all.That evening, in the silent and deserted bay, a council of war was heldon deck.  We were not, as it turned out, quite alone; there had alsocome in a steam yacht, the master of which informed our John of Skyethat such a gale he had not seen for three-and-twenty years.  He alsotold us that there was a heavy sea running in the Minch; and that novessel would try to cross.  Stornoway Harbour, we already knew, wasfilled with storm-stayed craft.  So we had to decide.Like the very small and white-faced boy who stood forth to declaimbefore a school-full of examiners and friends, and who raised his hand,and announced in a trembling falsetto that his voice was still for war,it was the women who spoke first, and they were for going right on thenext morning."Mind," said Angus Sutherland, looking anxiously at certain dark eyes;"there is generally a good sea in the Minch in the best of weathers; butafter a three or four days'well""I, for one, don't care," said Miss Avon, frankly regarding him."And I should like it," said the other woman, "so long as there isplenty of wind. But if Captain John takes me out into the middle of theMinch and keeps me rolling about on the Atlantic in a dead calm, thensomething will befall him that his mother knew nothing about."Here Captain John was emboldened to step forward, and to say, with anembarrassed politeness"I not afraid of anything for the leddies; for two better sailors Inever sah ahl my life lang."However, the final result of our confabulation that night was theresolve to get under way next morning, and proceed a certain distanceuntil we should discover what the weather was like outside.  With a fairwind, we might run the sixty miles to Stornoway before night; without afair wind, there was little use in our adventuring out to be knockedabout in the North Minch, where the Atlantic finds itself jammed intothe neck of a bottle, and rebels in a somewhat frantic fashion.  We mustdo our good friends in Portree the justice to say that they endeavouredto dissuade us; but then we had sailed in the White Dove before, andhad no great fear of her leading us into any trouble.And so, good-night!good-night!  We can scarcely believe that this isPortree Harbour, so still and quiet it is.  All the summer fleet ofvessels have fled; the year has gone with them; soon we, too, mustbetake ourselves to the south.  Good-night!good-night!  The peace ofthe darkness falls over us; if there is any sound, it is the sound ofsinging in our dreams.[Illustration: Music fragment]*CHAPTER XVII.**"A GOOD ONE FOR THE LAST."*"Ah, well, well," said the Laird, somewhat sadly, to his hostess, "Isuppose we may now conseeder that we have started on our last day'ssailing in the White Dove?""I suppose so," said she; and this was before breakfast, so she may havebeen inclined to be a bit sentimental too."I'm thinking," said he, "that some of us may hereafter look back onthis sailing as the longest and grandest holiday of their life, and willrecall the name of the White Dove with a certain amount of affection.I, for one, feel that I can scarcely justify myself for withdrawing solong from the duties that society demands from every man; and no doubtthere will be much to set right when one goes back to Strathgovan.  Butperhaps one has been able to do something even in one's idleness"He paused here, and remained silent for a moment or two."What a fine thing," he continued, "it must be for a doctor to watch thereturn of health to a patient's faceto watch the colour coming back,and the eyes looking happy again, and the spirits rising; and to thinkthat maybe he has helped.  And if he happens to know the patient, and tobe as anxious about her as if she were his own child, do not ye think hemust be a proud man when he sees the results of what he has done forher, and when he hears her begin to laugh again?"Despite the Laird's profound ingenuity, we knew very well who thatdoctor was.  And we had learned something about the affection which thismythical physician had acquired for this imaginary patient."What a sensitive bit crayture she is!" said he, suddenly, as if he werenow talking of some quite different person.  "Have ye seen thedifference the last few days have made on her facehave ye not observedit?""Yes, indeed I have.""Ye would imagine that her face was just singing a song from the morningtill the nightI have never seen any one with such expressive eyes asthat bit lass hasandandit is fairly a pleasure to any one to look atthe happiness of them.""Which she owes to you, sir.""To me?" said the Laird.  "Dear me!not to me.  It was a fortunatecircumstance that I was with ye on board the yacht, that is all.  What Idid no man who had the chance could have refused to do.  No, no; if thelass owes any gratitude to anybody or anything it is to the Semplecase.""What?""Just so, ma'am," said the Laird composedly. "I will confess to ye thata long holiday spent in sailing had not that attraction for me it mighthave had for othersthough I think I have come to enjoy it now with thebest of ye; but I thought, when ye pressed me to come, that it would bea grand opportunity to get your husband to take up the Semple case, andmaster it thoroughly, and put its merits in a just manner before thepublic.  That he does not appear to be as much interested in it as I hadreason to expect is a misfortuneperhaps he will grow to see theimportance of the principles involved in it in time; but I have ceasedto force it on his attention.  In the meanwhile we have had a fine, longholiday, which has at least given me leisure to consider many schemesfor the advantage of my brother pareeshioners.  Ay; and where is MissMary though?""She and Angus have been up for hours, I believe," said his hostess.  "Iheard them on deck before we started anyway.""I would not disturb them," said the Laird, with much consideration."They have plenty to talk aboutall their life opening up beforethemlike a road through a garden, as one might say.  And whateverbefalls them hereafter I suppose they will always remember the presenttime as the most beautiful of their existencethe wonder of it, thenewness, the hope.  It is a strange thing that.  Ye know, ma'am, thatour garden at Denny-mains, if I may say so, is far from insigneeficant.It has been greatly commended by experienced landscape gardeners.  Well,now, that garden, when it is just at its fullest of summer colourwithall its dahlias and hollyhocks and what notI say ye cannot get half asmuch delight from the whole show as ye get from the first glint o' aprimrose, as ye are walking through a wood, on a bleak March day, andnot expecting to see anything of the kind. Does not that make your heartjump?"Here the Laird had to make way for Master Fred and the breakfast tray."There is not a bairn about Strathgovan," he continued, with a laugh,"knows better than myself where to find the first primroses andbluebells and the red deadnettle, ye know, and so on.  Would ye believeit, that poor crayture, Johnny Guthrie was for cutting down the hedge inthe Coulterburn Road, and putting up a stone dyke!"  Here the Laird'sface grew more and more stern, and he spoke with unnecessary vehemence."I make bold to say that the man who would cut down a hawthorn hedgewhere the children go to gather their bits o' flowers, and would put inits place a stone wall for no reason on the face of the earth, I saythat man is an assan intolerable and perneecious ass!"But this fierceness instantly vanished, for here was Mary Avon come into bid him good morning.   And he rose and took both her hands in hisand regarded the upturned smiling face and the speaking eyes."Ay, ay, lass," said he, with great satisfaction and approval, "ye havegot the roses into your cheeks at last.  That is the morning airthe'roses weet wi' dew'it is a fine habit that of early rising.  Dear me,what a shilpit bit thing ye were when I first saw ye about three monthsago.  And now I daresay ye are just as hungry as a hawk with walking upand down the deck in the sea-airwe will not keep ye waiting a moment."The Laird got her a chair, next his own of course; and then rang MasterFred's bell violently."How's her head, skipper?" said Queen T., when the young Doctor made hisappearancehe had roses, too, in his cheeks, freshened by the morningair."Well," said he frankly, as he sate down, "I think it would be judiciousto have breakfast over as soon as possible; and get the things stowedaway.  We are flying up the Sound of Raasay like a witch on a broom; andthere will be a roaring sea when we get beyond the shelter of Skye.""We have been in roaring seas before," said she, confidently."We met a schooner coming into Portree Harbour this morning," said he,with a dry smile.  "She left yesterday afternoon just before we got in.They were at it all night, but had to run back at last.  They said theyhad got quite enough of it."This was a little more serious, but the women were not to be daunted.They had come to believe in the White Dove being capable of anything,especially when a certain aid to John of Skye was on board.  For therest, the news was that the day was lovely, the wind fair for Stornoway,and the yacht flying northward like an arrow.There was a certain solemnity, nevertheless, or perhaps only an unusualelaborateness, about our preparations before going on deck. Gun-caseswere wedged in in front of canvases, so that Miss Avon's sketches shouldnot go rolling on to the floor; all such outlying skirmishers ascandlesticks, aneroids, draught-boards, and the like, were moved to therear of compact masses of rugs; and then the women were ordered to arraythemselves in their waterproofs.  Waterproofs?and the sun floodingthrough the skylight!  But they obeyed.Certainly there did not seem to be any great need for waterproofs whenwe got above and had the women placed in a secure corner of thecompanion-way.  It was a brilliant, breezy, blue-skied morning, with thedecks as yet quite white and dry, and with the long mountainous line ofSkye shining in the sun.  The yacht was flying along at a famous pacebefore a fresh and steady breeze; already we could make out, far away onthe northern horizon, a pale, low, faint-blue line, which we knew to bethe hills of southern Lewis.  Of course, one had to observe that thevast expanse of sea lying between us and that far line was of a stormyblack; moreover, the men had got on their oilskins, though not a drop ofspray was coming on board.As we spun along, however, before the freshening wind, the crashes ofthe waves at the bows became somewhat more heavy, and occasionally somejets of white foam would spring up into the sunlight.  When it wassuggested to Captain John that he might set the gaff topsail, he veryrespectfully and shyly shook his head.  For one thing, it was ratherstrange that on this wide expanse of sea not a solitary vessel wasvisible.Farther and farther northward.  And now one has to look out for thewhite water springing over the bows, and there is a general ducking ofheads when the crash forward gives warning.  The decks are beginning toglisten now; and Miss Avon has received one sharp admonition to be morecareful, which has somewhat damped and disarranged her hair.  And so theWhite Dove still flies to the northlike an arrowlike a witch on abroomlike a hare, only that none of these things would groan so much ingetting into the deep troughs of the sea; and not even a witch on abroom could perform such capers in the way of tumbling and tossing, andpitching and rolling.However all this was mere child's play.  We knew very well when andwhere we should really "get it": and we got it.  Once out of the shelterof the Skye coast, we found a considerably heavy sea swinging along theMinch, and the wind was still freshening up, insomuch that Captain Johnhad to take the mizen and foresail off her.  How splendidly thosemountain masses of waves came heaving alongapparently quite black untilthey came near, and then we could see the sunlight shining green throughthe breaking crest; then there was a shock at the bows that caused theyacht to shiver from stem to stern; then a high springing into the air,followed by a heavy rattle and rush on the decks.  The scuppers were ofno use at all; there was a foot and a half of hissing and seething saltwater all along the lee bulwarks, and when the gangway was lifted to letit out the next rolling wave only spouted an equal quantity up on deck,soaking Dr. Angus Sutherland to the shoulder.  Then a heavier sea thanusual struck her, carrying off the cover of the fore hatch and sendingit spinning aft; while, at the same moment, a voice from the forecastleinformed Captain John in an injured tone that this last invader hadswamped the men's berths.  What could he do but have the main tackhauled up to lighten the pressure of the wind?  The waters of the Minch,when once they rise, are not to be stilled by a bottle of salad oil.We had never before seen the ordinarily buoyant White Dove take insuch masses of water over her bows; but we soon got accustomed to theseething lake of water along the lee scuppers, and allowed it to subsideor increase as it liked.  And the women were now seated a step lower onthe companion-way, so that the rags of the waves flew by them withouttouching them; and there was a good deal of laughing and jesting goingon at the clinging and stumbling of any unfortunate person who had tomake his way along the deck.  As for our indefatigable Doctor, his facehad been running wet with salt water for hours; twice he had slipped andgone headlong to leeward; and now, with a rope double twisted round thetiller, he was steering, his teeth set hard."Well, Mary," shrieked Queen Titania into her companion's ear.  "We arehaving a good one for the last!""Is he going up the mast?" cried the girl in great alarm."I say we are having a good one for the last!""Oh, yes!" was the shout in reply.  "She is indeed going fast!"But about mid-day we passed within a few miles to the east of the ShiantIslands, and here the sea was somewhat moderated, so we tumbled belowfor a snack of lunch.  The women wanted to devote the time to dressingtheir hair and adorning themselves anew; but purser Sutherland objectedto this altogether. He compelled them to eat and drink while that waspossible; and several toasts were proposedbriefly, but with muchenthusiasm. Then we scrambled on deck again.  We found that John hadhoisted his foresail again, but he had let the mizen alone.Northward and ever northwardand we are all alone on this wide, widesea.  But that pale line of coast at the horizon is beginning to resolveitself into definite forminto long, low headlands, some of which aredark in shadow, others shining in the sun. And then the cloudlikemountains beyond; can these be the far Suainabhal and Mealasabhal, andthe other giants that look down on Loch Roag and the western shores?They seem to belong to a world beyond the sea.Northward and ever northward; and there is less water coming over now,and less groaning and plunging, so that one can hear oneself speak.  Andwhat is this wagering on the part of the Doctor that we shall do thesixty miles between Portree and Stornoway within the six hours?  John ofSkye shakes his head; but he has the main tack hauled down.Then, as the day wears on, behold! a small white object in that line ofblue.  The cry goes abroad: it is Stornoway Light!"Come, now, John!" the Doctor calls aloud. "Within the six hoursfor aglass of whisky and a lucky sixpence!""We not at Styornaway Light yet," answered the prudent John of Skye, whois no gambler. But all the same, he called two of the men aft to set themizen again; and as for himself, he threw off his oilskins and appearedin his proud uniform once more.  This looked like business.Well, it was not within the six hours, but it was within the six hoursand a half, that we sailed past Stornoway lighthouse and its outstandingperch; and past a floating target with a red flag, for artillerypractice; and past a barque which had been driven ashore two daysbefore, and now stuck there, with her back broken.  And this was awonderful sightafter the lone, wide seasto see such a mass of ships ofall sorts and sizes crowded in here for fear of the weather.  We readtheir names in the strange foreign type as we passedDie Heimath,Georg Washington, Friedrich der Grosse, and the likeand we saw theyellow-haired Norsemen pulling between the vessels in their odd-lookingdouble-bowed boats.  And was not John of Skye a proud man that day, ashe stood by the tiller in his splendour of blue and brass buttons,knowing that he had brought the White Dove across the wild waters ofthe Minch, when not one of these foreigners would put his nose outsidethe harbour?The evening light was shining over the quiet town, and the shadowedcastle, and the fir-tipped circle of hills, when the White Doverattled out her anchor chain and came to rest. And as this was our lastnight on board, there was a good deal of packing and other trouble. Itwas nearly ten o'clock when we came together again.The Laird was in excellent spirits that night, and was more thanordinarily facetious; but his hostess refused to be comforted.  Athousand Homeshes could not have called up a smile.  For she had grownto love this scrambling life on board; and she had acquired a greataffection for the yacht itself; and now she looked round this old andfamiliar saloon, in which we had spent so many snug and merry eveningstogether; and she knew she was looking at it for the last time.At length, however, the Laird bethought himself of arousing her from hersentimental sadness, and set to work to joke her out of it. He told hershe was behaving like a school-girl come to the end of her holiday.Well, she only further behaved like a schoolgirl by letting her lipsbegin to tremble; and then she stealthily withdrew to her own cabin; anddoubtless had a good cry there.  There was no help for it, however: thechild had to give up its plaything at last.*CHAPTER XVIII.**ADIEU.*Next morning, also: why should this tender melancholy still dwell in thesoft and mournful eyes?  The sunlight was shining cheerfully on thesweep of wooded hill, on the grey castle, on the scattered town, and onthe busy quays. Busy was scarcely the word: there was a wild excitementabroad, for a vast take of herring had just been brought in.  There,close in by the quays, were the splendidly-built luggers, with theirmasts right at their bows; and standing up in them their stalwart crews,bronze-faced, heavy-bearded, with oilskin caps, and boots up to theirthighs.  Then on the quays above the picturesquely-costumed women busyat the salting; and agents eagerly chaffering with the men; and emptybarrels coming down in unknown quantities.  Bustle, life, excitementpervaded the whole town; but our tender-hearted hostess, as we gotashore, seemed to pay no heed to it.  As she bade good-bye to the men,shaking hands with each there were tears in her eyes; if she had wishedto cast a last glance in the direction of the White Dove, she couldscarcely have seen the now still and motionless craft.But by and by, when we had left our heavier luggage at the inn, and whenwe set out to drive across the island to visit some friends of ours wholive on the western side, she grew somewhat more cheerful.  Here andthere a whiff of the fragrant peat-smoke caught us as we passed,bringing back recollections of other days.  Then she had one or twostrangers to inform and instruct; and she was glad thai Mary Avon had abright day for her drive across the Lewis."But what a desolate place it must be on a wet day," that young personremarked, as she looked away across the undulating moors, vast, andlonely, and silent.Now, at all events, the drive was pleasant enough: for the sunlightbrought out the soft ruddy browns of the bog-land, and ever and againthe blue and white surface of a small loch flashed back the daylightfrom amid that desolation.  Then occasionally the road crossed abrawling stream, and the sound of it was grateful enough in theoppressive silence.  In due course of time we reached Garra na-hina.Our stay at the comfortable little hostelry was but brief, for the boatto be sent by our friends had not arrived, and it was proposed that inthe meantime we should walk along the coast to show our companions thefamous stones of Callernish.  By this time Queen Titania had quiterecovered her spirits, and eagerly assented, saying how pleasant a walkwould be after our long confinement on shipboard.It was indeed a pleasant walk, through a bright and cheerful piece ofcountry.  And as we went along we sometimes turned to look around usatthe waters of the Black River, a winding line of silver through theyellow and brown of the morass; and at the placid blue waters of LochRoag, with the orange line of seaweed round the rocks; and at the farblue bulk of Suainabhal.  We did not walk very fast; and indeed we hadnot got anywhere near the Callernish stones, when the sharp eye of ouryoung Doctor caught sight of two new objects that had come into thisshining picture. The first was a large brown boat, rowed by fourfishermen; the second was a long and shapely boatlike the pinnace of ayachtalso pulled by four men, in blue jerseys and scarlet caps.  Therewas no one in the stern of the big boat; but in the stern of the gigwere three figures, as far as we could make out.Now no sooner had our attention been called to the two boats which hadjust come round the point of an island out there, than our good QueenTitania became greatly excited, and would have us all go out to the topof a small headland and frantically wave our handkerchiefs there.  Thenwe perceived that the second boat instantly changed its course, and wasbeing steered for the point on which we stood.  We descended to theshore and went out on to some rocks, Queen Titania becoming quitehysterical."Oh, how kind of her! how kind of her!" she cried, "to come so far tomeet us!"For it now appeared that these three figures in the stern of the whitepinnace, were the figures of a young lady, who was obviously steering,and of two small boys, one on each side of her, and both dressed asyoung sailors. And the steerswomanshe had something of a sailor-lookabout her too; for she was dressed in navy blue; and she wore a strawhat with a blue ribbon and letters of gold.  But you would scarcely havelooked at the smart straw hat when you saw the bright and laughing face,and the beautiful eyes that seemed to speak to you long before she couldget to shore.And then the boat was run into a small creak; and the young lady steppedlightly outshe certainly was young-looking, by the way, to be themother of those two small sailorsand she quickly and eagerly and gladlycaught Queen Titania with both her hands."Oh, indeed I beg your pardon," said sheand her speech was exceedinglypleasant to hear"but I did not think you could be so soon over fromStyornaway."[Note by Queen Titania.It appears that now all our voyaging is over,and we are about to retire into privacy again, I am expected, as on aprevious occasion, to come forward and address to you a kind ofepilogue, just as they do on the stage.  This seems to me a sort ofstrange performance at the end of a yachting cruise, for what if ahandful of salt water were to come over the bows and put out my trumperyfootlights?  However, what must be must, as married women know: and so Iwould first of all say a word to the many kind people who were so verygood to us in these distant places in the north.  You may think itstrange to associate such things as fresh vegetables, or a basket offlowers, or a chicken, or a bottle of milk, or even a bunch of whiteheather, with sentiment; but people who have been sailing in the WestHighlands do not think soindeed, they know which is the most obligingand friendly and hospitable place in the whole world.  And then a wordto the reader. If I might hope that it is the same reader who has beenwith us in other climes in other yearswho may have driven with us alongthe devious English lanes; and crossed the Atlantic, and seen the bigcaons of the Rocky Mountains; and lived with us among those dear oldpeople in the Black Forest; and walked with us on Mickleham Downs in thestarlight, why, then, he may forgive us for taking him on such atremendous long holiday in these Scotch lochs.  But we hope that if everhe goes into these wilds for himself, he will get as good a skipper asJohn of Skye, and have as pleasant and true a friend on board as theLaird of Denny-mains.  Perhaps I may add, just to explain everything,that we are all invited to Denny-mains to spend Christmas; and somethingis going to happen there; and the Laird says that so far from objectingto a ceremony in the Episcopal Church, he will himself be present andgive away the bride.  It is even hinted that Mr. Tom Galbraith may comefrom Edinburgh as a great compliment: and then no doubt we shall all beintroduced to him.  And soGood-bye!Good-bye!and another messagefromthe heartto all the kind people who befriended us in those places faraway!T.]THE END.