WHITE HEATHER (VOL. I)This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almostno restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.Title: White Heather (Volume I of 3)A NovelAuthor: William BlackRelease Date: August 11, 2013 [EBook #43444]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHITE HEATHER (VOLUME I OF 3)***Produced by Al Haines.WHITE HEATHERA NovelBYWILLIAM BLACKAUTHOR OF 'MACLEOD OF DARE,''JUDITH SHAKESPEARE,' ETC.IN THREE VOLUMESVOL. I.LondonMACMILLAN AND CO.1885The right of translation is reserved.Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh.*CONTENTS OF VOL. I.*CHAPTER I.A JOURNEY NORTHWARDCHAPTER II.MEENIECHAPTER III.ON THE LOCHCHAPTER IV.A LETTERCHAPTER V.BEGINNINGSCHAPTER VI.A PROGRAMMECHAPTER VII.AN EYRIECHAPTER VIII.THE NEW YEAR'S FEASTCHAPTER IX.ENTICEMENTSCHAPTER X.HIGH FESTIVALCHAPTER XI.A REVELATIONCHAPTER XII.'WHEN SHADOWS FALL'CHAPTER XIII.A NEW ARRIVALCHAPTER XIV.'ABOUT ILLINOIS'CHAPTER XV.WILD TIMESCHAPTER XVI.DREAMS AND VISIONS*WHITE HEATHER.**CHAPTER I.**A JOURNEY NORTHWARD.*On a certain cold evening in January, and just as the Scotch night-mailwas about to start for the north, a stranger drove up to Euston andalighted, and was glad enough to escape from the chill draughts of theechoing station into the glow and warmth and comfort of a sleeping-car.He was a man of means apparently; for one half of this carriage,containing four berths, and forming a room apart, as it were, had beenreserved for himself alone; while his travelling impedimentafur-linedcoats and hoods and rugs and what notwere of an elaborate and sumptuousdescription. On the other hand, there was nothing of ostentation abouteither his dress or appearance or demeanour.  He was a tall, thin,quiet-looking man, with an aquiline nose, sallow complexion, and keenbut not unkindly gray eyes. His short-cropped hair was grizzled, andthere were deep lines in the worn and ascetic face; but this may havebeen the result of an exhausting climate rather than of any mental care,for there was certainly no touch of melancholy in his expression.  Hiscostume was somewhat prim and precise; there was a kind ofschoolmasterish look about the stiff white collar and small black tie;his gloves were new and neat.  For the rest, he seemed used totravelling; he began to make himself at home at once, and scarcelylooked up from this setting of things to rights when the conductor madehis appearance.'Mr. Hodson, sir?' the latter said, with an inquiring glance.'That's about what they call me,' he answered slowly, as he opened acapacious dressing-bag covered with crocodile-hide.'Do you expect any friends to join you farther along, sir?''Not that I know of,' was the answerand a pair of dark-blue velvetslippers, with initials worked in gold, were fished out and thrown uponthe seat beside him.But when the conductor had got one of the lower sleeping-berths madeready and the traveller had completed his leisurely arrangements forpassing the night in comfort, a somewhat one-sided conversation ensued.This gaunt, slow-speaking, reserved man proved to be quite talkativeina curious, measured, dry, and staccato fashion; and if his conversationconsisted chiefly of questions, these showed that he had a very honestand simple concern in the welfare of this other human being whom chancehad thrown in his way, and that he could express his friendly interestwithout any touch of patronage or condescension.  He asked first aboutthe railway-line; how the company's servants were paid; what were theirhours on duty; whether they had formed any associations for relief incase of sickness; what this particular man got for his work; whether hecould look forward to any bettering of his lot, and so forth.  And then,fixing his eyes more scrutinisingly on his companion, he began to askabout his family affairswhere he lived; what children he had; how oftenhe saw them; and the like; and these questions were so obviouslyprompted by no idle curiosity, but by an honest sympathy, and by theapparent desire of one human being to get to understand fully andclearly the position and surroundings and prospects of this otherfellow-creature, that it was impossible for any one to take offence.'And how old is your little girl?''Eight, sir: she will be nine in May next.''What do you call her?''Caroline, sir.''Why, you don't say!' he exclaimed, with his eyeswhich were usuallycalm and observantlighting up with some surprise.  'That is the name ofmy girl toothough I can't call her little any more.  Well now,' headded, as he took out his purse and selected a sovereign from the massof coins, 'I think this is about what you ought to do. When you get backto Camden Town, you start an account in the Post Office Savings Bank, inyour little girl's name, and you put in this sovereign as a firstdeposit.  Then, whenever you have an odd sixpence or shilling to givehera birthday present, or thatyou keep adding on and on; and therewill be a nice little sum for her in after years. And if ever she asks,you can tell her it was the father of an American Caroline who made herthis little present; and if she grows up to be as good a girl as theAmerican Carry, she'll do very well, I think.'The conductor scarcely knew how to express his thanks, but the Americancut him short, saying coolly'I don't give the sovereign to you at all.  It is in trust for yourdaughter.  And you don't look to me the kind of man who would go anddrink it.'He took out an evening newspaper, and, at the hint, the conductor wentaway to get ready the berths in the other end of the car.  When he cameback again to see if the gentleman wanted anything further for thenight, they had thundered along the line until they were nearing Rugby.'Why, yes,' Mr. Hodson said, in answer to the question, 'you might getme a bottle of soda-water when we get to the station.''I have soda-water in the car, sir.''Bring me a bottle, then, please.''And shall I get anything else for you, sir, at Rugby?''No, I thank you.'When the man returned with the soda-water, the traveller had taken fromhis dressing-bag a bottle labelled 'Bromide of Potassium' and he wasjust about to mix his customary sleeping-draught when it occurred to himthat perhaps this conductor could tell him something of the new and farcountry into which he was about to adventure for the first time.  And inmaking these inquiries he showed that he was just as frank-spoken abouthis own plans and circumstances as he expected other people to be abouttheirs. When the conductor confessed that he knew next to nothing aboutthe north of Scotland, never having been farther than Perth, and eventhen his knowledge of the country being confined to the railway-line andthe stations, Mr. Hodson went on to sayin that methodical way of his,with little rising inflexions here and there'Well, it's bound to be different from London, anyway. It can't be likeLondon; and that's the main thing for me. Why, that London fog, nevermoving, same in the morning, same at night, it's just too dismal foranything; the inside of a jail is a fool to it.  'Pears to me that aLondon afternoon is just about as melancholy as they make it; if there'sanything more melancholy than that anywhere, I don't know it.  Well,now, it can't be like that at Cape Wrath.''I should think not, sir.''I daresay if I lived in the town, and had my club, and knew people, itmight be different; and my daughter seems to get through the time wellenough; but young folks are easily amused.  Say, now, about this salmonfishing in the north: you don't know when it begins?''No, sir.''You haven't seen anybody going yet with a bundle of rods?''No, sir, not this year yet.''Hope they haven't been playing it on meI was told I could begin on theeleventh.  But it don't signify much so long's I get out of thatinfernal cut-throat atmosphere of London.'At this point the train began to slow into Rugby station, and theconductor left to attend to his duties; and by the time they were movingout again and on their way to the far north, Mr. Hodson had mixed anddrunk his nightly potion, and, partially undressed, was wrapped up inthe thick and warm coverings of the sleeping-berth, where, whether owingto the bromide of potassium, or the jog-trot rattle of the wheels, hewas soon plunged in a profound slumber.Well, if part of his design in thus venturing upon a journey to thenorth in mid-winter was to get away from the monotonous mists of London,the next morning showed him that so far he had been abundantlysuccessful.  The day breaking caused him to open his eyes; andinstinctively he turned to the window.  There before him was a strange,and unusual, and welcome sight.  No more dismal grays, and the gatheringdown of a hopeless dusk; but the clear, glad light of the morninga bandof flashing gold all along the eastern horizon, behind the jet-blackstems and branches of the leafless trees; and over that the heavens wereall of a pale and luminous lilac, with clouds hanging here andthereclouds that were dark and almost thunderous in their purple look,but that really meant nothing but beauty, as they lay there soft andmotionless in the glowing and mystical dawn.  Quickly he got up.  Thewindows were thrown open.  And this air that rushed inso fresh, sosweet, so full of all kinds of mellow and fragrant messages from thehills, and the pine-woods, and the wide-lying strathsdid it not bring astrange kind of joy and surprise with it?'A beautiful morning, sir; we are getting near to Perth now,' theconductor said, when he made his appearance.'Are we in time?''Yes, in very good time.''And no hurry about breakfast?''No, sir; you don't start again till nine o'clock.'Even this big hollow station, with its wide stone platforms andresounding arch: was it the white light that filled it, or the fresh airthat blew through it, that made it quite a cheerful place?  He wascharmed with the accent of the timid handmaiden who brought him hisbreakfast in the refreshment room, and who waited on him in such afriendly, half-anxious, shy fashion; and he wondered whether he woulddare to offer so pretty and well-mannered a young lady anything over thecustomary charge in token of his gratitude to her for her gentle ways.Perth itself: well, there had been rain in the night, and the streetsnear the station were full of mud; but then the cart ruts in the mudwere gleaming lines of gold; and the beautiful sky hung over the slowlyrising smoke of the houses; and the air was everywhere so sweet andwelcome.  He had got into a new world altogether; the weight of theLondon atmosphere was lifted from him; he whistled 'Auld LangSyne'which was the only Scotch air he knewand the lugubrious tunesounded quite pleasant on so joyous a morning.Moreover, these were but first and commonplace experiences. For by andby, when he had again taken his seat to prosecute his journeyand hefound himself the sole occupant of the carriagethe sunrise had widenedinto the full splendour of a sunlit day; and as the train sped away tothe north, he, sitting at the window there, and having nothing to do butexamine the new country he was entering, was wholly amazed at theintensity and brilliancy of the colouring around, and at theextraordinary vividness of the light.  The wide stretches of the Tayshone like burnished silver; there were yellow straths and fields; andbeech hedges of a rich russet-red; and fir-woods of a deep fresh green;and still farther away low-lying hills of a soft and ruddy purple,touched sharp here and there with patches of snow; and over all these ablue sky as of summer.  The moist, warm air that blew in at the windowseemed laden with pine odours; the country women at the small stationshad a fresh pink colour in their cheeks; everywhere a new and glad andwholesome life seemed to be abroad, and cheerfulness, and rich hues, andsunlight.'This is good enough,' he said to himself.  'This is something like whatI shipped for.'And so they sped on: through the soft, wide-stretching woods of Murthly,and Birnam, and Dunkeld; through the shadow and sudden gleams ofKilliecrankie Pass; on by Blair Athol and the banks of the Garry; until,with slow and labouring breath, the train began to force its way up theheights of the Grampians, in the lone neighbourhood of the DrumouchterForest.  The air was keener here; the patches of snow were nearer athand; indeed, in some places the line had evidently been cleared, andlarge snow banks heaped up on each side.  But by and by the motion ofthe train seemed to become easier; and soon it was apparent that thedescent had begun; presently they were rattling away down into the wideand shining valley of Strathspey; and far over there on the west andnorth, and keeping guard over the plain, as it were, rose the giantmasses of the Cairngorm Hills, the snow sparkling here and there ontheir shoulders and peaks.It was not until half-past four in the afternoon that the long railwayjourney came to an end; and during that time he had come upon many ascene of historical interest and pictorial beauty.  He had been within ashort distance of the mournful 'haughs of Cromdale;' he had crossedCulloden Moor.  Nearing Forres, he had come within sight of the NorthernSea; and thereafter had skirted the blue ruffled waters of the Moray,and Cromarty, and Dornoch Firths.  But even when he had got to Lairg, alittle hamlet at the foot of Loch Shin, his travelling for the day wasnot nearly over; there still remained a drive of four-and-twenty miles;and although it was now dusk and the weather threatened a change, hepreferred to push on that night.  Travelling did not seem to tire himmuch; no doubt he was familiar with immeasurably greater distances inhis own country.  Moreover, he had learned that there was nothingparticular to look at in the stretch of wild moorland that lay betweenhim and his destination; and then again, if it was dark now, there wouldbe moonlight later on.  So he ate his dinner leisurely and in content,until a waggonette with two stout horses was brought round; then he gotin; and presently they were away from the little hamlet and out in astrange land of darkness and silence, scarcely anything visible aroundthem, the only sound the jog-trot clatter of the horses' feet.It was a desperately lonely drive.  The road appeared to go overinterminable miles of flat or scarcely undulating moorland; and evenwhen the moonlight began to make the darkness faintly visible, that onlyincreased the sense of solitude, for there was not even a single tree tobreak the monotony of the sombre horizon line.  It had begun to rainalso: not actual rain, but a kind of thin drizzle, that seemed to mixitself up with the ineffectual moonlight, and throw a wan haze overthese far-reaching and desolate wastes. Tramp, tramp went the horses'feet through this ghostly world; the wet mist grew thicker and thickerand clung around the traveller's hair; it was a chilling mist, moreover,and seemed to search for weak places about the throat. The only sharplydefined objects that the eye could rest on were the heads and upthrownears of the horses, that shone in the light sent forward by the lamps:all else was a formless wilderness of gloom, shadows following shadows,and ever the desolate landscape stretching on and on, and losing itselfin the night.The American stood up in the waggonette, perhaps to shake off for asecond the clammy sensation of the wet.'Say, young man,' he observedbut in an absent kind of way, for he wasregarding, as far as that was possible, the dusky undulations of themournful landscape'don't you think now, that for a good wholesome doseof God-forsakenness, this'll about take the cake?''Ah beg your paurdon, sir,' said the driver, who was apparently aLowlander.The stranger, however, did not seem inclined to continue theconversation; he sank into his seat again; gathered his rugs round him;and contented himself as heretofore by idly watching the lamplighttouching here and there on the harness and lighting up the horses' headsand ears.Mile after mile, hour after hour, went by in this monotonous fashion;and to the stranger it seemed as if he were piercing farther and fartherinto some unknown land unpeopled by any human creatures.  Not a ray oflight from any hut or farmhouse was visible anywhere.  But as the timewent on, there was at least some little improvement in the weather.Either the moonlight was growing stronger, or the thin drizzle clearingoff; at all events he could now make out ahead of himand beyond theflat moorlandthe dusky masses of some mountains, with one great peakovertopping them all.  He asked the name.'That is Ben Clebrig, sir.'And then through the mist and the moonlight a dull sheet of silver beganto disclose itself dimly.'Is that a lake down there?''Loch Naver, sir.''Then we are not far from Inver-Mudal?''No far noo; just a mile or two, sir,' was the consoling answer.And indeed when he got to the end of his journey, and reached the littlehostelry set far amid these moorland and mountain wilds, his welcomethere made ample amends. He was ushered into a plain, substantiallyfurnished, and spacious sitting-room, brightly lit up by the lamp thatstood on the white cloth of the table, and also by the blazing glarefrom the peats in the mighty fireplace; and when his eyes had gotaccustomed to this bewilderment of warmth and light, he found, awaitinghis orders, and standing shyly at the door, a pretty, tall, fair-hairedgirl, who, with the softest accent in the world, asked him what sheshould bring him for supper.  And when he said he did not care to haveanything, she seemed quite surprised and even concerned. It was a long,long drive, she said, in her shy and pretty way; and would not thegentleman have some hare-soupthat they had kept hot for him? and soforth.  But her coaxing was of no avail.'By the way, what is your name, my girl?' he said.'Nelly, sir.''Well, then, Nelly, do you happen to know whether Lord Ailine's keeperis anywhere in the neighbourhood?''He is in the unn, sir, waiting for you.''Oh, indeed.  Well, tell him I should like to see him. And say, what ishis name?''Ronald, sir.''Ronald?''That is his first name,' she explained.'His "first name"?  I thought that was one of our Americanisms.'She did not seem to understand this.'Ronald Strang is his name, sir; but we jist call him Ronald.''Very well, Nelly; you go and tell him I want to see him.''Ferry well, sir,' she said; and away she went.But little indeed did this indefatigable student of nature and humannaturewho had been but half interested by his observations andexperiences through that long day's travelknow what was yet in storefor him.  The door opened; a slim-built and yet muscular young man ofeight-and-twenty or so appeared there, clad in a smart deer-stalkingcostume of brownish green; he held his cap in his hand; and round hisshoulder was the strap from which hung behind the brown leather case ofhis telescope.  This Mr. Hodson saw at a glance; and also somethingmore.  He prided himself on his judgment of character.  And when hisquick look had taken in the keen, sun-tanned face of this young fellow,the square, intellectual forehead, the firm eyebrows, the finely cut andintelligent mouth, and a certain proud set of the head, he said tohimself, 'This is a man: there's something here worth knowing.''Good evening, sir,' the keeper said, to break the momentary silence.'Good evening,' said Mr. Hodson (who had been rather startled out of hismanners).  'Come and sit down by the fire; and let's have a talk nowabout the shooting and the salmon-fishing.  I have brought the lettersfrom the Duke's agent with me.''Yes, sir,' said Strang; and he moved a bit farther into the room; butremained standing, cap in hand.'Pull in a chair,' said Mr. Hodson, who was searching for the letters.'Thank ye, sir; thank ye,' said the keeper; but he remained standingnevertheless.Mr. Hodson returned to the table.'Sit down, man, sit down,' said he, and he himself pulled in a chair.'I don't know what your customs are over here, but anyhow I'm anAmerican citizen; I'm not a lord.'Somewhat reluctantly the keeper obeyed this injunction, and for a minuteor two seemed to be rather uncomfortable; but when he began to answerthe questions concisely put to him with regard to the business beforethem, his shyness wholly wore away, for he was the master of thissubject, not the stranger who was seeking for information. Into thedetails of these matters it is needless to enter here; and, indeed, sostruck was the American with the talk and bearing of this newacquaintance that the conversation went far afield.  And the fartherafield it went, the more and more was he impressed with theextraordinary information and intelligence of the man, the independenceof his views, the shrewdness and sometimes sarcasm of his judgments.Always he was very respectful; but in his eyeswhich seemed singularlydark and lustrous here indoors, but which, out of doors and when he wasafter the wary stag, or the still more wary hinds, on the far slopes ofClebrig, contracted and became of a keen brownish graythere was a kindof veiled fire of humour which, as the stranger guessed, might in othercircumstances blaze forth wildly enough.  Mr. Hodson, of Chicago, wasentirely puzzled.  A gamekeeper?  He had thought (from his reading ofEnglish books) that a gamekeeper was a velveteen-coated person whoseideas ranged from the ale-house to the pheasant-coverts, and thence andquickly back again. But this man seemed to have a wide and competentknowledge of public affairs; and, when it came to a matter of argument(they had a keen little squabble about the protection tariffs ofAmerica) he could reason hard, and was not over-compliant.'God bless me,' Mr. Hodson was driven to exclaim at last, 'what is a manof your ability doing in a place like this?  Why don't you go away toone of the big citiesor over to Americawhere a young fellow with hiswits about him can push himself forward?''I would rather be "where the dun deer lie,"' said he, with a kind ofbashful laugh.'You read Kingsley?' the other said, still more astonished.'My brother lends me his books from time to time,' Ronald said modestly.'He's a Free Church minister in Glasgow.''A Free Church minister?  He went through college, then?''Yes, sir; he took his degree at Aberdeen.''Butbut' said the newcomer, who had come upon a state of affairs hecould not understand at all'who was your father, then?  He sent yourbrother to college, I presume?''Oh no, sir.  My father is a small farmer down the Lammermuir way; andhe just gave my brother Andrew his wages like the rest, and Andrew savedup for the classes.''You are not a Highlander, then?''But half-and-half, like my name, sir,' he said (and all the shyness wasgone now: he spoke to this stranger frankly and simply as he would havespoken to a shepherd on the hillside).  'My mother was Highland.  Shewas a Macdonald; and so she would have me called Ronald; it's a commonname wi' them.'Mr. Hodson stared at him for a second or two in silence.'Well,' said he, slowly, 'I don't know.  Different men have differentways of looking at things.  I think if I were of your age, and had yourintelligence, I would try for something better than being a gamekeeper.''I am very well content, sir,' said the other placidly; 'and I couldnabe more than that anywhere else.  It's a healthy life; and a healthylife is the best of anythingat least that is my way of thinking.  Iwadna like to try the toun; I doubt it wouldn't agree wi' me.'  And thenhe rose to his feet.  'I beg your pardon, sir; I've been keeping yelate.'Well, Mr. Hodson was nothing loth to let him go; for although he hadarrived at the conviction that here was a valuable human life, ofexceptional quality and distinction, being absolutely thrown away andwasted, still he had not formed the arguments by which he might try tosave it for the general good, and for the particular good of the youngman himself.  He wanted time to think over this matterand in coolblood; for there is no doubt that he had been surprised and fascinatedby the intellectual boldness and incisiveness of the younger man'sopinions and by the chance sarcasms that had escaped him.'I could get him a good opening in Chicago soon enough,' he was thinkingto himself, when the keeper had left, 'but upon my soul I don't know theman who is fit to become that man's master.  Why, I'd start a newspaperfor him myself, and make him editorand if he can't write, he has gotmother-wit enough to guide them who canbut he and I would bequarrelling in a week.  That fellow is not to be driven by anybody.'He now rang the bell for a candle; and the slim and yellow-haired Nellyshowed him upstairs to his room, which he found to be comfortably warm,for there was a blazing peat fire in the grate, scenting all the airwith its delicious odour.  He bade her good-night, and turned to openhis dressing-bag; but at the same moment he heard voices without, and,being of an inquiring turn of mind, he went to the window.  The firstthing he saw was that outside a beautiful clear moon was now shining;the leafless elm-trees and the heavy-foliaged pines throwing sharp blackshadows across the white road.  And this laughing and jesting at thedoor of the inn?surely he heard Ronald's voice therethe gayest ofanyamong the jibes that seemed to form their farewells for the night?Then there was the shutting of a door; and in the silence that ensued hesaw the solitary, straight-limbed, clean-made figure of a man stride upthe white road, a little dog trotting behind him.'Come along, Harry, my lad,' the man said to his small companionandthat, sure enough, was the keeper's voice.And then, in the stillness of the moonlight night, this watcher andlistener was startled to hear a clear and powerful tenor voice suddenlybegin to singin a careless fashion, it is true, as if it were but tocheer the homeward going'Come all ye jolly shepherds,That whistle through the glen,I'll tell ye of a secretThat courtiers dinna ken.What is the greatest blissThat the tongue o' man can name?'Tis to woo a bonnie lassieWhen the kye come hame.''Great heavens!' said Mr. Hodson to himself, 'such a voiceand allEurope waiting for a new tenor!  But at seven or eight and twenty Isuppose he is beyond training.'The refrain became more and more distant:'When the kye come hame,When the kye come hame,'Twixt the gloamin' and the mirk,When the kye come hame.'Both the keeper and the little trotting terrier had disappeared now,having turned a corner of the road where there was a clump of trees.The traveller who had wandered into these remote wilds sate down for aminute or two to sum up his investigations of the evening, and they werethese:'Accounts of the deer seem shaky; but there may have been bad shootingthis last year, as he says.  The salmon-fishing sounds more likely; andthen Carry could come with us in the boatwhich would make it less dullfor her.  Anyhow, I have discovered the most remarkable man I have metwith as yet in the old country; and to think of his being thrown awaylike that!'*CHAPTER II.**MEENIE.*We may now follow Ronald Strang as he walks along to his cottage, which,with its kennels and its shed for hanging up the slain deer, stands on alittle plateau by the roadside, a short distance from the inn.  Themoonlight night is white and beautiful, but far from silent; for thegolden plover are whistling and calling down by the lochside, and thesnipe are sending their curious harsh note across the moorland wastes.Moreover, he himself seems to be in a gay mood (perhaps glad to be overthe embarrassment of a first meeting with the stranger), and he isconversing amicably with his little terrier.  The subject is rats.Whether the wise little Harry knows all that is said need not bedetermined; but he looks up from time to time and wags his stump of atail as he trots placidly along. And so they get up to the cottage andenter, for the outer door is on the latch, thieves being unheard of inthis remote neighbourhood; though here Harry hesitates, for he isuncertain whether he is to be invited into the parlour or not.  But thenext moment all consideration of this four-footed friend is driven outof his master's head. Ronald had expected to find the parlour empty, andhis little sister, at present his sole housekeeper, retired to rest. Butthe moment he opens the door, he finds that not only is she there,sitting by the table near to the solitary lamp, but that she has acompanion with her.  And well he knows who that must be.'Dear me, Miss Douglas,' he exclaimed, 'have I kept you so late!'The young lady, who now rose, with something of a flush over herfeaturesfor she had been startled by his sudden entrancewas certainlyan extraordinarily pretty creature: not so much handsome, ordistinguished, or striking, as altogether pretty and winning andgentle-looking. She was obviously of a pure Highland type: the figureslender and graceful, the head small and beautifully formed; theforehead rather square for a woman, but getting its proper curve fromthe soft and pretty hair; the features refined and intelligent; themouth sensitive; the expression a curious sort of seeking to please, asit were, and ready to form itself into an abundant gratitude for thesmallest act of kindness.  Of course, much of this look was owing to hereyes, which were the true Highland eyes; of a blue gray these were, withsomewhat dark lashes; wide apart, and shy, and apprehensive, theyreminded one of the startled eyes of some wild animal; but they were,entirely human in their quick sympathy, in their gentleness, in theirappeal to all the world, as it were, for a favouring word.  As for hervoicewell, if she used but few of the ordinary Highland phrases, shehad undoubtedly a considerable trace of Highland accent; for, althoughher father was an Edinburgh man, her mother (as the elderly lady verysoon let her neighbours know) was one of the Stuarts of Glengask andOrosay; and then again Meenie had lived nearly all her life in theHighlands, her father never having risen above the position of a parishdoctor, and welcoming even such local removals as served to improve hisposition in however slight a way.'Maggie,' said Miss Douglas (and the beautiful wide-apart eyes were fullof a shy apology), 'was feeling a little lonely, and I did not like toleave her.''But if I had known,' said he, 'I would not have stayed so late.  Thegentleman that is come about the shooting is a curious man; it's no thesalmon and the grouse and the deer he wants to know about only; it'severything in the country.  Now, Maggie, lass, get ye to bed.  And Iwill see you down the road, Miss Douglas.''Indeed there is no need for that,' said Meenie, with downcast eyes.'Would ye have a bogle run away with ye?' he said good-naturedly.And so she bade good-night to the little Maggie, and took up some booksand drawings she had brought to beguile the time withal; and then shewent out into the clear night, followed by the young gamekeeper.And what a night it wasor rather, might have beenfor two lovers!  Thewide waters of the loch lay still and smooth, with a broad pathway ofsilver stretching away into the dusk of the eastern hills; not a breathof wind stirred bush or tree; and if Ben Clebrig in the south was mostlya bulk of shadow, far away before them in the northern skies rose thegreat shoulders of Ben Loyal, pallid in the moonlight, the patches ofsnow showing white up near the stars.  They had left behind them thelittle hamletwhich merely consisted of a few cottages and the inn; theywere alone in this pale silent world.  And down there, beneath thelittle bridge, ran the placid Mudal Water: and if they had a Bible withthem?and would stand each on one side of the stream?and clasp handsacross?  It was a night for lovers' vows.'Maggie is getting on well with her lessons,' the pretty young ladysaid, in that gentle voice of hers.  'She is very diligent.''I'm sure I'm much obliged to ye, Miss Douglas,' was the respectfulanswer, 'for the trouble ye take with her. It's an awkward thing to besae far from a school.  I'm thinking I'll have to send her to my brotherin Glasgow, and get her put to school there.''Oh, indeed, indeed,' said she, 'that will be a change now. And who willlook after the cottage for you, Ronald?'She addressed him thus quite naturally, and without shyness; for no oneever dreamed of calling him anything else.'Well, I suppose Mrs. MacGregor will give the place a redd[#] up fromtime to time.  But a keeper has but half learned his business that cannashift for himself; there's some of the up-country lodges with ne'er awoman-body within a dozen miles o' them.'[#] 'Redd,' a setting to rights.'It is your brother the minister that Maggie will be going to?' shesaid.'Oh yes; he is married, and has a family of his own; she will becomfortable there.''Well, it is strange,' said she, 'that you should have a brother inGlasgow, and I a sister, and that your mother should be Highland andmine too.'But this was putting himself and her on much too common a footing; andhe was always on his guard against that, however far her gentleness andgood-nature might lead her.'When is your father coming back, Miss Douglas?' said he.'Well, I really do not know,' she said.  'I do not think he has ever hadso wide a district to attend to, and we are never sure of his being athome.''It must be very lonely for a young lady brought up like you,' heventured to say, 'that ye should have no companions.  And for yourmother, too; I wonder she can stand it.''Oh no,' she said, 'for the people are so friendly with us.  And I donot know of any place that I like better.'By this time they were come to the little wooden gate of the garden, andhe opened that for her.  Before them was the cottage, with its windows,despite the moonlight on the panes, showing the neat red blinds within.She gave him her hand for a second.'Good night, Ronald,' said she pleasantly.'Good night, Miss Douglas,' said he; 'Maggie must not keep you up solate again.'And therewith he walked away back again along the white road, and onlynow perceived that by some accident his faithful companion Harry hadbeen shut in when they left.  He also discovered, when he got home, thathis sister Maggie had been so intent puzzling over some arithmeticalmysteries which Meenie had been explaining to her, that she had stillfurther delayed her going to bed.'What, what?' said he, good-humouredly.  'Not in bed yet, lass?'The little red-headed, freckled-faced lassie obediently gathered up herbelongings, but at the door she lingered for a moment.'Ronald,' said she, timidly, 'why do ye call Meenie "Miss Douglas?" It'snot friendly.''When ye're a bit older, lass, ye'll understand,' he said, with a laugh.Little Maggie was distressed in a vague way, for she had formed a warmaffection for Meenie Douglas, and it seemed hard and strange that herown brother should show himself so distant in manner.'Do you think she's proud? for she's not that,' the little girl madebold to say.'Have ye never heard o' the Stuarts of Glengask?' said he; and he addedgrimly, 'My certes, if ye were two or three years older, I'm thinkingMrs. Douglas would have told ye ere now how Sir Alexander used to callon them in Edinburgh every time he came north.  Most folk have heardthat story.  But however, when Meenie, as ye like to call her, goes tolive in Edinburgh or Glasgow, or some o' the big towns, of course she'llbe Miss Douglas to every one, as she ought to be here, only that she'staken a fancy to you, and, my lass, fairly spoils ye with her kindness.Now, off with ye, and dinna fash your head about what I or any one elsecalls her; if she's content to be Meenie to you, ye should be proudenough.'As soon as she was gone he stirred up the peats, lit his pipe, and drewin a chair to the small table near the fire. It was his first pipe thatevening, and he wished to have it in comfort.  And then, to pass thetime, he unlocked and opened a drawer in the table, and began to rummagethrough the papers collected thereall kinds of shreds and fragmentsthey were, scored over mostly in pencil, and many of them bearing marksas if the writing had been done outside in the rain.The fact was, that in idle times, when there was no trapping to be done,or shooting of hoodie-crows, or breaking-in of young dogs, he wouldwhile away many an hour on the hillside or along the shores of the lochby stringing verses together.  They were done for amusement's sake.Sometimes he jotted them down, sometimes he did not. If occasionally,when he had to write a letter to a friend of his at Tongue, or make somerequest of his brother in Glasgow, he put these epistles into jinglingrhyme, that was about all the publication his poetical efforts everachieved; and he was most particular to conceal from the 'gentry' whocame down to the shooting any knowledge that he scribbled at all.  Heknew it would be against him.  He had no wish to figure as one of thoselocal poets (and alas! they have been and are too numerous in Scotland)who, finding within them some small portion of the afflatus of a Burns,or a Motherwell, or a Tannahill, are seduced away from their lawfulemployment, gain a fleeting popularity in their native village, perhapsattain to the dignity of a notice in a Glasgow or Edinburgh newspaper,and subsequently and almost inevitably die of drink, in the most abjectmisery of disappointment.  No; if he had any ambition it was not in thatdirection; it was rather that he should be known as the smartestdeerstalker and the best trainer of dogs in Sutherlandshire.  He knewwhere his strength lay, and where he found content.  And then there wasanother reason why he could not court newspaper applause with these idlerhymes of his.  They were nearly all about Meenie Douglas.Meenie-olatry was written all across those scribbled sheets.  And ofcourse that was a dark secret known only to himself; and indeed itamused him, as he turned over the loose leaves, to think that all theStuarts of Glengask and Orosay (and that most severe and terrible ofthem all, Mrs. Douglas) could not in the least prevent his saying toMeenie just whatever he pleasedwithin the wooden confines of thisdrawer.  And what had he not said?  Sometimes it was but a bit ofcareless singingRoses white, roses red,Roses in the lane,Tell me, roses red and white,Where is Meenie gane?O is she on Loch Loyal's side?Or up by Mudal Water?In vain the wild doves in the woodsEverywhere have sought her.Roses white, roses red,Roses in the lane,Tell me, roses red and white,Where is Meenie gane?Well, now, supposing you are far away up on Ben Clebrig's slopes, a gunover your shoulder, and idly looking out for a white hare or aptarmigan, if you take to humming these careless rhymes to some suchtune as 'Cherry Ripe,' who is to hinder?  The strongest of all the southwinds cannot carry the tidings to Glengask nor yet to Orosay's shores.And so the whole country-sideevery hill and stream and wood androckcame to be associated with Meenie, and saturated with the praiseand glory of her. Why, he made the very mountains fight about her!Ben Loyal spake to Ben Clebrig,And they thundered their note of war:'You look down on your sheep and your sheepfolds;I see the ocean afar.'You look down on the huts and the hamlets,And the trivial tasks of men;I see the great ships sailingAlong the northern main.'Ben Clebrig laughed, and the laughterShook heaven and earth and sea:'There is something in that small hamletThat is fair enough for me'Ay, fairer than all your sailing shipsStruck with the morning flame:A fresh young flower from the hand of GodRose Meenie is her name!'But at this moment, as he turned over this mass of scraps and fragments,there was one, much more audacious than the rest, that he was in searchof, and when he found it a whimsical fancy got into his head.  If hewere to make out a fair copy of the roughly scrawled lines, and foldthat up, and address it to Meenie, just to see how it looked? He tookout his blotting-pad, and selected the best sheet of note-paper he couldfind; and then he wrote (with a touch of amusement, and perhaps ofsomething else, too, in his mind the while) thusO wilt thou be my dear love?(Meenie and Meenie),O wilt thou be my ain love?(My sweet Meenie),Were you wi' me upon the hill,It's I would gar the dogs be still,We'd lie our lane and kiss our fill,(My love Meenie).Aboon the burn a wild bush grows(Meenie and Meenie),And on the lush there blooms a rose(My sweet Meenie);And wad ye tak the rose frae me,And wear it where it fain would be,It's to your arms that I would flee,(Rose-sweet Meenie!)He carefully folded the paper and addressed it outsideso:Miss Wilhelmina Stuart Douglas,Care of James Douglas, Esq., M.D.,Inver-Mudal,Sutherlandshire.And then he held it out at arm's length, and regarded it, and laughed,in a contemptuous kind of way, at his own folly.'Well,' he was thinking to himself, 'if it were not for Stuart ofGlengask, I suppose the day might come when I could send her a letterlike that; but as it is, if they were to hear of any such madness,Glengask and all his kith and kin would be for setting the heather onfire.'He tossed the letter back on the blotting-pad, and rose and went andstood opposite the blazing peats.  This movement aroused the attentionof the little terrier, who immediately jumped up from his snooze andbegan to whimper his expectation.  Strang's heart smote him.'God bless us!' he said aloud.  'When a lass gets into a man's head,there's room for nothing else; he'll forget his best friends.  Here,Harry, come along, and I'll get ye your supper, my man.'He folded up the blotting-pad and locked it in the drawer, blew out thecandles, called Harry to follow him into the kitchen, where the smallterrier was duly provided for and left on guard.  Then he sought out hisown small room. He was whistling as he went; and, if he dreamt ofanything that night, be sure it was not of the might and majesty of SirAlexander Stuart of Glengask and Orosay. These verses to Meenie were butplaythings and fanciesfor idle hours.*CHAPTER III.**ON THE LOCH.*A considerable wind arose during the night; Mr. Hodson did not sleepvery well; and, lying awake towards morning, he came to the conclusionthat he had been befooled, or rather that he had befooled himself, withregard to that prodigy of a gamekeeper.  He argued with himself that hismental faculties must have been dulled by the long day's travel; he hadcome into the inn jaded and tired; and then finding himself face to facewith an ordinarily alert and intrepid intellect, he had no doubtexaggerated the young man's abilities, and made a wonder of him where nowonder was needed.  That he was a person of considerable information andshowed common sense was likely enough.  Mr. Hodson, in his studies ofmen and things, had heard something of the intelligence and education tobe found among the working classes in Scotland.  He had heard of thehandloom weavers who were learned botanists; of the stone-masons whowere great geologists; of the village poets who, if most of theirefforts were but imitations of Ferguson and Burns and Tannahill, wouldhere and there, in some chance moment of inspiration, sing out some trueand pathetic song, to be taken to the hearts of their countrymen, andadded to a treasure-store of rustic minstrelsy such as no other nationin the world has ever produced.  At the same time he was rather anxiousto meet Strang again, the better to get the measure of him.  And as hewas also curious to see what this neighbourhood into which he hadpenetrated looked like, he rose betimes in the morningindeed, beforethe day was fully declared.The wind still moaned about the house, but outside there was no sign ofany storm; on the contrary, everything was strangely calm.  The lake laya dark lurid purple in the hollow of the encircling hills; and these,along the eastern heavens, were of the deepest and softest olive green;just over them was a line of gleaming salmon-red, keen and resplendentas if molten from a furnace; and over that again soft saffron-duskyclouds, deepening in tone the higher they hung in the clear pale steelhues of the overhead sky.  There was no sign of life anywherenothingbut the birch woods sloping down to the shore; the moorland wastes ofthe lower hills; and above these the giant bulk and solemn shadows ofBen Clebrig,[#] dark against the dawn.  It was a lovely sight; he beganto think he had never before in his life felt himself so much alone.But whence came the sound of the wind that seemed to go moaning down thestrath towards the purple lake?[#] That is, the Hill of the Playing Trout.Well, he made no doubt that it was up towards the north and west thatthe storm was brewing; and he remembered that a window in thesitting-room below looked in that direction; there he would be able toascertain whether any fishing was practicable.  He finished his dressingand went down.  The breakfast table was laid; a mighty mass of peats wasblazing cheerfully in the spacious fireplace.  And the storm?  Why, allthe wide strath on this northern side of the house was one glow ofyellow light in the now spreading sunrise; and still farther away in thenorth the great shoulders of Ben Loyal[#] had caught a faint roseatetinge; and the same pale and beautiful colour seemed to transfuse alarge and fleecy cloud that clung around the snow-scarred peak.  So hecame to the conclusion that in this corner of the glen the wind saidmore than it meant; and that they might adventure on the loch withoutrisk of being swamped or blown ashore.[#] More properly Ben Laoghal, the Hill of the Calves.The slim tall Highland lass made her appearance with further plenishingsfor the table, and 'Good moarning!' she said, in her pretty way, inanswer to his greeting.'Say, now, has that man come down from Tongue yet?''No, sir,' said Nelly, 'he wass no come down yet.'  And then she lookedup with a demure smile.  'They would be keeping the New Year at Tonguelast night.''Keeping the New Year on the 14th of January?''It's the twelfth is the usual day, sir,' she explained, 'but that wasSaturday, and they do not like a Saturday night, for they have to stopat twelve o'clock, and so most of them were for keeping it last night.''Oh, indeed.  Then the festive gentleman won't show up to-day?''But it is of no matter whateffer whether he comes or no; for I am surethat Ronald will be willing to lend a hand.  Oh, I am sure of it.  Iwill ask him myself.''You will ask him?' was Mr. Hodson's internal soliloquy. 'It is toyou he will grant the favour.  Indeed!'He fixed his eyes on her,'He is a good-looking young fellow, that Ronald.'She did not answer that; she was putting the marmalade, and the honey,and the cream on the table.'He is not married?''No, sir.''Well, now, when he thinks about getting married, I suppose he'll prettywell have his choice about here?''Indeed there iss others besides him,' said Nelly rather proudly, buther face was red as she opened the door.Well, whether it was owing to the intervention of Nelly or not, as soonas Mr. Hodson was ready to start he found Ronald waiting for himwithout; and not only that, but he had already assumed command of theexpedition, having sent the one gillie who had arrived down to bale theboat. And then he would overhaul Mr. Hodson's fishing-gearexamining therods, testing the lines and traces, and rejecting all the spoon baits,angels, sand-eels, and what not, that had been supplied by the Londontackle-maker, for two or three of the familiar phantom minnows.  Mr.Hodson could scarcely believe that this was the same man who last nighthad been discussing the disestablishment of state churches and thepolicy of protecting native industries. He had not a word for anythingbut the business before him; and the bold fashion in which he handledthose minnows, all bristling with hooks, or drew the catgut tracesthrough his fingers (Mr. Hodson shivered, and seemed to feel his ownfingers being cut to the bone), showed that he was as familiar with theloch as with the hillside or the kennel.'I'm not much on salmon-fishing myself,' the American remarked modestly.'It's rather early in the season, sir, I'm afraid,' was the answer.'But we might get a fish after all; and if we do it'll be the firstcaught in Scotland this year, I warrant.'They set out and walked down to the shore of the loch, and there Mr.Hodson seated himself on the gunwale of the flat-bottomed coble, andwatched the two men putting the rods together and fixing the traces.The day had now declared itself; wild and stormy in appearance, but fairon the whole; great floods of sunshine falling suddenly on the yellowslopes and the russet birch woods; and shadows coming as rapidly acrossthe far heights of Clebrig, steeping the mountains in gloom.  As for thegillie who had been proof against the seductions of keeping the NewYear, and who was now down on one knee, biting catgut with his teeth, hewas a man as tall and as sallow as Mr. Hodson himself, but with an addedexpression of intense melancholy and hopelessness.  Or was that buttemporary?'Duncan doesna like that boat,' Ronald said, glancing at Mr. Hodson.The melancholy man did not speak, but shook his head gloomily.'Why?'As the gillie did not answer, Ronald said'He thinks there is no luck with that boat.''That boat?' the gillie said, with an angry look towards the haplesscoble.  'She has the worst luck of any boat in Sutherlandtam her,' headded, under his breath.'In my country,' the American said, in his slow way, 'we don't mind luckmuch; we find perseverance about as good a horse to win with in theend.'He was soon to have his perseverance tried.  Everything being ready theypushed off from the shore, Ronald taking stroke oar, the gillie at thebow; Mr. Hodson left to pay out the lines of the two rods, and fix thesein the stern, when about five-and-thirty yards had gone forth.  Atfirst, it is true, he waited and watched with a trifle of anxiety. Hewanted to catch a salmon; it would be something to write about to hisdaughter; it would be a new experience for himself.  But when timepassed and the boat was slowly rowed along the loch at a measureddistance from the shore, without any touch of anything coming to makethe point of either rod tremble, he rather gave up his hope in thatdirection, and took to talking with Ronald.  After all, it was notsalmon-fishing alone that had brought him into these wilds.'I suppose it is really too early in the season,' he observed, withoutmuch chagrin.'Rayther,' said Ronald.'Rawther,' said the melancholy gillie.But at that instant something happened that startled every one of themout of their apathy.  The top of one of the rods was violently pulledat, and then there was a long shrill yell of the reel.'There he is, sir! there he is, sir!' Ronald called.Mr. Hodson made a grab blindlyfor he had been looking at the sceneryaroundat one of the rods.  It was the wrong one.  But before he knewwhere he was, Ronald had got hold of the other and raised the top so asto keep a strain on the fish.  The exchange of the rods was effected ina moment.  Then when Ronald had wound in the other line and put the rodat the bow, he took to his oar again, leaving Mr. Hodson to fight hisunknown enemy as best he might, but giving him a few words of directionfrom time to time, quietly, as if it were all a matter of course.'Reel in, sir, reel inkeep an even strain on himlet him golet him goif he wants'Well, the fish was not a fierce fighter; after the first long rush hescarcely did anything; he kept boring downwards, with a dull, heavyweight.  It seemed easy work; and Mr. Hodsontriumphant in the hope ofcatching his first salmonwas tempted to call aloud to the melancholygillie'Well, Duncan, how about luck now?''I think it's a kelt,' the man answered morosely.But the sinister meaning of this reply was not understood.'I don't know what you call him,' said Mr. Hodson, holding on with bothhands to the long, lithe grilse-rod that was bent almost double.  'Celtor Saxon, I don't know; but I seem to have got a good grip of him.''Then he heard Ronald say, in an undertone, to the gillie'A kelt?  No fears.  The first rush was too heavy for that.'And the gillie responded sullenly'He's following the boat like a cow.''What is a kelt, anyway?' the American called out. 'Something thatswims, I suppose?  It ain't a man?''I hope it's no a kelt, sir,' said Ronaldbut doubtfully.'But what is a kelt, then, when he's at home?''A salmon, sir, that hasna been down to the sea; we'll have to put himback if he is.'Whirr! went the reel again; the fish, kelt or clean salmon, had struckdeep down.  But the melancholy creature at the bow was taking no furtherinterest in the fight.  He was sure it was a kelt.  Most likely theminnow would be destroyed.  Maybe he would break the trace. But a keltit was.  He knew the luck of this 'tammed' boat.The struggle was a tedious one.  The beast kept boring down with themere force of its weight, but following the coble steadily; and evenRonald, who had been combating his own doubts, at length gave in: he wasafraid it was a kelt.  Presently the last suspicion of hope wasbanished. With a tight strain on him, the now exhausted animal began toshow near the surface of the waterhis long eel-like shape and blackback revealing too obviously what manner of creature he was.  But thisrevelation had no effect on the amateur fisherman, who at last beheldthe enemy he had been fighting with so long.  He grew quite excited.  Akelt?he was a beautiful fine fish!  If he could not be eaten he couldbe stuffed!  Twenty pounds he was, if an ounce!would he throw back sucha trophy into the loch?Ronald was crouching in the stern of the boat, the big landing-net inhis hand, watching the slow circling of the kelt as it was being haulednearer and nearer.  His sentiments were of a different kind.'Ah, you ugly brute!ah, you rascal!ahah!'and then there was a deepscoop of the landing-net; and the next minute the huge eel-like beastwas in the bottom of the boat, Duncan holding on to its tail, and Ronaldgripping it by the gills, while he set to work to get the minnow out ofits jaws.  And then without further adoand without stopping to discussthe question of stuffingthe creature was heaved into the water again,with a parting benediction of 'Bah, you brute!'  It took its leaverapidly.'Well, it's a pity, sir,' Ronald said; 'that would have been atwenty-four-pound salmon if he had been down to the sea.''It's the luck of this tammed boat,' Duncan said gloomily.But Mr. Hodson could not confess to any such keen sense ofdisappointment.  He had never played so big a fish before, and wasrather proud that so slight a grilse-rod and so slender a line should(of course, with some discretion and careful nursing on his part) haveovermastered so big a beast.  Then he did not eat salmon; there was noloss in that direction.  And as he had not injured the kelt in any way,he reflected that he had enjoyed half-an-hour's excitement without doingharm to anything or anybody, and he was well content.  So he paid outthe two lines again, and set the rods, and began to renew his talk withRonald touching the customs connected with the keeping of the New Year.After all, it was a picturesque kind of occupation, kelts or no kelts.Look at the scene around themthe lapping waters of the loch, a vividand brilliant blue when the skies were shining fair, or black and stormyagain when the clouds were heavy in the heavens; and always thepermanent features of the landscapethe soft yellows of the lowerstraths, where the withered grass was mixed with the orange bracken; thesoft russet of the leafless birch woods fringing the shores of the lake;the deep violet shadows of Ben Clebrig stretching up into the longswathes of mist; and then the far amphitheatre of hillsBen Hee, and BenHope, and Ben Loyalwith sunlight and shade inter-mingling theirethereal tints, but leaving the snow-streaks always sparkling and clear.He got used to the monotony of the slow circling of the upper waters ofthe lake.  He forgot to watch the points of the rods.  He was asking allkinds of questions about the stags and the hinds, about ptarmigan, andwhite hares, and roe, about the price of sheep, the rents of crofts, thecomparative wages of gillies, and shepherds, and foresters, and keepers,and stalkers, and the habits and customs of land-agents and factors.And at length, when it came to lunch-time, and when they landed, andfound for him a sheltered place under the lee of a big rock, and whenRonald pointed out to him a grassy bank, and said rather ruefully'I dinna like to see that place empty, sir.  That's where the gentlemenhave the salmon laid out, that they may look at them at lunch-time'Mr. Hodson, as he opened the little basket that had been provided forhim, answered cheerfully enough'My good friend, don't you imagine that I feel like giving it up yet.I'm not finished with this lake, and I'll back perseverance against luckany day.  Seems to me we've done very well so far; I'm con-tent.'By and by they went back into the coble again, and resumed their patientpursuit; and there is little doubt that by this time Ronald had come tothe conclusion that this stranger who had come amongst them was asingularly odd and whimsical person.  It was remarkable enough that heshould have undertaken this long and solitary journey in order to fishfor salmon, and then show himself quite indifferent as to whether he gotany or not; and it was scarcely human for any one to betray nodisappointment whatever when the first fish caught proved to be a kelt;but it was still stranger that a man rich enough to talk about renting adeer-forest should busy himself with the petty affairs of the verypoorest people around.  Why, he wanted to know how much Nelly thehousemaid could possibly save on her year's wages; whether she wassupposed to lay by something as against her wedding-day; or whether anyof the lads about would marry her for her pretty face alone.  And whenhe discovered that Mr. Murray, the innkeeper, was about to give a NewYear supper and dance to the lads and lasses of the neighbourhood, hemade no scruple about hinting plainly that he would be glad of aninvitation to join that festive party.'Not if I'm going to be anything of a wet blanket,' he said candidly.'My dancing days are over, and I'm not much in the way of singing; butI'll tell them an American story; or I'll present them with a barrel ofwhiskyif that will keep the fun going.''I'm sure they'll be very glad, sir,' Ronald said, 'if ye just come andlook on.  When there's gentlemen at the Lodge, they generally come downto hear the pipes, and the young gentlemen have a dance too.''What night did you say?''Monday next, sir.'Well, he had only intended remaining here for a day or two, to see whatthe place was like; but this temptation was too great.  Here was afamous opportunity for the pursuit of his favourite studythe study oflife and manners. This, had Ronald but known it, was the constant andengrossing occupation that enabled this contented traveller to acceptwith equanimity the ill-luck of kelt-catching; it was a hobby he couldcarry about with him everywhere; it gave a continuous interest to everyhour of his life.  He cared little for the analyses of science; he caredless for philosophical systems; metaphysics he laughed at; but men andwomenthe problems of their lives and surroundings, their diversefortunes and aspirations and dealings with each otherthat was the oneand constant subject that engrossed his interest.  No doubt there was alittle more than this; it was not merely as an abstract study that hewas so fond of getting to know how people lived. The fact was that, evenafter having made ample provision for his family, he still remainedpossessed of a large fortune; his own expenditure was moderate; and heliked to go about with the consciousness that here or there, as occasionserved, he could play the part of a little Providence.  It was aharmless vanity; moreover, he was a shrewd man, not likely to bedeceived by spurious appeals for charity. Many was the young artist whomhe had introduced to buyers; many the young clerk whom he had helped toa better situation; more than one young woman in the humblest ofcircumstances had suddenly found herself enabled to purchase her weddingoutfit (with a trifle over, towards the giving her greater value in herlover's eyes), through the mysterious benevolence of some unknownbenefactor.  This man had been brought up in a country where every oneis restlessly pushing forward; and being possessed of abundant means,and a friendly disposition, it seemed the most natural thing in theworld that here or there, at a fitting opportunity, he should lend ahelping hand.  And there was always this possibility present to himthissense of poweras he made those minute inquiries of his into theconditions of the lives of those amongst whom he chanced to be living.The short winter day was drawing to a close; the brilliant steely blueof the driven water had given place to a livid gray; and the faintgleams of saffron-yellow were dying out in the western skies.'Suppose we'd better be going home now,' Mr. Hodson remarked at aventure, and with no great disappointment in his tone.'I'm afraid, sir, there's no much chance now,' Ronald said.'We must call again; they're not at home to-day,' the other remarked,and began with much complacency to reel in one of the lines.He was doing so slowly, and the men were as slowly pulling in for theshore in the gathering dusk, when whirr! went the other reel.  Theloud and sudden shriek in this silence was a startling thing; and noless so was the springing into the airat apparently an immense distanceawayof some creature, kelt or salmon, that fell into the water againwith a mighty splash.  Instinctively Mr. Hodson had gripped this rod,and passed the other one he had been reeling in to Strang.  It was ananxious moment.  Whirr! went another dozen yards of line; and againthe fish sprang into the airthis time plainly visible.'A clean fish, sir! a clean fish!' was the welcome cry.But there was no time to hazard doubts or ask questions; this suddenvisitor at the end of the line had not at all made up his mind to beeasily captured.  First of all he came sailing in quietly towards theboat, giving the fisherman all he could do to reel in and keep a strainon him; then he whirled out the line so suddenly that the rod was nearlybent double; and then, in deep water, he kept persistently sulking andboring, refusing to yield an inch. This was a temporary respite.'Well, now, is this one all right?' Mr. Hodson called outbut he wasrather bewildered, for he knew not what this violent beast might not beafter next, and the gathering darkness looked strange, the shadows ofClebrig overhead seeming to blot out the sky.'A clean fish, sir,' was the confident answer.'No doubt o' that, sir,' even the melancholy Duncan admitted; for heforesaw a dram now, if not a tip in actual money.Then slowly and slowly the salmon began to yield to the strain onhimwhich was considerable, for this was the heavier of the two rodsandquickly the line was got in, the pliant curve of the rod remainingalways the same; while Mr. Hodson flattered himself that he was doingvery well now, and that he was surely becoming the master of thesituation.  But the next instant something happened that his mind wasnot rapid enough to comprehend: something dreadful and horrible andsudden: there was a whirring out of the reel so rapid that he had tolower the point of the rod almost to the water; then the fish made oneflashing spring along the surfaceand this time he saw the creature, agleam of silver in the duskand then, to his unspeakable dismay andmortification, he felt the line quite slack.  He did utter a littlemonosyllable.'He's off, sir,' the melancholy gillie said in a tone of sadresignation.'Not a bit, sir, not a bit!  Reel in, quick!' Ronald called to him: andthe fisherman had sense enough to throw the rod as far back as he couldto see if there was yet some strain on it.  Undoubtedly the fish wasstill there.  Moreover, this last cantrip seemed to have taken thespirit out of him.  By and by, with a strong, steady strain on him, hesuffered himself to be guided more and more towards the boat, until, nowand again, they could see a faint gleam in the dark water; and nowRonald had relinquished his oar, and was crouching down in thesternthis time not with the landing-net in his hand, but with thebright steel clip just resting on the gunwale.'He's showing the white feather now, sir; give him a little more of thebutt.'However, he had not quite given in yet: each time he came in sight ofthe boat he would make another ineffectual rush, but rarely getting downdeeper than three or four yards.  And then, with a short line and thebutt well towards him, he began to make slow semicircles this way andthat; and always he was being steadily hauled nearer the coble; untilwith one quick dip and powerful upward pull Ronald had got himtransfixed on the gaff and landedthe huge, gleaming, beautiful silvercreature!in the bottom of the boat.'Well done, sir!a clean fish!a beautythe first caught in Scotlandthis year, I know!'these were the exclamations he heard now; but hescarcely knew how it had all happened, for he had been more excited thanhe was aware of.  He felt a vague and general sense of satisfaction;wanted to give the men a glass of whisky, and had none to give them;thought that the capture of a salmon was a noble thing; would have likedhis daughter Carry to hear the tidings at once; and had a kind ofgeneral purpose to devote the rest of that year to salmon-fishing in theHighlands.  From this entrancement he was awakened by a dispute betweenthe two men as to the size of the fish.'He's twelve pounds, and no more,' the melancholy Duncan said, eyeinghim all over.'Look at his shoulders, man,' Ronald rejoined.  'Fourteen pounds if he'san ounce.  Duncan, lad, ye've been put off your guessing by the sight ofthe kelt.''He's a good fish whateffer,' Duncan was constrained to admitfor hestill foresaw that prospect of a dram when they returned to the inn,with perhaps a more substantial handselling of good luck.Of course, they could do no more fishing that afternoon, for it wasnearly dark; but it was wonderful how the capture of this single salmonseemed to raise the spirits of the little party as they got ashore andwalked home.  There was a kind of excitement in the evening air.  Theytalked in a rapid and eager wayabout what the fish had done; what werethe chances of such and such a rush; the probable length of time it hadbeen up from the sea; the beauty of its shape; the smallness of itshead; the freshness of its colour, and so forthand there was a kind ofjubilation abroad.  The first fish caught in Scotland that year!ofcourse, it must be packed forthwith and sent south to his daughter Carryand her friends.  And Mr. Hodson was quite facetious with the prettyNelly when she came in to lay the table for dinner; and would have hersay whether she had not yet fixed her mind on one or other of theseyoung fellows around.  As for the small hamlet of Inver-Mudal, it wasabout as solitary and forlorn a habitation as any to be found in thewilds of northern Scotland; and he was there all by himself; but withthe blazing peat-fire, and the brilliant white cloth on thedinner-table, and the consciousness that the firm, stout-shouldered,clean-run fourteen-pounder was lying in the dairy on a slab of coldstone, he considered that Inver-Mudal was a most enjoyable and sociableand comfortable place, and that he had not felt himself so snug and somuch at home for many and many a day.*CHAPTER IV.**A LETTER.*After dinner he found himself with a pretty long evening before him, andthought he could not do better than devote the major part of it towriting to his daughter.  He would not confess to himself that he wantedher to know at once that he had caught his first salmon; that was but atrivial incident in the life of a philosopher and student of mankind;still she would be glad to hear of his adventures; and it was not anunpleasant way of passing the time.  So he wrote as follows:'MY DARLING CARRYYou will be rejoiced to learn that I have discovered aharbour of refuge for you, where that minute organ you call your mindmay lay aside its heaviest load of trouble.  Here, at last, is onecorner of Europe where you need have no fear of anybody mistaking youfor one of the Boston girls of fiction; indeed you might go about allday talking your beloved Texas with impunity; although, my dear younglady, that is a habit you would do well to drop, for sooner or later itwill get you into trouble when you are least expecting it.  But short ofscalping children or using a bowie-knife for a fork, I think you mightdo or say anything you pleased here; it is the most out-of-the-worldsort of place; a community of fifteen or twenty, I should guess, hiddenaway in a hole of a valley, and separated from the rest of the universeby great ranges of mountains and interminable miles of moorland.  Thepeople seem very friendly, but shy; and I don't quite catch on to themyet, for their speech bothers mescarcely any two of them seem to havethe same accent; but I hope to get to know something more about themnext Monday, when they have a New Year celebration, which I am invitedto the same.  Would you like to join in?  By all means come if you careto; the station is Lairg; wire, and I will meet you there.  You willmiss the wild excitement of paying afternoon calls and drinking tea; butyou will get sunlight and fresh air into your lungs.  The talk about thefierce weather is all nonsense.  There is a sprinkling of snow on thehigher hills, but the temperature is quite agreeable. In any case Iexpect you to come here with me in March, when the salmon-fishing willbegin in earnest; and I have no doubt you will have made theacquaintance of the whole of the people in a couple of days, shy as theyare. There is another point I have not forgotten.  As you seemdetermined to set yourself up for your lifetime with reminiscences ofyour travels in Europe, I have had to consider what you could carry awayfrom here.  I am afraid that Inver-Mudal jewellery wouldn't make much ofa show; and I haven't seen any shell necklaces or silk scarves or bluepots about.  But what about a Highland maid?  I suppose the N.Y. Customsofficers wouldn't charge much for that article of vertu.  Now the maidwho waits on me here is very pretty and gentle in manner; and I supposeshe could be induced to gofor a proper consideration; and you couldbegin the training of her now, and have her quite accomplished by thetime we got home.  Sounds rather like slavery, don't it?but she wouldbe going to the land of the free, and the banner would wave over her.She gets eighty dollars a year and her board; I'd go better than that,if you took a fancy to her.'But the most remarkable person hereperhaps it is the contrast betweenhis personal abilities and his position that is the striking thingis adeerstalker and gamekeeper whom they familiarly call Ronald; and Iconfess that, with all I had heard of the intelligence of the Scotchpeasantry, this fellow, before I had been talking with him ten minutes,rather made me open my eyes.  And yet, looking back over the differentsubjects we fell upon, I don't know that he said anything so veryremarkable on any one of them.  I think it is rather the personalcharacter of the man that is impressivethe manliness and independenceof his judgment, and yet his readiness to consider the other side if youcan convince him; his frank (and, I should say, foolish) recognition ofthe differences of social position; and then a kind of curiousself-respect he has which refuses to allow him to become quite friendly,though you may be willing enough to forget that you are talking oftaking a shooting on which he is one of the employs, and anxious onlyto converse with him as man to man. I'm afraid this is rather mixed, butyou would have to see him to understand quite well what manner of personhe isa good-looking fellow too, well knit together, with a keen, hardface, full of life and a half-concealed force of humour.  I should judgehe would make a pretty fair king of good company in the unrestrainedintercourse of a few boon companions; and I imagine he has a hard headif there should be any drinking going on.  What to do with him I don'tknow.  It is absurd he should be where he is. His brother has been tocollege, taken his degree, and is now in the Scotch Church somewhere.But this fellow seems quite content to trap foxes and shoot gray crows,and, in the autumn, look after the grouse-shooting and deerstalking ofother people.  A man of his brains would not be in that position for afortnight in our country. Here everything is fixed.  He thinks it isnatural for him to be in a subservient position.  And yet there is acurious independence about the fellow; I don't know what inducement Icould put before him to get him out of it.  Suppose we said, "Come youwith us to America, and we'll run you for President;" I'm afraid he'dquote Kingsley in our face, and be off to "where the dun deer lie."  Infact his reverence for the star-spangled banner appears to be of amitigated description.  I found he knew more than I expected about ourwire-pulling gentry at home; but then, on the other hand, I discoveredthat he knew nothing about the necessity of protecting the industries ofa young country beyond what he had read in the English papers, and youknow what high old Mother Hubbardism that is. Now I want to do somethingfor this fellow, and don't know how.  He's too good a man to be thrownawaya kind of upper servant, as it were, of his lordship.  He hasplenty of ability and he has plenty of knowledge in a dozen differentdirections, if they could only be applied.  But then he is a doggedkind of a creaturehe is not pliant; if you can show him sufficientreason for changing he might change, otherwise not one inch will hebudge.  What is the inducement to be?  It is useless offering him anallotment of land in Nebraska; here he has miles and miles of the mostpicturesque territory conceivable, of which, save for a month or two inthe autumn, he is the absolute master.  He enjoys an ownership overthese hills and moors and lochs more obvious than that of the Dukehimself; he would not exchange that for the possession of a bit oftable-land on the Platte Valley, unless he were a fool, and that he isfar from being.  The Presidentship?  Well, I waved your beloved bannerover him, but he didn't enthuse worth a cent.  However, I must castabout and see what is to be done with him, for I am really interested inthe man.'At this moment there was a tapping at the door, and Nelly appeared witha huge armful of peats, which she began to build up dexterously in thefireplace, always leaving a central funnel open.'Say, my girl, when will this letter go south?' Mr. Hodson asked.'To-morrow moarning,' was the answer.'And the fish, too?''Yes, sir, by the mail cart.''Has Duncan packed it in the rushes yet?''Oh no, sir, Ronald will do that; he can do it better as any of them; hewould not let any one else do it, for they're saying it iss the firstfish of the year, and he's very proud of your getting the fish, sir.''Ich auch!' observed Mr. Hodson to himself; and he would probably havecontinued the conversation, but that suddenly a strange noise was heard,coming from some distant part of the inna harsh, high, note, all inmonotone.'What's that now, Nelly?''It will be Ronald tuning his pipes,' said she, as she was going to thedoor.'Oh, he can play the pipes too?''Indeed, yes, sir; and better as any in Sutherland, I hef heard themsay,' she added.Just as she opened the door the drones and chanter broke away into ashrill and lively march that seemed to flood the house with itspenetrating tones.'I think it's "Dornoch Links" he's playing,' Nelly said, with a quietsmile, 'for there's some of the fisher-lads come through on their way toTongue.'She left then; but the solitary occupant of the sitting-room thought hecould not do better than go to the door and listen for a while to thisstrange sort of music, which he had never heard played properly before.And while he could scarcely tell one tune from another except by thetimethe slow, wailing, melancholy Lament, for example, was easilyenough distinguished from the bright and lively Strathspeyhere andthere occurred an airthe '79th's Farewell,' or the 'Barren Rocks ofAden,' or the 'Pibroch of Donald Dhu,' had he but known the names ofthemwhich had a stately and martial ring about it; he guessed that itwas meant to lead the tramp of soldiers.  And he said to himself'Here, now, is this fellow, who might be piper to a Highland regiment,and I daresay all the use he makes of his skill is to walk up and downoutside the dining-room window of the Lodge and play to a lot ofwhite-kneed Englishmen when they come down for the autumn shooting.'He returned to his letter.'I have the honour to inform you that the first salmon caught on anyScotch loch this year was caught by me this afternoon, and to-morrowwill be on its way to you.  If you don't believe the story, look at thesalmon itself for evidence.  And as regards this loch-fishing, itappears to me you might have a turn at it when we come up inMarchtaking one of the two rods; a little practice with Indian clubsmeanwhile would enable you to make a better fight of it when you have tokeep a continuous strain on a fourteen-pound fish for twenty minutes orhalf an hour. You must have some amusement or occupation; for there isno societyexcept, by the way, the doctor's daughter, who might be acompanion for you.  I have not seen her yet; but the handmaiden I havementioned above informs me that she is "a ferry pretty young lady, andferry much thought of, and of a ferry great family too."  I should notimagine, however, that her Highland pride of blood would bar the wayagainst your making her acquaintance; her father is merely the parishdoctoror rather, the district doctor, for he has either two or threeparishes to look afterand I don't suppose his emoluments are colossal.They have a pretty cottage; it is the swell feature of the village, ifyou can call the few small and widely scattered houses a village.  Youcould practise Texas talk on her all day long; I daresay she wouldn'tknow.'Good-night; it's rather sleepy work being out in that boat in the cold.Good-night, good-night; and a kiss from the Herr Papa.'Well, by this time the fisher-lads had left the inn and were off on theway to Tongueand glad enough to have a moonlight night for the wearytrudge.  Ronald remained behind for a while, drinking a glass of alewith the inn-keeper; and generally having to keep his wits about him,for there was a good deal of banter going on.  Old John Murray was afacetious person, and would have it that Nelly was setting her cap atRonald; while the blushing Nelly, for her part, declared that Ronald wasnothing but a poor south-country body; while he in fair warfare had toretort that she was 'as Hielan's a Mull-drover.'  The quarrel was not adeadly one; and when Ronald took up his pipes in order to go home, hecalled out to her in parting'Nelly, lass, see you get the lads to clean out the barn ere Mondaynext; and put on your best ribbons, lassie; I'm thinking they'll be forhaving a spring o' Tullochgorum.'The pipes were over his shoulder as he walked away along the moonlitroad; but he did not tune up; he had had enough playing for thatevening.  And be sure that in his mind there was no discontent becausehe had no allotment of land on the Platte Valley, nor yet a place in aChicago bank, nor the glory of being pipe-major to a Highland regiment.He was perfectly content as he was; and knew naught of these things.  Ifthere was any matter troubling himon this still and moonlight night, ashe walked blithely along, inhaling the keen sweet air, and conscious ofthe companionship of the faithful Harryit was that the jog-trot kind oftune he had invented for certain verses did not seem to have sufficientdefiniteness about it.  But then the verses themselvesas they kept timeto his tramp on the roadwere careless and light-hearted enough:The blossom was white on the blackthorn tree,And the mavis was singing rarely;When Meenie, Love Meenie, walked out wi' me,All in the springtime early.'Meenie, Love Meenie, your face let me see,Meenie, come answer me fairly;Meenie, Love Meenie, will you wed me,All in the springtime early?'Meenie but laughed; and kentna the painThat shot through my heart fu' sairly:'Kind sir, it's a maid that I would remain,All in the springtime early.'And 'Hey, Harry, lad,' he was saying, as he entered the cottage and wentinto the little parlour, where a candle had been left burning, 'we'llhave our supper together now; for between you and me I'm just as hungryas a gled.'*CHAPTER V.**BEGINNINGS.*Next day promised to give them sharper work on the loch. The weather hadchanged towards the morning; showers of hail had fallen; and now all thehills aroundBen Hee and Ben Hope and Ben Loyalhad their far peaks andshoulders powdered over, while the higher slopes and summit of the giantClebrig were one solid mass of white.  It was much colder, too; and thegusts of wind that came hurling along Strath Terry[#] struck down on theloch, spreading out like black fans, and driving the darkened water intocurling crisp foam.  It was a wild, changeable, blowy morning; sunlightand gloom intermingled; and ever the wind howled and moaned around thehouse, and the leafless trees outside bent and shivered before thewintry blast.[#] No doubt corrupted from Strath Tairibh, the Strath of the Bull.When the tall Highland lass brought in breakfast it appeared that therecusant gillie had not yet come down from Tongue; but it was no matter,she said; she would call Ronald.  Now this exactly suited Mr. Hodson,who wanted to have some further speech with the young manin view ofcertain far-reaching designs he had formed; and what better opportunityfor talk than the placid trolling for salmon on the lake there?  Butcourtesy demanded some small protest.'I am afraid I cannot ask him a second day,' he remarked.'Oh,' said she (for she did not wish the gentleman to imagine that shethought over much of the smart young keeper), 'he ought to be ferry gladif he can be of use to any one.  He is jist amusing himself with theother lads.'Which was strictly true at this moment.  On the little plateau outsideRonald's cottage two or three of them were standing together.  They hadgot a heavy iron ball, to which was attached about a yard and a half ofrope, and one after another was trying who could launch this ball thefarthest, after swinging it three or four times round his head.  It cameto Ronald's turn.  He was not the most thick-set of those young fellows;but he was wiry and muscular.  He caught the rope with both hands, swungthe heavy weight round his head some four or five timeshis teethgetting ever and ever more firmly clenched the whileand then away wentthe iron ball through the air, not only far outstripping all previousefforts, but unluckily landing in a wheelbarrow and smashing sadly ajacket which one of the lads had thrown there when he entered upon thiscompetition.  When he somewhat ruefully took up the rent garment, therewas much ironical laughing; perhaps that was the reason that none ofthem heard Nelly calling.'Ronald!'The tall, slim Highland maid was pretty angry by this time.  She hadcome out of the house without any head-gear on; and the cold wind wasblowing her yellow hair about her eyes; and she was indignant that shehad to walk so far before attracting the attention of those idle lads.'Ronald, do you hear!' she called; and she would not move another yardtowards them.And then he happened to notice her.'Well, lass, what is't ye want?''Come away at once!' she called, in not the most friendly way.  'Thegentleman wants you to go down to the loch.'But he was the most good-natured of all these young fellows; the lassesabout ordered him this way or that just as they pleased.'What!' he called to her, 'hasna Fraser come down from Tongue yet?''No, he has not.''Bless us; the whisky must have been strong,' said he, as he picked uphis jacket.  'I'll be there in a minute, Nelly.'And so it was that when Mr. Hodson went into the little front hall, hefound everything in trim readiness for getting down to the lochtheproper minnows selected; traces tried; luncheon packed; and his heavywaterproof coat slung over Ronald's arm.'Seems you think I can't carry my own coat?' Mr. Hodson said; for he didnot like to see this man do anything in the shape of servant work;whereas Ronald performed these little offices quite naturally and as amatter of course.'I'll take it, sir,' said he; 'and if you're ready now we'll be off.Come along, Duncan.'And he was striding away with his long deerstalker step, when Mr. Hodsonstopped him.'Wait a bit, man; I will walk down to the loch with you.'So Duncan went on, and the American and Ronald followed.'Sharp this morning.''Rayther sharp.''But this must be a very healthy life of yoursout in the fresh airalwaysplenty of exerciseand so forth.''Just the healthiest possible, sir.''But monotonous a little?'''Deed no, sir.  A keeper need never be idle if he minds his business;there's always something new on hand.''Then we'll say it is a very enjoyable life, so long as your healthlasts, and you are fit for the work?'This was apparently a question.'Well, sir, the head stalker on the Rothie-Mount forest is seventy-twoyears of age; and there is not one of the young lads smarter on the hillthan he is.''An exception, doubtless.  The betting is all against your matching thatrecord.  Well, take your own case: what have you to look forward to asthe result of all your years of labour?  I agree with you that in themeantime it is all very fine; I can understand the fascination of it,even, and the interest you have in becoming acquainted with the habitsof the various creatures, and so forth.  Oh yes, I admit thatthehealthiness of the life, and the interest of it; and I daresay you getmore enjoyment out of the shooting and stalking than Lord Ailine, whopays such a preposterous price for it.  But say we give you a fairlylong lease of health and strength sufficient for the work: we'll takeyou at sixty; what then?  Something happensrheumatism, a broken leg,anythingthat cripples you.  You are superseded; you are out of therunning; what is to become of you?''Well, sir,' said Ronald instantly, 'I'm thinking his lordship wouldnathink twice about giving a pension to a man that had worked for him aslong as that.'It was a luckless answer.  For Mr. Hodson, whose first article of beliefwas that all men are born equal, had come to Europe with a positiveresentment against the very existence of lords, and a detestation of anysocial system that awarded them position and prestige merely on accountof the accident of their birth.  And what did he find now? Here was ayoung fellow of strong natural character, of marked ability, and fairlyindependent spirit, so corrupted by this pernicious system that helooked forward quite naturally to being helped in his old age by hislordshipby one of those creatures who still wore the tags and rags ofan obsolete feudalism, and were supposed to 'protect' their vassals.The House of Peers had a pretty bad time of it during the next fewminutes; if the tall, sallow-faced, gray-eyed man talked with littlevehemence, his slow, staccato sentences had a good deal of keen irony inthem. Ronald listened respectfully.  And perhaps the lecture was all themore severe that the lecturer had but little opportunity of deliveringit in his own domestic circle.  Truly it was hard that his pet grievancewon for him nothing but a sarcastic sympathy there; and that it was hisown daughter who flouted him with jibes and jeers.'Why, you know, pappa dear,' she would say as she stood at the window oftheir hotel in Piccadilly, and watched the carriages passing to and frobeneath her, 'lords may be bad enough, but you know they're not half asbad as the mosquitoes are at home.  They don't worry one half as much;seems to me you might live in this country a considerable time and neverbe worried by one of them.  Why, that's the worst of it.  When I lefthome, I thought the earls and marquises would just be crowding us; andthey don't seem to come along at all.  I confess they are a mean lot.Don't they know well enough that the first thing ['the fooist thing,'she said, of course; but her accent sounded quite quaint and pretty ifyou happened to be looking at the pretty, soft, opaque, dark eyes] thefirst thing an American girl has to do when she gets to Europe is tohave a lord propose to her, and to reject him? But how can I?  Theywon't come along!  It's just too horrid for anything; for of course whenI go back home they'll say"It's because you're not a Boston girl.London's full of lords; but it's only Boston girls they run after; and,poor things, they and their coronets are always being rejected.  Thenoble pride of a Republican country; wave the banner!"'But here Mr. Hodson met with no such ill-timed and flippant opposition.Ronald the keeper listened respectfully, and only spoke when spoken to;perhaps the abstract question did not interest him.  But when it came tothe downright inquiry as to whether he, Strang, considered his master,Lord Ailine, to be in any way whatever a better man than himself, hisanswer was prompt.'Yes, sir, he is,' he said, as they walked leisurely along the road.'He is a better man than me by two inches round the chest, as I shouldguess.  Why, sir, the time that I hurt my kneecap, one night we werecoming down Ben Strua, our two selves, nothing would hinder his lordshipbut he must carry me on his back all the way down the hill and acrossthe burn till we reached the shepherd's bothy.  Ay, and the burn inspate; and the night as dark as pitch; one wrong step on theswing-bridge, and both of us were gone.  There's Peter McEachran atTongue, that some of them think's the strongest man in these parts; andI offered to bet him five shillings he wouldna carry me across thatbridgelet alone down the hillon a dark night.  But would he try?  Nota bit, sir.''I should think Peter Macwhat's his name?was a wiser man than to riskhis neck for five shillings,' Mr. Hodson said drily.  'And youyou wouldrisk yoursfor what?''Oh, they were saying things about his lordship,' Ronald saidcarelessly.'Then he is not worshipped as a divinity by everybody?' the Americansaid shrewdly.But the keeper answered, with much nonchalance'I suppose he has his ill-wishers and his well-wishers, like most otherfolk; and I suppose, like most other folk, he doesna pay ower greatattention to what people say of him.'They did not pursue the subject further at this moment, for a turn ofthe road brought them suddenly within sight of a stranger, and theappearance of a stranger in these parts was an event demanding silenceand a concentration of interest.  Of course, to Ronald Strang MissMeenie Douglas was no stranger; but she was obviously a source of someembarrassment: the instant he caught sight of her his face reddened, andas she approached he kept his eyes fixed on the ground.  It was not thathe was ashamed she should see him acting the part of a gillie; for thathe did not care in the least, it was as much a part of his work asanything else; what vexed him was lest some sign of recognition shouldshow the stranger gentleman that Miss Douglas had formed theacquaintance of the person who was at the moment carrying his waterproofand his fishing-rods.  And he hoped that Meenie would have the sense togo by without taking any notice of him; and he kept his eyes on theroad, and walked forward in silence.'Who is she?' Mr. Hodson asked, in an undertone, and with someastonishment, for he had no idea there was any such neatly-dressed andpretty young lady in the neighbourhood.Ronald did not answer, and they drew nearer.  Indeed, Meenie was lookingquite beautiful this morning; for the cold air had brightened up thecolour in her cheeks; and the wide-apart blue-gray eyes were clear andfull of light; and her brown hair, if it was tightly braided and boundbehind, had in front been blown about a little by the wind, and here andthere a stray curl appeared on the fair white forehead.  And then againher winter clothing seemed to suit the slight and graceful figure; shelooked altogether warm, and furry, and nice, and comfortable; and therewas a sensible air about her dressthe blue serge skirt, thetight-fitting sealskin coat (but this was a present from the laird ofGlengask and Orosay) and the little brown velvet hat with its wing ofptarmigan plumage (this was a present not from Glengask, and probablywas not of the value of three halfpence, but she wore it, nevertheless,when she was at her smartest).  And if Ronald thought she was going topass him by without a word, he was mistaken.  It was not her way.  Asshe met them, one swift glance of her Highland eyes was all she bestowedon the stranger; then she said, pleasantly, as she passed'Good morning, Ronald.'He was forced to look up.'Good morning, Miss Douglas,' said he, with studied respect; and theywent on.'Miss Douglas?' Mr. Hodson repeated, as soon as they were beyondhearing.  'The doctor's daughter, I presume?''Yes, sir.''ButbutI had no ideawhy, she is a most uncommonly pretty youngladyone of the most interesting faces I have seen for many a day.  Youdid not say there was such a charming young person in the place; why,she adds a new interest altogether; I fancy my daughter won't be long inmaking her acquaintance when she comes here.'Indeed, as they got down to the boat, and the two men set about gettingthe rods ready, all his talk was about the pretty young lady he hadseen; and he scarcely noticed that Ronald, in answering these questions,showed a very marked reserve.  He could not be got to speak of herexcept in curt answers; perhaps he did not like to have the melancholyDuncan listening; at all events, he showed a quite absorbing interest inthe phantom minnows, and traces, and what not.  Moreover, when they gotinto the boat, there was but little opportunity for conversation. Theday had become more and more squally; there was a considerable sea on;it was all the two men could do to keep sufficient way on the coble sothat the phantoms should spin properly.  Then every few minutes arain-cloud would come drifting acrossat first mysterious and awful, asif the whole world were sinking into darkness; then a few big dropswould patter about; then down came the sharp clattering shower, only tobe followed by a marvellous clearing up again, and a burst of waterysunshine along the Clebrig slopes.  But these changes kept Mr. Hodsonemployed in sheltering himself from the rain while it lasted, and thengetting off his waterproof again lest perchance there might come asalmon at one of the lines.  That event did actually occur; and whenthey least expected it.  In one of the heaviest of the squalls they hadsuch a fight to get the boat along that the minnows, sinking somewhat,caught the bottom.  Of course the rowers had to back downor rather todrift downto get the lines released; and altogether the prospect ofaffairs seemed so unpromisingthe heavens darkening with further rain,the wind blowing in sharper and sharper gusts, and the water comingheavily over the bowsthat Mr. Hodson called out that, as soon as he hadgot the minnows free, they might as well run the coble on to the land,and wait for calmer weather.  But this was a lee shore.  The men werewilling to give up for a timebut not until they had got to thesheltered side; so he was counselled to put out the lines again, slowly,and they began anew their fight against the gale.  Well, he was actuallypaying out the first of the lines with his hand, when suddenlyandwithout any of the preliminary warnings that usually tell of a salmonbeing after a minnowthe line was snatched from his fingers, and outwent the reel with that sharp long shriek that sends the whole boat'screw into an excitement of expectation.  But there was no spring intothe air away along there in the darkened and plunging waters; as herapidly got in his line, he knew only of a dull and heavy strain; andthe men had to keep on with their hard pulling against the wind, for thefish seemed following the boat in this sulky and heavy fashion.'What do you think?' Mr. Hodson said, half turning round, and not givingplainer voice to his anxieties.'I'm afraid it's a kelt, sir,' the dismal gillie answered.'Looks like it, don't it?' the fisherman said rather dolefully; for thefish showed no sign of life whatever.'We'll see by and by,' was Ronald's prudent answer; but even he wasdoubtful; the only good feature being that, if the fish showed no fight,at least he kept a heavy strain on the rod.But it seemed as if everything was conspiring against them.  The blackheavens above them burst into a torrent of rain; and with that came asquall that tore the water white, and blew them down on the fish inspite of their hardest efforts.  Shorter and shorter grew the line as itwas rapidly got in, and still the fish did not show; it was now so nearto the boat that any sudden movement on its part was almost certain toproduce a catastrophe.  Nor could they drive the boat ashore; the beachwas here a mass of sharp stones and rocks; in three minutes the coblewould have been stove in.  With faces set hard the two men pulled andpulled against the storm of wind and rain; and Mr. Hodsonseated now,for he dared not attempt to stand up, the boat was being thrown about soby the heavy wavescould only get in a little more line when he had thechance, and look helplessly on, and wait.Then, all of a sudden, there was a long shrill shriekheard loud abovethe din of wind and watercontinued and continued, and in vain he triedto arrest this wild rush; and then, some seventy or eighty yards away,there was a great white splash among the rushing black wavesandanotherand anotherand then a further whirling out of some fifteenyards of line, until he glanced with alarm at the slender quantity lefton the reel.  But presently he began to get some in again; the men wereglad to let the boat drift down slowly; harder and harder he worked atthe big reel, and at last he came to fighting terms with the animalkeltor salmon, as it might bewith some five-and-twenty yards out, and thesquall moderating a little, so that the men could keep the boat as theywanted.  Nay, he ventured to stand up now, wedging his legs and feet sothat he should not be suddenly thrown overboard; and it was quiteevident, from the serious purpose of his face, that all possibility ofthis being a kelt had now been thrown aside.'No kelt is he, Ronald?' he called aloud.'Not a bit, sir!  There's no kelt about that one.  But give him time;he's a good big fish, or I'm sore mistaken.'They were far from the end yet, however.  The long rush and thesplashing had exhausted him for a while; and the fisherman, with a firmapplication of the butt, thought he could make the fish show himself;but still he kept boring steadily down, sometimes making little angryrushes of a dozen yards or so.  And then all of a sudden began some wildcantrips.  There was another rush of ten or a dozen yards; and a clearleap into the aira beautiful, great, silvery creature he looked amidall this hurrying gloom; and then another downward rush; and then hecame to the surface again, and shook and tugged and struck with his tailuntil the water was foaming white about him.  These were a few terriblyanxious seconds, but all went happily by, and then it was felt that theworst of the fighting was over. After that there was but the sullenrefusal to come near the boatthe short sheering off whenever he saw itor one of the oars; but now, in the slow curves through the water, hewas beginning to show the gleam of his side; and Ronald was crouchingdown in the stern, gaff in hand.'Steady, sir, steady,' he was saying, with his eye on those slowcircles; 'give him time, he's no done yet; a heavy fish, sira good fishthattwenty pounds, I'm thinkingcome along, my beauty, come alongthebutt now, sir!'  And then, as the great gleaming fish, head up, camesheering along on its side, there was a quick dive of the steel clip,and the next second the splendid creature was in the bottom of thecoble.Mr. Hodson sank down on to his seat; it had been a long fightover halfan hour; he was exhausted with the strain of keeping himself balanced;and he was also (what he had not perceived in this long spell ofexcitement) wet to the skin.  He pulled out a spirit-flask from thepocket of his waterproofas ill-luck would have it, that useful garmenthappened to be lying in the bottom of the boat when the fight beganandgave the two men a liberal dram; he then took a sip himself; and whenthere had been a general quarrel over the size of the fishnineteen thelowest, twenty-two the highest guessthey began to consider what theyought to do next.  The weather looked very ugly.  It was resolved to getup to the head of the loch anyhow, and there decide; and so the men tookto their oars again, and began to force their way through the heavy andwhite-crested waves.But long ere they had reached the head of the loch Mr. Hodson had becomeaware of a cold feeling about his shoulders and back, and quickly enoughhe came to the conclusion that sitting in an open boat, with clothes wetthrough, on a January day, did not promise sufficient happiness.  Hesaid they might put him ashore as soon as possible.'Indeed, sir, it's no much use going on in this weather,' Ronald said,'unless maybe you were to try the fly.''I thought you said it was rather early for the fly.''Rayther early,' Ronald admitted.'Rawther,' said Duncan.'Anyhow,' observed Mr. Hodson, 'I don't feel like sitting in this boatany longer in wet clothes.  I'm going back to the inn right now; maybethe afternoon will clear upand then we might have another try.'They got ashore at last, and Mr. Hodson at once started off for the inn;and when the two men had got the rods taken down, and the fish tied headand tail for the better carrying of it, they set out too.  But Ronaldseemed unusually depressed and silent.  Where was the careless joketheverse of an idle songwith which he was wont to brave the discomforts ofwind and weather?  The two men strode along without a word; and it wasnot likely that Duncan the dismal should be the first to break thesilence. Nay, when they got to the inn, Ronald would not go in for aminute or two, as was his custom, to see the fish weighed and have achat.  He went on to his own cottage; got the key of the kennel; andpresently he and the dogs were leaving the little scattered hamlet,taking the lonely moorland road that led away up the Mudal valley.He knew not why he was so ill at ease; but something had gone wrong.Had his mind been disturbed and disquieted by the American gentleman'splainly hinting to him that he was living in a fool's paradise; and thatold age, and illness, and the possible ingratitude of his master werethings to be looked forward to?  Or was it that the sudden meeting withMeenie, with this stranger looking on, seemed to have revealed to himall at once how far away she was from him?  If she and he had met, asevery day they did, and passed with the usual friendly greeting, itwould all have been quite simple and ordinary enough; but with thisstranger looking on,and she appearing so beautiful and refined andneatly dressed, and wearing moreover the present given her by Glengaskand Orosaywhile he, on the other hand, was carrying the gentleman'swaterproof and a bundle of rodswell, that was all different somehow.And why had she said 'Good-morning!' with such a pointed friendliness?He did not wish this stranger to imagine that Miss Douglas and he wereeven acquaintances.  And then he thought that that very night he wouldburn all those stupid verses he had written about her; that secret andhalf-regretful joy of hisof imagining himself in a position that wouldentitle him to address her sowas all too daring and presuming.  It istrue, she wore the ptarmigan's wing she had begged him to get for her(and never in all the years had he so gladly sped up the Clebrig slopesas when she sent him on that errand), but that was a trifle; any younglady, if she wanted such a thing, would naturally ask the nearestgamekeeper.  And then the other young ladythe American young ladywhenshe came, and made Meenie's acquaintance: would not they be muchtogether?  Meenie would be still farther and farther away then.  Hewould himself have to keep studiously aloof, if in the generosity of herheart she wished to be as friendly as ever.Well, these were not very bitter or tragic thoughts; and yetandyetthere was something wrong.  He scarcely knew what it was, but onlythat the little hamletas he returned to it after a long and solitarywanderingdid not seem to be the simple and natural and happy place thatit used to be.  But one thing he was glad of.  The second gillie had nowarrived from Tongue.  Consequently his services would no longer beneeded in the coble; he would return to his own ways; and be his ownmaster.  And as for companions?well, Clebrig and he had long beenfriends.*CHAPTER VI.**A PROGRAMME.*That same evening little Maggie, having made herself as smart and neatas possible, went along the dark road to the doctor's house, wasadmitted, and forthwith passed upstairs to Miss Douglas's own room.  Itwas an exceedingly small apartment; but on this cold winter night itlooked remarkably warm and snug and bright, what with the red peats inthe fireplace, and the brilliant little lamp on the table; and it wasprettily decorated too, with evidences of feminine care and industryeverywhere about.  And Meenie herself was therein her gown of plainblue serge; and apparently she had been busy, for the table was litteredwith patterns and designs and knitting-needles and what not, while alarge mass of blue worsted was round the back of a chair, waiting forthe winding.'Help me to clear the table, Maggie,' she said good-naturedly, when hervisitor entered, 'and then we will get tea over: I declare I have somany things to think of that I am just driven daft.'And then she saidwith some touch of anger'Do you know that I saw your brotheron a cold, wet day like thisand hewas walking along the road, with his jacket open, and paying no heed atall to the weather? Maggie, why do you not make him take some care ofhimself?  In Januaryand he goes about as if it were June!  How wouldyou like it if he were to catch a bad cold and have to take to his bed?Why do you not make him take care of himself?''He would only laugh at me,' the little Maggie said ruefully.  'Hedoesna mind anything.  I do my best to get his clothes dried when hecomes in wet; but he doesna like to be botheredespecially if he'swriting or reading; he says that a pipe keeps the harm away.  I'm sureif you would speak to him, Meenie, he would take a great deal morecare.''What, me!' the girl saidand there was a touch of colour in the prettyrefined face; and then she added, with a good-humoured smile, 'No, hewould not mind what I said, I know.  But it is little matter; for withsuch a wilful man you can do nothing except by cunning.  Do you see thewool there, Maggie?'She laughed; but the little, red-haired, freckled girl looked ratherfrightened.'Oh no, Meenie, I dare not take it,' she said.  'He would know I had notthe money to buy all that wool; and then he would ask; and I should bescolded'Nonsense, nonsense!' the other cried, in her friendly way.  'Do youthink a man would ask any such questions? It would never occur to him atall!  When the jersey is all knitted and complete, you will just say tohim, "Ronald, here is a jersey that I have knitted for you all bymyself; and you are to put it on whenever there is a cold morning;" andyou will see he will think your knitting it yourself explainseverything.  Ask about the wool?he will never think of such a thing.If you hang the jersey on the nail of his bedroom door, it will be all amatter of course; I should not wonder, now, if he forgot to say "Thankyou."''And then there is another thing,' Maggie said, rather timidly andwistfully.  'How am I to tell him that I knitted the jersey when youknow that you will do the most of it? For it is always that; you didnearly all the socks that we gave to Ronald; and he thinks it was me.'But here the good humour left Meenie Douglas's facethat was suddenlygrown red and embarrassed.'How can you talk such foolishness?' she said, rather sharply.  'If Ishow you here or there how you are to go on, is that doing the knittingfor you?  I wonder you have no more sense, Maggie.  Of course, I willhave to begin the jersey for you; and if I cast on the stitches for thewidth of the neck, what is that?  It is what any one would do foryouMrs. Murray, or one of the girls at the inn. And I hope you are notgoing away with that idea in your head; or sooner or later you will betelling somebody that I am knitting a jersey for your brotherthat wouldbe a fine thing!'A timid appealing hand was put on her arm.'I am sure that Ronald would rather never see or hear of any jersey thanhave anything make you angry, Meenie.'The trouble was over in a moment: the girl was essentially quick andgenerous and kind-hearted; and this small lassie was about her onlycompanion.  Moreover, tea was brought in at this moment by themaidservant; and so the question of the proportion of work contributedby either of them to Ronald's woollen gear was put aside.'And what do you think of this now, Maggie?' the elder said, with someeagerness in her face and eyes.  'You know the great preparations theyare making for Monday nightthe long barn is to be cleared; and they aregoing to have a chimney made and a fireplace; and long tables all theway down, and wooden forms to sit on; and some of the lads, they say,are talking of a chandelier to be made out of hoops, and candles stuckall the way round.  And all that trouble for the grown-up folk!  Is itfair?  Oh, it is quite absurd to have such a deal of trouble; and allfor the grown-up people.  Now, if Ronald would help meand you know heis such a favourite he always has his own way with everybodywould itnot be a fine thing to ask Mr. Murray to leave all those preparations asthey are for a day or twoperhaps till Wednesdayand by that time wecould have messages sent to the farms round about, and all the childrenbrought in for a soire?  Why should the grown-up people haveeverything?  And there would be nobody but ourselves,that's Ronald andyou and I, Maggie,for the children would have more freedom andamusement that wayyou see my father is not likely to be back by then,or we might ask himand then, with nearly a week, we could send toTongue for a great many thingsandandhave a splendid children's partyjust as fine as fine could be.'She was quite excited over this matter.'Look,' she said, going and fetching a sheet of paper which was writtenover in a bold, large hand (her own handwriting was small and neatenough, but this had been assumed for so important a public purpose);'look at the programmeit is all guess work as yet, of course, for Ihave not asked Ronald; but I am sure he will help us; and if he says itis to be done, then everything will go rightthey will keep the barn forus; and the people will send the children; and those of them who can'tgo back will stay the night at the inn.  I have saved my pocket-moneyfor months for it; but who could have expected such a chancethe barnall fitted up, and the fire to keep it warm, and the chandelier?  Therenow, Maggie, what do you think?'The little Maggie took up the big sheet of paper, wondering; for allthis was a wild and startling project amid the monotony of their life inthis remote and small hamlet.CHILDREN'S SOIREE.Inver-Mudal, Wednesday, January 23.MR. RONALD STRANG in the Chair.PROGRAMME.Psalm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Old Hundredth.Service of Tea and Cake.Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . CHAIRMAN.Service of Raisins.Song  . . . 'My love she's but a lassie yet.' . . MR. RONALD STRANG.Reading . . 'The Cameronian's Dream.' . . . . . . Miss M. DOUGLAS.Song  . . . 'O dinna cross the burn, Willie.' . . MR. RONALD STRANG.Pipe-Music  'Lord Breadalbane's March.' . . . . . MR. RONALD STRANG.Service of Oranges.Hymn  . . . 'Whither, pilgrims, are you going?' . . CHILDREN.Duet  . . . 'Huntingtower.' . . . . . . . . . . . . { Miss M. DOUGLAS{ & Miss M. STRANG.But at this point Maggie broke into pure affright.'Oh, Meenie!' she cried'how can I?-before them all!''But only before children!' was the quick remonstrance. 'Would you haveRonald do everything?  Why, lookan addressa songa songa march on thepipesis he to have no rest at all?''But you, Meenieyou can sing so well and without troubleI know I willspoil everything''No, no, you will spoil nothing; and we will get through very well.''Ferry well,' she said, in spite of her Edinburgh birth; and she wasevidently vastly proud of her skill in drawing up so brilliant andvaried a programme.  Maggie continued her readingbut now in some alarm:Song . . . . 'The Laird o' Cockpen.' . . . . . MR. RONALD STRANG.Reading  . . 'Jeanie Morrison.'  . . . . . . . Miss M. DOUGLAS.Service of Shortbread.Song . . . . 'Gloomy Winter's now awa'.' . . . MR. RONALD STRANG.Song . . . . 'Auld Lang Syne.' . . . . . . . . THE COMPANY.Vote of thanks to the Chairman . . . . . . . . Miss M. DOUGLAS.Finale.Pipe-Music, 'Caidil gu lo' (Sleep on till day) MR. RONALD STRANG.Meenie looked and laughed with pleasure; she was quite proud of herskill of arrangement.'But, Meenie,' her companion said, 'why have ye not put down a duetbetween you and Ronald?  He can sing so well; and you; and that would beprettier far than anything.  Do ye no mind the time we were a' awayfishing at Loch Loyal; and we were walking back; and Ronald was tellingus of what he saw in a theatre in Edinburgh? And when he told us aboutthe young lady's sweetheart coming in a boat at night, and singing toher below the window, you knew what it was well enoughand you tried ittogetheroh! that was so fine!  Will ye no ask him to sing that withye?'Meenie's face flushed somewhat; and she would have evaded the questionwith a little laugh but that it was repeated.  Whereupon she said'Why, now, Maggie, you have such a memory!  And I have no doubt therewas nonsense going on as we were walking back from Loch Loyalfor abeautiful night it was, in the middle of summer, when there is nodarkness at all in the skies all the night long.  Oh yes, I remember ittoo; and very well; but it was amongst ourselves; we are not going tohave any such nonsense before other people.  And if we were to sing "Ohush thee, my baby," would not the children be thinking it was a hintfor them to go away to bed?  And besides, surely I have asked Ronald todo enough for us; do you not think he will be surprised, and perhapsangry, when he sees how often his name comes there?''Indeed no, I'm sure,' Maggie said promptly.  'There's just nothing thathe wouldna do for you, Meenie.''But I will wait till I see him in a good humour,' said her friend,laughing, 'before I ask him for so much.''Mich,' she said; unawares she had caught up a good many of the localtouches.'And do ye think ye could ever find him in an ill-humour wi' you?'Maggie said, almost reproachfully.There was no answer to the question; the programme was put aside.'Very well, then,' Meenie said, 'we will suppose that is settled.  Andwhat is next?  Why, Maggie, if I had not the brain of a prime minister,I could never get through so many schemes.  Oh, this is it: of course weshall be very much obliged to them if they lend us the barn and all itsfittings and we should do something for them in return. And I am surethe lads will be thinking of nothing but the carpentering; and thelasses at the inn will be thinking only of the cooking of the supper,and their own ribbons and frocks.  Now, Maggie, suppose you and I wereto do something to make the barn look pretty; I am sure Ronald would cutus a lot of fir-branches, for there's nothing else just now; and wecould fix them up all round the barn; and thenlook here.'She had got a lot of large printed designs; and a heap of stiff paper ofvarious colours.'We will have to make paper flowers for them, because there's nonegrowing just now; and very well they will look among the fir-branches.Oh yes, very well indeed.  Red and white roses do not grow onfir-branchesit does not need the old man of Ross to tell us that; butthey will look very well whatever; and then large orange lilies, andanything to make a bold show in so big a place.  And if the lads aremaking a chandelier out of the hoops of a barrel, we will ask them tolet us put red worsted round the hoops; that will look very well too.For we must do something to thank them, Maggie; and then, indeed, whenit comes to our turn, we will have the chance too of looking at thedecorations when we have the children's soire.'Maggie looked up quickly.'But, Meenie, you are coming to the party on Monday night too?'There was no embarrassment on the beautiful, fine, gentle face.  Sheonly said'Well, no one has asked me.'And the little Maggie flushed with shame and vexation.'Indeed, now!  Did Ronald not speak to you about it?''Oh, I have known about it for a long time,' she said lightly, 'and Iwas very glad to hear of it, for I thought it was a great chance for meto get the loan of the barn.''But youyou, Meeniethat they did not ask you first of all!' theyounger girl cried.  'But it can only be that every one is expected tocomeevery one except the small children who canna sit up late.  And I'msure I did not expect to go; but Mr. Murray, he was joking and sayingthat I would have to dance the first dance wi' him; and Ronald said Imight be there for a while.  ButbutI'm no going if you're no going,Meenie.''But that is nonsense, Maggie,' the other said good-naturedly.  'Ofcourse you must go.  And I should like well enough''I am sure Mr. Murray would put you at the head of the tableby his ownsideand proud, too!' Maggie exclaimed warmly.'And I am sure I should not wish anything like that,' Meenie said,laughing.  'I would far rather go with you. I would like to see some ofthe dancing.''Oh, Meenie,' her companion said, with eyes full of earnestness, 'didyou ever see Ronald dance the sword-dance?''No, I have not, Maggie.''They say there is none can do it like him.  And if he would only go tothe Highland meetings, he could win prizes and medalsand for thepipe-playing too, and the tossing the caber.  There is not one of thelads can come near him; but it is not often that he tries; for he is notproud.''I am glad that he does not go to the Highland meetings,' Meenie said,rather quietly, and with her eyes cast down.'No, he is not proud,' said Maggie, continuing (for she had but the onehero in all the world), 'although there is nothing he canna do betterthan any of them.  There was one of the gentlemen said to him lastyearthe gentleman hadna been shooting very well the day beforehe said,"Ronald, let one of the gillies look after the dogs to-day, and go youand bring your gun, and make up for my mistakes;" and when he came homein the evening, he said, "It was a clean day's shooting the day; we didnot leave one wounded bird or hare behind us."  And another gentlemanwas saying, "Ronald, if ye could sell your eye-sight, I would give yefive hundred pounds for't."  And Duncan was saying that this gentlemanthat's come for the fishing, he doesna talk to Ronald about the salmonand the loch, but about everything in the country, and Ronald knows aswell as him about such things.  And his lordship, too, he writes toRonald, "Dear Ronald," and quite friendly; and when he was going away hegave Ronald his own pipe, that has got a silver band on it, and histobacco-pouch, with the letters of his name worked in silk.  And there'snot one can say that Ronald's proud.'Well, this was very idle talk; and moreover it was continued, for thered-haired and freckled little sister was never weary of relating theexploits of her handsome brotherthe adventures he had had withwild-cats, and stags, and seals, and eagles, and the like; and,strangely enough, Miss Douglas showed no sign of impatience whatever.Nay, she listened with an interest that scarcely allowed her tointerrupt with a word; and with satisfaction and approval, to judge byher expression; and all that she would say from time to timeandabsentlywas:'But he is so careless, Maggie!  Why don't you speak to him?  You reallymust make him more heedful of himself.'However, the night was going by; and Maggie's praises and recitals hadcome to an end.  Meenie went down to the door to see her friendcomfortably wrapped up; but there was no need of escort; the stars wereshining clear, though the wind still howled blusteringly.  And so theysaid good-bye; and Maggie went on through the dark to the cottage,thinking that Meenie Douglas was the most beautiful and sweet andwarm-hearted companion she was ever likely to meet with through all herlife, and wondering how it came about that Ronald and Mr. Murray and therest of them had been so disgracefully neglectful in not inviting her tothe New Year's festivities on the forthcoming Monday.  Ronald, at least,should hear of his remissness, and that at once.*CHAPTER VII.**AN EYRIE.*'Come along, Harry, my lad,' the young keeper cried next morning to hisfaithful terrier, 'and we'll go and have a look up the hill.'He slipped a cartridge or two into his pocket, more by custom thandesign as it were; put his gun over his shoulder; and went out into thecold clear air, the little terrier trotting at his heels.  The vagueunrest of the previous evening was altogether gone now; he was hisnatural self again; as he strode along the road he was lightlysingingbut also under his breath, lest any herd-laddie should overhearRoses red, roses white,Roses in the lane,Tell me, roses white and red,Where is Meenie gane!And when he got as far as the inn he found that the mail-cart had justarrived, so he turned aside to have a little gossip with the small groupof shepherds and others who had come to see whether there were anynewspapers or letters for them.  He was a great favourite with these;perhaps also an object of envy to the younger of the lads; for he livedthe life of a gentleman, one might say, and was his own master;moreover, where was there any one who looked so smart and dressed soneatlyhis Glengarry cap, his deerstalking jacket, his knickerbockers,his hand-knitted socks, and white spats, and shoes, being all so trimand well cared for, even in this wild winter weather?  There was somelaughing and joking about the forthcoming supper-party; and more thanone of them would have had him go inside with them to have 'a glass,'but he was proof against that temptation; while the yellow-haired Nelly,who was at work within, happening to turn her eyes to the window, andcatching sight of him standing there, and being jealous of hispopularity with all those shepherd-lads and gillies, suddenly said toher mistress'There's Ronald outside, mem, and I think he might go away and shootsomething for the gentleman's dinner.''Very well,' said Mrs. Murray; 'go and say that I would be very muchobliged to him indeed if he would bring me a hare or two the first timehe is going up the hill, but at his own convenience, to be sure.'But that was not the message that Nelly went to deliver. She wanted toshow her authority before all these half-critical idlers, and also, as agood-looking lass, her independence and her mastery over men-folk.'Ronald,' said she, at the door of the inn, 'I think you might just aswell be going up the hill and bringing us down a hare or two, instead ofstanding about here doing nothing.''Is that Highland manners, lass?' he said, but with perfect good humour.'I'm thinking ye might say "if ye please."  But I'll get ye a hare ortwo, sure enough, and ye'll keep the first dance for me on Mondaynight.''Indeed I am not sure that I will be at the dancing at all,' retortedthe pretty Nelly; but this was merely to cover her retreatshe did notwish to have any further conversation before that lot of idlehalf-grinning fellows.As for Ronald, he bade them good-morning, and went lightly on his wayagain.  He was going up the hill anyway; and he might as well bring downa brace of hares for Mrs. Murray; so, after walking along the road for amile or so, he struck off across some rough and partly marshy ground,and presently began to climb the lower slopes of Clebrig, getting ever awider and wider view as he ascended, and always when he turned findingbeneath him the wind-stirred waters of the loch, where a tiny darkobject, slow-moving near the shores, told him where the salmon fisherswere patiently pursuing their sport.No, there were no more unsettling notions in his brain; here he wasmaster and monarch of all he surveyed; and if he was profoundlyunconscious of the ease with which he breasted this steep hillside, atleast he rejoiced in the ever-widening prospectas lochs and hills andstretches of undulating moorland seemed to stretch ever and ever outwarduntil, afar in the north, he could make out the Kyle of Tongue and thefaint line of the sea.  It was a wild and changeable day; now filledwith gloom, again bursting forth into a blaze of yellow sunshine; whileever and anon some flying tag of cloud would come sweeping across thehillside and engulf him, so that all he could then discern was the roughhard heather and bits of rock around his feet.  It was just as one ofthese transient clouds was clearing off that he was suddenly startled bya loud noiseas of iron rattling on stones; and so bewildering was thisunusual noise in the intense silence reigning there that instinctivelyhe wheeled round and lowered his gun.  And then again, the next second,what he saw was about as bewildering as what he had hearda greatcreature, quite close by, and yet only half visible in the clearingmist, with huge outspread wings, dragging something after it across thebroken rocks.  The truth flashed upon him in an instant; it was an eaglecaught in a fox-trap; the strange noise was the trap striking here andthere on a stone.  At once he put down his gun on an exposed knoll andgave chase, with the greatest difficulty subduing the eager desire ofthe yelping Harry to rush forward and attack the huge bird by himself.It was a rough and ludicrous pursuit but it ended in capturethoughhere, again, circumspection was necessary, for the eagle, with all hisneck-feathers bristling, struck at him again and again with the talonsthat were free, only one foot having been caught in the trap. But thepoor beast was quite exhausted; an examination of the trap showed Ronaldthat he must have flown with this weight attached to his leg all the wayfrom Ben Ruach, some half dozen miles away; and now, though there wasyet an occasional automatic motion of the beak or the claws, as thoughhe would still strike for liberty, he submitted to be firmly seizedwhile the iron teeth of the trap were being opened.  And then Ronaldlooked at his prize (but still with a careful grip).  He was a splendidspecimen of the golden eaglea bird that is only found here and there inSutherlandshire, though the keepers are no longer allowed to killthemand, despite himself, looking at the noble creature, he began toask himself casuistical questions.  Would not this make a handsome giftfor Meenie?he could send the bird to Macleay at Inverness, and have itstuffed and returned without anybody knowing.  Moreover, the keeperswere only charged to abstain from shooting such golden eagles as theymight find on their own ground; and he knew from the make of the trapthat this one must have come from a different shooting altogether; itwas not a Clebrig eagle at all.  But he looked at the fierce eye of thebeast, and its undaunted mien; he knew that, if it could, it would fightto the death; and he felt a kind of pride in the creature, andadmiration for it, and even a sort of sympathy and fellow-feeling.'My good chap,' said he, 'I'm not going to kill you in cold bloodnotme.  Go back to your wife and weans, wherever they are.  Off!'And he tried to throw the big beast into the air.  But this was not likeflinging up a released pigeon.  The eagle fell forward, and stumbledtwice ere it could get its great wings into play; and then, instead oftrying to soar upward, it went flapping away down windincreasing inspeed, until he could see it, now rising somewhat, cross the lowerwindings of Loch Naver, and make away for the northern skies.'It's a God's mercy,' he was saying to himself, as he went back to gethis gun, 'that I met the creature in the daytime; had it been at night,I would hae thought it was the devil.'Some two or three hundred feet still farther up the hillside he came tohis own eyriea great mass of rock, affording shelter from eithersoutherly or easterly winds, and surrounded with some smaller stones;and here he sate contentedly down to look around himHarry crouched athis feet, his nose between his paws, but his eyes watchful.  And thiswide stretch of country between Clebrig and the northern sea would haveformed a striking prospect in any kind of weatherthe strange and savageloneliness of the moorlands; the solitary lakes with never a sign ofhabitation along their shores; the great ranges of mountains whosesilent recesses are known only to the stag and the hind; but on such amorning as this it was all as unstable and unreal as it was wildlybeautiful and picturesque;for the hurrying weather made a kind ofphantasmagoria of the solid land; bursts of sunlight that struck on theyellow straths were followed by swift gray cloud-wreaths blotting outthe world; and again and again the white snow-peaks of the hills wouldmelt away and become invisible only to reappear again shining andglorious in a sky of brilliant blue; until, indeed, it seemed as if theearth had no substance and fixed foundation at all, but was a meredream, an aerial vision, changed and moved and controlled by some unseenand capricious hand.And then again, on the dark and wind-driven lake far below him, thatsmall object was still to be made outlike some minute, black, crawlingwater insect.  He took out his glass from its leather case, adjusted it,and placed it to his eye.  What was this?  In the world suddenly broughtnearand yet dimly near, as though a film interposedhe could see thatsome one was standing up in the stern of the boat, and another crouchingdown, by his side. Was that a clip or the handle of the landing-net; inother words, was it a salmon or a kelt that was fighting them there?  Heswept the dull waters of the loch with his glass; but could make out nosplashing or springing anywhere near them.  And then he could see by thecurve of the rod that the fish was close at hand; there was a minute ortwo longer of anxiety; then a sudden movement on the part of thecrouching personand behold a silver-white object gleams for a moment inthe air and then disappears!'Good!' he says to himselfwith a kind of sigh of satisfaction as if hehad himself taken part in the struggle and capture.How peaceful looks the little hamlet of Inver-Mudal! The wildstorm-clouds, and the bursts of sunlight, and the howling winds seem tosail over it unheeded; down in the hollow there surely all is quiet andstill.  And is Meenie singing at her work, by the window; or perhapssuperintending Maggie's lessons; or gone away on one of the lonely walksthat she is fond ofup by the banks of the Mudal Water?  It is a bleakand a bare stream; there is scarce a bush on its banks; and yet he knowsof no other riverhowever hung with foliage and flowersthat is so sweetand sacred and beautiful.  What was it he wrote in the bygone yearonesummer day when he had seen her go byand he, too, was near the water,and could hear the soft murmuring over the pebbles?  He called the idleversesMUDAL IN JUNE.Mudal, that comes from the lonely mere,Silent or whispering, vanishing ever,Know you of aught that concerns us here?You, youngest of all God's creatures, a river.Born of a yesterday's summer shower,And hurrying on with your restless motion,Silent or whispering, every hour,To lose yourself in the great lone ocean.Your banks remain; but you go by,Through day and through darkness swiftly sailing:Say, do you hear the curlew cry,And the snipe in the night-time hoarsely wailing?Do you watch the wandering hinds in the morn;Do you hear the grouse-cock crow in the heather;Do you see the lark spring up from the corn,All in the radiant summer weather?O Mudal stream, how little you knowThat Meenie has loved you, and loves you ever;And while to your ocean home you flow,She says good-bye to her well-loved river!O see you her nowshe is coming anighAnd the flower in her hand her aim discloses:Laugh, Mudal, your thanks as you're hurrying byFor she flings you a rose, in the month of roses!Well, that was written as long ago as last midsummer; and was Meeniestill as far away from him as then, and as ignorant as ever of his muteworship of her, and of these verses that he had written about her?  Buthe indulged in no day-dreams.  Meenie was as near to him as he had anyright to expectgiving him of an assured and constant friendship; and asfor these passing rhymeswell, he tried to make them as worthy of her ashe could, though he knew she should never see them; polishing them, inso far as they might be said to have any polish at all, in honour ofher; and, what is more to the point, at once cutting out and destroyingany of them that seemed to savour either of affectation or of echo.  No:the rude rhymes should at least be honest and of his own invention andmethod; imitations he could not, even in fancy, lay at Meenie's feet.And sometimes, it is true, a wild imagination would get hold of himawhimsical thing, that he laughed at: supposing that lifethe actual reallife here at Inver-Mudalwere suddenly to become a play, a poem, aromantic tale; and that Meenie was to fall in love with him; and he togrow rich all at once; and the Stuarts of Glengask to be quitecomplaisant: why, then, would it not be a fine thing to bring all thiscollection of verses to Meenie, and say 'There, now, it is not much; butit shows you that I have been thinking of you all through these years?'Yes, it would be a very fine thing, in a romance. But, as has been said,he was one not given to day-dreams; and he accepted the facts of lifewith much equanimity; and when he had written some lines about Meeniethat he regarded with a little affectionas suggesting, let us say,something of the glamour of her clear Highland eyes, and therose-sweetness of her nature, and the kindness of her heartand when itseemed rather a pity that she should never see themif only as a tributeto her gentleness offered by a perfectly unbiassed spectatorhe quicklyreminded himself that it was not his business to write verses but totrap foxes and train dogs and shoot hoodie-crows. He was not vain of hisrhymesexcept where Meenie's name came in.  Besides, he was a very busyperson at most seasons of the year; and men, women, and children alikeshowed a considerable fondness for him, so that his life was full ofsympathies and interests; and altogether he cannot be regarded, nor didhe regard himself, as a broken-hearted or blighted being.  Histemperament was essentially joyous and healthy; the passing moment wasenough; nothing pleased him so much as to have a grouse, or a hare, or aptarmigan, or a startled hind appear within sure and easy range, and tosay 'Well, go on.  Take your life with you.  Rather a pleasant day this:why shouldn't you enjoy it as well as I?'However, on this blustering and brilliant morning he had not come allthe way up hither merely to get a brace of hares for Mrs. Murray, noryet to be a distant spectator of the salmon-fishing going on far below.Under this big rock there was a considerable cavity, and right at theback of that he had wedged in a wooden box lined with tin, and fittedwith a lid and a lock.  It was useful in the autumn; he generally keptin it a bottle of whisky and a few bottles of soda-water, lest any ofthe gentlemen should find themselves thirsty on the way home from thestalking.  But on this occasion, when he got out the key and unlockedthe little chest, it was not any refreshment of that kind he was after.He took out a copy-booka cheap paper-covered thing such as is used injuvenile schools in Scotlandand turned to the first page, which wasscrawled over with pencilled lines that had apparently been written intime of rain, for there were plenty of smudges there.  It had become ahabit of his that, when in these lonely rambles among the hills, hefound some further rhymes about Meenie come into his head, he would jotthem down in this copy-book, deposit it in the little chest, andprobably not see them again for weeks and weeks, when, as on the presentoccasion, he would come with fresh eyes to see it there were any worthor value in them.  Not that he took such trouble with anything else.His rhyming epistles to his friends, his praises of his terrier Harry,his songs for the Inver-Mudal lasses to singthese things were thrownoff anyhow, and had to take their chance.  But his solitaryintercommunings away amid these alpine wastes were of a more seriouscast; insensibly they gathered dignity and repose from the very silenceand awfulness of the solitudes around; there was no idle and pastoralsinging here about roses in the lane.  He regarded the blurred lines,striving to think of them as having been written by somebody else:Through the long sad centuries Clebrig slept,Nor a sound the silence broke,Till a morning in Spring a strange new thingBetrayed him and he awoke;And he laughed, and his joyous laugh was heardFrom Erribol far to Tongue;And his granite veins deep down were stirred,And the great old mountain grew young.'Twas Love Meenie he saw, and she walked by the shore,And she sang so sweet and so clear,That the sound of her voice made him see againThe dawn of the world appear;And at night he spake to the listening starsAnd charged them a guard to keepOn the hamlet of Inver-Mudal thereAnd the maid in her innocent sleep,Till the years should go by; and they should seeLove Meenie take her stand'Mong the maidens around the footstool of GodShe gentlest of all the band!He tore the leaf out, folded it, and put it in his pocket.'Another one for the little bookie that's never to be seen,' said he,with a kind of laugh; for indeed he treated himself to a good deal ofsatire, and would rather have blown his brains out than that theneighbourhood should have known he was writing these verses about MeenieDouglas.'And hey, Harry, lad!' he called, as he locked the little cupboardagain, 'I'm thinking we must be picking up a hare now, if it's for soupfor the gentleman's dinner the night.  So ye were bauld enough to facean eagle?  I doubt, if both his feet had been free, but ye might havehad a lift in the air, and seen the heavens and the earth spread outbelow ye.'He shouldered his gun and set out againmaking his way towards somerockier ground, where he very soon bagged the brace of hares he wanted.He tied their legs together, slung them over his shoulder, and began todescend the mountain againusually keeping his eye on the minute blackspeck on the loch, lest there might be occasion again for his telescope.He took the two haresthey looked remarkably like cats, by the way, forthey were almost entirely whiteinto the inn, and threw them on to thechair in the passage.'There you are, Nelly, lass,' said he, as the fair-haired Highland maidhappened to go by.'All right,' said she, which was no great thanks.But Mr. Murray, in the parlour, had heard the keeper's voice.'Ronald,' he cried, 'come in for a minute, will ye?'Mr. Murray was a little, wiry, gray-haired, good-natured looking man,who, when Ronald entered the parlour, was seated at the table, andevidently puzzling his brains over a blank sheet of paper that laybefore him.'Your sister Maggie wass here this morning,' the inn-keeper saidstillwith his eyes fixed upon the paper'and she wass saying that maybeMeenieMiss Douglaswould like to come with the others on Mondaynightay, and maybe Mrs. Douglas herself too as wellbut they would hefto be asked.  And Kott pless me, it is not an easy thing, if you hef towrite a letter, and that is more polite than askingit is not an easything, I am sure.  Ronald,' he said, raising his eyes and turning round,'would you tek a message?''Where?' said Ronaldbut he knew well enough, and was only seeking timeto make an excuse.'To Mrs. Douglas and the young lass; and tell them we will be glad ifthey will come with the others on Monday nightfor the doctor is awayfrom home, and why should they be left by themselves?  Will you tek themessage, Ronald?''How could I do that?' Ronald said.  'It's you that's giving the party,Mr. Murray.''But they know you so ferry wellandand there will be no harm if theycome and see the young lads and lasses having a reel togetheray, and asong too.  And if Mrs. Douglas could not be bothered, it's you thatcould bring the young ladyoh yes, I know ferry wellif you will askher, she will come.''I am sure no,' Ronald said hastily, and with an embarrassment he soughtin vain to conceal.  'If Miss Douglas cares to come at all, it will bewhen you ask her. And why should ye write, man?  Go down the road andask her yourselfI mean, ask Mrs. Douglas; it's as simple as simple.What for should ye write a letter?  Would ye send it through the posttoo?  That's ceremony for next-door neighbours!''But Ronald, lad, if ye should see the young lass herself''No, no; take your own message, Mr. Murray; they can but give you acivil answer.'Mr. Murray was left doubting.  It was clear that the awful shadow ofGlengask and Orosay still dwelt over the doctor's household; and thatthe innkeeper was not at all sure as to what Mrs. Douglas would say toan invitation that she and her daughter Meenieor Williamina, as themother called hershould be present at a merry-meeting of farm lads,keepers, gillies, and kitchen wenches.*CHAPTER VIII.**THE NEW YEAR'S FEAST.*Loud and shrill in the empty barn arose the strains of the AtholeMarch, warning the young lasses to hasten with the adjustment of theirribbons, and summoning the young lads about to look sharp and escortthem.  The long and narrow table was prettily laid out; two candelabrainstead of one shed a flood of light on the white cover; the walls weredecorated with evergreens and with Meenie's resplendent paper blossoms;the peats in the improvised fireplace burned merrily.  And when thecompany began to arrive, in twos and threes, some bashful andhesitating, others merry and jocular, there was a little embarrassmentabout the taking of places until Ronald laid down his pipes and set towork to arrange them.  The American gentleman had brought in Mrs. Murrayin state, and they were at the head of the table; while Ronald himselftook the foot, in order, as he said, to keep orderif he were ableamongthe lasses who had mostly congregated there.  Then the generalexcitement and talking was hushed for a minute, while the innkeeper saidgrace; and then the girlsfarm wenches, some of them, and Nelly, thepretty parlour-maid, and Finnuala, the cook's youngest sister, who wasbut lately come from Uist and talked the quaintest English, and Mr.Murray's two nieces from Tongue, and the other young lasses about theinnall of them became demure and proper in their manner, for they wereabout to enjoy the unusual sensation of being waited upon.This, of course, was Ronald's doing.  There had been a question as towhich of the maids were to bring in supper for so large a number; so headdressed himself to the young fellows who were standing about.'You lazy laddies,' he said, 'what are ye thinking o'? Here's a chancefor ye, if there's a pennyworth o' spunk among the lot o' ye.  Theylasses there wait on ye the whole year long, and make the beds for ye,and redd the house; I'm thinking ye might do worse than wait on them forone night, and bring in the supper when they sit down. They canna doboth things; and the fun o' the night belongs to them or to nobody atall.'At first there was a little shamefaced reluctanceit was 'lasses' work,'they saiduntil a great huge Highland tykea Ross-shire drover whohappened to be here on a visita man of about six feet four, with a redbeard big enough for a raven to build in, declared that he would lend ahand, if no one else did; and forthwith brought his huge fist down onthe bar-room table to give emphasis to his words. There was somesuspicion that this unwonted gallantry was due to the fact that he had acovetous eye on Jeannie, Donald Macrae's lass, who was a very superiordairy-mistress, and was also heir-presumptive to her father's farmsteadand about a score of well-favoured cattle; but that was neither here northere; he was as good as his word; he organised the brigade, and led it;and if he swallowed a stiff glass of whisky before setting out from thekitchen for the barn, with a steaming plate of soup in each hand, thatwas merely to steady his nerves and enable him to face the merriment ofthe whole gang of those girls.  And then when this red-bearded giant ofa Ganymede and his attendants had served every one, they fetched intheir own plates, and sat down; and time was allowed them; for theevening was young yet, and no one in a hurry.Now if Mr. Hodson had been rather doubtful lest his presence mightproduce some little restraint, he was speedily reassured, to his owngreat satisfaction, for he was really a most good-natured person andanxious to be friendly with everybody.  In the general fun and jollityhe was not even noticed; he could ask Mrs. Murray any questions he chosewithout suspicion of being observant; the young lady next himwho wasJeannie Macrae herself, and to whom he strove to be as gallant as mightbewas very winsome and gentle and shy, and spoke in a more Highlandfashion than he had heard yet; while otherwise he did not fare at allbadly at this rustic feast, for there were boiled fowls and roast haresafter the soup, and there was plenty of ale passed round, and tea forthose who wished it.  Nay, on the contrary, he had rather to pushhimself forward and assert himself ere he could get his proper share ofthe work that was going on.  He insisted upon carving for at least halfa dozen neighbours; he was most attentive to the pretty Highland girlnext him; and laughed heartily at Mrs. Murray's Scotch stories, which hedid not quite understand; and altogether entered into the spirit of theevening.  But there was no doubt it was at the other end of the tablethat the fun was getting fast and furious; and just as little doubt thatRonald the keeper was suffering considerably at the hands of thoseungrateful lasses for whom he had done so much.  Like a prudent man, heheld his tongue and waited his opportunity; taking their teasing withmuch good humour; and paying no heed to the other young fellows who wereurging him to face and silence the saucy creatures.  And his opportunitycame in the most unexpected way.  One of the girls, out of puremischief, and without the least notion that she would be overheard,rapped lightly on the table, and said: 'Mr. Ronald Strang will nowfavour us with a song.'  To her amazement and horror there was an almostinstant silence; for an impression had travelled up the table that someannouncement was about to be made.'What is it now?  What are you about down there?' their host called tothemand the silence, to her who had unwittingly caused it, wasterrible.But another of the girls, still bent on mischief, was bold enough tosay.'Oh, it's Ronald that's going to sing us a song.''Sing ye a song, ye limmer, ere ye're through with your supper?' Ronaldsaid sharply.  'I'd make ye sing yourselfwith a leather strapif I hadmy will o' ye.'But this was not heard up the table.'Very well, then, Ronald,' the innkeeper cried, graciously. 'Come awaywith it now.  There is no one at all can touch you at that.''Oh, do not ask him,' the pretty Nelly saidapparently addressing thecompany, but keeping her cruel eyes on him. 'Do not ask Ronald to sing.Ronald is such a shy lad.'He glanced at her; and then he seemed to make up his mind.'Very well, then,' said he, 'I'll sing ye a songand let's have achorus, lads.'Now in Sutherlandshire, as in many other parts of the Highlands, thechief object of singing in company is to establish a chorus; and theaudience, no matter whether they have heard the air or not, so soon asit begins, proceed to beat time with hand and heel, forming a kind ofaccompanying tramp, as it were; so that by the time the end of the firstverse is reached, if they have not quite caught the tune, at least theycan make some kind of rhythmic noise with the refrain.  And on thisoccasion, if the words were newand Ronald, on evil intent, took care topronounce them clearlythe air was sufficiently like 'Jenny dang theWeaver' for the general chorus to come in, in not more than half a dozenkeys.  This was what Ronald sangand he sang it in that resonant tenorof his, and in a rollicking fashionjust as if it were an impromptu, andnot a weapon that he had carefully forged long ago, and hidden away toserve some such chance as the present:O lasses, lasses, gang your ways,And dust the house, or wash the claes,Ye put me in a kind o' blazeYe'll break my heart among ye!The girls rather hung their headsthe imputation that they were allsetting their caps at a modest youth who wanted to have nothing to dowith them was scarcely what they expected.  But the lads had struck thetune somehow; and there was a roaring chorus, twice repeated, with heavyboots marking the timeYe'll break my heart among ye!And then the singer proceededgravelyAt kirk or market, morn or e'en,The like o' them was never seen,For each is kind, and each a queen;Ye'll break my heart among ye!And again came the roaring chorus from the delighted ladsYe'll break my heart among ye!There was but one more verseThere's that one dark, and that one fair,And yon has wealth o' yellow hair;Gang hame, gang hameI can nae mairYe'll break my heart among ye!Yellow hair?  The allusion was so obvious that the pretty Nelly blushedscarletall the more visibly because of her fair complexion; and whenthe thunder of the thrice-repeated refrain had ceased, she leant forwardand said to him in a low voice, but with much terrible meaning'My lad, when I get you by yourself, I'll give it to you!'They had nearly finished supper by this time; but ere they had the deckscleared for action, there was a formal ceremony to be gone through.  Thehost produced his quaicha small cup of horn, with a handle on eachside; and likewise a bottle of whisky; and as one guest after anothertook hold of the quaich with the thumb and forefinger of each hand, theinnkeeper filled the small cup with whisky, which had then to be drankto some more or less appropriate toast.  These were in Gaelic for themost part'To the goodman of the inn'; 'To the young girls that arekind, and old wives that keep a clean house'; 'Good health; and goodluck in finding things washed ashore,' and so forthand when it came toMr. Hodson's turn, he would have a try at the Gaelic too.'I think I can wrestle with it, if you give me an easy one,' heremarked, as he took the quaich between his fingers and held it till itwas filled.'Oh no, sir, do not trouble about the Gaelic,' said his pretty neighbourJeannieblushing very much, for there was comparative silence at thetime.'But I want to have my turn.  If it's anything a white man can do, I cando it.''Say air do shlintethat is, your good health,' said Jeannie,blushing more furiously than ever.He carefully balanced the cup in his hands, gravely turned towards hishostess, bowed to her, repeated the magic words with a very fair accentindeed, and drained off the whiskyamid the general applause; thoughnone of them suspected that the swallowing of the whisky was to him amuch more severe task than the pronunciation of the Gaelic.  And then itcame to Ronald's turn.'Oh no, Mr. Murray,' said the slim-waisted Nelly, who had recovered fromher confusion, and whose eyes were now as full of mischief as ever, 'donot ask Ronald to say anything in the Gaelic; he is ashamed to hearhimself speak. It is six years and more he has been trying to say "ayoung calf," and he cannot do it yet.''And besides, he's thinking of the lass he left behind in the Lothians,'said her neighbour.'And they're all black-haired girls there,' continued the fair-hairedNelly.  'Ronald, drink "mo nighean dubh."'He fixed his eyes on her steadily, and said: 'Tir nam beann, nangleann, s'nan gaisgeach;[#] and may all the saucy jades in Sutherlandfind a husband to keep them in order ere the year be out.'[#] The land of hills and glens and heroes.And now two or three of the lasses rose to clear the table; for thered-bearded drover and his brigade had not the skill to do that; and themen lit their pipes; and there was a good deal of joyous schwrmerei.In the midst of it all there was a rapping of spoons and knuckles at theupper end of the table; and it was clear, from the importance of hislook, that Mr. Murray himself was about to favour the companyso that ageneral silence ensued.  And very well indeed did the host of theevening singin a shrill, high-pitched voice, it is true, but still withsuch a multitude of small flourishes and quavers and grace notes asshowed he had once been proud enough of his voice in the days gone by.'Scotland yet' he sang; and there was a universal rush at the chorus'And trow ye as I sing, my lads,The burden o't shall be,Auld Scotland's howes, and Scotland's knowes,And Scotland's hills for me,I'll drink a cup to Scotland yet,Wi' a' the honours three.'And was their American friend to be excluded?not if he knew it.  Hecould make a noise as well as any; and he waved the quaichwhich hadwandered back to himround his head; and strident enough was his voicewithI'll drink a cup to Scotland yet,Wi' a' the honours three.''I feel half a Scotchman already,' said he gaily to his hostess.'Indeed, sir, I wish you were altogether one,' she said in her gentleway.  'I am sure I think you would look a little better in health if youlived in this country.''But I don't look so ill, do I?' said herather disappointed; for he hadbeen striving to be hilarious, and had twice drank the contents of thequaich, out of pure friendliness.'Well, no, sir,' said Mrs. Murray politely, 'not more than most of themI hef seen from your country; but surely it cannot be so healthy asother places; the young ladies are so thin and delicate-lookingwhatever; many a one I would like to hef kept here for a whilefor morefriendly young ladies I never met with anywherejust to see what themountain air and the sweet milk would do for her.''Well, then, Mrs. Murray, you will have the chance of trying yourdoctoring on my daughter when she comes up here a few weeks hence; but Ithink you won't find much of the invalid about herit's my belief shecould give twenty pounds to any girl I know of in a go-as-you-pleaserace across the stiffest ground anywhere.  There's not much the matterwith my Carry, if she'd only not spend the whole day in those stores inRegent Street.  Well, that will be over when she come here; I shouldthink it'll make her stare some, if she wants to buy a veil or a pair ofgloves.'But the girls at the foot of the table had been teasing Ronald to singsomething; silence was forthwith procured; and presentlyfor he was verygood natured, and sang whenever he was askedthe clear and penetratingtenor voice was ringing along the rafters:'The news frae Moidart cam' yestreen,Will soon gar many ferlie,[#]For ships o' war hae just come inAnd landed royal Charlie.'[#] 'Ferlie,' wonder.It was a well-known song, with a resounding chorus:'Come through the heather, around him gather,Ye're a' the welcomer early;Around him cling wi' a' your kin,For wha'll be king but Charlie?'Nay, was not this the right popular kind of songto have two chorusesinstead of one?'Come through the heather, around him gather,Come Ronald, and Donald, come a'thegitherAnd claim your rightfu' lawfu' king,For who'll be king but Charlie?'This song gave great satisfaction; for they had all taken part in thechorus; and they were pleased with the melodious result.  And then thelasses were at him again:'Ronald, sing "Doon the burn, Davie lad."''Ronald, will you not give us "Logan Water" now?''Ronald, "Auld Joe Nicholson's Bonnie Nannie" or "My Peggy is a youngthing" whichever you like best yourself.''No, no,' said the pretty Nelly, 'ask him to sing, "When the kye comehame," and he will be thinking of the black-haired lass he left in theLothians.''Gae wa', gae wa',' said he, rising and shaking himself free from them.'I ken what'll put other things into your headsor into your heels,rather.'He picked up his pipes, which had been left in a corner, threw thedrones over his shoulder, and marched to the upper end of the barn; thenthere was a preliminary groan or two, and presently the chanter brokeaway into a lively reel tune.  The effect of this signal, as it might becalled, was magical; every one at once divined what was needed; and thenext moment they were all helping to get the long table separated intoits component parts and carried out into the dark.  There was a crosstable left at the upper end, by the peat-fire, for the elderly peopleand the spectators to sit at, if they chose; the younger folk had woodenforms at the lower end; but the truth is that they were so eager not tohave any of the inspiriting music thrown away that several sets wereimmediately formed, and off they went to the brisk strains of MissJenny Gordon's Favouriteintertwisting deftly, setting to partnersagain, fingers and thumbs snapped in the air, every lad amongst themshowing off his best steps, and ringing whoops sent up to the rafters asthe reel broke off again into a quick strathspey.  It was wild andbarbaric, no doubt; but there was a kind of rhythmic poetry in it too;Ronald grew prouder and prouder of the fire that he could infuse intothis tempestuous and yet methodical crowd; the whoops became yells; andif the red-bearded drover, dancing opposite the slim-figured Nelly,would challenge her to do her best, and could himself perform someremarkable steps and shakes, well, Nelly was not ashamed to raise hergown an inch or two just to show him that he was not dancing with aflat-footed creature, but that she had swift toes and graceful ankles tocompare with any.  And then again they would trip off into the figure 8,swinging round with arms interlocked; and again roof and rafter would'dirl' with the triumphant shouts of the men.  Then came the longwailing monition from the pipes; the sounds died down; panting andlaughing and rosy-cheeked the lasses were led to the benches by theirpartners; and a general halt was called.Little Maggie stole up to her brother.'I'm going home now, Ronald,' she said.'Very well,' he said.  'Mind you go to bed as soon as ye get in.Good-night, lass.''Good-night, Ronald.'She was going away, when he said to her'Maggie, do ye think that Miss Douglas is not coming along to see thedancing?  I thought she would do that if she would rather no come to thesupper.'In truth he had had his eye on the door all the time he was playingMiss Jenny Gordon's Favourite.'I am sure if she stays away,' the little Maggie said, 'it is not herown doing.  Meenie wanted to come.  It is very hard that everybodyshould be at the party and not Meenie.''Well, well, good-night, lass,' said he; for the young folk werechoosing their partners again, and the pipes were wanted.  Soon therewas another reel going on, as fast and furious as before.At the end of this reelMeenie had not appeared, by the way, and Ronaldconcluded that she was not to be allowed to look on at the dancingtheyellow-haired Nelly came up to the top of the room, and addressed Mrs.Murray in the Gaelic; but as she finished up with the word quadrille,and as she directed one modest little glance towards Mr. Hodson, thatamiable but astute onlooker naturally inferred that he was somehowconcerned in this speech.  Mrs. Murray laughed.'Well, sir, the girls are asking if you would not like to have a dancetoo; and they could have a quadrille.''I've no cause to brag about my dancing,' he said good-humouredly, 'butif Miss Nelly will see me through, I dare say we'll manage somehow.Will you excuse my ignorance?'Now the tall and slender Highland maid had not in any way bargained forthisit was merely friendliness that had prompted her proposal; but shecould not well refuse; and soon one or two sets were formed; and a younglad called Munro, from Lairg, who had brought his fiddle with him forthis great occasion, proceeded to tune up.  The quadrille, when it cameoff, was performed with more of vigour than science; there was noignominious shirking of stepsno idle and languid walkingbut a thoroughand resolute flinging about, as the somewhat bewildered Mr. Hodsonspeedily discovered.  However, he did his part gallantly, and was nowgrown so gay that when, at the end of the dance, he inquired of the fairNelly whether she would like to have any little refreshment, and whenshe mildly suggested a little water, and offered to go for it herself,he would hear of no such thing.  No, no; he went and got somesoda-water, and declared that it was much more wholesome with a littlewhisky in it; and had some himself also.  Gay and gallant?why,certainly.  He threw off thirty years of his life; he forgot that thiswas the young person who would be waiting at table after his daughterCarry came hither: he would have danced another quadrille with her; andfelt almost jealous when a young fellow came up to claim her for theHighland Schottischethus sending him back to the society of Mrs.Murray.  And it was not until he had sate down that he remembered he hadsuggested to his daughter the training of this pretty Highland girl forthe position of maid and travelling companion. But what of that?  If allmen were born equal, so were women; and he declared to himself that anyday he would rather converse with Nelly the pretty parlour-maid than(supposing him to have the chance) with Her Illustrious Highness thePrincess of Pfalzgrafweiler-Gunzenhausen.In the meantime Ronald, his pipes not being then needed, had wanderedout into the cold night-air.  There were some stars visible, but theyshed no great light; the world lay black enough all around.  He wentidly and dreamily along the roadthe sounds in the barn growing fainterand fainteruntil he reached the plateau where his own cottage stood.There was no light in it anywhere; doubtless Maggie had at once gone tobed, as she had been bid.  And then he wandered on againwalking alittle more quietlyuntil he reached the doctor's house. Here all thelights were out but one; there was a red glow in that solitary window;and he knew that that was Meenie's room.  Surely she could not besitting up and listening?even the skirl of the pipes could scarcely beheard so far; and her window was closed.  Reading, perhaps?  He knew somany of her favourites'The Burial March of Dundee,' 'Jeannie Morrison,''Bonny Kilmeny,' 'Christabel,' the 'Hymn before Sunrise in the Valley ofChamounix,' and others of a similar noble or mystical or tender kind;and perhaps, after all, these were more in consonance with the gentledignity and rose-sweetness of her mind and nature than the gambols of alot of farm-lads and wenches?  He walked on to the bridge, and sate downthere for a while, in the dark and the silence; he could hear the MudalWater rippling by, but could see nothing.  And when he passed along theroad again, the light in the small red-blinded window was gone; Meeniewas away in the world of dreams and phantomsand he wondered if thepeople there knew who this was who had come amongst them, with herwondering eyes and sweet ways.He went back to the barn, and resumed his pipe-playing with all hiswonted vigourwaking up the whole thing, as it were; but nothing couldinduce him to allow one or other of the lads to be his substitute, sothat he might go and choose a partner for one of the reels.  He wouldnot dance; he said his business was to keep the merry-making going.  Andhe and they did keep it going till between five and six in the morning,when all hands were piped for the singing of 'Auld Lang Syne:' andthereafter there was a general dispersal, candles going this way andthat through the blackness like so many will-o'-the-wisps; and the lastgood-nights at length sank into silencea silence as profound and hushedas that that lay over the unseen heights of Clebrig and the dark andstill lake below.*CHAPTER IX.**ENTICEMENTS.*At about eleven o'clock on the same morning Miss Douglas was standing atthe window of her own little room looking rather absently at thefamiliar wintry scene without, and occasionally turning to a letter thatshe held in her hand, and that she had apparently just then written.Presently, however, her face brightened.  There was a faint sound in thedistance as of some one singing; no doubt that was Ronald; he would becoming along the road with the dogs, and if she were in any difficultyhe would be the one to help.  So she waited for a second or two, hopingto be able to signal him to stop; and the next minute he was in sight,walking briskly with his long and steady stride, the small terrier athis heels, the other dogssome handsome Gordon setters, a brace ofpointers, and a big brown retrieverranging farther afield.But why was it, she asked herself, that whenever he drew near herfather's cottage he invariably ceased his singing?  Elsewhere, as wellshe knew, he beguiled the tedium of these lonely roads with an almostconstant succession of songs and snatches of songs; but here heinvariably became mute.  And why did he not raise his eyes to thewindowwhere she was waiting to give him a friendly wave of the hand, oreven an invitation to stop and come within-doors for a minute or two?No, on he went with that long stride of his, addressing a word now andagain to one or other of the dogs, and apparently thinking of nothingelse. So, as there was nothing for it now but to go out and intercepthim on his return, she proceeded to put on her ulster and aclose-fitting deerstalker's cap; and thus fortified against the gustynorth wind that was driving clouds and sunshine across the loch andalong the slopes of Clebrig, she left the cottage, and followed the roadthat he had taken.As it turned out, she had not far to go; for she saw that he was nowseated on the parapet of the little bridge spanning the Mudal Water, andno doubt he was cutting tobacco for his pipe.  When she drew near, herose; when she drew nearer, he put his pipe in his waistcoat pocket.'Good-morning, Ronald!' she cried, and the pretty fresh-tinted facesmiled on him, and the clear gray-blue Highland eyes regarded him in themost frank and friendly way, and without any trace whatever of maidenbashfulness.'Good-morning, Miss Douglas,' said he; he was far more shy than she was.'What a stupid thing happened this morning,' said she. 'When I heardthat the American gentleman was going south, I wanted to tell the driverto bring the children from Crask with him as he came back in theevening; and I sent Elizabeth round to the inn to tell him that; andthenwhat do you think!they had started away half an hour before therewas any need.  But now I have written a letter to the Crask people,asking them to stop the waggonette as it comes back in the afternoon,and telling them that we will make the children very comfortable herefor the night; and if only I could get it sent to Crask everything wouldbe arranged.  And do you think now you could get one of the young ladsto take it to Crask if I gave him a shilling?'She took out her purse, and selected a shilling from the very slenderstore of coins there.'It is not much for so long a walk,' she said, rather doubtfully.'Eight miles there and eight backis it enough, do you think?''Oh, I'll get the letter sent for ye, Miss Douglas, easily enough,' saidheand indeed he had already taken it from her hand.Then she offered him the shilling, but with a little gesture he refusedit.  And thenfor there flashed upon her mind a sudden suspicion thatperhaps he might choose to walk all that way himself just to please her(indeed, he had done things like that before)she became greatlyembarrassed.'Give me the letter, Ronald,' said she, 'and I will find some onemyself.  You are going away now with the dogs.''Oh no,' said he, 'I will see that the Crask folk get your message.''And the money to pay the lad?' said she timidly.'Dinna bother your head wi' that,' he answered. 'There's enough moneyscattered about the place just nowthe American gentleman wasfree-handed this morning. Ay, and there's something I've got for you.''For me?' she said, with her eyes opening somewhat.'Well,' said he (and very glad he was to have the letter safe and soundin his possession), 'I was telling him about the children's partyto-morrow night; and he's a friendly kind o' man, that; he said he wouldlike to have been at it, if he could have stayed; and I'm sure he wouldhave got on wi' them well enough, for he's a friendly kind o' man, as Isay.  Well, then, I couldna tell him the exact number o' the bairns; butno matter what number, each one o' them is to find sevenpence under theteacupthat's a penny for each fish he got.  Ay, he's a shrewd-headedfellow, too; for says he "I suppose, now, the old people will be forhaving the children save up the sixpence, so at least they'll have thepenny to spend;" and he was curious even to find out where the bairns ina place like this got their toys, or if sweeties ever came their way."It's little enough of either o' them," I said to him, "they see, exceptwhen Miss Douglas has been to Lairg or Tongue;" and he was very anxiousto make your acquaintance, I may tell ye, but he said he would wait tillhis daughter came with him the next time.  I'm thinking the bairns willbe pleased to find a little packet of money in the saucers; and it's nottoo much for a man to pay for the luck o' getting seven salmon in themiddle of Januaryfor who could have expected that?'And then Meenie laughed.'It's little you know, Ronald, what is in store for you to-morrow night.It will be the hardest night's work you ever undertook in your life.''I'm not afraid o't,' he answered simply.'But you do not know yet.'She opened her ulster and from an inside pocket produced the formidabledocument that she had shown to Ronald's sister; and then she buttonedthe long garment again, and contentedly sate herself down on the lowstone parapet, the programme in her hand.  And now all trace ofembarrassment was fled from her; and when she spoke to him, or smiled,those clear frank eyes of hers looked straight into his, fearingnothing, but only expecting a welcome.  She did not, as he did,continually remember that she was Miss Douglas, the doctor's daughter,and he merely a smart young deerstalker.  To her he was simplyRonaldthe Ronald that every one knew and liked; who had a kind ofmasterful way throughout this neighbourhood, and was arbiter in allmatters of public concern; but who, nevertheless, was of such amazinggood nature that there was no trouble he would not undertake to gratifyher slightest wish.  And as he was so friendly and obliging towards her,she made no doubt he was so to others; and that would account for hisgreat popularity, she considered; and she thought it was very lucky forthis remote little hamlet that it held within it one who was capable ofproducing so much good feeling, and keeping the social atmosphere sweetand sound.As for him, he met this perfect friendship of hers with a studiedrespect.  Always, if it was on the one side 'Ronald,' on the other itwas 'Miss Douglas.'  Why, her very costume was a bar to more familiarrelations.  At this moment, as she sate on the stone parapet of thebridge, looking down at the document before her, and as he stood at alittle distance, timidly awaiting what she had to say, it occurred tohim again, as it had occurred before, that no matter what dress it was,each one seemed to become her better than any other.  What was thereparticular in a tight-fitting gray ulster and a deerstalker's cap? andyet there was grace there, and style, and a nameless charm.  If one ofthe lasses at the inn, now, were sent on an errand on one of these wildand blustering mornings, and got her hair blown about, she came backlooking untidy; but if Miss Douglas had her hair blown about, so thatbits and curls of it got free from the cap or the velvet hat, and hunglightly about her forehead or her ears or her neck, it was a greaterwitchery than ever.  Then everything seemed to fit her so well and soeasily, and to be so simple; and always leaving herhowever it was somanagedperfect freedom of movement, so that she could swing a child onto her shoulder, or run after a truant, or leap from bank to bank of aburn without disturbing in the least that constant symmetry andneatness. To Ronald it was all a wonder; and there was a still furtherwonder always seeming to accompany her and surround her.  Why was itthat the bleakest winter day, on these desolate Sutherland moors,suddenly grew filled with light when he chanced to see a well-knownfigure away along the roadthe world changing into a joyful thing, as ifthe summer were already come, and the larks singing in the blue?  Andwhen she spoke to him, there was a kind of music in the air; and whenshe laughedwhy, Clebrig and Ben Loyal and the whispering Mudal Waterseemed all to be listening and all to be glad that she was happy andpleased.  She was the only one, other than himself, that the faithfulHarry would follow; and he would go with her wherever she went, so longas she gave him an occasional word of encouragement.'Will I read you the programme, Ronald?' said she, with just a trace ofmischief in the gray-blue eyes.  'I'm sure you ought to hear what has tobe done, for you are to be in the chair, you know.''Me?' said he, in astonishment.  'I never tried such a thing in mylife.''Oh yes,' she said cheerfully.  'They tell me you are always at the headof the merry-makings: and is not this a simple thing?  And besides, I donot want any other grown peopleI do not want Mr. Murrayhe is a verynice manbut he would be making jokes for the grown-up people all thetime.  I want nobody but you and Maggie and myself besides the children,and we will manage it very well, I am sure.'There was a touch of flattery in the proposal.'Indeed, yes,' said he at once.  'We will manage well enough, if ye wishit that way.''Very well, then,' said she, turning with a practical air to theprogramme.  'We begin with singing Old Hundred, and then the childrenwill have tea and cakeand the sixpence and the penny.  And then thereis to be an address by the Chairmanthat's you, Ronald.''Bless me, lassie!' he was startled into saying; and then he stammeredan apology, and sought safety in a vehement protest against the fancythat he could make a speechabout anything whatever.'Well, that is strange,' said Meenie looking at him, and rather inclinedto laugh at his perplexity.  'It is a strange thing if you cannot make alittle speech to them; for I have to make oneat the end.  See, there ismy name.'He scarcely glanced at the programme.'And what have you to speak about, Miss Douglas?'She laughed.'About you.''About me?' he said, rather aghast.'It is a vote of thanks to the chairmanand easy enough it will be, I amsure.  For I have only to say about you what I hear every one say aboutyou; and that will be simple enough.'The open sincerity of her friendshipand even of her marked liking forhimwas so apparent that for a second or so he was rather bewildered.But he was not the kind of man to misconstrue frankness; he knew thatwas part of herself; she was too generous, too much inclined to thinkwell of everybody; and the main point to which he had to confine himselfwas this, that if she, out of her good-nature, could address a few wordsto those childrenabout him or any other creature or object in theworldit certainly behoved him to do his best also, although he hadnever tried anything of the kind before.  And then a sudden fancy struckhim; and his eyes brightened eagerly. 'Oh yes, yes,' he said, 'I willfind something to say. I would make a bad hand at a sermon; but thebairns have enough o' that at times; I dare say we'll find something forthem o' another kindand they'll no be sorry if it's short.  I'mthinking I can find something that'll please them.'And what was this that was in his head?what but the toast of theMistress of the Feast!  If Meenie had but known, she would doubtlesshave protested against the introduction of any mutual admiration societyinto the modest hamlet of Inver-Mudal; but at that moment she was stillscanning the programme.'Now you know, Ronald,' she said, 'it is to be all quiet and private;and that is why the grown-up people are to be kept out except ourselves.Well, then, after they have had raisins handed round, you are to sing"My love she's but a lassie yet"that is a compliment to the littleones; and then I will read them something; and then you are to sing "Odinna cross the burn, Willie"I have put down no songs that I have notheard you sing.  And then if you would play them "Lord Breadalbane'sMarch" on the pipes'She looked up again, with an air of apology.'Do you think I am asking too much from you, Ronald?' she said.'Indeed not a bit,' said he promptly.  'I will play or sing for them allthe night long, if you want; and I'm sure it's much better we should doit all ourselves, instead o' having a lot o' grown-up folk to make thebairns shy.''It is not the chairman anyway, that will make them shyif what they saythemselves is true,' said Meenie very prettily; and she folded up herprogramme and put it in her pocket again.She rose; and he whistled in the dogs, as if he would return to thevillage.'I thought you were taking them for a run,' said she.'Oh, they have been scampering about; I will go back now.'Nor did it occur to her for a moment that she would rather not walk backto the door of her mother's house with him.  On the contrary, if she hadbeen able to attract his notice when he passed, she would have gone downto the little garden-gate, and had this conversation with him in view ofall the windows.  If she wanted him to do anything for her, she neverthought twice about going along to his cottage and knocking at the door;or she would, in the event of his not being there, go on to the inn andask if any one had seen Ronald about.  And so on this occasion she wentalong the road with him in much good-humour; praising the dogs, hopingthe weather would continue fine, and altogether in high spirits over herplans for the morrow.However, they were not to part quite so pleasantly. At the smallgarden-gate, and evidently awaiting them, stood Mrs. Douglas; and Ronaldguessed that she was in no very good temper.  In truth, she seldom was.She was a doll-like little woman, rather pretty, with cold clear blueeyes, fresh-coloured cheeks, and quite silver-white hair, which wascarefully curled and braideda pretty little old lady, and one to bepetted and made much of, if only she had had a little more amiability ofdisposition.  But she was a disappointed woman.  Her big good-naturedhusband had never fulfilled the promise of his early years, when, in afit of romance, she married the penniless medical student whom she hadmet in Edinburgh.  He was not disappointed at all; his life suited himwell enough; he was excessively fond of his daughter Meenie, and wantedno other companion when she was about; after the hard work of making around of professional visits in that wild district, the quiet andcomfort and neatness of the little cottage at Inver-Mudal were all thathe required.  But it was far otherwise with the once ambitious littlewoman whom he had married.  The shadow of the dignity of the Stuarts ofGlengask still dwelt over her; and it vexed her that she had nothingwith which to overawe the neighbours or to convince the passing strangerof her importance.  Perhaps if she had been of commanding figure, thatmight have helped her, however poor her circumstances might be; as itwas, being but five feet two inches in heightand rather toy-likewithaleverything seemed against her.  It was but little use herendeavouring to assume a majestic manner when her appearance was somehowsuggestive of a glass case; and the sharpness of her tongue, which wasconsiderable, seemed to be but little heeded even in her own house, forboth her husband and her daughter were persons of an easy good humour,and rather inclined to pet her in spite of herself.'Good morning, Mrs. Douglas,' Ronald said respectfully, and he raisedhis cap as they drew near.'Good morning, Mr. Strang,' she said, with much precision, and scarcelyglancing at him.She turned to Meenie.'Williamina, how often have I told you to shut the gate after you whenyou go out?' she said sharply.  'Here has the cow been in again.''It cannot do much harm at this time of the year,' Meenie said lightly.'I suppose if I ask you to shut the gate that is enough? Where have youbeen?  Idling, I suppose.  Have you written to Lady Stuart to thank herfor the Birthday Book?'It seemed to Ronald (who wished to get away, but could scarcely leavewithout some civil word of parting) that she referred to Lady Stuart inan unmistakably clear tone.  She appeared to take no notice of Ronald'spresence, but she allowed him to hear that there was such a person asLady Stuart in existence.'Why, mother, it only came yesterday, and I haven't looked over it yet,'Meenie said.'I think when her ladyship sends you a present,' observed the littlewoman, with severe dignity, 'the least you can do is to write and thankher at once.  There are many who would be glad of the chance.  Go in andwrite the letter now.''Very well, mother,' said Meenie, with perfect equanimity; and then shecalled 'Good morning, Ronald!' and went indoors.What was he to do to pacify this imperious little dame? As a gamekeeper,he knew but the one way.'Would a hare or two, or a brace of ptarmigan be of any use to you, Mrs.Douglas?' said he.'Indeed,' she answered, with much dignity, 'we have not had much game ofany kind of late, for at Glengask they do not shoot any of the deerafter Christmas.'This intimation that her cousin, Sir Alexander, was the owner of adeer-forest might have succeeded with anybody else.  But alas! thisyoung man was a keeper, and very well he knew that there was no forestat all at Glengask, though occasionally in October they might comeacross a stag that had been driven forth from the herd, or they mightfind two or three strayed hinds in the woods later on; while, if Mrs.Douglas had but even one haunch sent her in the yearsay at Christmasheconsidered she got a very fair share of whatever venison was going atGlengask.  But of course he said nothing of all this.'Oh, very well,' said he, 'I'm thinking o' getting two or three o' thelads to go up the hill for a hare-drive one o' these days.  The hares'll be the better o' some thinning downon one or two o' the far tops;and then again, when we've got them it's no use sending themsouththey're no worth the carriage.  So if ye will take a few o' them,I'm sure you're very welcome.  Good morning, ma'am.''Good morning,' said she, a little stiffly, and she turned and walkedtowards the cottage.As for him, he strode homeward with right goodwill; for Meenie's letterwas in his pocket; and he had forthwith to make his way toCraskpreferring not to place any commission of hers in alien hands.  Hegot the dogs kennelled upall except the little terrier; he slung histelescope over his shoulder, and took a stick in his hand. 'Come along,Harry, lad, ye'll see your friends at Crask ere dinner time, and ifye're well-behaved ye'll come home in the waggonette along wi' thebairns.'It was a brisk and breezy morning; the keen north wind was fortunatelybehind him; and soon he was swinging along through the desolatesolitudes of Strath Terry, his footfall on the road the only sound inthe universal stillness.  And yet not the only sound, for sometimes heconversed with Harry, and sometimes he sent his clear tenor voiceringing over the wide moorland, and startling here or there a sheep, thesolitary occupant of these wilds.  For no longer had he to propitiatethat domineering little dame; and the awful shadow of Glengask was asnothing to him; the American, with his unsettling notions, had departed;here he was at home, his own master, free in mind, and with the best ofall companions trotting placidly at his heels.  No wonder his voice rangloud and clear and contented:'"'Tis not beneath the burgonet,Nor yet beneath the crown,'Tis not on couch of velvet,Nor yet on bed of down."Harry, lad, do ye see that hoodie?  Was there ever such impudence?  Icould maist kill him with a stone.  But I'll come along and pay a visitto the gentleman ere the month's much older:"'Tis beneath the spreading birch,In the dell without a name,Wi' a bonnie, bonnie lassie,When the kye come hame."What think ye o' that now?for we'll have to do our best to-morrow nightto please the bairns.  Ah, you wise wee deevil!catch you drinking outo' a puddle when ye see any running water near."When the kye come hame, when the kye come hame,Twixt the gloaming and the mirk, when the kye come hame."*CHAPTER X.**HIGH FESTIVAL.*A children's tea-party in a Highland barn sounds a trivial sort ofaffair; and, as a spectacle, would doubtless suffer in contrast with afancy-dress ball in Kensington or with a State concert at BuckinghamPalace.  But human nature is the important thing, after all, no matterwhat the surroundings may be; and if one considers what the ordinarylife of these children wasthe dull monotony of it in those far andbleak solitudes; their ignorance of pantomime transformation scenes;their lack of elaborately illustrated fairy tales, and similar aids tothe imagination enjoyed by more fortunate young people elsewhereit wassurely an interesting kind of project to bring these bairns away fromthe homely farm or the keeper's cottage, in the depth of mid-winter, andto march them through the blackness of a January evening into a suddenlyopening wonderland of splendour and colour and festivity.  They were notlikely to remember that this was but a barnthis beautiful place, withits blazing candelabra, and its devices of evergreens and great whiteand red roses, and the long table sumptuously set forth, and each guestsitting down, finding himself or herself a capitalist to the extent ofsevenpence.  And so warm and comfortable the lofty building was; and sobrilliant and luminous with those circles of candles; and the loudstrains of the pipes echoing through itgiving them a welcome just as ifthey were grown-up people: no wonder they stared mostly in silence atfirst, and seemed awestruck, and perhaps were in doubt whether thismight not be some Cinderella kind of feast, that they might suddenly besnatched away fromand sent back again through the cold and the night tothe far and silent cottage in the glen.  But this feeling soon wore off;for it was no mystical fairythough she seemed more beautiful andgracious, and more richly attired than any fairy they had ever dreamedaboutwho went swiftly here and there and everywhere, arranging theirseats for them, laughing and talking with them, forgetting not one oftheir names, and as busy and merry and high-spirited as so great anoccasion obviously demanded.Moreover, is it not in these early years that ideals are unconsciouslybeing formedfrom such experiences as are nearest?ideals that inafter-life may become standards of conduct and aims.  They had neverseen any one so gentle-mannered as this young lady who was at once theirhostess and the little mother of them all, nor any one so dignified andyet so simple and good-humoured and kind. They could not but observewith what marked respect Ronald Strang (a most important person in theireyes) treated herinsisting on her changing places with him, lest sheshould be in a draught when the door was opened; and not allowing her totouch the teapots that came hot and hot from the kitchen, lest sheshould burn her fingers; he pouring out the tea himself, and ratherclumsily too. And if their ideal of sweet and gracious womanhood(supposing it to be forming in their heads) was of but a prospectiveadvantage, was there not something of a more immediate value to them inthus being allowed to look on one who was so far superior to theordinary human creatures they saw around them?  She formed an easy keyto the few imaginative stories they were familiar with.  Cinderella, forexample: when they read how she fascinated the prince at the ball, andwon all hearts and charmed all eyes, they could think of Miss Douglas,and eagerly understand.  The Queen of Sheba, when she came in all hersplendour: how were these shepherds' and keepers' and crofters' childrento form any notion of her appearance but by regarding Miss Douglas inthis beautiful and graceful attire of hers? In point of fact, her gownwas but of plain black silk; but there was something about the manner ofher wearing it that had an indefinable charm; and then she had asingularly neat collar and a pretty ribbon round her neck; and therewere slender silver things gleaming at her wrists from time to time.Indeed, there was no saying for how many heroines of history or fictionMiss Meenie Douglas had unconsciously to herself to do dutyin thesolitary communings of a summer day's herding, or during the drearyhours in which these hapless little people were shut up in some small,close, overcrowded parish church, supposing that they lived anywherewithin half a dozen miles of such a building: now she would be Joan ofArc, or perhaps Queen Esther that was so surpassing beautiful, or LordUllin's daughter that was drowned within sight of Ulva's shores.  Andwas it not sufficiently strange that the same magical creature, whorepresented to them everything that was noble and beautiful and refinedand queen-like, should now be moving about amongst them, cutting cakefor them, laughing, joking, patting this one or that on the shoulder,and apparently quite delighted to wait on them and serve them?The introductory singing of the Old Hundredth Psalm was, it must beconfessed, a failure.  The large majority of the children present hadnever either heard or seen a piano; and when Meenie went to thatstrange-looking instrument (it had been brought over from her mother'scottage with considerable difficulty), and when she sate down and struckthe first deep resounding chordsand when Ronald, at his end of thetable, led off the singing with his powerful tenor voicethey were fartoo much interested and awestruck to follow.  Meenie sang, in her quietclear way, and Maggie timidly joined in, but the children were silent.However, as has already been said, the restraint that was at firstpretty obvious very soon wore off; the tea and cake were consumed amidmuch general hilarity and satisfaction; and when in due course theChairman rose to deliver his address, and when Miss Douglas tapped onthe table to secure attention, and also by way of applause, several ofthe elder ones had quite enough courage and knowledge of affairs tofollow her example, so that the speaker may be said to have beenreceived with favour.And if there were any wise ones there, whose experience had taught themthat tea and cake were but a snare to entrap innocent people into beinglectured and sermonised, they were speedily reassured.  The Chairman'saddress was mostly about starlings and jays and rabbits and ferrets andsquirrels; and about the various ways of taming these, and teachingthem; and of his own various successes and failures when he was a boy.He had to apologise at the outset for not speaking in the Gaelic; for hesaid that if he tried they would soon be laughing at him; he would haveto speak in English; but if he mentioned any bird or beast whose namethey did not understand, they were to ask him, and he would tell themthe Gaelic name.  And very soon it was clear enough that this was nolecture on the wanderings of the children of Israel, nor yet a sermon onjustification by faith; the eager eyes of the boys followed every detailof the capture of the nest of young ospreys; the girls were like to cryover the untimely fate of a certain tame sparrow that had strayed withinthe reachor the spring ratherof an alien cat; and general laughtergreeted the history of the continued and uncalled-for mischiefs and evildeeds of one Peter, a squirrel but half reclaimed from its savage ways,that had cost the youthful naturalist much anxiety and vexation, andalso not a little blood.  There was, moreover, a dark and wild story ofrevengeon an ill-conditioned cur that was the terror of the wholevillage, and was for ever snapping at girls' ankles and boys' legsamost improper and immoral story to be told to young folks, though theboys seemed to think the ill-tempered beast got no more than itdeserved.  That small village, by the way, down there in the Lothians,seemed to have been a very remarkable place; the scene of the strangestexploits and performances on the part of terriers, donkeys, pet kittens,and tame jackdaws; haunted by curious folk, too, who knew all aboutbogles and kelpies and such uncanny creatures, and had had the mostremarkable experiences of them (though modern science was allowed tocome in here for a little bit, with its cold-blooded explanations of thesupernatural).  And when, to finish up this discursive and apparentlyaimless address, he remarked that the only thing lacking in that villagewhere he had been brought up, and where he had observed all theseincidents and wonders, was the presence of a kind-hearted and generousyoung lady, who, on an occasion, would undertake all the trouble ofgathering together the children for miles around, and would doeverything she could to make them perfectly happy, they knew perfectlywell whom he meant; and when he said, in conclusion, that if they knewof any such an one about here, in Inver-Mudal, and if they thought thatshe had been kind to them, and if they wished to show her that they weregrateful to her for her goodness, they could not do better than give herthree loud cheers, the lecture came to an end in a perfect storm ofapplause; and Meenieblushing a little, and yet laughinghad to get upand say that she was responsible for the keeping of order by thisassembly, and would allow no speech-making and no cheering that was notput down in the programme.After this there was a service of raisins; and in the general quiet thatfollowed Mr. Murray came into the room, just to see how things weregoing on.  Now the innkeeper considered himself to be a man of ahumorous turn; and when he went up to shake hands with Miss Douglas, andlooked down the long table, and saw Ronald presiding at the other end,and her presiding at this, and all the children sitting so sedatelythere, he remarked to her in his waggish way'Well, now, for a young married couple, you have a very large family.'But Miss Douglas was not a self-conscious young person, nor easilyalarmed, and she merely laughed and said'I am sure they are a very well-behaved family indeed.'But Ronald, who had not heard the jocose remark, by the way, objected toany one coming in to claim Miss Douglas's attention on so important anoccasion; and in his capacity of Chairman he rose and rapped loudly onthe table.'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, 'we're not going to have any idlershere the night.  Any one that bides with us must do something.  I callon Mr. Murray to sing his well-known song, "Bonnie Peggie, O."''Indeed no, indeed no,' the innkeeper said, instantly retreating to thedoor.  'There iss too many good judges here the night.  I'll leave youto yourselfs; but if there's anything in the inn you would like sentover, do not be afraid to ask for it, Ronald.  And the rooms for thechildren are all ready, and the beds; and we'll make them verycomfortable, Miss Douglas, be sure of that now.''It's ower soon to talk about beds yet,' Ronald said, when the innkeeperhad gone; and he drove home the wooden bolt of the door, so that noother interloper should get in.  Meenie had said she wanted no outsiderspresent; that was enough.And then they set about getting through the programmethe details ofwhich need not be repeated here.  Song followed song; when there was anypause Meenie played simple airs on the piano; for 'The Cameraman'sDream,' when it came to her turn to read them something, she substituted'The Pied Piper of Hamelin,' which was listened to with breathlessinterest.  Even the little Maggie did her part in the 'Huntingtower'duet very creditablyfortified by the knowledge that there were nocritics present.  And as for the children, they had become quiteconvinced that there was to be no sermon; and that they were not to becatechised about their lessons, nor examined as to the reasons annexedto the Fourth Commandment; all care was gone from them; for the momentlife was nothing but shortbread and raisins and singing, with admirationof Miss Douglas's beautiful hair and beautiful kind eyes and soft andlaughing voice.And then, as the evening wore on, it became time to send these youngpeople to the beds that had been prepared for them at the inn; and ofcourse they could not break up without singing 'Auld Lang Syne'Meenieofficiating at the piano, and all the others standing up and joininghands.  And then she had to come back to the table to propose a vote ofthanks to the Chairman.  Well, she was not much abashed.  Perhaps therewas a little extra colour in her face at the beginning; and she said shehad never tried to make a speech before; and, indeed, that now there wasno occasion, for that all of them knew Ronald (so she called him, quitenaturally), and knew that he was always willing to do a kindness when hewas asked.  And she said that he had done a great deal more than hadbeen originally begged of him; and they ought all of them, includingherself, to be very grateful to him; and if they wished to give him aunanimous vote of thanks, they were all to hold up their right handasshe did.  So that vote was carried; and Ronald said a few words inreplymostly about Miss Douglas, in truth, and also telling them to whomthey were indebted for the money found in each saucer. Then came thebusiness of finding wraps for them and muffling them up ere they wentout into the January night (though many a one there was all unused tosuch precautions, and wondered that Miss Douglas should be so careful ofthem), while Ronald, up at the head of the room, was playing them aparting salute on the pipesCaidil gu lo it was, which means 'Sleep ontill day.'  Finally, when Maggie and Meenie were ushering their smallcharges through the darkness to the back-door of the inn, he foundhimself alone; and, before putting out the candles and fastening up, hethought he might as well have a smokefor that solace had been deniedhim during the long evening.Well, he was staring absently into the mass of smouldering peats, andthinking mostly of the sound of Meenie's voice as he had heard it whenshe sang with the children 'Whither, pilgrims, are you going?' when heheard footsteps behind him, and turning found that both Meenie andMaggie had come back.'Ronald,' said Meenie, with her pretty eyes smiling at him, 'do you knowthat Maggie and I are rather tired''Well, I dinna wonder,' said he.'Yes, and both of us very hungry too.  And I am sure there will be nosupper waiting for either Maggie or me when we go home; and do you thinkyou could get us some little thing now?''Here?' said he, with his face lighting up with pleasure: were thosethree to have supper all by themselves?'Oh yes,' said she, in her friendly way.  'I am not sure that my motherwould like me to stay at the inn for supper; but this is our own place;and the table laid; and Maggie and I would rather be here, I am sure.And youare you not hungry tooafter so long a timeI am sure you wantsomething besides raisins and shortbread.  But if it will be anytrouble'Trouble or no trouble,' said he quickly, 'has nothing to do wi't.Here, Maggie, lass, clear the end of the table; and we'll soon get somesupper for ye.'And away he went to the inn, summoning the lasses there, and driving andhurrying them until they had arranged upon a large tray a verypresentable suppersome cold beef, and ham, and cheese, and bread, andale; and when the fair-haired Nelly was ready to start forth with thisburden, he lit a candle and walked before her through the darkness, lestshe should miss her footing.  And very demure was Nelly when she placedthis supper on the table; there was not even a look for the smart youngkeeper; and when Meenie said to her'I hear, Nelly, you had great goings-on on Monday night'she onlyanswered'Oh yes, miss, there was that'and could not be drawn intoconversation, but left the moment she had everything arranged.But curiously enough, when the two girls had taken their seats at thislittle cross table, Ronald remained standingjust behind them, indeed,as if he were a waiter. And would Miss Douglas have this? and would MissDouglas have that? he suggestedmostly to cloak his shamefacedness; forindeed that first wild assumption that they were all to have suppertogether was banished now as an impertinence.  He would wait on them,and gladly; butbut his own supper would come after.'And what will you have yourself, Ronald?' Meenie asked.'Oh,' said he, 'that will do by and by.  I am not so hungry as you.''Did you have so much of the shortbread?' said she, laughing.He went and stirred up the peatsand the red glow sent a genial warmthacross towards them.'Come, Ronald,' said the little Maggie, 'and have some supper.''There is no hurry,' he said evasively.  'I think I will go outside andhave a pipe now; and get something by and by.''I am sure,' said Meenie saucily, 'that it is no compliment to us thatyou would rather go away and smoke.  See, now, if we cannot tempt you.'And therewith, with her own pretty fingers, she made ready his place atthe table; and put the knife and fork properly beside the plate; andhelped him to a slice of beef and a slice of ham; and poured some aleinto his tumbler. Not only that, but she made a little movement ofarranging her dress which was so obviously an invitation that he shouldthere and then take a place by her, that it was not in mortal man toresist; though, indeed, after sitting down, he seemed to devote all hisattention to looking after his companions.  And very soon any smallembarrassment was entirely gone; Meenie was in an unusually gay andmerry moodfor she was pleased that her party had been so obviously asuccess, and all her responsibilities over.  And this vivacity gave anew beauty to her face; her eyes seemed more kind than ever; when shelaughed, it was a sweet low laugh, like the cooing of pigeons on asummer afternoon.'And what are you thinking of, Maggie?' she said, suddenly turning tothe little girl, who had grown rather silent amid this talking andjoking.'I was wishing this could go on for ever,' was the simple answer.'What?  A perpetual supper?  Oh, you greedy girl! Why, you must belooking forward to the Scandinavian heaven''No, it's to be with Ronald and you, Meenie dearjust like nowfor youseem to be able to keep everybody happy.'Miss Douglas did blush a little at this; but it was an honestcompliment, and it was soon forgotten.  And then, when they had finishedsupper, she said'Ronald, do you know that I have never played an accompaniment to one ofyour songs?  Would you not like to hear how it sounds?'Butbut I'm not used to itI should be putting you wrong''No, no; I'm sure we will manage.  Come along,' she said briskly.'There is that one I heard you sing the other dayI heard you, thoughyou did not see me"Gae bring to me a pint o' wine, and fill it in asilver tassie; that I may drink, before I go, a service to my bonnielassie"and very proud she was, I suppose.  Well, now, we will try thatone.'So they went to the other end of the barn, where the piano was; andthere was a good deal of singing there, and laughing and jokingamongthis little party of three. And Meenie sang tooon condition(woman-like) that Ronald would light his pipe.  Little Maggie scarcelyknew which to admire the morethis beautiful and graceful young lady,who was so complaisant and friendly and kind, or her own brother, whowas so handsome and manly and modest, and yet could do everything in theworld.  Nor could there have been any sinister doubt in that wish ofhers that these three should always be together as they were then; howwas she to know that this was the last evening on which Meenie Douglasand Ronald were to meet on these all too friendly terms?*CHAPTER XI.**A REVELATION.*Early the next morning, when as yet the sunrise was still widening upand over the loch, and the faint tinge of red had not quite left thehigher slopes of Clebrig, Ronald had already finished his breakfast, andwas in his own small room, smoking the customary pipe, and idlyand withsome curious kind of whimsical amusement in his brainturning over theloose sheets of scribbled verses.  And that was a very ethereal andimaginary Meenie he found therea Meenie of lonely hillside wanderingsaMeenie of daydreams and visions: not the actual, light-hearted,shrewd-headed Meenie of the evening before, who was so merry after thechildren had gone, and so content with the little supper-party of three,and would have him smoke his pipe without regard to her pretty silkdress.  This Meenie on paper was rather a wistful, visionary, distantcreature; whereas the Meenie of the previous evening was altogethergood-humoured and laughing, with the quaintest mother-ways in themanagement of the children, and always a light of kindness shining inher clear Highland eyes.  He would have to write something to portrayMeenie (to himself) in this more friendly and actual character.  Hecould do it easily enough, he knew.  There never was any lack of rhymeswhen Meenie was the occasion.  At other things he had tolabourfrequently, indeed, until, reflecting that this was not hisbusiness, he would fling the scrawl into the fire, and drive it into thepeats with his heel, and go away with much content.  But when Meenie wasin his head, everything came readily enough; all the world around seemedfull of beautiful things to compare with her; the birds were singing ofher; the mountains were there to guard her; the burn, as it whisperedthrough the rushes, or danced over the open bed of pebbles, had but theone continual murmur of Meenie's name.  Verses? he could have writtenthem by the scoreand laughed at them, and burned them, too.Suddenly the little Maggie appeared.'Ronald,' she said, 'the Doctor's come home.''Whatat this time in the morning?' he said turning to her.'Yes, I am sure; for I can see the dog-cart at the door of the inn.''Well now,' said he, hastily snatching up his cap, 'that is a stroke ofluckif he will come with us.  I will go and meet him.'But he need not have hurried so much; the dog-cart was still at the doorof the inn when he went out; and indeed remained there as he made hisway along the road. The Doctor, who was a most sociable person, hadstopped for a moment to hear the news; but Mr. Murray happened to bethere, and so the chat was a protracted one.  In the meantime Ronald'slong swinging stride soon brought him into their neighbourhood.'Good morning, Doctor!' he cried.'Good morning, Ronald,' said the other, turning round. He was a big man,somewhat corpulent, with an honest, wholesome, ruddy face, soft browneyes, and an expressive mouth, that could temper his very apparentgood-nature with a little mild sarcasm.'You've come back in the nick of time,' the keeper saidfor well he knewthe Doctor's keen love of a gun. 'I'm thinking of driving some of thefar tops the day, to thin down the hares a bit; and I'm sure ye'd beglad to lend us a hand.''Man, I was going home to my bed, to tell ye the truth,' said theDoctor; 'it's very little sleep I've had the last ten days.''What is the use of that?' said Ronald, 'there's aye plenty o' time forsleep in the winter.'And then the heavy-framed occupant of the dog-cart glanced up at thefar-reaching heights of Clebrig, and there was a grim smile on hismouth.'It's all very well,' said he, 'for herring-stomached young fellows likeyou to face a hill like that; but I've got weight to carry, man; and'Come, come, Doctor; it's not the first time you've been on Clebrig,'Ronald saidhe could see that Meenie's father wanted to be persuaded.'Besides, we'll no try the highest tops up therethere's been too muchsnow.  And I'll tell ye how we'll make it easy for ye; we'll row ye downthe loch and begin at the other end and work homethere, it's a fairoffer.'It was an offer, at all events, that the big doctor could not withstand.'Well, well,' said he, 'I'll just drive the dog-cart along and see howthey are at home; and then if the wife lets me out o' her clutches, I'llcome down to the loch side as fast as I can.'Ronald turned to one of the stable-lads (all of whom were transformedinto beaters on this occasion).'Jimmy, just run over to the house and fetch my gun; and bid Maggie puttwenty cartridgesnumber 4, she knows where they areinto the bag; andthen ye can take the gun and the cartridge-bag down to the boatand begiving her a bale-out till I come along.  I'm going to the farm now, toget two more lads if I can; tell the Doctor I'll no be long after him,if he gets down to the loch first.'Some quarter of an hour thereafter they set forth; and a rough pull itwas down the loch, for the wind was blowing hard, and the waves werecoming broadside on.  Those who were at the oars had decidedly the bestof it, for it was bitterly cold; but even the others did not seem tomind muchthey were chiefly occupied in scanning the sky-line of thehills (a habit that one naturally falls into in a deer country), whileRonald and the Doctor, seated in the stern, were mostly concerned aboutkeeping their guns dry.  In due course of time they landed, made theirway through a wood of young birch-trees, followed the channel of a burnfor a space, and by and by began to reach the upper slopes, where theplans for the first drive were carefully drawn out and explained.Now it is unnecessary to enter into details of the day's achievements,for they were neither exciting nor difficult nor daring.  It was clearlya case of shooting for the pot; although Ronald, in his capacity ofkeeper, was anxious to have the hares thinned down, knowing well enoughthat the over-multiplying of them was as certain to bring in disease asthe overstocking of a mountain farm with sheep. But it may be said thatthe sport, such as it was, was done in a workmanlike manner.  InRonald's case, each cartridge meant a hareand no praise to him, for itwas his business. As for the Doctor, he was not only an excellent shot,but he exercised a wise and humane discretion as well.  Nothing wouldinduce him to fire at long range on the off-chance of hitting; and thisis all the more laudable in the shooting of mountain hares, for these,when wounded, will frequently dodge into a hole among the rocks, like arabbit, baffling dogs and men, and dying a miserable death. Moreover,there was no need to take risky shots.  The two guns were posted behinda stone or small hillocklying at full length on the ground, only theirbrown-capped heads and the long barrels being visible.  Then the faintcries in the distance became somewhat louderwith sticks rattled onrocks, and stones flung here and there; presently, on the sky-line ofthe plateau, a small object appeared, sitting upright and dark againstthe sky; then it came shambling leisurely alongbecoming bigger andbigger and whiter and whiter every moment, until at length it showeditself almost like a cat, but not running stealthily like a cat, ratherhopping forward on its ungainly high haunches; and then again it wouldstop and sit up, its ears thrown back, its eyes not looking at anythingin front of it, its snow-white body, with here and there a touch ofbluish-brown, offering a tempting target for a pea-rifle.  But by thistime, of course, numerous others had come hopping over the sky-line; andnow as the loud yells and shouts and striking of stones were close athand, there was more swift running instead of hobbling and pausing amongthe white frightened creatures; and as they cared for nothing in front(in fact a driven hare cannot see anything that is right ahead of it,and will run against your boots if you happen to be standing in theway), but sped noiselessly across the withered grass and hard clumps ofheatherbang! went the first barrel, and then another and another, asquick as fingers could unload and reload, until here, there, andeverywherebut always within a certain radius from the respectivepostsa white object lay on the hard and wintry ground. The beaters cameup to gather them together; the two guns had risen from their coldquarters; there were found to be thirteen hares all tolda quitesufficient number for this partand not one had crawled or hobbled awaywounded.But we will now descend for a time from these bleak altitudes and returnto the little hamletwhich seemed to lie there snugly enough andsheltered in the hollow, though the wind was hard on the dark and drivenloch.  Some hour or so after the shooters and beaters had left, MeenieDouglas came along to Ronald's cottage, and, of course, found Maggie thesole occupant, as she had expected. She was very bright and cheerful andfriendly, and spoke warmly of Ronald's kindness in giving her father aday's shooting.'My mother was a little angry,' she said, laughing, 'that he should goaway just the first thing after coming home; but you know, Maggie, he isso fond of shooting; and it is not always he can get a day, especiallyat this time of the year: and I am very glad he has gone; for you knowthere are very few who have to work so hard.''I wish they may come upon a stag,' said the little Maggiewith recklessand irresponsible generosity.'Do you know, Maggie,' said the elder young lady, with a shrewd smile onher face, 'I am not sure that my mother likes the people about here tobe so kind; she is always expecting my father to get a better postbut Iknow he is not likely to get one that will suit him as well with thefishing and shooting.  There is the Mudalthe gentlemen at the lodge lethim have that all the spring through; and when the loch is not let, hecan always have a day by writing to Mr. Crawford; and here is Ronald,when the hinds have to be shot at Christmas, and so on.  And if theAmerican gentleman takes the shooting as well as the loch, surely hewill ask my father to go with him a day or two on the hill; it is alonely thing shooting by one's self. Well now, Maggie, did you put thecurtains up again in Ronald's room?''Yes, I did,' was the answer, 'and he did not tear them down this time,for I told him you showed me how to hang them; but he has tied them backso that they might just as well not be there at all.  Come and see,Meenie dear.'She led the way into her brother's room; and there, sure enough, thewindow-curtains (which were wholly unnecessary, by the way, except fromthe feminine point of view, for there was certainly not too much lightcoming in by the solitary window) had been tightly looped and tied back,so that the view down the loch should be unimpeded.'No matter,' said Meenie; 'the window is not so bare-looking as it usedto be.  And I suppose he will let them remain up now.''Oh yes, when he was told that you had something to do with them,' wasthe simple answer.Meenie went to the wooden mantelpiece, and put the few things therestraight, just as she would have done in her own room, blowing the lightwhite peat-dust off them, and arranging them in neater order.'I wonder, now,' she said, 'he does not get frames for thesephotographs; they will be spoiled by finger marks and the dust.'Maggie said shyly'That was what he said to me the other daybut not about theseabout theone you gave me of yourself.  He asked to see it, and I showed him howcareful I was in wrapping it up; but he said nothe first packman thatcame through I was to get a frame if he had one, and glass too; or elsethat he would send it in to Inverness to be framed.  But you know,Meenie, it's not near so nice-lookingor anything, anything like sonice-lookingas you are.''Nothing could be that, I am sure,' said Meenie lightly; and she wascasting her eyes about the room, to see what further improvements shecould suggest.But Maggie had grown suddenly silent, and was standing at the littlewriting-table, apparently transfixed with astonishment.  It will beremembered that when Ronald, in the morning, heard that the Doctor wasat the door of the inn, he had hurriedly hastened away to intercept him;and that, subsequently, in order to save time, he had sent back a ladfor his gun and cartridges, while he went on to the farm.  Now it wasthis last arrangement that caused him to overlook the fact that he hadleft his writing materialsthe blotting-pad and everythinglying exposedon the table; a piece of neglect of which he had scarcely ever beforebeen guilty.  And as ill-luck would have it, as Maggie was idlywandering round the room, waiting for Meenie to make any furthersuggestions for the smartening of it, what must she see lying beforeher, among these papers, but a letter, boldly and conspicuouslyaddressed?'Well!' she exclaimed, as she took it up.  'Meenie, here is a letter foryou! why didna he send it along to you?''A letter for me?' Meenie said, with a little surprise. 'No! why shouldRonald write a letter to me?I see him about every day.''But look!'Meenie took the letter in her hand; and regarded the address; andlaughed.'It is very formal,' said she.  'There is no mistake about it.  "MissWilhelmina Stuart Douglas"when was I ever called that before?  And"Inver-Mudal, Sutherlandshire, N.B."  He should have added Europe,as if he was sending it from the moon.  Well, it is clearly meant forme, any wayoh, and open too'The next minute all the careless amusement fled from her face; hercheeks grew very white, and a frightened, startled look sprang to hereyes.  She but caught the first few lines'O wilt thou be my dear love?(Meenie and Meenie)O wilt thou be my ain love?(My sweet Meenie)?and then it was with a kind of shiver that her glance ran over the restof it; and her heart was beating so that she could not speak; and therewas a mist before her eyes.'Maggie,' she managed to say at lengthand she hurriedly folded up thepaper again and placed it on the table with the others'I should nothave read itit was not meant for meit was not meant that I should readitcome away, come away, Maggie.'She took the younger girl out of the room, and herself shut the door,firmly, although her fingers were all trembling.'Maggie,' she said, 'you must promise never to tell any one that yougave me that letterthat I saw it''But what is the matter, Meenie?' the smaller girl said in bewilderment,for she could see by the strange half-frightened look of Miss Douglas'sface that something serious had happened.'Well, it is nothingit is nothing,' she forced herself to say.  'Itwill be all right.  I shouldn't have read the letterit was not meantfor me to seebut if you say nothing about it, no harm will be done.That's all; that's all. And now I am going to see if the children areready that are to go by the mail-car.''But I will go with you, Meenie.'Then the girl seemed to recollect herself; and she glanced round at theinterior of the cottage, and at the little girl, with an unusual kind oflook.'No, no, not this morning, Maggie,' she said.  'You have plenty to do.Good-byegood-bye!' and she stooped and kissed her, and patted her onthe shoulder, and left, seeming anxious to get away and be by herself.Maggie remained there in considerable astonishment. What had happened?Why should she not go to help with the children? and why good-byewhenMeenie would be coming along the road in less than an hour, as soon asthe mail-car had left?  And all about the reading of something containedin that folded sheet of paper.  However, the little girl wisely resolvedthat, whatever was in that letter, she would not seek to know it, norwould she speak of it to any one, since Meenie seemed so anxious on thatpoint; and so she set about her domestic duties againlooking forward tothe end of these and the resumption of her knitting of her brother'sjersey.Well, the winter's day went by, and they had done good work on the hill.As the dusk of the afternoon began to creep over the heavens, they setout for the lower slopes on their way home; and very heavily weightedthe lads were with the white creatures slung over their backs on sticks.But the dusk was not the worst part of this descent; the wind was nowdriving over heavy clouds from the north; and again and again they wouldbe completely enveloped, and unable to see anywhere more than a yardfrom their feet.  In these circumstances Ronald took the lead; theDoctor coming next, and following, indeed, more by sound than by sight;the lads bringing up in the wake in solitary file, with their heavyloads thumping on their backs.  It was a ghostly kind of procession;though now and again the close veil around them would be rent in twain,and they would have a glimpse of something afar offperhaps a spur ofBen Loyal, or the dark waters of Loch Meidie studded with its smallislands.  Long before they had reached Inver-Mudal black night hadfallen; but now they were on easier ground; and at last the firm footingof the road echoed to their measured tramp, as the invisible companymarched on and down to the warmth and welcome lights of the inn.The Doctor, feeling himself something of a truant, went on direct to hiscottage; but the others entered the inn; and as Ronald forthwithpresented Mrs. Murray with half a dozen of the hares, the landlord wasright willing to call for ale for the beaters, who had had a hard day'swork.  Nor was Ronald in a hurry to get home; for he heard that Maggiewas awaiting him in the kitchen; and so he and Mr. Murray had a pipe anda chat together, as was their custom.  Then he sent for his sister.'Well, Maggie, lass,' said he, as they set out through the dark, 'didyou see all the bairns safely off this morning?''No, Ronald,' she said, 'Meenie did not seem to want me; so I stayed athome.''And did you find Harry sufficient company for ye?  But I suppose MissDouglas came and stayed with ye for a while.''No, Ronald,' said the little girl, in a tone of some surprise; 'she hasnot been near the house the whole day, since the few minutes in themorning.''Oh,' said he, lightly, 'she may have been busy, now her father is comehome.  And ye maun try and get on wi' your lessons as well as ye can,lass, without bothering Miss Douglas too much; she canna always spend somuch time with ye.'The little girl was silent.  She was thinking of that strange occurrencein the morning of which she was not to speak; and in a vague kind of wayshe could not but associate that with Meenie's absence all that day, andalso with the unusual tone of her 'good-bye.'  But yet, if there wereany trouble, it would speedily pass away.  Ronald would put everythingright.  Nobody could withstand himthat was the first and last articleof her creed.  And so, when they got home, she proceeded cheerfullyenough to stir up the peats, and to cook their joint supper in a mannerreally skilful for one of her years; and she laid the cloth; and put thecandles on the table; and had the tea and everything ready.  Then theysate down; and Ronald was in very good spirits, and talked to her, andtried to amuse her. But the little Maggie rather wistfully looked backto the brilliant evening before, when Meenie was with them; and perhapswondered whether there would ever again be a supper-party as joyful andfriendly and happy as they three had been when they were all bythemselves in the big gaily-lit barn.*CHAPTER XII.**'WHEN SHADOWS FALL.'*The deershed adjoining the kennels was a gloomy place, with its barewalls, its lack of light, and its ominous-looking crossbeams, ropes, andpulley for hanging up the slain deer; and the morning was dark andlowering, with a bitter wind howling along the glen, and sometimesbringing with it a sharp smurr of sleet from the northern hills.  Butthese things did not seem to affect Ronald's spirits much as he stoodthere, in his shirt-sleeves, and bare-headed, sorting out the hares thatwere lying on the floor, and determining to whom and to whom such andsuch a brace or couple of brace should be sent.  Four of the plumpest hehad already selected for Mrs. Douglas (in the vague hope that the usefulpresent might make her a little more placable), and he was going on withhis choosing and setting asidesometimes lighting a pipesometimessinging carelessly'O we aft hae met at e'en, bonnie Peggie, O,On the banks o' Cart sae green, bonnie Peggie, O,Where the waters smoothly rin,Far aneath the roarin' linn,Far frae busy strife and din, bonnie Peggie, O'when the little Maggie came stealing in.'Ronald,' she said, with an air of reproach, 'why are ye going about onsuch a morning without your jacket, and bare-headed, too?''Toots, toots, lassie, it's a fine morning,' said he indifferently.'It was Meenie said I was not to let you do such foolish things,' thelittle lass ventured to say diffidently.Of course this put a new aspect on the case, but he would not admit asmuch directly.'Oh, well,' said he, 'if you bring me out my coat and bonnet I will putthem on, for I'm going down to the Doctor's with two or three of thehares.'And then she hesitated.'Ronald,' said she, 'I will take them to Mrs. Douglas, if you like.''You?' said he.'For I would give them to her with a nice message from you; andandifyou take them, you will say nothing at all; and where is thecompliment?'He laughed.'Ye're a wise little lass; but four big hares are heavy to carrywiththe wind against ye; so run away and get me my coat and my Glengarry;and I will take them along myself, compliment or no compliment.'However, as it turned out, Mrs. Douglas was not the first of the familyhe was fated to meet that morning.  He had scarcely left the deershedwhen he perceived Meenie coming along the road; and this was anauspicious and kindly event; for somehow the day seemed to go by moresmoothly and evenly and contentedly when he had chanced to meet Meeniein the morning, and have a few minutes' chat with her about affairs ingeneral, and an assurance that all was going well with her.  So he wentforward to meet her with a light heart; and he thought she would bepleased that he was taking the hares to her mother; and perhaps, too, heconsidered that they might be a little more frank in their friendshipafter the exceeding good fellowship of the night of the children'sparty.He went forward unsuspectingly.'Good morning, Miss Douglas!' said he, slackening in his pace, fornaturally they always stopped for a few seconds or minutes when they metthus.But to his astonishment Miss Douglas did not seem inclined to stay.  Hereyes were bent on the ground as she came along; she but timidly halflifted them as she reached him; and 'Good morning, Ronald!' she said,and would have passed on.  And then it seemed as if, in her greatembarrassment, she did not know what to do. She stopped; her face wassuffused with red; and she said hurriedlyand yet with an effort toappear unconcerned'I suppose Maggie is at home?''Oh yes,' said he, and her manner was so changed that he also scarceknew what to say or to think.And again she was going on, and again she lingeredwith a sudden fearthat she might be thought ungracious or unkind.'The children all got away safely yesterday morning,' said shebut hereyes never met his; and there was still tell-tale colour in her cheeks.'So I heard,' he answered.'I am sure they must have enjoyed the evening,' she said, as if forcingherself to speak.And then it suddenly occurred to himfor this encounter had been all toobrief and bewildering for any proper understanding of itthat perhapsher mother had been reproving her for being too friendly with the peopleabout the inn and with himself, and that he was only causing herembarrassment by detaining her, and so he said'Oh yes, I'm sure o' that.  Well, good morning, Miss Douglas; I'm goingalong to give your mother these two or three hares.''Good morning,' said shestill without looking at himand then she went.And he, too, went on his way; but only for a brief space; presently hesate down on the low stone dyke by the roadside, and dropped the hareson the ground at his feet.  What could it all mean?  She seemed anxiousto limit their acquaintanceship to the merest formalities; and yet to bein a manner sorry for having to do so.  Had he unwittingly given hersome cause of offence?  He began to recall the minutest occurrences ofthe night of the children's partywondering if something had thenhappened to account for so marked a change?  But he could think ofnothing.  The supper-party of three was of her own suggestion; she couldnot be angry on that account. Perhaps he ought to have asked this personor that person over from the inn to join them, for the sake ofpropriety? Well, he did not know much about such matters; it seemed tohim that they were very happy as they were; and that it was nobodyelse's business.  But would she quarrel with him on that account?  Or onaccount of his smoking in her presence?  Again and again he wished thathis pipe had been buried at the bottom of the loch; and indeed hissmoking of it that evening had given him no enjoyment whatever, exceptin so far as it seemed to please her; but surely, in any case, that wasa trifle?  Meenie would not suddenly become cold and distant (in howeverreluctant a way) for a small matter like that?  Nor could she be angrywith him for taking her father away for a day on the hill; she wasalways glad when the Doctor got a day's shooting from anybody.  No; theonly possible conclusion he could come to was that Mrs. Douglas had morestrongly than ever disapproved of Meenie's forming friendships amongpeople not of her own station in life; and that some definiteinstructions had been given, which the girl was anxious to obey.  And ifthat were so, ought he to make it any the more difficult for her?  Hewould be as reserved and distant as she pleased.  He knew that she was avery kindly and sensitive creature; and might dread giving pain; andherself suffer a good deal more than those from whom she was in ameasure called upon to separate herself.  That was a reason why itshould be made easy for her; and he would ask Maggie to get on with herlessons by herself, as much as she could; and when he met Miss Douglason the road, his greeting of her would be of the briefestand yet withas much kindness as she chose to accept in a word or a look.  And if hemight not present her with the polecat's skin that was now just aboutdressed?well, perhaps the American gentleman's daughter would take it,and have it made into something, when she came up in March.The pretty, little, doll-like woman, with the cold eyes and the haughtystare, was at the front-door of the cottage, scattering food to thefowls.'I have brought ye two or three hares, Mrs. Douglas, if they're of anyuse to ye,' Ronald said modestly.'Thank you,' said she, with lofty courtesy, 'thank you; I am muchobliged.  Will you step in and sit down for a few minutes?I am sure alittle spirits will do you no harm on such a cold morning.'In ordinary circumstances he would have declined that invitation; for hehad no great love of this domineering little woman, and much preferredthe society of her big, good-natured husband; but he was curious aboutMeenie, and even inclined to be resentful, if it appeared that she hadbeen dealt with too harshly.  So he followed Mrs. Douglas into thedignified little parlourwhich was more like a museum of cheapcuriosities than a room meant for actual human use; and forthwith sheset on the crimson-dyed table-cover a glass, a tumbler, a jug of water,and a violet-coloured bulbous glass bottle with an electro-platedstopper.  Ronald was bidden to help himself; and also, out of hermunificence, she put before him a little basket of sweet biscuits.'I hear the Doctor is away again,' Ronald saidand a hundred times wouldhe rather not have touched the violet bottle at all, knowing that herclear, cold, blue eyes were calmly regarding his every movement.'Yes,' she said, 'to Tongue.  There is a consultation there.  I am surehe has had very little peace and quiet lately.''I am glad he had a holiday yesterday,' Ronald said, with an endeavourto be agreeable.But she answered severely'It might have been better if he had spent the first day of his gettingback with his own family.  But that has always been his way; everythingsacrificed to the whim of the momentto his own likings and dislikings.''He enjoys a day's sport as much as any man I ever saw,' said henotknowing very well what to talk about.'Yes, I daresay,' she answered shortly.Then she pushed the biscuits nearer him; and returned to her attitude ofobservation, with her small, neat, white hands crossed on her lap, therings on the fingers being perhaps just a little displayed.'Miss Douglas is looking very well at present.' he said, at a venture.'Williamina is well enoughshe generally is,' she said coldly.  'Thereis never much the matter with her health. She might attend to herstudies a little more and do herself no harm.  But she takes after herfather.'There was a little sigh of resignation.'Some of us,' said he good-naturedly, 'were expecting her to come overon Monday night to see the dancing.'But here he had struck solid rock.  In a secondfrom her attitude anddemeanourhe had guessed why it was that Meenie had not come over to thelandlord's party: a matter about which he had not found courage toquestion Meenie herself.'Williamina,' observed the little dame, with a magnificent dignity, 'hasother things to think ofor ought to have, at her time of life, and inher position.  I have had occasion frequently of late to remind her ofwhat is demanded of her; she must conduct herself not as if she were forever to be hidden away in a Highland village.  It will be necessary forher to take her proper place in society, that she is entitled to fromher birth and her relatives; and of course she must be preparedofcourse she must be prepared. There are plenty who will be willing toreceive her; it will be her own fault if she disappoints themand us,too, her own parents.  Williamina will never have to lead the life thatI have had to lead, I hope; she belongs by birth to another sphere; andI hope she will make the most of her chances.''Miss Douglas would be made welcome anywhere, I am sure,' he ventured tosay; but she regarded him with a superior lookas if it were not for himto pronounce an opinion on such a point.'Soon,' she continuedand she was evidently bent on impressing him, 'shewill be going to Glasgow to finish in music and German, and to get onwith her Italian: you will see she has no time to lose in idleamusement.  We would send her to Edinburgh or to London, but her sisterbeing in Glasgow is a great inducement; and she will be well lookedafter.  But, indeed, Williamina is not the kind of girl to go and marrya penniless student; she has too much common sense; and, besides, shehas seen how it turns out.  Once in a family is enough.  No; we count onher making a good marriage, as the first step towards her taking theposition to which she is entitled; and I am sure that Lady Stuart willtake her in hand, and give her every chance.  As for their taking herabroad with themand Sir Alexander almost promised as muchwhat bettercould there be than that?she would be able to show off her acquirementsand accomplishments; she would be introduced to the distinguished peopleat the ministerial receptions and balls; she would have her chance, as Isay.  And with such a chance before her, surely it would be nothing lessthan wicked of her to fling away her time in idle follies. I want her toremember what lies before her; a cottage like this is all very wellfor-meI have made my bed and must lie on it; but for herwho may evenbe adopted by Lady Stuartwho knows? for stranger things havehappenedit would be downright madness to sink into content with herpresent way of life.''And when do you think that M that Miss Douglas will be going away toGlasgow?' he askedbut absently, as it were, for he was thinking ofInver-Mudal, and Clebrig, and Loch Loyal, and Strath-Terry, and ofMeenie being away from them all.'That depends entirely on herself,' was the reply.  'As soon as she issufficiently forward all round for the finishing lessons, her sister isready to receive her.''It will be lonely for you with your daughter away,' said he.'Parents have to make sacrifices,' she said.  'Yes, and children too.And better they should make them while they are young than all throughthe years after.  I hope Williamina's will be no wasted life.'He did not know what further to say; he was dismayed, perplexed,downhearted, or something: if this was a lesson she had meant to readhim, it had struck home.  So he rose and took his leave; and she thankedhim again for the hares; and he went out, and found Harry awaiting himon the doorstep.  Moreover, as he went down to the little gate, heperceived that Meenie was coming backshe had been but to the inn with amessage; and, obeying some curious kind of instinct, he turned to theleftpretending not to have seen her coming; and soon he was over thebridge, and wandering away up the lonely glen whose silence is brokenonly by the whispering rush of Mudal Water.He wandered on and on through the desolate moorland, on this wild andblustering day, paying but little heed to the piercing wind or thedriven sleet that smote his eyelids. And he was not so very sorrowful;his common sense had told him all this before; Rose Meenie, Love Meenie,was very well in secret fancies and rhymes and verses; but beyond thatshe was nothing to him.  And what would Clebrig do, and Mudal Water, andall the wide, bleak country that had been brought up in the love of her,and was saturated with the charm of her presence, and seemed for everlistening in deathlike silence for the light music of her voice?  Therewere plenty of verses running through his head on this wild day too; thehills and the clouds and the January sky were full of speech; and theywere all of them to be bereft of her as well as he:Mudal, that comes from the lonely loch,Down through the moorland russet and brown,Know you the news that we have for you?Meenie's away to Glasgow town.See Ben Clebrig, his giant frontHidden and dark with a sudden frown;What is the light of the valley to him,Since Meenie's away to Glasgow town?Empty the valley, empty the world,The sun may arise and the sun go down;But what to do with the lonely hours,Since Meenie's away to Glasgow town?Call her back, Clebrig!  Mudal, call.Ere all of the young spring time be flown;Birds, trees, and blossomsyou that she lovedO summon her back from Glasgow town!'Call her back, Clebrig!  Mudal, call!' he repeated to himself as hemarched along the moorland road; for what would they do without some oneto guard, and some one to watch for, and some one to listen for, in thefirst awakening of the dawn?  Glasgowthe great and grimy citythatwould be a strange sort of guardian, in the young Spring days that werecoming, for this fair Sutherland flower.  And yet might not some appealbe made even theresome summons of attention, as it were?O Glasgow town, how little you knowThat Meenie has wandered inTo the very heart of your darkened streets,Through all the bustle and din.A Sutherland blossom shining fairAmid all your dismal haze,Forfeiting the breath of the summer hills,And the blue of the northern days.From Dixon's fire-wreaths to Rollox stalk,Blow, south wind, and clear the sky,Till she think of Ben Clebrig's sunny slopes,Where the basking red-deer lie.Blow, south wind, and show her a glimpse of blueThrough the pall of dusky brown;And see that you guard her and tend her well,You, fortunate Glasgow town!But thenbut thenthat strange, impossible timeduring which there wouldbe no Meenie visible anywhere along the mountain roads; and Mudal Waterwould go by unheeded; and there would be no careless, clear-singinggirl's voice along Loch Naver's shoresthat strange time would surelycome to an end, and he could look forward and see how the ending of itwould be:The clouds lay heavy on Clebrig's crest,For days and weeks together;The shepherds along Strath-Terry's sideCursed at the rainy weather;They scarce could get a favouring dayFor the burning of the heather.When sudden the clouds were rent in twainAnd the hill laughed out to the sun;And the hinds stole up, with wondering eyes,To the far slopes yellow and dun;And the birds were singing in every bushAs at spring anew begun,O Clebrig, what is it that makes you glad,And whither is gone your frown?Are you looking afar into the south,The long, wide strath adown?And see you that Meenie is coming backLove Meenie, from Glasgow town!He laughed.  Not yet was Love Meenie taken away from them all.  And ifin the unknown future the Stuarts of Glengask and Orosay were to carryher off and make a great lady of her, and take her to see strangeplaces, and perhaps marry her to some noble person, at least in themeantime Ben Clebrig and Ben Loyal and the wide straths between knewthat they still held in the mighty hollow of their hand this sweetflower of Sutherlandshire, and that the world and the skies and thewoods and lakes seemed fairer because of her presence.  And as regardedhimself, and his relations with her?  Well, what must be must. Only hehopedand there was surely no great vanity nor self-love nor jealousy inso modest a hopethat the change of her manner towards him was due tothe counsels of her mother rather than to anything he had unwittinglysaid or done.  Rose MeenieLove Meeniehe had called her in verses; butalways he had been most respectful to herself; and he could not believethat she thought him capable of doing anything to offend her.*CHAPTER XIII.**A NEW ARRIVAL.*Very early one Sunday morning, while as yet all the world seemed asleep,a young lady stole out from the little hotel at Lairg, and wandered downby herself to the silent and beautiful shores of Loch Shin.  The middleof March it was now, and yet the scene around her was quite summer-like;and she was a stranger from very far climes indeed, who had venturedinto the Highlands at this ordinarily untoward time of the year; so thatthere was wonder as well as joy in her heart as she regarded thefairyland before her, for it was certainly not what she had been taughtto expect.  There was not a ripple on the glassy surface of the lake;every feature of the sleeping and faintly sunlit world was reflectedaccurately on the perfect mirror: the browns and yellows of the lowermoorland; the faint purple of the birch-woods; the aerial blues of thedistant hills, with here and there a patch of snow; and the fleecy whitemasses of the motionless clouds.  It was a kind ofdream-worldsoft-toned and placid and still, the only sharp bit ofcolour being the scarlet-painted lines of a boat that floated double onthat sea of glass.  There was not a sound anywhere but the twittering ofsmall birds; nor any movement but the slow rising into the air of a tinycolumn of blue smoke from a distant cottage; summer seemed to be herealready, as the first light airs of the morningfresh and clear andsweetcame stealing along the silver surface of the water, and onlytroubling the magic picture here and there in long trembling swathes.The young lady was of middle height, but looked taller than that byreason of her slight and graceful form; she was pale, almost sallow, offace, with fine features and a pretty smile; her hair was of a lustrousblack; and so, too, were her eyeswhich were large and soft andattractive.  Very foreign she looked as she stood by the shores of thisHighland loch; her figure and complexion and beautiful opaque soft darkeyes perhaps suggesting more than anything else the Spanish type of theSouthern American woman; but there was nothing foreign about her attire;she had taken care about that; and if her jet-black hair and pale cheekhad prompted her to choose unusual tones of colour, at all events thearticles of her costume were all correctthe warm and serviceable ulsterof some roughish yellow and gray material, the buff-coloured, gauntletedgloves, and the orange-hued Tam o' Shanter which she wore quite as oneto the manner born.  For the rest, one could easily see that she was ofa cheerful temperament; pleased with herself; not over shy, perhaps; andvery straightforward in her look.However, the best description of this young lady was the invention of aningenious youth dwelling on the southern shores of Lake Michigan.'CarryHodson,' he observed on one occasion, 'is just a real good fellow,that's what she is.'  It was a happy phrase, and it soon became popularamong the young gentlemen who wore English hats and vied with each otherin driving phantom vehicles behind long-stepping horses.  'CarryHodson?she's just the best fellow going,' they would assure you.  Andhow better can one describe her?  There was a kind of frankcamaraderie about her; and she liked amusement, and was easily amused;and she laboured under no desire at all of showing herself'bright'which chiefly reveals itself in impertinence; but, above all,there was in her composition not a trace of alarm over her relations,however frank and friendly, with the other sex; she could talk to anymanold or young, married or singlepositively without wondering when hewas about to begin to make love to her.  For one thing, she was quitecapable of looking after herself; for another, the very charm of hermannerthe delightful openness and straightforwardness of itseemed todrive flirtation and sham sentiment forthwith out of court.  And if,when those young gentlemen in Chicago called Miss Carry Hodson 'a realgood fellow,' they could not help remembering at the same time that shewas an exceedingly pretty girl, perhaps they appreciated so highly theprivilege of being on good-comrade terms with her that they were contentto remain there rather than risk everything by seeking for more.However, that need not be discussed further here.  People did say,indeed, that Mr. John C. Huysen, the editor of the Chicago Citizen,was more than likely to carry off the pretty heiress; if there was anytruth in the rumour, at all events Miss Carry Hodson remained just asfrank and free and agreeable with everybodyespecially with young menwho could propose expeditions and amusements.Now there was only one subject capable of entirely upsetting this younglady's equanimity; and it is almost a pity to have to introduce it here;for the confession must be made that, on this one subject, she was inthe habit of using very reprehensible language.  Where, indeed, she hadpicked up so much steamboat and backwoods slangunless through thereading of Texas Siftingsit is impossible to say; but her father, whowas about the sole recipient of these outbursts, could object with butlittle show of authority, for he was himself exceedingly fond, notexactly of slang, but of those odd phrases, sometimes half-humorous,that the Americans invent from day to day to vary the monotony ofordinary speech.  These phrases are like getting off the car and runningalongside a little bit; you reach your journey's endthe meaning of thesentenceall the same.  However, the chief bugbear and grievance of MissCarry Hodson's life was the Boston girl as displayed to us in fiction;and so violent became her detestation of that remarkable young personthat it was very nearly interfering with her coming to Europe.'But, pappa, dear,' she would say, regarding the book before her withsome amazement, 'will the people in Europe think I am like that?''They won't think anything about you,' he would say roughly.'What a shamewhat a shameto say American girls are like that!' shewould continue vehemently.  'The self-conscious little beastswith theirchatter about tone, and touch, and culture!  And the menmy gracious,pappa, do the people in England think that our young fellows talk likethat?  "Analyse me; formulate me!" he cries to the girl; "can't youimagine my environment by the aid of your own intuitions?"I'd analysehim if he came to me; I'd analyse him fast enough: Nine different sortsof a born fool; and the rest imitation English prig.  I'd formulate himif he came to me with his pretentious idiotcy; I'd show him the kind ofchipmunk I am.''You are improving, Miss Carry,' her father would say resignedly.  'Youare certainly acquiring force in your language; and sooner or later youwill be coming out with some of it when you least expect it; and thenwhether it's you or the other people that will get fits I don't know.You'll make them jump.''No, no, pappa, dear,' she would answer good-naturedly; for hervehemence was never of long duration.  'I have my company manners whenit is necessary.  Don't I know what I am?  Oh yes, I do.  I'm a realhigh-toned North Side society lady; and can behave as sichwhen there'sanybody present.  But when it's only you and me, pappa, I like to wavethe banner a littlethat's all.'This phrase of hers, about waving the banner, had come to mean so manydifferent things that her father could not follow half of them, and soit was handy in winding up a discussion; and he could only remark, withregard to her going to Europe, and her dread lest she should besuspected of resembling one of the imaginary beings for whom she hadconceived so strong a detestation, that really people in Europe were asbusy as people elsewhere, and might not show too absorbing an interestin declaring what she was like; that perhaps their knowledge of theBoston young lady of fiction was limited, and the matter not one of deepconcern; and that the best thing she could do was to remember that shewas an American girl, and that she had as good a right to dress in herown way and speak in her own way and conduct herself in her own way asany French, or German, or English, or Italian person she might meet.All of which Miss Carry received with much submissionexcept aboutdress: she hoped to be able to study that subject, with a littleattention, in Paris.Well, she was standing there looking abroad on the fairy-like picture oflake and wood and mountainand rather annoyed, too, that, now she wasactually in the midst of scenes that she had prepared herself for byreading, she could recollect none of the reading at all, but was whollyand simply interested in the obvious beauty of the place itselfwhen shebecame conscious of a slow and stealthy footstep behind her, and,instantly turning, she discovered that a great dun-coloured dog, nodoubt belonging to the hotel, had come down to make her acquaintance.He said as much by a brief and heavy gambol, a slow wagging of hismighty tail, and the upturned glance of his small, flat, leonine eyes.'Well,' she said, 'who are you?  Would you like to go for a walk?'Whether he understood her or no he distinctly led the waytaking thepath leading along the shores of the loch towards Inver-shin; and asthere did not seem to be any sign yet of anybody moving about the hotel,she thought she might just as well take advantage of this volunteeredescort.  Not that the mastiff was over communicative in hisfriendliness; he would occasionally turn round to see if she wasfollowing; and if she called to him and spoke to him, he would merelymake another heavy effort at a gambol and go on again with hisslow-moving pace.  Now and again a shepherd's collie would come chargingdown on him from the hillside, or two or three small terriers, keepingsentry at the door of a cottage, would suddenly break the stillness ofthe Sunday morning by the most ferocious barking at his approach; but hetook no heed of one or the other.'Do you know that you are an amiable dogbut not amusing?' she said tohim, when he had to wait for her to let him get through a swingingstile.  'I've got a dog at home not a quarter as big as you, and he cantalk twice as much.  I suppose your thoughts are important, though. Whatdo they call you?  Dr. Johnson?'He looked at her with the clear, lionlike eyes, but only for a second;seemed to think it futile trying to understand her; and then went onagain with his heavy, shambling waddle. And she liked the freshness ofthe morning, and the novelty of being all alone by herself in theScottish Highlands, and of going forward as a kind of pioneer anddiscoverer; and so she walked on in much delight, listening to thebirds, looking at the sheep, and thinking nothing at all of breakfast,and the long day's drive before her father and herself.And then a sudden conviction was flashed on her mind that something waswrong.  There was a man coming rushing along the road after herwithneither coat nor cap onand as he drew near she could hear him say'Ah, you rascal! you rascal!  Bolted again?'He seemed to pay no attention to her; he ran past her and made straightfor the mastiff; and in a couple of minutes had a muzzle securelyfastened on the beast, and was leading him back with an iron chain.'Surely that is not a ferocious dog?' said she, as they came upandperhaps she was curious to know whether she had run any chance of beingeaten.'The master had to pay five pounds last year for his worrying sheeptherascal,' said the man; and the great dog wagged his tail as if inapproval.'Why, he seems a most gentle creature,' she said, walking on with theman.'Ay, and so he is, missmost times.  But he's barely three years old,and already he's killed two collies and a terrier, and worried threesheep.''Killed other dogs?  Oh, Dr. Johnson!' she exclaimed.'He's sweirt[#] to begin, miss; but when he does begin he maunkillthere's no stopping him.  The rascal! he likes fine to get slippin'away wi' one of the gentlefolks, if he's let off the chain for a fewminutesit's a God's mercy he has done no harm this morningit was theostler let him off the chainand he'd have lost his place if there hadbeen ony mair worrying.'[#] Sweirt, reluctant.'No, no, no, he would not,' she said confidently.  'I took the dog away.If any mischief had been done, I would have paidwhy, of course.''Why, of cois' was what she really said; but all the man knew was thatthis American young lady spoke with a very pleasant voice; and seemedgood-natured; and was well-meaning, too, for she would not have had theostler suffer.  Anyway, the mastiff, with as much dignity as wascompatible with a muzzle and an iron chain, was conducted back to hiskennel; and Miss Hodson went into the hotel, and expressed her profoundsorrow that she had kept breakfast waiting; but explained to her fatherthat it was not every morning she had the chance of exploring theHighlands all by herselfor rather accompanied by a huge creatureapparently of amiable nature, but with really dark possibilitiesattached.In due course of time the waggonette and horses were brought round tothe door of the little hotel; their baggage was put in; and presentlythey had set forth on their drive through the still, sunlit, solitarycountry.  But this was a far more pleasant journey than his firstventuring into these wilds.  He had been warning his daughter of thebleak and savage solitude she would have to encounter; but now itappeared quite cheerfulin a subdued kind of way, as if a sort of Sundaysilence hung over the landscape.  The pale blue waters of Loch Shin, thebeech-woods, the russet slopes of heather, the snow-touched azure hillsalong the horizonall these looked pretty and were peacefully shining onthis fair morning; and even after they had got away from the last traceof human habitation, and were monotonously driving through mile aftermile of the wide, boggy, hopeless peatland, the winter colours werereally brighter than those of summer, and the desolation far fromoverpowering.  If they met with no human beings, there were other livingobjects to attract the eye.  A golden ploverstanding on a hillock nothalf a dozen yards off, would be calling to his mate; a wild duck wouldgo whirring by; a red-plumed grouse-cock would cease dusting himself inthe road, and would be off into the heather as they came along, standingand looking at them as they passed.  And so on and on they went, mileafter mile, along the fair shining Strath-Terry; the morning air blowingfreshly about them; the sunlight lying placidly on those wide stretchesof russet and golden bogland; and now and again a flash of dark blueshowing where some mountain-tarn lay silent amid the moors.'And you thought I should be disappointed, pappa dear?' said Miss Carry,'or frightened by the loneliness? Why, it's just too beautiful foranything!  And so this is where the Clan Mackay lived in former days?''Is it?' said her father.  'I wonder what they lived on. I don't thinkwe'd give much for that land in Illinois. Give for it?  You couldn't geta white man to trade for that sort of land; we'd have to ask Wisconsinto take it and hide it away somewhere.''What are those things for?' she asked, indicating certain tall polesthat stood at intervals along the roadside.'Why, don't you know?  These are poles to tell them where the road is insnow time.''Then it is not always May in these happy latitudes?' she observedshrewdly.He laughed.'I heard some dreadful stories when I was here in Januarybut I don'tbelieve much in weather stories. Anyhow, we've got to take what comesnow; and so far there is not much to howl about.'And at last they came in sight of the ruffled blue waters of Loch Naver;and the long yellow promontories running out into the lake; and thescant birch-woods fringing here and there the rocky shore; with thelittle hamlet of Inver-Mudal nestling down there in the hollow; and faraway in the north the mountain-masses of Ben Hope and Ben Loyal struckwhite with snow.  And she was very curious to see the kind of people wholived in these remote solitudes; and the pretty sloe-black eyes were allalert as the waggonette rattled along towards the two or three scatteredhouses; and perhaps, as they drove up to the inn, she was wonderingwhether Ronald the gamekeeper, of whom she had heard so much, would beanywhere visible.  But there was scarcely any one there.  The Sabbathquiet lay over the little hamlet.  Mr. Murray appeared, however,in hisSunday costume, of course,and an ostler; and presently Miss Carry andher father were in the sitting-room that had been prepared for themagreat mass of peats cheerfully blazing in the capacious fireplace, andthe white-covered table furnished with a substantial luncheon.'And what do you think of your future maid?' her father asked, when thepretty Nelly had left the room.'Well, I think she has the softest voice I ever heard a woman speakwith,' was the immediate answer.  'And such a pretty way of talkingandlooking at youvery gentle and friendly.  But she won't do for my maid,pappa; she's too tall; I should want to put a string round her neck andlead her about like a giraffe.'However, she was pleased with the appearance and manner of the girl, andthat was something; for, oddly enough, Mr. Hodson seemed to imagine thathe had discovered this remote hamlet, and was responsible for it, andanxious that his daughter should think well of it, and of the people shemight meet in it.  He called her attention to the scent of the peat; tothe neatness with which the joints on the table had been decorated withlittle paper frills; to the snugness and quiet of the sitting-room; tothe spacious character of the views from the windowsone taking inClebrig and the loch, the other reaching away up to Ben Loyal.  Allthese things he had provided for her, as it were; and it must be saidthat she was a most excellent travelling-companion, always content,easily interested, never out of humour.  So, when he proposed, afterluncheon, that they should go along and call on Ronald Strang, shereadily consented; no doubt a keeper's dwelling in these wilds would besomething curiousperhaps of a wigwam character, and of course filledwith all kinds of trophies of his hunting.Well, they went along to the cottage, and Mr. Hodson knocked lightly onthe door.  There was no answer.  He rapped a little more loudly; thenthey heard some one within; and presently the door was thrown open, andRonald stood before thema book in one hand, a pipe in the other, nojacket covering his shirt-sleeves, and the absence of any necktieshowing a little more than was necessary of the firm set of hissun-tanned throat.  He had been caught unawaresas his startled eyesproclaimed; in fact, he had been reading Paradise Regained, andmanfully resisting the temptation to slip on to the gracious melody ofL'Allegro, and Il Penseroso, and Lycidas; and when he heard thetapping he fancied it was merely one of the lads come for a chat or thelast newspaper, and had made no preparations for the reception ofvisitors.'How are you, Ronald?' said Mr. Hodson.  'I have brought my daughter tosee you.''Will ye step in, sir?' said Ronald hastily, and with a terribleconsciousness of his untidy appearance.  'Ay, in therewill ye sit downfor a few minutesand will ye excuse meI thought you werena coming tillto-morrow''Well, I thought they might object to driving me on a Sunday.  I can'tmake it out.  Perhaps what I have read about Scotland is not true.  Orperhaps they have altered of late years.  Anyhow they made no objection,and here I am.'In the midst of these brief sentenceseach pronounced with a littlerising inflexion at the endRonald managed to slip away and get himselfmade a little more presentable. When he returned the apparent excuse forhis absence was that he brought in some glasses and water and a bottleof whisky; and then he went to a little mahogany sideboard and broughtout a tin case of biscuits.'You need not trouble about these things for us; we have just hadlunch,' Mr. Hodson said.'Perhaps the young lady?' said Ronald timidly, and even nervously, forthere was no plate handy, and he did not know how to offer her thebiscuits.'Oh no, I thank you,' she said, with a pretty and gracious smile; and hehappened to meet her eyes just at that time; and instantly became awarethat they were curiously scrutinising and observant, despite theirapparent softness and lustrous blackness.Now Miss Carry Hodson had an abundance of shrewd feminine perception,and it was easy for her to see that this handsome and stalwart youngfellow had been grievously disturbed, and was even now unnerved, throughhis having been caught in disarray on the occasion of a young ladyvisiting him; and accordingly, to allow him to recover, she deliberatelyeffaced herself; saying not a word, nor even listening, while her fatherand he proceeded to talk about the salmon-fishing, and about thedistressingly fine weather that threatened to interfere with thatpursuit.  She sate silent, allowing those observant eyes of hers to roamfreely round the room, and indeed wondering how a man of his occupationscould so have contrived to rob his home of all distinctive character andto render it so clearly common-place.  There was nothing wild or savageabout it; not the skin of any beast, nor the plumage of any bird;everything was of a bourgeois neatness and respectabilitythe ornamentson the mantel-shelf conspicuously so; and what was strangest ofallthough this will scarcely be believedthe two roebucks' heads thatadorned the wall, in a country where roe abound, were earthenware casts,and very bad casts too, obviously hailing from Germany.  She observed,however, that there were a good many books aboutsome of them even piledin obscure corners; and to judge by the sober character of their clothbinding she guessed them to be of a rather superior class.  The pictureson the walls were some cheap reprints of Landseer; a portrait of theDuke of Sutherland, in Highland garb; a view of Dunrobin Castle; and aphotograph of Mr. Millais' 'Order of Release.'After a while she began to know (without looking) that the young man hadassumed sufficient courage to glance at her from time to time; and sheallowed him to do that; for she considered that the people in RegentStreet had fitted her out in Highland fashion in a sufficiently accurateway.  But it soon appeared that he was talking about her; and what wasthis wild proposal?'It seems a pity,' he was saying, 'if the fish are taking, not to havetwo boats at the work.  And there's that big rod o' yours, siryou coulduse that for the trolling; and let the young lady have one o' yourgrilse rods.  Then there's mineshe can have that and welcome''Yes, but the gillies''Oh, I'll take a turn myself; I'm no so busy the now. And I can get oneo' the lads to lend a hand.''Do you hear this, Carry?' her father said.'What, pappa?''Ronald wants you to start off salmon-fishing to-morrow, in a boat allto yourself'Alone?''Why, no!  He says he will go with you, and one of the lads; and youwill have all the best advice and experienceI don't think it's fair,myselfbut it's very good-natured anyhow''And do you think there's a chance of my catching a salmon?' she saideagerly, and she turned her eloquent black eyes, all lit up withpleasure, full upon him.'Oh yes, indeed,' said he, looking down, 'and many and many a one, I amsure, if we could only get a little wet weather.''My!' she exclaimed.  'If I caught a salmon, I'd have it stuffed rightaway''With sage and onions, I suppose,' her father said severely.'And we begin to-morrow?  Why, it's just too delightfulI was lookingforward to days and days indoors, with nothing but books.  And I shallreally have a chance?''I think you might as well thank Ronald for his offer,' her father said.'I should never have thought of it.'Well, she hesitated; for it is a difficult thing to make a formal littlespeech when it is asked for by a third person; but the young keeperquickly laughed away her embarrassment.'No, no, sir; we'll wait for that till we see how our luck turns out.And we'll have the Duke's boat, mind, that Duncan says is the lucky one;you'll have to look sharp, sir, or we'll have the biggest show on thegrass at the end of the day.'Mr. Hodson now rose to take his leave, for he wanted his daughter towalk down to the shores of the loch where they were next day to begintheir labours.  And thus it was that Miss Carrywho had looked forwardat the most to sitting in the boat with her father and looking onfoundherself pledged to a course of salmon-fishing, under the immediateguidance and instruction of the young keeper; and she had noticed thathe had already talked of the occupants of the Duke's boat as'we'assuming that he and she were in a sort of partnership, and pittedagainst the others.  Well, it would be amusing, she thought.  She alsoconsidered that he was very good-looking; and that it would bepleasanter to have a companion of that kind than a surly old boatman.She imagined they might easily become excellent friendsat least, shewas willing enough; and he seemed civil and good-humoured and modest;and altogether the arrangement promised to work very well.*CHAPTER XIV.**'ABOUT ILLINOIS.'*There was a good deal of bustle in the inn next morning; Ronald busywith the fishing-tackle for the second boat; luncheon being got readyfor six; and the gillies fighting as to which party should have thelanding-net and which the clip.  In the midst of all this MissCarrylooking very smart in her Highland costume, Tam o' Shanter andallcame placidly in to breakfast, and as she sate down she said'Pappa dear, I met such a pretty girl.''Have you been out?' he asked.'Only as far as the bridge.  I met her as I was coming back.  And shelooked so pretty and shy that I spoke to her; I think she was a littlefrightened at first; but anyway I got to know who she isthe Doctor'sdaughter.  Oh, you should hear her speakthe accent is so pretty andgentle. Well, it's all settled, pappa; I'm just in love with theHighland people, from this out.''There's safety in numbers,' observed her father grimly; and then heproceeded to explore the contents of the covers.When they were ready to go down to the loch they found that the men hadalready set outall but Ronald, who had remained behind to see if therewas nothing further he could carry for the young lady.  So these threestarted together; and of course all the talk was about the far too fineweather, and the chances of getting a fish or two in spite of it, andthe betting on the rival boats.  Miss Carry listened in silence; so farshe had heard or seen nothing very remarkable about the handsome youngkeeper who had so impressed her father.  He spoke frankly and freelyenough, it is true (when he was not speaking to her), and he wasrecounting with some quiet sarcasm certain superstitious beliefs andpractices of the people about there; but, apart from the keen look ofhis eyes, and the manly ring of his voice, and the easy swing of thewell-built figure, there was nothing, as she considered, very noticeableabout him.  She thought his keeper's costume rather picturesque, andweather-worn into harmonious colour; and wondered how men in towns hadcome to wear the unsightly garments of these present days.  And so atlast they arrived at the loch; and found that the gillies had got therods fixed and everything ready; and presently the black boat, with Mr.Hodson and his two gillies, was shoved off, and Ronald, before askingthe young lady to step into the green boatthe Duke's boatwas showingher what she should do if a salmon should attach itself to either of thelines.'I don't feel like catching a salmon somehow,' she remarked.  'I don'tthink it can be true.  Anyway you'll see I shan't scream.'She stepped into the boat and took her seat; the rods were placed forher; the coble was shoved farther into the water, and then Ronald andthe young lad got in and took to the oars.  Miss Carry was bidden to payout one of the lines slowly as they moved away from the bank; and in duecourse she had both lines out and the two rods fixed at the properangle, and the reels free.  She obeyed all his instructions withouthaste or confusion.  She was a promising pupil.  And he wondered whatnerve she would show when the crisis came.Now it may be explained for the benefit of those inexperienced in suchthings that these fishing cobles have a cross bench placed about midwaybetween the stern and the thwart occupied by the stroke oar; and theusual custom is for the fisherman to sit on this bench facing the stern,so that he can see both rods and be ready for the first shaking of thetop.  But Miss Carry did not understand this at all.  In entering thecoble she naturally took her place right astern, facing the rowers.  Itnever entered her head to be guilty of the discourtesy of turning herback on them; besides, Ronald was directing her with his eyes as much aswith his speech, and she must be able to see him; moreover he did nottell her she was sitting the wrong way; and then again was not the firstsignal to be the shrieking of the reel?and both reels were now underher observation, so that she could snatch at either rod in a second.The consequence of all this was that she and Ronald sate face tofacenot more than a yard and a half between themtheir eyes exactly ona leveland when they spoke to each other, it was very distinctly untervier Augen, for the boy at the bow was mostly hidden.'Pappa dear,' she said to her father that evening, 'he is a very nervousman.''Who?''Ronald.''Nonsense.  He is hard as nails.  He don't know what nerves mean.''He is a very nervous man,' she insisted (and had she not been studyinghim for a whole day?).  'His eyes throb when you meet them suddenly.  Orrather he seems to know they are very powerful and penetratingand hedoes not like to stare at youso you can see there is a tremor of thelid sometimes as he looks upas if he would partly veil his eyes.  It'svery curious.  He's shylike a wild animal almost.  And that pretty girlI met this morning has something of that look too.''Perhaps they're not used to having the cold gaze of science turned onthem,' her father remarked drily.'Is that me?''You may take it that way.''Then you're quite wrong.  It isn't science at all.  It is an active andbenevolent sympathy; I am going to make friends with every one of them.Ronald says her name is Miss Douglasand I mean to call.''Very well, then,' said her father, who left this young lady pretty muchthe mistress of her own actions.However, to return to the fishing: the morning did not promise well, theweather being too bright and clear, though there was a very fairbreezeof a curious sultry character for the middle of Marchblowing upfrom the south and making a good ripple on the loch.  Again and againthe two boats crossed each other; and the invariable cry was'Nothing yet?'And the answer'Not a touch.'By this time Miss Carry had got to know a good deal about the youngkeeper whose eyes were so directly on a level with hers.  He had been toAberdeen, and to Glasgow, and to Edinburgh; but never out ofScotland?no.  Had he no wish to see London and Paris?  Had he no wishto see America?why, if he came over, her father would arrange to havehim put in the way of seeing everything. And perhaps he might be temptedto stay?there were such opportunities for young men, especially in thewest. As for her, she was most communicative about herself; andapparently she had been everywhere and seen everythingexceptStratford-on-Avon: that was to be the climax; that was to be the lastthing they should visit in Europeand then on to Liverpool and home.She had been a great deal longer in Europe than her father, she said.Her mother was an invalid and could not travel; her brother George(Joidge, she called him) was at school; so she and a schoolfellow ofhers had set out for Europe, accompanied by a maid and a courier, andhad 'seen most everything' from St. Petersburg to Wady Halfa.  And allthis and more she told him with the black soft eyes regarding himopenly; and the pale, foreign, tea-rose tinted face full of a friendlyinterest; and the pretty, white, delicate small fingers idlyintertwisting the buff-coloured gloves that she had taken off at hisrequest.  Inver-Mudal, Clebrig, Ben Loyal, the straths and woods aroundlooked to him small and confined on this quiet morning.  She seemed tohave brought with her a wider atmosphere, a larger air.  And for a younggirl like this to know so muchto have seen so muchand to talk sosimply and naturally of going here, there, or anywhere, as if distancewere nothing, and time nothing, and money nothing; all this puzzled himnot a little.  She must have courage, then, and daring, and endurance,despite the pale face and the slender figure, and the small, white,blue-veined hands?  Why, she spoke of running over to Paris, in about afortnight's time, to be present at the wedding of a friend, just as anyone about here would speak of driving on to Tongue and returning by themail-cart next day.Suddenly there was a quick, half-suppressed exclamation.'There he is!there he is!'And all in a second, as it seemed, Ronald had flung his oar back to thelad behind, seized one of the rods and raised it and put it in herhands, and himself got hold of the other, and was rapidly reeling in theline.  What was happening she could hardly tellshe was so bewildered.The rod that she painfully held upright was being violently shakennowand again there was a loud, long whirr of the reeland Ronald was by hershoulder, she knew, but not speaking a wordand she was wildlyendeavouring to recall all that he had told her.  Then there was asudden slackening of the linewhat was this?'All right,' said he, very quietly.  'Reel in nowas quick as ye can,please.'Well, she was reeling in as hard as her small and delicate wrist wasable to doand in truth she was too bewildered to feel excited; andabove all other earthly things was she anxious that she shouldn't showherself a fool, or scream, or let the thing gowhen all at once thehandle of the reel seemed to be whipped from her grasp; there was a longwhirring shriek of the line; she could hear somewhere a mighty splash(though she dared not look at anything but what was in her hands), andat the same moment she fancied Ronald said, with a quiet laugh'We've beat them this timea clean fish!''Do you think we'll get him?' she said breathlessly.'We'll hold on to him as long as he holds on to us,' Ronald said; andshe heard him add to himself, 'I would rather than five shillings we gotthe first fish!''But this thing is so heavy!' she pleaded.'Never mindthat's rightthat's rightkeep a good strain on himwe'llsoon bring him to his senses.'Again there was a sudden slackening of the line; and this time sheactually saw the animal as it sprang into the aira white gleamingcurved thingbut instantly her attention was on the reel.'That's ityou're doing fine,' he said, with an intentional quietude oftone, so that she might not get over-nervous and make a mistake.Then he made her stand up, and fortunately the coble was rocking butlittle; and he moved her left hand a little higher up the rod, so thatshe should have better leverage; and she did all that she was bid mutelyand meekly, though her arm was already beginning to feel the heavystrain. She vowed to herself that so long as she could draw a breath shewould not give in.The other boat was passingbut of course at a respectful distance.'Hold on to him, Carry!' her father called.She paid no heed.  She dared not even look in his direction.  The fishseemed to be following up the coble now, and it was all that the slenderwrist could do to get in the line so as to keep the prescribed curve onthe rod. And then she had to give way again; for the salmon wentsteadily and slowly downboring and sulkingand they pulled the boataway a bit, lest he should suddenly come to the surface and be aftersome dangerous cantrip.  She took advantage of this period of quiet topass the rod from her left hand to her right; and that relieved her arma little; and she even ventured to say'How long is he going on like this?''We'll give him his own time, Miss,' Ronald said.'Don't call me Miss,' she said, with a little vexation.'II beg your pardonwhat then?''Oh, anything you like.  Mind you catch me if I fall into the water.'The truth was she was a little bit excited, and desperately anxious thather strength should hold out; and even permitting herself an occasionalgleam of hope and joy and triumph.  Her first salmon?  Here would betidings for the girls at home!  If only the beast would do somethingorshow signs of yieldinganything rather than she should have to give in,and weakly resign the rod to Ronald!  As for him, he stood almosttouching her shoulder.'No, no,' said he, 'there's no fear o' your falling into the water.We've got to get this gentleman out first.'And then her feeble efforts at talking (meant to show that she was notexcited, but having exactly the contrary effect) all went by the board.Something was happeningshe knew not whatsomething wild, terrifying,violent, desperateand apparently quite nearand all the line was slacknowand the handle of the reel stuck in her frantic efforts to turn itwith an impossible quicknessand her heart was choking with fright.  Forwhy would this beast spring, and splash, and churn the water, while theline seemed to go all wrong and everything become mixed? But hertrembling fingers got the reel to work at last; and she wound as quicklyas she could; and by this time the salmon had disappeared again, and wasbearing an even, dead strain on the rod, but not so heavily as before.'My gracious!' she saidshe was quite breathless.'It's all right,' he said quietly; but he had been pretty breathlesstoo, and for several seconds in blank despair.The fish began to show signs of yieldingthat last fierce thrashing ofthe water had weakened him.  She got in more and more lineRonald'sinstructions being of the briefest and quietestand presently they couldsee a faint gleam in the water as the big fish sailed this way or that.But still, she knew not what he might not do.  That terrible time hadbeen altogether unexpected.  And yet she knewand her left arm wasgratefully consciousthat the strain was not so heavy now; the line wasquite short; and she became aware that she was exercising more and morepower over her captive and could force him to stop his brief andineffectual rushes.Once or twice he had come quite near the boatsailing in on his side, asit wereand then sheering off again at the sight of them; but theseefforts to get away were growing more and more feeble; and at lastRonald called'We'll try him this timegive him the butt wellthat's rightlift hisheadnow' and then there was a quick stroke of the clip, and the greatmonster was in the boat, and she sank down on to the bench, her armslimp and trembling, but her hand still grasping the rod.  And she felt alittle inclined to laugh and to cry; and she wondered where her fatherwas; and she looked on in a dazed way as they killed the fish, and gotthe phantom-minnow out of its mouth, and proceeded to the weighing ofthe prize.'Eleven pounds and a halfwell done the Duke's boat!' Ronald cried.  'Isit your first salmon, Miss Hodson?''Why, certainly.''You'll have to drink its health, or there'll be no more luck for youthis season,' said he, and he reached back for a pocket-flask.'But where is my father?' she saidshe was anxious he should hear thenews.'Oh,' said he coolly, 'they've been into a fish for the last tenminutes; I wouldna tell ye, in case it might distract ye.''Have they got one?' she cried.'They've got somethingand I dinna think it's a kelt from the waythey're working.'She clapped her hands in delight.  Yes, and that involuntary littleaction revealed to her what she had not known beforethat one of herfingers was pretty badly cut, and bleeding.'What's this?' she said, but she did not heed muchnow that the greatbeautiful gleaming fish lay in the bottom of the boat.Ronald cared a great deal more.  He threw aside the flask.  A cut?itwas his own stupidity was the cause of it; he ought to have known thather delicate fingers could not withstand the whirring out of the line;he should have allowed her to keep on her gloves.  And nothing would dobut that she must carefully bathe the wound in the fresh water of theloch; and he produced a piece of plaster; and then he cut a strip offher handkerchief, and bound up the finger so.'What do I care?' she saidpointing to the salmon.And then he begged her to drink a little whisky and waterfor luck'ssakethough he had been rather scornful about these customs in themorning; and she compliedsmiling towards him as the Netherby bride mayhave looked at Young Lochinvar; but yet he would not drink in herpresence; he put the flask aside; and presently they were at their workagain, both lines out, and the southerly breeze still keeping up.They passed the other boat.'What weight?' was the cry.'Eleven and a half.  Have you got one?''Yes.''How much?''Just over seven.''Duncan will be a savage man,' said Ronald, with a laugh.  'It's all thebad luck of his boat, he'll be saying; though it's good enough luck forthe two first fish to be clean fish and no kelt.'However, the Duke's boat fell away from its auspicious beginning thatmorning.  When lunch time arrived, and both cobles landed at a part ofthe shore agreed upon, where there was a large rock for shelter, and agood ledge for a seat, Miss Carry had but the one fish to be taken outand placed on the grass, while her father had tworespectively seven andthirteen pounds.  And very picturesque, indeed, it was to see thosewhite gleaming creatures lying there; and the two boats drawn up on theshore, with the long rods out at the stern; and the gillies forming agroup at some distance off under the shelter of the stone dyke; and thewide waters of the lake all a breezy blue in the cup of the encirclingsunlit hills.  Ronald got out the luncheon, for he had seen to thepacking of itand he knew more about table-napkins and things of thatsort than those men; and then, when he had made everything right, andbrought ashore a cushion for Miss Carry to sit upon, and so forth, hewent away.'Ronald,' Mr. Hodson called to him, 'ain't you going to have somelunch?''Yes, sir.''Come along, then; there's plenty of room right here.''Thank ye, sir; I know where they've put my little parcel,' said heandhe went and sate down with the gillies; and soon there was enoughtalking and laughing amongst themfaintly heard across the wind.'Well?' said her father, when they were left alone.'Oh, it's just too delightful for anything.'This was her summing up of the whole situation.  And then she added'Pappa, may I send my salmon to Lily Selden?''I wouldn't call it kindness,' said he.  'Looks more like boasting.  Andwhat's the good, since she is staying at a hotel?''Oh, she will be as glad as I am even to see it.  But can't they cook itat a hotel anyway?  I want to be even with Lily about that balloon.  Idon't see much myself in going up in a balloon.  I would just like tohave Lily here nowthink she wouldn't fall down and worship thosebeautiful creatures?''Well, you may send her yours, if you like,' her father said.  'But youneedn't dawdle so over your luncheon. These days are short; and I wantto see what we can do on our first trial.''I'm ready now, if it comes to that,' said she placidly; and she put acouple of sweet biscuits in her pocket, to guard against emergency.And soon they were afloat again.  But what was this that was coming overthe brief winter afternoon?  The sultry south wind did not die away, noryet did any manifest clouds appear in the heavens, but a strange gloombegan to fill the skies, obscuring the sun, and gradually becomingdarker and darker.  It was very strange; for, while the skies overheadwere thus unnaturally black, and the lapping water around the boatssimilarly livid, the low-lying hills at the horizon were singularly keenand intense in colour.  The air was hot and close, though the breezestill came blowing up Strath-Terry.  There was a feeling as if thunderwere imminent, though there were no clouds anywhere gathering along thepurple mountain-tops.This unusual darkness seemed to affect the fishing. Round after roundthey madetouching nothing but one or two kelts; and this Ronalddeclared to be a bad sign, for that when the kelts began to take, therewas small chance of a clean fish.  However, Miss Carry did not care.She had caught her first salmonthat was enough.  Nay, it was sufficientto make her very cheerful and communicative; and she told him a gooddeal about her various friends in the Garden Citybut more especially,as it seemed to the respectful listener, of the young men who, from ahumble beginning, had been largely successful in business; and she askedhim many questions about himself, and was curious about his relationswith Lord Ailine.  Of course, she went on the assumption that the futureof the world lay in America, and that the future of America lay in thebountiful lap of Chicago: and she half intimated that she could notunderstand how any one could waste his time anywhere else.  Her fatherhad been born in a log-cabin; but if hethat is, Ronaldcould see theimmense blocks devoted to 'Hodson's reaper' 'on Clinton and CanalStreets' he would understand what individual enterprise could achieveout west.  The 'manifest destiny' of Chicago loomed large in this younglady's mind; the eastern cities were 'not in it,' so to speak; andRonald heard with reverence of the trade with Montana, and Idaho, andWyoming, and Colorado, and Utah, and Nevada.  It is true that she wasrecalled from this imparting of information by a twenty-five minutes'deadly struggle with a creature that turned out after all to be averitable clean salmon: and with this triumph ended the day's sport; forthe afternoon was rapidly wearing to dusk.  The gloom of the evening, bythe way, was not decreased by a vast mass of smoke that came slowlyrolling along between the black sky and the black lake; though thisportentous thingthat looked as if the whole world were on firemeantnothing further than the burning of the heather down Strath-Terry way.When both cobles were drawn up on the beach, it was found that Mr.Hodson had also added one clean salmon to his score; so that the fivefish, put in a row on the grass, made a very goodly display, and were asufficiently auspicious beginning.'Carry,' said her father, as they walked home together in the gatheringdarkness, 'do you know what you are expected to do?  You have caughtyour first salmon: that means a sovereign to the men in the boat.''I will give a sovereign to the young fellow,' said she, 'and willingly;but I can't offer money to Ronald.''Why not?  it is the custom here.''Oh, I declare I couldn't do it.  My gracious, no!  I would soonerIwould soonerno, no, pappa dear, I could not offer him money.''Well, we must do something.  You see, we are taking up all his time.  Isuppose we'll have to send for another gillieif you care to go on withthat boat''I should think I did!' she said.  'But why should you send for anothergillie so long as Ronald says he is not busy?  I dare say he can tell uswhen he is; I don't believe he's half so shy as he looks.  And he's muchbetter fun than one of these Highlanders; he wants his own way; and,with all his shyness, he has a pretty good notion of himself and his ownopinions.  He don't say you are a fool if you differ from him; but hemakes you feel like it.  And then, besides,' she added lightly, 'we canmake it up to him some way or other.  Why, I have been giving him agreat deal of good advice this afternoon.''You?  About what?''About Illinois,' she said.*CHAPTER XV.**WILD TIMES.*What that mysterious gloom had meant on the previous evening wasrevealed to them the next morning by a roaring wind that came swoopingdown from the Clebrig slopes, shaking the house, and howling through thebent and leafless trees.  The blue surface of the lake was driven whitewith curling tips of foam; great bursts of sunlight sped across theplains and suddenly lit up the northern hills; now and again Ben Hope orBen Hee or Ben Loyal would disappear altogether behind a vague mass ofgray, and then as quickly break forth again into view, the peaks andshoulders all aglow and the snow-patches glittering clear and sharp. Thegillies hung about the inn door, disconsolate.  Nelly made no speed withthe luncheon-baskets.  And probably Mr. Hodson and his daughter wouldhave relapsed into letter-writing, reading, and other feeble methods ofpassing a rough day in the Highlands, had not Ronald come along andchanged the whole aspect of affairs.  For if the wind was too strong, hepointed out, to admit of their working the phantom-minnow properly, theymight at least try the fly. There were occasional lulls in the gale.  Itwas something to do.  Would Miss Hodson venture?  Miss Hodson replied byswinging her waterproof on her arm; and they all set out.Well, it was a wild experiment.  At first, indeed, when they got down tothe shores of the loch, the case was quite hopeless; no boatmuch less ashallow flat-bottomed coblecould have lived in such a sea; and theymerely loitered about, holding themselves firm against the force of thewind, and regarding as best they might the savage beauty of the scenearound themthe whirling blue and white of the loch, the disappearingand reappearing hills, the long promontories suddenly become of a vividand startling yellow, and then as suddenly again steeped in gloom.  ButMiss Carry was anxious to be aboard.'We should only be driven across to the shore yonder,' Ronald said; 'ormaybe capsized.''Oh, but that would be delightful,' she remarked instantly.  'I neverhad my life saved.  It would read very well in the papers.''Yes, but it might end the other way,' her father interposed.  'And thenI don't see where the fun would come inthough you would get yournewspaper paragraph all the same.'Ronald had been watching the clouds and the direction of the squalls onthe loch; there was some appearance of a lull.'We'll chance it now,' he said to the lad; and forthwith they shoved theboat into the water, and arranged the various things.Miss Carry was laughing.  She knew it was an adventure.  Her fatherremonstrated; but she would not be hindered.  She took her seat in thecoble, and got hold of the rod; then they shoved off and jumped in; andpresently she was paying out the line, to which was attached a 'silverdoctor' about as long as her forefinger.  Casting, of course, was beyondher skill, even had the wind been less violent; there was nothing for itbut to trail the fly through these rushing and tumbling and hissingwaves.And at first everything seemed to go well enoughexcept that the coblerolled in the trough of the waves so that every minute she expected tobe pitched overboard. They were drifting down the wind; with the twooars held hard in the water to retard the pace; and the dancing movementof the coble was rather enjoyable; and there was a kind of fierceness ofsunlight and wind and hurrying water that fired her brain.  These poorpeople lingering on the shorewhat were they afraid of?  Why, was thereever anything so delightful as thisthe cry of the wind and the rush ofthe water; and everything around in glancing lights and vivid colours;for the lake was not all of that intense and driven blue, it became abeautiful roseate purple where the sunlight struck through the shallowson the long banks of ruddy sand.  She would have waved her cap to thosepoor forlorn ones left behind, but that she felt both hands must be leftfree in case of emergency.But alas! that temporary lull in which they had started was soon over.A sharper squall than any before came darkening and tearing across theloch; then another and another; until a downright gale was blowing, andapparently increasing every moment in violence.  Whither were theydrifting?  They dared not run the coble ashore; all along those rocks aheavy sea was breaking white; they would have been upset and the boatstove in in a couple of minutes.'This'll never do, Johnnie, lad,' she heard Ronald call out.  'We'llhave to fight her back, and get ashore at the top.''Very well; we can try.'And then the next moment all the situation of affairs seemed changed.There was no longer that too easy and rapid surging along of the coble,but apparently an effort to drive her through an impassable wall ofwater; while smash after smash on the bows came the successive waves,springing into the air, and coming down on the backs of the men with arattling volley of spray.  Nay, Miss Carry, too, got her Highlandbaptismfor all her crouching and shrinking and ducking; and herlaughing face was running wet; and her eyeswhich she would not shut,for they were fascinated with the miniature rainbows that appeared fromtime to time in the whirling spraywere half-blinded. But she did notseem to care.  There was a fierce excitement and enjoyment in thestrugglefor she could see how hard the men were pulling.  And which wasgetting the better of the fightthis firm and patient endeavour, or thefell power of wind and hurrying seas?And then something happened that made her heart stand still: there was ashriek heard above all the noise of the wavesand instinctively shecaught up the rod and found the line whirling out underneath her closedfingers. What was it Ronald had exclaimed?  'Oh, thunder!' or some suchthing; but the next moment he had called to her in a warning voice'Sit stillsit stilldon't movenever mind the fishlet him gohe'llbreak away with the fly and welcome.'But it seemed to him cowardly advice too; and she one behind her fatherin the score.  He sent a glance forward in a kind of desperation: no,there was no sign of the squall moderating, and they were a long wayfrom the head of the loch.  Moreover, the salmon, that was either astrong beast or particularly lively, had already taken out a largelength of line, in the opposite direction.'Do you think,' said he hurriedly, 'you could jump ashore and take therod with you, if I put you in at the point down there?''Yes, yes!' she said, eagerly enough.'You will get wet.''I don't care a cent about thatI will do whatever you say'He spoke a few words to the lad at the bow; and suddenly shifted his oarthither.'As hard as ye can, my lad.'And then he seized the rod from her, and began reeling in the line withan extraordinary rapidity, for now they were drifting down the lochagain.'Do ye see the point down there, this side the bay?''Yes.''There may be a little shelter there; and we're going to try to put yeashore.  Hold on to the rod, whatever ye do; and get a footing as fastas ye can.''And then?' she said.  'What then?  What am I to do?'for she was ratherbewilderedthe water still blinding her eyes, the wind choking herbreath.'Hold on to the rodand get in what line ye can.'All this wild, rapid, breathless thing seemed to take place at once.  Hegave her the rod; seized hold of his oar again, and shifted it; thenthey seemed to be turning the bow of the boat towards a certain smallpromontory where some birch trees and scattered stones faced the rushingwater.  What was happeningor going to happenshe knew not; only thatshe was to hold on to the rod; and then there was a sudden grating ofthe bow on stonesa smash of spray over the sternthe coble wheeledroundRonald had leapt into the waterand, before she knew where shewas, he had seized her by the waist and swung her ashoreand though shefell, or rather slipped and quietly sat down on some rocks, she stillclung to the rod, and she hardly had had her feet wet!  This was whatshe knew of her own position; as for Ronald and the lad, they paid nofurther heed to her, for they were seeking to get the coble safe fromthe heavy surge; and then again she had her own affairs to attend to;for the salmon, though it was blissfully sulking after the first longrushes, might suddenly make up its mind for cantrips.Then Ronald was by her side againrather breathless.'You've still got hold of him?that's rightbut give him his owntimelet him aloneI don't want him in here among the stones in roughwater like this.'And then he said, rather shamefacedly'I beg your pardon for gripping ye as I had to doII thought we shouldhave been overand you would have got sorely wet.''Oh, that's all right,' she saidseeking in vain amid the whirling wasteof waters for any sign or glimpse of the salmon.  'But youyou must bevery wetwhy did you jump into the water?''Oh, that's nothingthere, let him go!give him his own way!now, reelin a bitquickerquickerthat'll do, now.'As soon as she had got the proper strain on the fish again, she held outher right hand.'Pull off my glove, please,' she saidbut still with her eyes intent onthe whirling waves.Well, he unbuttoned the long gauntletthough the leather was allsaturated with water; but when he tried the fingers, he could not getthem to yield at all; so he had to pull down the gauntlet over the hand,and haul off the glove by main forcethen he put it in his pocket, forthere was no time to waste on ceremony.There was a sudden steady pull on the rod; and away went the reel.'Let him golet him goah, a good fish, and a clean fish too!  I hopehe'll tire himself out there, before we bring him in among the stones.'Moreover, the gale was abating somewhat, though the big waves still keptchasing each other in and springing high on the rocks.  She became moreeager about getting the fish.  Hitherto, she had been rather excited andbewildered, and intent only on doing what she was bid; now the prospectof really landing the salmon had become joyful.'But how shall we ever get him to come in here?' she said.'He's bound to come, if the tackle holds; and I'm thinking he's wellhooked, or he'd been off ere now, with all this scurrying water.'She shifted the rod to her right hand; her left arm was beginning tofeel the continued strain.'Has the other boat been out?' she asked.'No, no,' said he, and then he laughed.  'It would be a fine thing if wecould take back a good fish.  I know well what they were thinking whenwe let the boat drift down the second timethey were thinking we had gotthe line aground, and were in trouble.  And now they canna see usit'slittle they're thinking that we're playing a fish.''We' and 'us' he said quite naturally; and she, also, had got into theway of calling him Ronaldas every one did.Well, that was a long and a stiff fight with the salmon; for whenever itfound that it was being towed into the shallows, away it went again,with rush on rush, so that Miss Carry had her work cut out for her, andhad every muscle of her arms and back aching.'Twenty pounds, you'll see,' she heard the lad Johnnie say to hiscompanion; and Ronald answered him'I would rather than ten shillings it was.'Twenty pounds!  She knew that this was rather a rarity on this lochtenor eleven pounds being about the average; and if only she could capturethis animalin the teeth of a gale tooand go back to the others intriumph, and also with another tale to tell to Lily Selden!  She putmore and more strain on; she had both hands firm on the butt; her teethwere set hard.  Twenty pounds!  Or if the hook should give way?  Or theline be cut on a stone?  Or the fish break it with a spring and lash ofits tail?  Fortunately she knew but little of the many and heart-rendingaccidents that happen in salmon-fishing, so that her fears were fewerthan her hopes; and at last her heart beat quickly when she saw Ronaldtake the clip in his hand.But he was very cautious; and bade her take time; and spoke in anequable voicejust as if she were not growing desperate, and wonderinghow long her arms would hold out!  Again and again, by dint of tightreeling up and putting on a deadly strain, she caught a glimpse of thesalmon; and each of these times she thought she could guide it sailinglytowards the spot where Ronald was crouching down by the rocks; and thenagain it would turn and head away and disappeartaking the line veryslowly now, but still taking it.  She took advantage of one of thesepauses in the fight to step farther back some two or three yards; thiswas at Ronald's direction; and she obeyed without understanding.  Butsoon she knew the reason; for at last the salmon seemed to come floatingin without even an effort at refusal; and as she was called on to givehim the butt firmly, she found she could almost drag him right up andunder Ronald's arm.  And then there was a loud 'hurrah!' from the ladJohn as the big silver fish gleamed in the air; and the next second itwas lying there on the withered grass and bracken.  Miss Carry, indeed,was so excited that she came near to breaking the top of the rod; sheforgot that the struggle was over; and still held on tightly.'Lower the top, Miss,' the lad John said, 'or ye can put the rod downaltogether.'Indeed he took it from her to lay it down safely, and right glad wasshe; for she was pretty well exhausted by this time, and fain to take aseat on one of the rocks while they proceeded to weigh the salmon with apocket-scale.'Seventeen poundsand a beauty: as pretty a fish as ever I saw come outof the loch.''Well, we've managed it, Ronald,' said she, laughing, 'but I don't knowhow.  There he issure; but how we got him out of that hurricane I can'ttell.''There was twice I thought ye had lost him,' said he gravely.  'The linegot desperately slack after ye jumped ashore''Jumped ashore?' she said.  'Seems to me I was flung ashore, like a sackof old clothes.''But ye were not hurt?' said he, glancing quickly at her.'No, no; not a bitnor even wet; and if I had been, that is enough foranything.''Johnnie, lad, get some rushes, and put the fish in the box.  We'll havea surprise for them when we get back, I'm thinking.''And can we get back?' she said.'We'll try, anywayoh yesit's no so bad now.'But still it was a stiff pull; and they did not think it worth while toput out the line again.  Miss Carry devoted her whole attention tosheltering herself from the spray; and was fairly successful.  When, atlength, they reached the top of the loch and landed, they were treatedto a little mild sarcasm from those who had prudently remained on shore;but they said nothing; the time was not yet come.Then came the question as to whether all of them could pull down theopposite side of the loch to the big rock; for there they would haveshelter for lunch; while here in the open every gust that swooped downfrom the Clebrig slopes caught them in mid career.  Nay, just then thewind seemed to moderate; so they made all haste into the cobles; and indue time the whole party were landed at the rock, which, with its broadledges for seats, and its overhanging ferns, formed a very agreeable andsheltered resort.  Of course, there was but the one thing wanting.  Afishing party at lunch on the shores of a Highland loch is a verypicturesque thing; but it is incomplete without some beautifulsilver-gleaming object in the foreground.  There always is a bit ofgrass looking as if it were just meant for that display; and when thelittle plateau is empty, the picture lacks its chief point of interest.'Well, you caught something if it wasn't a salmon,' her father said,glancing at her dripping hat and hair.'Yes, we did,' she answered innocently.'You must be wet through in spite of your waterproof. Sometimes I couldnot see the boat at all for the showers of spray.  Did you get muchshelter where you stopped?''Not mucha little.''It was a pretty mad trick, your going out at all. Of course Ronald onlywent to please you; he must have known you hadn't a ghost of a chance ina gale like that.''Pappa dear,' said she, 'there's nothing mean about me. There's many agirl I know would play it on her pa; but I'm not one of that kind.  WhenI have three kings and a pair'Stop it, Carry,' said he angrily, 'I'm tired of your Texas talk.  Whatdo you mean?''I only want to show my hand,' she said sweetly; and she calledaloud'Johnnie!'The young lad jumped up from the group that were cowering under theshelter of the stone dyke.'Bring the fish out of the boat, please.'He went down to the coble, and got the salmon out of the well; and then,before bringing it and placing it on the grass before the young lady, heheld it up in triumph for the gillies to see: the sarcasm was all theother way now.'You see, pappa dear, you would have bet your boots against it, wouldn'tyou?' she remarked.'But where did you get it?' he said, in amazement.  'I was watching yourboat all the time.  I did not see you playing a fish.''Because we got ashore as fast as we could, and had the fight out there.But please, pappa, don't ask me anything more than that.  I don't knowwhat happened.  The wind was choking me, and I was half-blind, and thestones were slippery and moving, andand everything was in a kind ofuproar.  Perhaps you don't think I did catch the salmon.  If my armscould speak, they could tell you a different tale just at this minute;and I shall have a back to-morrow morning, I know that.  Seventeenpounds, Ronald says; and as prettily shaped a fish as he has ever seentaken out of the lake.''He is a handsome fish,' her father admitted; and then he looked upimpatiently at the wind-driven sky.  'There is no doubt there are plentyof fish in the lake, if the weather would only give us a chance.  Butit's either a dead calm or else a raging gale.  Why, just look at that!'For at this moment a heavier gust than ever struck down on the waterandwidened rapidly outand tore the tops of the waves into sprayuntil awhirling gray cloud seemed to be flying over to the other shores.  Thenoise and tumult of the squall were indescribable; and then, in five orsix minutes or so, the loch began to reappear again, black and sullen,from under that mist of foam; and the wind subsidedonly to keep moaningand howling as if meditating further springs.  There was not much use inhurrying lunch.  The gillies had comfortably lit their pipes.  Two ofthe younger lads were trying their strength and skill at 'putting thestone;' the others merely lay and looked on; an occasional glance at theloch told them they need not stir.It was not jealousy of his daughter having caught a fish that made Mr.Hodson impatient; it was the waste of time. He could not find refuge incorrespondence; he had no book with him; while gazing at scenery is afeeble substitute for salmon-fishing, if the latter be your aim.  Andthen again the loch was very tantalisingawaking delusive hopes everyfew minutes.  Sometimes it would become almost quietsave for certainlittle black puffs of wind that fell vertically and widened and widenedout; and they would be on the point of summoning the men to the cobleswhen, with a low growl and then a louder roar, the gale would be rushingdown again, and the storm witches' white hair streaming across thesuddenly darkened waters.'"Ben Clebrigthe Hill of the Playing Trout,"' said he peevishly.  'Idon't believe a word of it.  Why, the Celtic races were famous forgiving characteristic names to placesdescribing the things accurately."The Hill of the Playing Trout!"  Now, if they had called it "The Hillof the Infernal Whirlwinds," or "The Hill of Blasts and Hurricanes," orsomething of that kind, it would have been nearer the mark.  And thisvery day last year, according to the list that Ronald has, they got ninesalmon.''Perhaps we may get the other eight yet, pappa,' said she lightly.And indeed, shortly after this, the day seemed to be getting a littlequieter; and her father decided upon a start. The men came along to thecoble.  Ronald said to her'We will let them get well ahead of us; it's their turn now.'  And so heand she and the lad John remained on the shore, looking after thedeparting boat, and in all sincerity wishing them good luck.Presently she said, 'What's that?'for something had struck her sharplyon the cheek.  It was a heavy drop of rain, that a swirl of wind hadsent round the side of the rock; and now she became aware thateverywhere beyond their shelter there was a loud pattering, becomingevery moment heavier and heavier, while the wind rose and rose into anominous high screeching.  And then all round there was a hissing and aroar and from under the rock she looked forth on the most extraordinaryphantasmagoriafor now the sheets of rain as they fell and broke on thewater were caught by the angry mountain blasts and torn into spindrift,so that the whole lake seemed to be a mass of white smoke.  And herfather?well, she could see something like the ghost of a boat and twoor three phantom figures; but whether they were trying to fight theirway, or letting everything go before the tempest, or what, she could notmake outfor the whirling white rain-smoke made a mere spectral visionof them.  Ronald came to her.'That's bad luck,' said he composedly.'What?' she asked, quickly.  'They are not in danger?''Oh no,' said he.  'But they've got both minnows aground, as far as Ican make out.''But what about that? why don't they throw the rods and everythingoverboard, and get into safety?''Oh, they'll try to save the minnows, I'm thinking.'And they did succeed in doing soafter a long and strenuous struggle;and then Mr. Hodson was glad to have them row him back to the shelter ofthe rock.  Apparently his success with regard to the minnows had put himinto quite a good humour.'Carry,' said he, 'I'm not an obstinate manI know when I've got enough.I will allow that this battle is too much for me.  I'm going home.  I'mgoing to walk.''Then I will go with you, pappa,' she said promptly.'You may stay if you choose,' said he.  'You may stay and take my shareas well as your own.  But I'm going to see what newspapers the mailbrought this morning; and there may be letters.''And I have plenty to do also,' said she.  'I mean to call on thatpretty Miss Douglas I told you ofthe Doctor's daughter.  And do youthink she would come along and dine with us?or must I ask her mother aswell?''I don't know what the society rules are here,' he answered.  'I suspectyou will have to find out.''And Ronalddo you think he would come in and spend the evening with us?I can't find out anything about himit's all phantom-minnows and thingswhen he is in the boat.''Well, I should like that too,' said he: for he could not forsake thetheories which he had so frequently propounded to her.And so they set forth for the inn, leaving the men to get the boats backwhen they could; and after a long and brave battling with rain and windthey achieved shelter at last.  And then Miss Carry had to decide whatcostume would be most appropriate for an afternoon call in theHighlandson a day filled with pulsating hurricanes. Her bodice of bluewith its regimental gold braid she might fairly adoptfor it could becovered over and protected; but her James I. hat with its gray andsaffron plumes she had to discardshe had no wish to see it suddenlywhirling away in the direction of Ben Loyal.*CHAPTER XVI.**DREAMS AND VISIONS.*Miss Hodson was in no kind of anxiety or embarrassment about this visit;she had quite sufficient reliance on her own tact; and when, going alongto the Doctor's cottage, she found Meenie alone in that little room ofhers, she explained the whole situation very prettily and simply andnaturally.  Two girls thrown together in this remote and solitary place,with scarcely any one else to talk with; why should they not know eachother?  That was the sum and substance of her appeal; with a littletouch here and there about her being a stranger, and not sure of theways and customs of this country that she found herself in.  And thenMeenie, who was perhaps a trifle overawed at first by this resplendentvisitor, was almost inclined to smile at the notion that any apology wasnecessary, and said in her gentle and quiet way'Oh, but it is very kind of you.  And if you had lived in one or twoScotch parishes, you would know that the minister's family and thedoctor's family are supposed to know every one.'She did not add 'and be at every one's disposal'for that might haveseemed a little rude.  However, the introduction was over and done with;and Miss Carry set herself to work to make herself agreeablewhich shecould do very easily when she liked.  As yet she kept the invitation todinner in the background; talked of all kinds of thingsthesalmon-fishing, the children's soire she had heard of; Ronald; Ronald'sbrother the minister; and her wonder that Ronald should be content withhis present position; and always those bright dark eyes seemed to bescanning everything in the room with a pleased curiosity, and then againand again returning to Meenie's face, and her dress, and her way ofwearing her hair, with a frank scrutiny which made the country mouse nota little shy in the presence of this ornate town mouse.  For Miss Carry,with her upper wrappings discarded, was not only very prettily attired,but also she had about her all kinds of nick-nacks and bits of finerythat seemed to have come from many lands, and to add to her foreignlook.  Of course, a woman's glanceeven the glance of a shy Highlandgirltakes note of these things; and they seemed but part of the unusualcharacter and appearance of this stranger, who seemed so delicate andfragile, and yet was full of an eager vivacity and talkativeness, andwhose soft, large, black eyes, if they seemed to wander quickly andrestlessly from one object to another, were clearly so full of kindnessand a wish to make friends.  And very friendly indeed she was; and shehad nothing but praise for the Highlands, and Highland scenery, andHighland manners, and even the Highland accent.'I suppose I have an accent myself; but of course I don't know it,' sherattled on.  'Even at home they say our western accent is pretty bad.Well, I suppose I have got it; but anyway I am not ashamed of it, and Iam not in a hurry to change it.  I have heard of American girls inEurope who were most afraid to speak lest they should be foundout-found out!  Why, I don't see that English girls try to hide theiraccent, or want to copy any one else; and I don't see why American girlsshould be ashamed of having an American accent.  Your accent, now; Ihave been trying to make out what it is, but I can't.  It is verypretty; and not the least like the English way of talking; but I can'tjust make out where the difference is.'For this young lady had a desperately direct way of addressing any one.She seemed to perceive no atmosphere of conventionality between personand person; it was brain to brain, direct; and no pausing to judge ofthe effect of sentences.'I know my mother says that I speak in the Highland way,' Meenie said,with a smile.'There now, I declare,' said Miss Hodson, 'that did not sound like anEnglish person speaking, and yet I could not tell you where thedifference was.  I really think it is more manner than accent.  Theboatmen and the girls at the innthey all speak as if they were anxiousto please you.''Then it cannot be a very disagreeable accent,' said Meenie, laughing inher quiet way.'No, no; I like it.  I like it very much.  Ronald now, has nothing ofthat; he is positive and dogmaticI would say gruff in his way oftalking, if he was not so obliging. But he is very obliging andgood-natured; there is just nothing he won't do for usand we areperfect strangers to him.'And so she prattled on, apparently quite satisfied that now they weregood friends; while Meenie had almost forgotten her shyness in theinterest with which she listened to this remarkable young lady who hadbeen all over the world and yet took her travelling so much as a matterof course.  Then Miss Hodson said'You know my father and I soon exhaust our remarks on the events of theday when we sit down to dinner; and we were wondering whether you wouldtake pity on our solitude and come along and dine with us this evening.Will you?  I wish you wouldit would be just too kind of you.'Meenie hesitated.'I would like very well,' said she, 'butbut my mother and the lad havedriven away to Tongue to fetch my father homeand it may be late beforethey are back''The greater reason why you should comewhy, to think of your sittinghere alone!  I will come along for you myself.  And if you are afraid ofhaving too much of the star-spangled banner, we'll get somebody else inwho is not an American; I mean to ask Ronald if he will come in andspend the evening with usor come in to dinner as well, if he hastime'Now the moment she uttered these words she perceived the mistake she hadmade.  Meenie all at once looked troubled, conscious, apprehensivetherewas a touch of extra colour in her face: perhaps she was annoyed thatshe was betraying this embarrassment.'I think some other night, if you please,' the girl said, in a lowvoice, and with her eyes cast down, 'some other night, when mamma is athomeI would like to ask her first.''Class distinctions,' said Miss Carry to herself, as she regarded thisembarrassment with her observant eyes. 'Fancy class distinctions in alittle community like thisin mid-winter too!  Of course the Doctor'sdaughter must not sit down to dinner with Lord Ailine's head keeper.'But she could not offer to leave Ronald outthat would but have added tothe girl's confusion, whatever was the cause of it.  She merely saidlightly'Very well, then, some other evening you will take pity on usand I hopebefore I go to Paris.  And then I want you to let me come in now andagain and have a cup of tea with you; and I get all the illustratedperiodicals sent me from homewith the fashion-plates, you know.'She rose.'What a nice roomit is all your own, I suppose?''Oh yes; that is why it is so untidy.''But I like to see a room look as if it was being used. Well, now, whatare these?' she said, going to the mantel-shelf, where a row of bottlesstood.'These are medicines.''Why, you don't look sick,' the other said, turning suddenly.'Oh no.  These are a few simple things that my father leaves with mewhen he goes from homethey are for children mostlyand the people haveas much faith in me as in anybody,' Meenie said, with a shy laugh.'Papa says I can't do any harm with them, in any case; and the peopleare pleased.''Hush, hush, dear, you must not tell me any secrets of that kind,' saidMiss Carry gravely; and then she proceeded to get on her winter wraps.Meenie went downstairs with her, and at the door would see that she wasall properly protected and buttoned up about the throat.'For it is very brave of you to come into Sutherlandshire in thewinter,' said she; 'we hardly expect to see any one until the summer isnear at hand.''Then you will let me come and have some tea with you at times, will younot?''Oh yesif you will be so kind.'They said good-bye and shook hands; and then Miss Carry thought thatMeenie looked so pretty and so shy, and had so much appealing gentlenessand friendliness in the clear, transparent, timid blue-gray eyes, thatshe kissed her, and said 'Good-bye, dear,' again, and went out into thedusk and driving wind of the afternoon, entirely well pleased with hervisit.But it seemed as though she were about to be disappointed in bothdirections; for when she called in at Ronald's cottage he was not there;and when she returned to the inn, he was not to be found, nor could anyone say whither he had gone.  She and her father dined by themselves.She did not say why Meenie had declined to come along and join them; butshe had formed her own opinion on that point; and the more she thoughtof it, the more absurd it seemed to her that this small handful ofpeople living all by themselves in the solitude of the mountains shouldthink it necessary to observe social distinctions. Was not Ronald, sheasked herself, fit to associate with any one?  But then she rememberedthat the Highlanders were said to be very proud of their descent; andshe had heard something about Glengask and Orosay; and she resolved thatin the future she would be more circumspect in the matter ofinvitations.About half-past eight or so the pretty Nelly appeared with the messagethat Ronald was in the inn, and had heard that he was being asked for.'What will I tell him ye want, sir?' she said, naturally assuming thatRonald was to be ordered to do something.'Give him my compliments,' said Mr. Hodson, 'and say we should beobliged if he would come in and smoke a pipe and have a chat with us, ifhe has nothing better to do.'But Nelly either thought this was too much politeness to be thrown awayon the handsome keeper, or else she had some small private quarrel withhim; for all she said to him, and that brusquely, was'Ronald, you're wanted in the parlour.'Accordingly, when he came along the passage, and tapped at the door andopened it, he stood there uncertain, cap in hand.  And Mr. Hodson had torepeat the invitationexplaining that they had wanted him to have somedinner with them, but that he could not be found; and then Ronald, withless of embarrassment than might have been expectedfor he knew thesetwo people better nowshut the door, and laid down his cap, and modestlyadvanced to the chair that Mr. Hodson had drawn in towards one side ofthe big fireplace.  Miss Carry was seated apart on a sofa, apparentlyengaged in some sort of knitting work; but her big black eyes couldeasily be raised when there was need, and she could join in theconversation when she chose.At first that was mostly about the adjacent shooting, which Mr. Hodsonthought of taking for a season merely by way of experiment; and thequestion was how long he would in that case have to be away from hisnative country. This naturally took them to America, and eventually andalas! to politicswhich to Miss Carry was but as the eating of choppedstraw.  However, Mr. Hodson (if you could keep the existence of lordsout of his reach) was no very violent polemic; and moreover, wheneverthe Bird of Freedom began to clap its wings too loudly, was there not onthe sofa there a not inattentive young lady to interfere with a littlegentle sarcasm?  Sometimes, indeed, her interpositions were bothuncalled for and unfair; and sometimes they were not quite clearlyintelligible.  When, for example, they were talking of the colossalstatue of Liberty enlightening the World which the French Republicproposed to present to the American Republic to be set up in New YorkBay, she pretended not to know in which directioneast or westthe giantfigure was to extend her light and liberty-giving arm; and her objectionto her father's definition of the caucus system as a despotism temperedby bolting, was a still darker saying of which Ronald could make nothingwhatever.  But what of that? Whatever else was veiled to him, this wasclearthat her interference was on his behalf, so that he should not beoverpressed in argument or handicapped for lack of information; and hewas very grateful to her, naturally; and far from anxious to sayanything against a country that had sent him so fair and so generous anally.But, after all, was not this laudation of the institutions of the UnitedStates meant only as a kindnessas an inducement to him to go thither,and better his position? There was the field where the race was to theswiftest, where the best man got to the front, and took the prize whichhe had fairly won.  There no accident of birth, no traditional usage,was a hindrance.  The very largeness of the area gave to the individuallargeness of view.'Yes,' said Miss Carry (but they took no heed of her impertinence) 'inour country a bar-tender mixes drinks with his mind fixed on Niagara.'Nay, the very effort to arouse dissatisfaction in the bosom of this manwho seemed all too well contented with his circumstances was in itselfmeant as a kindness.  Why should he be content?  Why should he not geton?  It was all very well to have health and strength and high spirits,and to sing tenor songs, and be a favourite with the farm-lasses; butthat could not last for ever.  He was throwing away his life.  Hischances were going by him. Why, at his age, what had so-and-so done, andwhat had so-and-so not done?  And how had they started?  What did theyowe to fortunewhat, rather, to their own resolution and brain?'Ronald, my good fellow,' said his Mentor, in the most kindly way, 'if Icould only get you to breathe the atmosphere of Chicago for a fortnight,I am pretty sure you wouldn't come back to stalk deer and train dogs forLord Ailine or any other lordship.'Miss Carry said nothing; but she pictured to herself Ronald passing downMadison Streetno longer, of course, in his weather-tanned stalkingcostume, but attired as the other young gentlemen to be found there; andgoing into Burke's Hotel for an oyster luncheon; and coming out againchewing a toothpick; and strolling on to the Grand Pacific to look atthe latest telegrams.  And she smiled (though, indeed, she herself hadnot been behindhand in urging him to get out of his present estate andbetter his fortunes), for there was something curiously incongruous inthat picture; and she was quite convinced that in Wabash Avenue he wouldnot look nearly as handsome nor so much at his ease as now he did.'I am afraid,' said he, with a laugh, 'if ye put me down in a place likethat, I should be sorely at a loss to tell what to turn my hand to.It's rather late in the day for me to begin and learn a new trade.''Nonsense, man,' the other said.  'You have the knowledge already, ifyou only knew how to apply it.''The knowledge?' Ronald repeated, with some surprise. Most of hisbook-reading had been in the field of English poetry; and he did not seehow he could carry that to market.Mr. Hodson took out his note-book; and began to look over the leaves.'And you don't need to go as far as Chicago, if you would rather not,'said he.'If you do,' said Miss Carry flippantly, 'mind you don't eat any of ourpork.  Pappa dear, do you know why a wise man doesn't eat pork inIllinois?  Don't you know? It is because there is a trichinosis worthtwo of that.'Ronald laughed; but her father was too busy to attend to such idiotcy.'Even if you would rather remain in the old country,' he continued, 'andenjoy an out-of-door life, why should you not make use of what youalready know?  I have heard you talk about the draining of soil, andplanting of trees, and so on: well, look here now.  I have beeninquiring into that matter; and I find that the Highland andAgricultural Society of Scotland grants certificates for proficiency inthe theory and practice of forestry.  Why shouldn't you try to gain oneof those certificates; and then apply for the post of land-steward?I'll bet you could manage an estate as well as most of them who are atitespecially one of those Highland sporting estates. And then you wouldbecome a person of importance; and not be at any lordship's beck andcall; you would have an opportunity of beginning to make a fortune, ifnot of making one at once; and if you wanted to marry, there would be asubstantial future for you to look to.''And then you would come over and see us at Chicago,' said Miss Carry.'We live on North Park Avenue; and you would not feel lonely for want ofa lake to look atwe've a pretty big one there.''But the first stepabout the certificate?' said Ronalddoubtfullythough, indeed, the interest that these two kindly peopleshowed in him was very delightful, and he was abundantly grateful, andperhaps also a trifle bewildered by these ambitious and seductivedreams.'Well, I should judge that would be easy enough,' continued Mr. Hodson,again referring to his note-book in that methodical, slow-mannered wayof his.  'You would have to go to Edinburgh or Glasgow, and attend someclasses, I should imagine, for they want you to know something ofsurveying and geology and chemistry and botany. Some of these you couldread up herefor you have plenty of leisure, and the subjects are justat your hand.  I don't see any difficulty about that.  I suppose youhave saved something now, that you could maintain yourself when you wereat the classes?''I could manage for a while,' was the modest answer.'I have myself several times thought of buying an estate in theHighlands,' Mr. Hodson continued, 'if I found that I have not forgottenaltogether how to handle a gun; and if I did so, I would give you themanagement right off.  But it would not do for you to risk such achance; what you want is to qualify yourself, so that you can take yourstand on your own capacity, and demand the market value for it.'Well, it was a flattering proposal; and this calm, shrewd-headed manseemed to consider it easily practicableand as the kind of thing that ayoung man in his country would naturally make for and achieve; while theyoung lady on the sofa had now thrown aside the pretence of knitting,and was regarding him with eloquent eyes, and talking as if it were allsettled and attained, and Ronald already become an enterprising andprosperous manager, whom they should come to see when they visitedScotland, and who was certainly to be their guest when he crossed theAtlantic.  No wonder his head was turned.  Everything seemed soeasywhy, both she and her father appeared to be surrounded, when athome, with men who had begun with nothing and made fortunes.  And thenhe would not be torn away altogether from the hills.  He might stillhave a glimpse of the dun deer from time to time; there would still bethe dewy mornings by lake and strath and mountain-tarn, with thestumbling on a bit of white heather, and the picking it and wearing itfor luck.  And if he had to bid farewell to Clebrig and Ben Loyal andBen Hope and Bonnie Strath-Naverwell, there were other districts farmore beautiful than that, as well he knew, where he would still hear thecurlew whistle, and the grouse-cock crow in the evening, and the greatstags bellow their challenge through the mists of the dawn.  And as fora visit to Chicago?and a view of great cities, and harbours, and thewide activities of the world?surely all that was a wonderful dream, ifonly it might come true!'I'm sure I beg your pardon,' said he, rising, 'for letting ye talk allthis time about my small affairs.  I think you'll have a quieter dayto-morrow; the wind has backed to the east; and that is a very good windfor this loch.  And I've brought the minnows that I took to mend; thekelts are awful beasts for destroying the minnows.'He put the metal box on the mantelpiece.  They would have had him staylongerand Miss Carry, indeed, called reproaches down on her head thatshe had not asked him to smoke nor offered him any kind ofhospitalitybut he begged to be excused.  And so he went out and gothome through the cold dark nightto his snug little room and thepeat-fire, and his pipe and papers and meditations.A wonderful dream, trulyand all to be achieved by the reading up of afew subjects of some of which he already knew more than a smattering.And why should he not try?  It seemed the way of the worldat least, ofthe world of which he had been learning so much from these strangerstostrive and push forward and secure, if possible, means and independence.Why should he remain at Inver-Mudal?  The old careless happiness hadfled from it.  Meenie had passed him twice noweach time merely givinghim a formal greeting, and yet, somehow, as he imagined, with a timidtrouble in her eyes, as if she was sorry to do that.  Hersuperintendence of Maggie's lessons was more restricted now; and neverby any chance did she come near the cottage when he was within or about.The old friendliness was gone; the old happy companionshiphoweverrestricted and respectful on his side; the old, frank appeal for his aidand counsel when any of her own small schemes had to be undertaken.  Andwas she in trouble on his account?and had the majesty of Glengask andOrosay been invoked?  Well, that possibility need harrow no human soul.If his acquaintanceshipor companionship, in a measurewith Meenie wasconsidered undesirable, there was an easy way out of the difficulty.Acquaintanceship or companionship, whichever it might be, it wouldendit had ended.And then again, he said to himself, as he sate at the little table andturned over those leaves that contained many a gay morning song and manya midnight musingbut all about Meenie, and the birds and flowers andhills and streams that knew hersoon she would be away from Inver-Mudal,and what would the place be like then? Perhaps when the young corn wasspringing she would take her departure; and what would the world be likewhen she had left?  He could see her seated in the little carriage; herface not quite so bright and cheerful as usually it was; her eyesthatwere sometimes as blue as a speedwell in June, and sometimes gray likethe luminous clear gray of the morning skyperhaps clouded a little; andthe sensitive lips trembling?  The children would be there, to bid hergood-bye.  And then away through the lonely glens she would go, by hilland river and wood, till they came in sight of the western ocean, andLoch Inver, and the great steamer to carry her to the south.  Meeniewould be awayand Inver-Mudal, then?Small birds in the cornAre cowering and quailing:O my lost love,Whence are you sailing?Fierce the gale blowsAdown the bleak river;The valley is emptyFor ever and ever.Out on the seas,The night-winds are wailing:O my lost love,Whence are you sailing?*CHAPTER I.**A FURTHER DISCOVERY.*It can hardly be wondered at that these suddenly presented ambitiousprojectsthis call to be up and doing, and getting forward in thegeneral race of the worldshould add a new interest and fascination, inhis eyes, to the society of the American father and daughter who hadwandered into these distant wilds.  And perhaps, after all, he had beenmerely wasting his time and throwing away his life? That solitary,contented, healthy and happy existence was a mistakean idle dreamananachronism, even?  The common way of the world was right; and that, ashe heard of it in the echoes brought by these strangers from without,was all a pushing and striving and making the most of opportunities,until the end was reachedindependence and ease and wealth; the power ofchoosing this or that continent for a residence; the radiant happinessand glow of success.  And then it all seemed so easy and practicablewhen he heard these two talking about their friends and the fortunesthey had made; and it seemed still more easyand a far more desirableand beautiful thingwhen it was Miss Carry herself who was speaking, sheseated alone in the stern of the boat, her eyesthat had a kind ofsurface darkness and softness, like blackberries wet with rainhelpingout her speech, and betraying an open friendliness, and even conferringa charm on her descriptions of that far-off pork-producing city of thewest.  Mr. Hodson, as he sate upright in his easy-chair before the fire,spoke slowly and sententiously, and without any visible enthusiasm; MissCarry, in the stern of the coble, her face all lit up with the blowingwinds and the sunlight, talked with far greater vivacity, and wasobviously deeply interested in the future of her companion.  And it hadcome to this now, that, as she sate opposite him, he quite naturally andhabitually regarded her eyes as supplementing her meaning; he no longerrather shrank from the directness of her look; he no longer wished thatshe would sit the other way, and attend to the tops of the salmon-rods.As for their speech together, the exceeding frankness of it and lack ofconventionality arose from one or two causes, but no doubt partly fromthisthat during their various adventures on the loch there was no timefor the observance of studied forms.  It was 'Do this' and 'Do that,' onhis partsometimes with even a sharp word of monition; and with her itwas 'Will that do, Ronald?' or again,when she was standing up in fellencounter with her unseen enemy, both hands engaged with therod'Ronald, tie my cap down, or the wind will blow it awayNo, no, theother stringsunderneath!'Indeed, on the morning after the evening on which they had been urginghim to make a career for himself, there was not much chance of any calmdiscussion of that subject.  The proceedings of the day opened in aremarkably lively manner.  For one thing the wind had backed stillfarther during the night, and was now blowing briskly from the north,bringing with it from time to time smart snow showers that blackened theheavens and earth for a few minutes and then sped on, leaving the peaksand shoulders and even the lower spurs of the hills all a gleaming whitein the wintry sunlight.'Salmon-fishing in a snow-stormwell, I declare!' said she, as she stoodon the shore of the lake, watching him putting the rods together.'The very best time,' said he, in his positive way (for he had assumed akind of authority over her, whereas with Meenie he was always reservedand distant and timidly gentle).  'None better.  I would just like tofind a foot of snow on the ground, right down to the edge of the loch;and the flakes falling so thick ye couldna see a dozen yards ahead ofye.''Do you know where I should be then?' she retorted. 'I should be warmingmy toes in front of Mrs. Murray's peat-fire.''Not one bit,' said he, just as positively.  'If ye heard the salmonwere taking, ye'd be down here fast enough, I'm thinking.'And presently it seemed as if this early start of theirs was to berewarded, for scarcely were both lines outand Miss Carry was justsettling herself down for a little quiet talk, and was pulling thecollar of her ulster higher over her ears (for the wind was somewhatcold)when a sudden tugging and straining at one of the rods, followedby a sharp scream of the reel, upset all these little plans.  She made adash at the rod and raised it quickly.'That's a good fishthat's a good fish!' Ronald cried, with his mouthset hard.  'Now let's see if we canna hold on to this one.  Let him go,lassie!I beg your pardonlet him golet him gothat's righta cleanfish, and a beauty!'Beauty or no, the salmon had no hesitation about showing himself, atleast; for now he began to lash the surface of the water, some fiftyyards away, not springing into the air, but merely beating the waveswith head and body and tail to get rid of this unholy thing that he hadpursued and gripped.  Then down he went with a mighty plungethe reelwhirring out its shrill cry, and Miss Carry's gloves suffering inconsequenceand there he sulked; so that they backed the boat again, andagain she got in some of the line.  What was the sound that came acrossthe lake to them, in the face of the northerly wind?'They're waving a handkerchief to ye, Miss Hodson,' said he, 'from theother boat.''Oh, bother,' said she (for the strain of a heavy salmon and forty yardsof line was something on her arms), 'here, take the handkerchief fromthis breast-pocket, and wave it back to themstand up beside metheywon't see the difference'He did as he was bid; apparently she paid little attention; she seemedwholly bent on getting the fish.  And clearly the salmon had somewhatexhausted himself with his first escapades; he now lay deep down, notstirring an inch; so that she got in her line until there was not morethan twenty yards out: then they waited.And meanwhile this strange thing that was overtaking them?  The bright,windy, changeable daywith its gleaming snow-slopes and sunlit strathsand woods darkened by passing shadowsseemed to be slowly receding fromthem, and around them came a kind of hushed and stealthy gloom.  Andthen the wind stirred again; the gusts came sharper and colder; here andthere a wet particle stung the cheek or the back of the hand.  Ofcourse, she was in a death-struggle with a salmon; she could not heed.And presently the gathering blackness all around seemed to break into asoft bewilderment of snow; large, soft, woolly flakes came driving alongbefore the wind; all the world was shut out from them; they could seenothing but a short space of livid dark water, and feel nothing but thischoking silent thing in the air.  And then again, with a magicalrapidity, the heavens and the earth seemed to open above and aroundthem; the clouds swept on; there was a great deep of dazzling bluesuddenly revealed in the sky overhead; and all the dancing waters of thelake, from the boat to the farthest shores, were one flashing andlapping mass of keen, pure cobalt, absolutely bewildering to the eyes.The joy of that radiant colour, after the mystery and the darkness!  Andthen the sunlight broke out; and Clebrig had a touch of gold along hismighty shoulders; and Ben Loyal's snow-slopes were white against thebrilliant blue; and it seemed as if the fairest of soft summer skieswere shining over Bonnie Strath-Naver.To her it meant that she could see a little more clearly. She shook thesnowflakes from her hair.'Ronald, you are sure it is not a kelt?''Indeed I am.  There's nothing of the kelt about that one.''If it is,' said she, 'I'll go home and tell my ma.'She was clearly feeling a little more secure about this one.  And shedid capture the creature in the end, though it was after a long andarduous struggle.  For he was a strong fishfresh run up from the sea,and heavy for his size; and again and again, and a dozen times repeated,he would make rushes away from the boat just as they thought he wasfinally showing the white feather.  It was the toughest fight she hadhad; but practice was hardening her muscles a little; and she hadacquired a little dexterity in altering her position and shifting thestrain.  By this time the other boat was coming round.'Stick to him, Carry!' her father cried.  'No Secesh tactics allowed:hold on to him!'The next moment Ronald had settled all that by a smart scoop of theclip; and there in the bottom of the boat lay a small-headeddeep-shouldered fish of just over sixteen poundsRonald pinning him downto get the minnow out of his jaw, and the lad Johnnie grinning all overhis ruddy face with delight.Miss Carry looked on in a very calm and business-like fashion; though inreality her heart was beating quicklywith gladness and exultation.  Andthen, with the same business-like calmness, she took from the deeppocket of her ulster a flask that she had borrowed from Mr. Murray.'Ronald,' said she, 'you must drink to our good luck.'She handed him the flask.  She appeared to be quite to the manner bornnow.  You would not have imagined that her heart was beating so quickly,or her hands just a little bit nervous and shaky after that prolongedexcitement.Good luck seemed to follow the Duke's boat this morning. Within the nextthree quarters of an hour they had got hold of another salmonjust overten pounds.  And it was barely lunch time when they had succeeded inlanding a thirdthis time a remarkably handsome fish of fifteen pounds.She now thought she had done enough.  She resumed her seat contentedly;there was no elation visible on her face.  But she absolutely forbadethe putting out of the lines again.'Look here, Ronald,' she said seriously.  'What do you think I came herefor?  Do you think I came here to leave my bones in a foreign land?  Iam just about dead now.  My arms are not made of steel.  We can goashore, and get lunch unpacked; the other boat will follow quicklyenough.  I tell you my arms and wrists have just had about enough forone morning.'And a very snug and merry little luncheon-party they made theredown bythe side of the lapping water, and under the shelter of a wood of youngbirch-trees.  For the other boat had brought ashore two salmon; so thatthe five handsome fish, laid side by side on a broad slab of rock, madean excellent show.  Miss Carry said nothing about her arms aching; butshe did not seem to be in as great a hurry as the others to set to workagain.  No; she enjoyed the rest; and, observing that Ronald hadfinished his lunch, she called to him, under the pretext of wanting toknow something about sending the fish south.  This led on to otherthings; the three of them chatting together contentedly enough, andRonald even making bold enough to light his pipe.  A very friendlylittle group this wasaway by themselves there in these wintrysolitudeswith the wide blue waters of the lake in front of them, andthe snows of Clebrig white against the sky.  And if he were to go awayfrom these familiar scenes, might he not come back again in the afterdays?  And with the splendid power of remaining or going, just as hepleased?just as these friendly folk could, who spoke so lightly ofchoosing this or that quarter of the globe for their temporaryhabitation?  Yes, there were many things that money could do: these twostrangers, now, could linger here at Inver-Mudal just as long as thesalmon-fishing continued to amuse them; or they could cross over toParis, and see the wonders there; or they could go away back to thegreat cities and harbours and lakes and huge hotels that they spoke somuch about. He listened with intensest interest, and with a keenimagination.  And was this part of the shore around themwith its rocksand brushwood and clear waterreally like the shores of Lake George,where she was so afraid of rattlesnakes?  She said she would send himsome photographs of Lake Michigan.Then in the boat in the afternoon she quite innocently remarked that shewished he was going back home with them; for that he would find thevoyage across the Atlantic so amusing.  She described the people comingout to say good-bye at Liverpool; and the throwing of knives andpencil-cases and what not as farewell gifts from the steamer to thetender, and vice vers; she described the scamper round Queenstown andthe waiting for the mails; then the long days on the wide ocean, withall the various occupations, and the concerts in the evening, and theraffles in the smoking-room (this from hearsay); then the crowding ondeck for the first glimpse of the American coast-line; and the glidingover the shallows of Sandy Hook; and the friends who would come steamingdown the Bay to wave handkerchiefs and welcome them home.  She seemed toregard it as a quite natural and simple thing that he should be of thisparty; and that, after landing, her father should take him about and'see him through,' as it were; and if her fancy failed to carry outthese forecasts, and to picture him walking along Dearborn Avenue ordriving out with them to Washington Park, it was that once or twice erenow she had somehow arrived at the notion that Ronald Strang and Chicagowould prove to be incongruous.  Or was it some instinctive feeling that,however natural and fitting their friendship might be in this remotelittle place in the Highlands, it might give rise to awkwardness overthere?  Anyhow, that could not prevent her father from seeing thatRonald had ample introductions and guidance when he landed at New York;and was not that the proper sphere for one of his years and courage andabilities?When they got ashore at the end of the day it was found that each boathad got two more salmon, so that there was a display of nine big fish onthe grass there in the gathering dusk.'And to think that I should live to catch five salmon in one day,' saidMiss Carry, as she contemplated her share of the spoil.  'Well, no onewill believe it; for they're just real mean people at home; and theywon't allow that anything's happened to you in Europe unless you havesomething to show for it.  I suppose Ronald would give me a writtenguarantee.  Anyway, I am going to take that big one along to theDoctorit will be a good introduction, won't it, pappa?'But a curious thing happened about that same salmon. When they got tothe inn the fish were laid out on the stone flags of the dairythecoolest and safest place for them in the house; and Miss Carry, who hadcome along to see them, when she wanted anything done, naturally turnedto Ronald.'Ronald,' said she, 'I want to give that big one to Mrs. Douglas, and Iam going along now to the cottage.  Will you carry it for me?'He said something about getting a piece of string and left.  A couple ofminutes thereafter the lad Johnnie appeared, with a stout bit of cord inhis hand; and he, having affixed that to the head and the tail of thesalmon, caught it up, and stood in readiness.  She seemed surprised.'Where is Ronald?' said shefor he was always at her bidding.'He asked me to carry the fish to the Doctor's house, mem,' said thelad.  'Will I go now?'Moreover, this salmon was accidentally responsible for a still furtherdiscovery.  When Miss Carry went along to call on the Douglases, littleMaggie was with her friend Meenie; and they all of them had teatogether; and when the little Maggie considered it fitting she should gohome, Miss Carry said she would accompany herfor it was now quite dark.And they had a good deal of talk by the way, partly about schooling andaccomplishments, but much more largely about Ronald, who was the oneperson in all the world in the eyes of his sister.  And if Maggie wasready with her information, this pretty young lady was equallyinterested in receiving it, and also in making inquiries.  And thus itcame about that Miss Carry now for the first time learned that Ronaldwas in the habit of writing poems, verses, and things of that kind; andthat they were greatly thought of by those who had seen them or to whomhe had sent them.'Why, I might have guessed as much,' she said to herself, as she walkedon alone to the innthough what there was in Ronald's appearance tosuggest that he was a writer of rhymes it might have puzzled any one todetermine.But this was a notable discovery; and it set her quick and fertile brainworking in a hundred different ways; but mostly she bethought her of oneJohn C. Huysen and of a certain newspaper-office on Fifth Avenue,Chicago, 111.'Well, there,' she said to herself, as the result of these rapidcogitations, 'if Jack Huysen's good for anythingif he wants to say hehas done me a serviceif he wants to show he has the spirit of a man inhimwell, now's his chance.'*CHAPTER II.**CONFESSIONS.*It was but another instance of the curiously magnetic influence of thisman's personality that she instantly and unhesitatingly assumed thatwhat he wrote must be of value. Now every second human being, as wellshe knew, writes verses at one period of his life, and these are mostlytrash; and remain discreetly hidden, or are mercifully burned. But whatRonald wrote, she was already certain, must be characteristic ofhimself, and have interest and definite worth; and what better could shedo than get hold of some of these things, and have them introduced tothe public, perhaps with some little preliminary encomium written by afriendly hand?  She had heard from the little Maggie that Ronald hadnever sent any of his writings to the newspapers; might not this be aservice?  She could not offer him a sovereign because he happened to bein the boat when she caught her first salmon; but famethe appeal to thewide-reading publicthe glory of print?  Nay, might they not be of somecommercial value also?  She knew but little of the customs of theChicago journals, but she guessed that a roundabout hint conveyed to Mr.John C. Huysen would not be without effect.  And what were the subjects,she asked herself, that Ronald wrote about? In praise of deerstalking,for one thing, and mountain-climbing, and out-of-door life, she feltassured: you could see it in his gait and in his look; you could hear itin his laugh and his singing as he went along the road.  Politics,perhapsif sarcastic verses were in his way; for there was a sharpsavour running through his talk; and he took abundant interest in publicaffairs.  Or perhaps he would be for recording the charms of some rusticmaidensome 'Jessie, the Flower o' Dumblane'some blue-eyed and rathersilent and uninteresting young person, living alone in a glen, andtending cattle or hanging out things to dry on a hedge?  Well, even asong would be something.  The Chicago Citizen might not pay very muchfor it, but the great and generous public might take kindly to it; andif Jack Huysen did not say something friendly about it, then she wouldknow the reason why.But the stiffest struggle Miss Carry ever had with any salmon was merechild's play compared with the fight she had with Ronald himself overthis matter.  At first he was exceedingly angry that she should havebeen told; but then he laughed, and said to her that there were plentyof folk in Scotland as elsewhere who wrote idle verses, but that theyhad the common sense to say nothing about it. If she wanted a memento ofher stay in the Highlands to take back with her to America, he wouldgive her her choice of the deer-skins he had in the shed; that would beappropriate, and she was welcome to the best of them; but as forscribblings and nonsense of that kindno, no.  On the other hand she wasjust as persistent, and treated him to a little gentle raillery,wondering that he had not yet outgrown the years of shyness; andfinally, when everything else had failed, putting her request as a graceand courtesy to be granted to an American stranger.  This was hardlyfair; but she was very anxious about the matter; and she knew that herdemand was founded far less on mere curiosity than on an honest desireto do him a service.Of course he yielded; and a terrible time he had of it the night he setabout selecting something to show to her. For how could she understandthe circumstances in which these random things were writtenthese idlefancies of a summer morningthese careless love songsthese rhymedepistles in which the practical common sense and shrewd advice were muchmore conspicuous than any graces of art? And then again so many of themwere about Meenie; and these were forbidden; the praise of Meenieevenwhen it was the birds and the roses and the foxgloves and the summerrills that sang of herwas not for alien eyes.  But at last he lit uponsome verses supposed to convey the sentiments of certain exiles mettogether on New Year's night in Nova Scotia; and he thought it was asimple kind of thing; at all events it would get him out of a grievousdifficulty. Sofor the lines had been written many a day ago, and cameupon him now with a new aspecthe altered a phrase here or there, by wayof passing the time; and finally he made a fair copy.  The next morning,being a Sunday, he espied Miss Carry walking down towards the river; andhe overtook her and gave her this little piece to redeem his pledge.'It's not worth much,' said he, 'but you'll understand what it is about.Burn it when you've read itthat's all I ask of ye'  Then on he went,glad not to be cross-questioned, the faithful Harry trotting at hisheels.So she sat down on the stone parapet of the little bridgeon thishushed, still, shining morning that was quite summer-like in itscalmand opened the paper with not a little curiosity.  And well enoughshe understood the meaning of the little piece: she knew that theMackays[#] used to live about here; and was not Strath-Naver but a fewmiles off; and this the very Mudal river running underneath the bridgeon which she was sitting? But here are the verses she readand he hadentitled them[#] Pronounced Mackise, with the accent on the second syllable.ACROSS THE SEA.In Nova Scotia's clime they've metTo keep the New Year's night;The merry lads and lasses crowdAround the blazing light.But father and mother sit withdrawnTo let their fancies fleeTo the old, old time, and the old, old homeThat's far across the sea.And what strange sights and scenes are theseThat sadden their shaded eyes?Is it only thus they can see againThe land of the Mackays?O there the red-deer roam at will:And the grouse whirr on the wing;And the curlew call, and the ptarmiganDrink at the mountain spring;And the hares lie snug on the hillside:And the lusty blackcock crows;But the river the children used to loveThrough an empty valley flows.Do they see again a young lad waitTo shelter with his plaid,When she steals to him in the gathering dusk.His gentle Highland maid?Do they hear the pipes at the weddings;Or the low sad funeral wailAs the boat goes out to the island,And the pibroch tells its tale?O fair is Naver's strath, and fairThe strath that Mudal laves;And dear the haunts of our childhood,And dear the old folks' graves;And the parting from one's native landIs a sorrow hard to dree:God's forgiveness to them that sent usSo far across the sea!And is bonnie Strath-Naver shining,As it shone in the bygone years?As it shines for us noway, everThough our eyes are blind with tears.Well, her own eyes were moistthough that was but for a moment; for whenshe proceeded to walk slowly and meditatively back to the inn, her mindwas busy with many things; and she began to think that she had not gotany way near to the understanding of this man, whom she had treated inso familiar a fashion, as boatman, and companion, and gilliealmost asvalet.  What lay behind those eyes of his, that glowed with so strange alight at times, and seemed capable of reading her through and through,only that the slightly tremulous eyelids came down and veiled them, orthat he turned away his head? And why this strain of pathos in a naturethat seemed essentially joyous and glad and careless?  Not only that,but in the several discussions with her fatheroccasionally becomingrather warm, indeedRonald had been invariably on the side of thelandlord, as was naturally to be expected. He had insisted that thegreat bulk of the land given over to deer was of no possible use to anyother living creature; he had maintained the right of the landlord toclear any portion of his property of sheep and forest it, if by so doinghe could gain an increase of rental; he had even maintained the right ofthe landlord to eject non-paying tenants from holdings clearly notcapable of supporting the ever-increasing families; and so forth.  Butwas his feeling, after all, with the peoplehe himself being one of thepeople? His stout championship of the claims and privileges of LordAilinethat was not incompatible with a deeper sense of the cruelty ofdriving the poor people away from the land of their birth and the homeof their childhood? His natural sentiment as a man was not to beoverborne by the fact that he was officially a dependant on Lord Ailine?These and a good many other curious problems concerning himandconcerning his possible futureoccupied her until she had got back tothe snug little parlour; and there, as she found her father seated infront of the blazing fire, and engaged in getting through the mightypile of newspapers and illustrated journals and magazines that had comeby the previous day's mail, she thought she might as well sit down andwrite a long letter to her bosom friend in Chicago, through whoseintermediation these verses might discreetly be brought to the notice ofMr. Huysen.  She had reasons for not asking any favour directly.'DEAREST EM,' she wroteafter having studied a long while as to how sheshould begin'would it surprise you to know that I have at last found myfate in the very handsome person of a Scotch gamekeeper?  Well, itaint so; don't break the furniture; but the fact is my poor brain hasbeen wool-gathering a little in this land of wild storms and legends andromantic ballads; and to-morrow I am fleeing away to Paristhe region ofclear atmosphere, and reasonable people, and cynicism; and I hope tohave any lingering cobwebs of romance completely blown out of my head.Not that I would call it romance, even if it were to happen; I shouldcall it merely the plain result of my father's theories.  You know he isalways preaching that all men are born equal; which isn't true anyhow;he would get a little nearer the truth if he were to say that all menare born equal except hotel clerks, who are of a superior race; butwouldn't it be a joke if I were to take him at his word, and ask him howhe would like a gamekeeper as his son-in-law?  But you need not beafraid, my dear Em; this chipmunk has still got a little of her sensesleft; and I may say in the words of the poet"There is not in this wide world a valet so sweet"no, nor any Claude Melnotte of a gardener, nor any handsome coachman orgroom, who could induce me to run away with him.  It would be "playingit too low down on pa," as you used to say; besides, one knows how thesethings always end.  Another besides; how do I know that he would marryme, even if I asked him?and I should have to ask him, for he wouldnever ask me.  Now, Em, if you don't burn this letter the moment youhave read it, I will murder you, as sure as you are alive.'Besides, it is a shame.  He is a real good fellow; and no such nonsensehas got into his head, I know.  I know it, because I tried him twice forfun; I got him to tie my cap under my chin; and I made him take mypocket-handkerchief out of my breast-pocket when I was fighting a salmon(I caught five in one daymonsters!), and do you think the bashfulyoung gentleman was embarrassed and showed trembling fingers?  Not abit; I think he thought me rather a nuisancein the polite phraseologyof the English people.  But I wish I could tell you about him, really.It's all very well to say he is very handsome and hardy-looking andweather-tanned; but how can I describe to you how respectful his manneris, and yet always keeping his own self-respect, and he won't quarrelwith mehe only laughs when I have been talking absolute follythoughpapa and he have rare fights, for he has very positive opinions, andsticks to his guns, I can tell you. But the astonishing thing is hiseducation; he has been nowhere, but seems to know everything; he seemsto be quite content to be a gamekeeper, though his brother took hisdegree at college and is now in the Scotch Church.  I tell you he makesme feel pretty small at times.  The other night papa and I went along tohis cottage after dinner, and found him reading Gibbon's Decline andFall of the Roman Empirelent him by his brother, it appeared.  Iborrowed the first volumebut, oh, squawks! it is a good deal too stiffwork for the likes of me.  And then there is never the least pretence orshow, but all the other way; he will talk to you as long as you likeabout his deerstalking and about what he has seen his dogs do; but nevera word about books or writingunless you happen to have found out.'Now I'm coming to business.  I have never seen any writing of his untilthis morning, when, after long goading, he showed me a little poem whichI will copy out and enclose in this letter when I have finished.  Now,darling Em, I want you to do me a real kindness; the first time you seeJack HuysenI don't want to ask the favour of him directwill you askhim to print it in the Citizen, and to say something nice about it?  Idon't want any patronage: understandI mean let Jack Huysenunderstandthat Ronald Strang is a particular friend of both my fatherand myself; and that I am sending you this without his authority, butmerely to give him a little pleasant surprise, perhaps, when he sees itin print; and perhaps to tempt him to give us some more.  I should likehim to print a volume,for he is really far above his present station,and it is absurd he should not take his place,and if he did that Iknow of a young party who would buy 500 copies even if she were to goback home without a single Paris bonnet. Tell Jack Huysen there is to beno patronage, mind; there is to be nothing about the peasant poet, oranything like that; for this man is a gentleman, if I know anythingabout it; and I won't have him trotted out as a phenomenonto bediscussed by the dudes who smoke cigarettes in Lincoln Park.  If youcould only talk to him for ten minutes it would be better than fiftyletters, but I suppose there are attractions nearer home just atpresent.  My kind remembrances to T.T.'I forgot to say that I am quite ignorant as to whether newspapers everpay for poetryI mean if a number of pieces were sent?  Or could JackHuysen find a publisher who would undertake a volume; my father will seehe does not lose anything by it.  I really want to do something for thisRonald, for he has been so kind and attentive to us; and before long itmay become more difficult to do so; for of course a man of his abilitiesis not likely to remain as he is; indeed, he has already formed plansfor getting away altogether from his present way of life, and whateverhe tries to do I know he will doand easily.  But if I talk any moreabout him, you will be making very very mistaken guesses; and I won'tgive you the delight of imagining even for a moment that I have beencaught at last; when the sad event arrives there will be time enough foryou to take your cake-walk of triumph up and down the roomof course toDancing in the Barn, as in the days of old.'Here followed a long and rambling chronicle of her travels in Europesince her last letter, all of which may be omitted; the only point to beremarked was that her very brief experiences of Scotland took up adisproportionately large portion of the space, and that she was minutein her description of the incidents and excitement of salmon-fishing.Then followed an outline of her present plans; a string of questions; arequest for an instant reply; and finally'With dearest love, old Em,'Thine,'Carry.'And then she had to copy the verses; but when she had done that, andrisen, and gone to the window for a time, some misgiving seemed to enterher mind, for she returned to the table, and sate down again, and wrotethis postscript:'Perhaps, after all, you won't see much in this little piece; if youwere here, among the very places, and affected by all the old storiesand romantic traditions and the wild scenery, it might be different.Since I've been to Europe I've come to see what's the trouble about ourreading English history and literature at home; why, you can't do it,you can't understand it, unless you have lived in an atmosphere that isjust full of poetry and romance, and meeting people whose names tell youthey belong to the families who did great things in history centuriesand centuries ago.  I can't explain it very wellnot even to myself; butI feel it; why, you can't take a single day's drive in England withoutcoming across a hundred things of interestNorman churches, and thetombs of Saxon Kings, and old abbeys, and monasteries, and battlefields,and, just as interesting as any, farm-houses of the sixteenth century intheir quaint old-fashioned orchards.  And as for Scotland, why, it isjust steeped to the lips in poetry and tradition; the hills and theglens have all their romantic stories of the clans, many of them verypathetic; and you want to see these wild and lonely places before youcan understand the legends.  And in southern Scotland toowhat could anyone at home make of such a simple couplet as this"The King sits in Dunfermline town,Drinking the blude-red wine;"but when you come near Dunfermline and see the hill where MalcolmCanmore built his castle in the eleventh century, and when you are toldthat it was from this very town that Sir Patrick Spens and the Scotslords set out for "Norroway o'er the faem," everything comes nearer toyou. In America, I remember very well, Flodden Field sounded to ussomething very far away, that we couldn't take much interest in; but ifyou were here just now, dear Em, and told that a bit farther north therewas a river that the Earl of Caithness and his clan had to cross whenthey went to Flodden, and that the people living there at this very daywon't go near it on the anniversary of the battle, because on that daythe ghosts of the earl and his men, all clad in green tartan, come homeagain and are seen to cross the river, wouldn't that interest you?  InAmerica we have got nothing behind us; when you leave the day beforeyesterday you don't want to go back.  But here, in the most vulgarsuperstitions and customs, you come upon the strangest things.  Wouldyou believe it, less than twenty miles from this place there is a littlelake that is supposed to cure the most desperate diseasesdiseases thatthe doctors have given up; and the poor people meet at midnight, on thefirst Monday after the change of the moon, and then they throw a pieceof money into the lake, and go in and dip themselves three times, andthen they must get home before sunrise.  Perhaps it is very absurd, butthey belong to that same imaginative race of people who have left somany weird stories and poetical legends behind them; and what I say isthat you want to come over and breathe this atmosphere of tradition andromance, and see the places, before you can quite understand the charmof all that kind of literature.  And perhaps you don't find much inthese verses about the poor people who have been driven away from theirnative strath?  Well, they don't claim to be much.  They were nevermeant for you to see.  But yes, I do think you will like them; andanyhow Jack Huysen has got to like them, and treat them hospitably,unless he is anxious to have his hair raised.'Gracious me, I think I must hire a hall.  I have just read this scrawlover.  Sounds rather muzzy, don't it? But it's this poor brain of minethat has got full of confusion and cobwebs and theories of equality,when I wasn't attending to it.  My arms had the whole day's work todoas they remind me at this minute; and the Cerebral Hemispheres laidtheir heads, or their half-heads together, when I was busy with thesalmon; and entered into a conspiracy against me; and began to makepicturesghosts, phantom earls, and romantic shepherds andpeasant-poets, and I don't know what kind of dreams of a deer stalkerwalking down Wabash Avenue.  But, as I said, to-morrow I start forParis, thank goodness; and in that calmer atmosphere I hope to come tomy senses again; and I will send you a long account of Lily Selden'smarriagethough your last letter to me was a fraud: what do I care aboutthe C.M.C.A.?  This letter, anyhow, you must burn; I don't feel likereading it over again myself, or perhaps I would save you the trouble;but you may depend on it that the one I shall send you from Paris willbe quite sane.'Second P.S.Of course you must manage Jack Huysen with a littlediscretion.  I don't want to be drawn into it any more than I can help;I mean, I would just hate to write to him direct and ask him for aparticular favour; but this is a very little one, and you know him aswell as any of us.  And mind you burn this letterinstantlythe momentyou have read itfor it is just full of nonsense and wool-gathering; andit will not occur again.  Toujours a toi.  C.H.''What have you been writing all this time?' her father said, when sherose.'A letterto Emma Kerfoot.''It will make her stare.  You don't often write long letters.''I do not,' said she, gravely regarding the envelope; and then she addedsolemnly: 'But this is the record of a chapter in my life that is nowclosed for everat least, I hope so.'*CHAPTER III.**HESITATIONS.*The waggonette stood at the door; Miss Carry's luggage was put in; andher father was waiting to see her off.  But the young lady herselfseemed unwilling to take the final step; twice she went back into theinn, on some pretence or another; and each time she came out she lookedimpatiently around, as if wondering at the absence of some one.'Well, ain't you ready yet?' her father asked.'I want to say good-bye to Ronald,' she said half angrily.'Oh, nonsenseyou are not going to America.  Why, you will be back inten days or a fortnight.  See here, Carry,' he added, 'are you sure youdon't want me to go part of the way with you?''Not at all,' she said promptly.  'It is impossible for Mary to mistakethe directions I wrote to her; and I shall find her in the Station Hotelat Inverness all right.  Don't you worry about me, pappa.'She glanced along the road again, in the direction of the keeper'scottage; but there was no one in sight.'Pappa dear,' she said, in an undertonefor there were one or twoonlookers standing by'if Ronald should decide on giving up his placehere, and trying what you suggested, you'll have to stand by him.''Oh yes, I'll see him through,' was the complacent answer.  'I shouldtake him to be the sort of man who can look after himself; but if hewants any kind of helpwell, here I am; I won't go back on a man who isacting on my advice.  Why, if he were to come out to Chicago''Oh no, not Chicago, pappa,' she said, somewhat earnestly, 'not toChicago.  I am sure he will be more at homehe will be happierin hisown country.'She looked around once more; and then she stepped into the waggonette.'He might have come to see me off,' she said, a little proudly.'Good-bye, pappa dearI will send you a telegram as soon as I get toParis.'The two horses sprang forward; Miss Carry waved her lily hand; and thenset to work to make herself comfortable with wraps and rugs, for themorning was chill.  She thought it was very unfriendly of Ronald not tohave come to say good-bye.  And what was the reason of it?  Of course hecould know nothing of the nonsense she had written to her friend inChicago.'Have you not seen Ronald about anywhere?' she asked of the driver.'No, mem,' answered that exceedingly shy youth, 'he wass not about allthe morning.  But I heard the crack of a gun; maybe he wass on thehill.'And presently he said'I'm thinking that's him along the roadit's two of his dogs whatever.'And indeed this did turn out to be Ronald who was coming striding alongthe road, with his gun over his shoulder, a brace of setters at hisheels, and something dangling from his left hand.  The driver pulled uphis horses.'I've brought ye two or three golden plover to take with ye, MissHodson,' Ronald saidand he handed up the birds.Well, she was exceedingly pleased to find that he had not neglected her,nay, that he had been especially thinking of her and her departure.  Butwhat should she do with these birds in a hotel?'It's so kind of you,' she said, 'but really I'm afraid they'rewouldyou not rather give them to my father?''Ye must not go away empty-handed,' said he, with good-humouredinsistence; and then it swiftly occurred to her that perhaps this wassome custom of the neighbourhood; and so she accepted the little partinggift with a very pretty speech of thanks.He raised his cap, and was going on.'Ronald,' she called, and he turned.'I wish you would tell me,' she saidand there was a little touch ofcolour in the pretty, pale, interesting face'if there is anything Icould bring from London that would help youI mean books aboutchemistryororabout treesor instruments for land-surveyingI am sureI could get them'He laughed, in a doubtful kind of a way.'I'm obliged to ye,' he said, 'but it's too soon to speak about that.  Ihavena made up my mind yet.''Not yet?''No.''But you will?'He said nothing.'Good-bye, then.'She held out her hand, so that he could not refuse to take it.  So theyparted; and the horses' hoofs rang again in the silence of the valley;and she sat looking after the disappearing figure and the meeklyfollowing dogs.  And then, in the distance, she thought she could makeout some faint sound: was he singing to himself as he strode alongtowards the little hamlet?'At all events,' she said to herself, with just a touch of pique, 'hedoes not seem much downhearted at my going away.'  And little indeed didshe imagine that this song he was thus carelessly and unthinkinglysinging was all about Meenie, and red and white roses, and trifles lightand joyous as the summer air.  For not yet had black care got a grip ofhis heart.But this departure of Miss Carry for the south now gave him leisure toattend to his own affairs and proper duties, which had suffered somewhatfrom his attendance in the coble; and it was not until all these wereput straight that he addressed himself to the serious consideration ofthe ambitious and daring project that had been placed before him.Hitherto it had been pretty much of an idle speculationa dream, inshort, that looked very charming and fascinating as the black-eyed younglady from over the seas sate in the stern of the boat and chattedthrough the idle hours.  Her imagination did not stay to regard theimmediate and practical difficulties and risks; all these seemed alreadysurmounted; Ronald had assumed the position to which he was entitled byhis abilities and personal character; she only wondered which part ofScotland he would be living in when next her father and herself visitedEurope; and whether they might induce him to go over with them for awhile to the States.  But when Ronald himself, in cold blood, came toconsider ways and means, there was no such plain and easy sailing.  Notthat he hesitated about cutting himself adrift from his presentmoorings; he had plenty of confidence in himself, and knew that he couldalways earn a living with his ten fingers, whatever happened.  Then hehad between 80 and 90 lodged in a savings bank in Inverness; and outof that he could pay for any classes he might have to attend, or perhapsoffer a modest premium if he wished to get into a surveyor's office fora short time.  But there were so many things to think of.  What shouldhe do about Maggie, for example? Then Lord Ailine had always been a goodmaster to him: would it not seem ungrateful that he should throw up hissituation without apparent reason?  And so forth, and so forth, throughcogitations long and anxious; and many a half-hour on the hillside andmany a half-hour by the slumbering peat-fire was given to this greatproject; but always there was one side of the question that he shut outfrom his mind.  For how could he admit to himself that this lingeringhesitationthis dread, almost, of what lay await for him in thefuturehad anything to do with the going away from Meenie, and theleaving behind him, and perhaps for ever, the hills and streams andlonely glens that were all steeped in the magic and witchery of herpresence?  Was it not time to be done with idle fancies? And if, in thegreat cityin Edinburgh or Glasgow, as the case might behe should fallto thinking of Ben Loyal and Bonnie Strath-Naver, and the long, longdays on Clebrig; and Meenie coming home in the evening from herwanderings by Mudal-Water, with a few wild-flowers, perhaps, or a bit ofwhite heather, but always with her beautiful blue-gray Highland eyes sofull of kindness as she stopped for a few minutes' friendlychattingwell, that would be a pretty picture to look back upon, alllambent and clear in the tender colours that memory loves to use.  Asilent picture, of course: there would be no sound of the summer rills,nor the sweeter sound of Meenie's voice; but not a sad picture; onlyremote and ethereal, as if the years had come between, and madeeverything distant and pale and dreamlike.The first definite thing that he did was to write to his brother inGlasgow, acquainting him with his plans, and begging him to obtain somefurther particulars about the Highland and Agricultural Society'scertificates.  The answer that came back from Glasgow was mostencouraging; for the Rev. Alexander Strang, though outwardly a heavy andlethargic man, had a shrewd head enough, and was an enterprising shiftyperson, not a little proud of the position that he had won for himself,and rather inclined to conceal from his circle of friendswho weremostly members of his congregationthe fact that his brother was merelya gamekeeper in the Highlands.  Nay, more, he was willing to assist; hewould take Maggie into his house, so that there might be no difficultyin that direction; and in the meantime he would see what were the bestclass-books on the subjects named, so that Ronald might be working awayat them in these comparatively idle spring and summer months, and neednot give up his situation prematurely.  There was even some hint thrownout that perhaps Ronald might board with his brother; but this was notpressed; for the fact was that Mrs. Alexander was a severely rigiddisciplinarian, and on the few occasions on which Ronald had been theirguest she had given both brothers to understand that the frivolousgaiety of Ronald's talk, and the independence of his manners, and hisGallio-like indifference about the fierce schisms and heart-burnings inthe Scotch Church were not, in her opinion, in consonance with theatmosphere that ought to prevail in a Free Church minister's house.  Buton the whole the letter was very friendly and hopeful; and Ronald wasenjoined to let his brother know when his decision should be finallytaken, and in what way assistance could be rendered him.One night the little Maggie stole away through the dark to the Doctor'scottage.  There was a light in the window of Meenie's room; she couldhear the sound of the piano; no doubt Meenie was practising and alone;and on such occasions a visit from Maggie was but little interruption.And so the smaller girl went boldly towards the house and gainedadmission, and was proceeding upstairs without any ceremony, when thesudden cessation of the music caused her to stop.  And then she heard avery simple and pathetic air beginjust touched here and there with afew chords: and was Meenie, tired with the hard work of the practising,allowing herself this little bit of quiet relaxation?  She was singingtoothough so gently that Maggie could scarcely make out the words.  Butshe knew the songhad not Meenie sung it many times before to her?andwho but Meenie could put such tenderness and pathos into the simple air?She had almost to imagine the wordsso gentle was the voice that wentwith those lightly-touched chords'The sun rase sae rosy, the gray hills adorning,Light sprang the laverock, and mounted on hie,When true to the tryst o' blythe May's dewy morning,Jeanie cam' linking out owre the green lea.To mark her impatience I crap 'mong the brackens,Aft, aft to the kent gate she turned her black e'e;Then lying down dowilie, sighed, by the willow tree,"I am asleep, do not waken me."'[#][#] 'I am asleep, do not waken me' is the English equivalent of theGaelic name of the air, which is a very old one, and equally pathetic inits Irish and Highland versions.Then there was silence.  The little Maggie waited; for this song was agreat favourite with Ronald, who himself sometimes attempted it; and shewould be able to tell him when she got home that she had heard Meeniesing itand he always listened with interest to anything, even thesmallest particulars, she could tell him about Meenie and about what shehad done or said.  But where were the other verses? She waited andlistened; the silence was unbroken.  And so she tapped lightly at thedoor and entered.And then something strange happened.  For when Maggie shut the doorbehind her and went forward, Meenie did not at once turn her head to seewho this was, but had hastily whipped out her handkerchief and passed itover her eyes.  And when she did turn, it was with a kind of look ofbraveryas if to dare any one to say that she had been cryingthoughthere were traces of tears on her cheeks.'Is it you, Maggie?  I am glad to see you,' she managed to say.The younger girl was rather frightened and sorely concerned as well.'But what is it, Meenie dear?' she said, going and taking her hand.'Are you in trouble?''No, no,' her friend said, with an effort to appear quite cheerful, 'Iwas thinking of many thingsI scarcely know what.  And now take off yourthings and sit down, Maggie, and tell me all about this great news.  Itwas only this afternoon that my father learnt that you and your brotherwere going away; and he would not believe it at first, till he sawRonald himself.  And it is true, after all?  Dear me, what a changethere will be!'She spoke quite in her usual manner now; and her lips were no longertrembling, but smiling; and the Highland eyes were clear, and as full ofkindness as ever.'But it is a long way off, Meenie,' the smaller girl began to explainquickly, when she had taken her seat by the fire, 'and Ronald is soanxious to please everybody, andand that is why I came along to ask youwhat you think best.''I?' said Meenie, with a sudden slight touch of reserve.'It'll not be a nice thing going away among strange folk,' said hercompanion, 'but I'll no grumble if it's to do Ronald good; and evenamong strange folkwell, I don't care as long as I have Ronald and you,Meenie.  And it's to Glasgow, and not to Edinburgh, he thinks he'll haveto go; and then you will be in Glasgow too; so I do not mind anythingelse.  It will not be so lonely for any of us; and we can spend theevenings togetheroh no, it will not be lonely at all''But, Maggie,' the elder girl said gravely, 'I am not going to Glasgow.'Her companion looked up quickly, with frightened eyes.'But you said you were going, Meenie!''Oh no,' the other said gently.  'My mother has often talked of itand Isuppose I may have to go some time; but my father is against it; and Iknow I am not going at present anyway.''And you are staying hereandand Ronald and mewe will be by ourselvesin Glasgow!' the other exclaimed, as if this prospect were too terribleto be quite comprehended as yet.'But if it is needful he should go?' Meenie said. 'People have often topart from their friends like that.''Yes, and it's no much matter when they have plenty of friends,' saidthe smaller girl, with her eyes becoming moist, 'but, Meenie, I havenagot one but you.''Oh no, you must not say that,' her friend remonstrated. 'Why, there isyour brother in Glasgow, and his family; I am sure they will be kind toyou.  And Ronald will make plenty of friends wherever he goesyou cansee that for yourself; and do you think you will be lonely in a greattown like Glasgow?  It is the very place to make friends, and plenty ofthem'Oh, I don't know what to doI don't know what to do, if you are notgoing to Glasgow, Meenie!' she broke in.  'I wonder if it was that thatRonald meant.  He asked me whether I would like to stay here or go withhim, for Mrs. Murray has offered to take me in, and I would have to helpat keeping the books, and that is very kind of them, I am sure, for Idid not think I could be of any use to anybody.  And you are to be herein Inver-Mudaland Ronald away in Glasgow'Well, it was a bewildering thing.  These were the two people she caredfor most of all in the world; and virtually she was called upon tochoose between them.  And if she had a greater loyalty and reverencetowards her brother, still, Meenie was her sole girl-friend, andmonitress, and counsellor.  What would her tasks be without Meenie'sapproval; how could she get on with her knitting and sewing withoutMeenie's aid; what would the days be like without the witchery ofMeenie's companionshipeven if that were limited to a passing word or asmile?  Ronald had not sought to influence her choice; indeed, thealternative had scarcely been considered, for she believed that Meeniewas going to Glasgow also; and with her hero brother and her beautifulgirl-friend both there, what more could she wish for in the world?  Butnow-?Well, Meenie, in her wise and kind way, strove to calm the anxiety ofthe girl; and her advice was altogether in favour of Maggie's going toGlasgow with her brother Ronald, if that were equally convenient to him,and of no greater expense than her remaining in Inver-Mudal with Mrs.Murray.'For you know he wants somebody to look after him,' Meenie continued,with her eyes rather averted, 'and if it does not matter so much hereabout his carelessness of being wet and cold, because he has plenty ofhealth and exercise, it will be very different in Glasgow, where thereshould be some one to bid him be more careful.''But he pays no heed to me,' the little sister sighed, 'unless I cantell him you have been saying so-and-sothen he listens.  He is verystrange.  He has never once worn the blue jersey that I knitted for him.He asked me a lot of questions about how it was begun; and I told him aslittle as I could about the help you had given me,' she continuedevasively, 'and when the snow came on, I thought he would wear it; butnohe put it away in the drawer with his best clothes, and it's lyingthere all neatly folded upand what is the use of that?  If you weregoing to Glasgow, Meenie, it would be quite different.  It will be verylonely there.''Lonely!' the other exclaimed; 'with your brother Ronald, and your otherbrother's family, and all their friends. And then you will be able to goto school and have more regular teachingRonald spoke once or twice tome about that.''Yes, indeed,' the little Maggie said; but the prospect did not cheerher much; and for some minutes they both sate silent, she staring intothe fire.  And then she said bitterly'I wish the American people had never come here.  It is all their doing.It never would have come into Ronald's head to leave Inver-Mudal but forthem.  And where else will he be so well knownandand every onespeaking well of himand every one so friendly''But, Maggie, these things are always happening,' her companionremonstrated.  'Look at the changes my father has had to make.''And I wonder if we are never to come back to Inver-Mudal, Meenie?' thegirl said suddenly, with appealing eyes.Meenie tried to laugh, and said'Who can tell?  It is the way of the world for people to come and go.And Glasgow is a big placeperhaps you would not care to come back afterhaving made plenty of friends there.''My friends will always be here, and nowhere else,' the smaller girlsaid, with emphasis.  'Oh, Meenie, do you think if Ronald were to get onwell and make more money than he has now, he would come back here, andbring me too, for a week maybe, just to see every one again?''I cannot tell you that, Maggie,' the elder girl said, rather absently.After this their discussion of the strange and unknown future that laybefore them languished somehow; for Meenie seemed preoccupied, andscarcely as blithe and hopeful as she had striven to appear.  But whenMaggie rose to return homesaying that it was time for her to be lookingafter Ronald's supperher friend seemed to pull herself togethersomewhat, and at once and cheerfully accepted Maggie's invitation tocome and have tea with her the following afternoon.'For you have been so little in to see us lately,' the small Maggiesaid; 'and Ronald always engaged with the American peopleand often inthe evening too as well as the whole day long.''But I must make a great deal of you now that you are going away,' saidMiss Douglas, smiling.'And Ronaldwill I ask him to stay in till you come?'But here there was some hesitation.'Oh no, I would not do thatno doubt he is busy just now with hispreparations for going away.  I would not say anything to himyou and Iwill have tea together by ourselves.'The smaller girl looked up timidly.'Ronald is going away too, Meenie.'Perhaps there was a touch of reproach in the tone; at all events Meeniesaid, after a moment's embarrassment'Of course I should be very glad if he happened to be in thehouseandand had the time to spare; but I think he will understandthat, Maggie, without your saying as much to him.''He gave plenty of his time to the American young lady,' said Maggie,rather proudly.'But I thought you and she were great friends,' Meenie said, in somesurprise.'It takes a longer time than that to make friends,' the girl said; andby and by she left.Then Meenie went up to her room again, and sate down in front of thedull, smouldering peat-fire, with its heavy lumps of shadow, and itskeen edges of crimson, and its occasional flare of flame and shower ofsparks.  There were many pictures thereof distant things; of the comingspring-time, with all the new wonder and gladness somehow gone out ofit; and of the long long shining summer days, and Inver-Mudal grownlonely: and of the busy autumn time, with the English people come fromthe south, and no Ronald there, to manage everything for them.  For herheart was very affectionate; and she had but few friends; and Glasgowwas a great distance away.  There were some other fancies too, andself-questionings and perhaps even self-reproaches, that need not bementioned here.  When, by and by, she rose and went to the piano, whichwas still open, it was not to resume her seat.  She stood absentlystaring at the keysfor these strange pictures followed her; and indeedthat one half-unconscious trial of 'I am asleep, do not waken me' hadbeen quite enough for her in her present mood.*CHAPTER IV.**'AMONG THE UNTRODDEN WAYS.'*Yes; it soon became clear that Meenie Douglas, in view of thisforthcoming departure, had resolved to forego something of the tooobvious reserve she had recently imposed on herselfif, indeed, thatmaidenly shrinking and shyness had not been rather a matter of instinctthan of will.  When Ronald came home on the following evening she wasseated with Maggie in the old familiar way at a table plentifullylittered with books, patterns, and knitting; and when she shook handswith him, her timidly uplifted eyes had much of the old friendliness inthem, and her smile of welcome was pleasant to see.  It was he who wasdiffident and very respectful.  For if her mother had enjoined her to bea little more distant in manner towards this one or the other of thosearound herwell, that was quite intelligible; that was quite right; andhe could not complain; but on the other hand, if the girl herself, inthis very small domestic circle, seemed rather anxious to put asidethose barriers which were necessary out of doors, he would not presumeon her good-nature.  And yetand yethe could not help thawing a little;for she was very kind, and even merry withal; and her eyes were like theeyes of the Meenie of old.'I am sure Maggie will be glad to get away from Inver-Mudal,' she wassaying, 'for she will not find anywhere a schoolmistress as hard as Ihave been.  But maybe she will not have to go to school at all, if shehas to keep house for you?''But she'll no have to keep house for me,' Ronald said at once.  'If shegoes to Glasgow, she'll be much better with my brother's family, forthat will be a home for her.''And where will you go, Ronald?' she said.'Oh, into a lodgingI can fend for myself.'At this she looked gravenay, she did not care to conceal herdisapproval.  For had she not been instructing Maggie in the mysteriesof housekeeping in a townas far as these were known to herself: and hadnot the little girl showed great courage; and declared there was nothingshe would not attempt rather than be separated from her brother Ronald?'It would never do,' said he, 'to leave the lass alone in the house allday in a big town.  It's very well here, where she has neighbours andpeople to look after her from time to time; but among strangers'Then he looked at the table.'But where's the tea ye said ye would ask Miss Douglas in to?''We were so busy with the Glasgow housekeeping,' Meenie said, laughing,'that we forgot all about it.''I'll go and get it ready now,' the little Maggie said, and she wentfrom the room, leaving these two alone.He was a little embarrassed; and she was also.  There had been noamantium irae of any kind; but all the same the integratio amoriswas just a trifle difficult; for she on her side was anxious to havetheir old relations re-established during the brief period that wouldelapse ere he left the neighbourhood, and yet she was hesitating anduncertain; while he on his side maintained a strictly respectfulreserve.  He 'knew his place;' his respect towards her was part of hisown self-respect; and if it did not occur to him that it was rather hardupon Meenie that all the advances towards a complete rehabilitation oftheir friendship should come from her, that was because he did not knowthat she was moved by any such wish, and also because he was completelyignorant of a good deal else that had happened of late.  Of course,certain things were obvious enough.  Clearly the half-frightened,distant, and yet regretful look with which she had recently met andparted from him when by chance they passed each other in the road was nolonger in her eyes; there was a kind of appeal for friendliness in hermanner towards him; she seemed to say, 'Well, you are going away; don'tlet us forget the old terms on which we used to meet.'  And not only didhe quickly respond to that feeling, but also he was abundantly gratefulto her; did not he wish to carry away with him the pleasantest memoriesof this beautiful, sweet-natured friend, who had made all the worldmagical to him for a while, who had shown him the grace and dignity andhonour of true womanhood, and made him wonder no less at the charm ofher clear-shining simplicity and naturalness? The very name of 'LoveMeenie' would be as the scent of a roseas the song of a larkfor himthrough all the long coming years.'It will make a great change about here,' said she, with her eyesaverted, 'your going away.''There's no one missed for long,' he answered, in his downright fashion.'Where people go, people come; the places get filled up.''Yes, but sometimes they are not quite the same,' said she rathergently.  She was thinking of the newcomer. Would he be the universalfavourite that Ronald wasalways good-natured and laughing, but managingeverybody and everything; lending a hand at the sheep-shearing orplaying the pipes at a weddinganything to keep life moving alongbriskly; and always ready to give her father a day's hare-shooting or aturn at the pools of Mudal-Water when the spates began to clear?  Sheknew quite wellfor often had she heard it spoken ofthat no one couldget on as well as Ronald with the shepherds at the time of theheather-burning: when on the other moors the shepherds and keepers weregrowling and quarrelling like rival leashes of collies, on Lord Ailine'sground everything was peace and quietness and good humour.  And then shehad a vague impression that the next keeper would be merely a keeper;whereas Ronald wasRonald.'I'm sure I was half ashamed,' said he, 'when I got his lordship'sletter.  It was as fair an offer as one man could make to another; orrather, half a dozen offers; for he said he would raise my wage, if thatwas what was wrong; or he would let me have another lad to help me inthe kennels; or, if I was tired of the Highlands he would get me a placeat his shooting in the south.  Well, I was sweirt to trouble hislordship with my small affairs; but after that I couldna but sit downand write to him the real reason of my leaving''And I'm certain,' said she quickly, 'that he will write back and offeryou any help in his power.''No, no,' said he, with a kind of laugh, 'the one letter is enoughif itever comes to be a question of a written character.  But it's just realfriendly and civil of him; and if I could win up here for a week or afortnight in August, I would like well to lend them a hand and set themgoing; for it will be a good year for the grouse, I'm thinking''Oh, will you be coming to see us in August?' she said, with her eyessuddenly and rather wistfully lighting up.'Well, I don't know how I may be situated,' said he. 'And there's therailway expensethough I would not mind that much if I had the chanceotherwise; for his lordship has been a good master to me; and I wouldjust like to lend him a hand, and start the new man with the managementof the dogs and the beats.  That's one thing Lord Ailine will do for me,I hope: I hope he will let me have a word about the man that's coming inmy place; I would not like to have a cantankerous ill-tempered brute ofa fellow coming in to have charge of my dogs.  They're the bonniest lotin Sutherlandshire.'All this was practical enough; and meanwhile she had set to work toclear the table, to make way for Maggie. When the young handmaidenappeared with the tea-things he left the room for a few minutes, andpresently returned with a polecat-skin, carefully dressed and smoothed,in his hand.'Here's a bit thing,' said he, 'I wish ye would take, if it's of any useto you.  Or if ye could tell me anything ye wished it made into, I couldhave that done when I go south.  And if your mother would like one ortwo of the deer-skins, I'm sure she's welcome to them; they're usefulabout a house.''Indeed, you are very kind, Ronald,' said she, flushing somewhat, 'andtoo kind, indeedfor you know that ever since we have known you allthese kindnesses have always been on one sideandandwe have never hada chance of doing anything in return for you''Oh, nonsense,' said he good-naturedly.  'Well, there is one thing yourfather could do for meif he would take my gun, and my rifle, and rodsand reels, and just keep them in good working order, that would bebetter than taking them to Glasgow and getting them spoiled with rustand want of use.  I don't want to part with them altogether; for they'reold friends; and I would like to have them left in safe keepingShe laughed lightly.'And that is your way of asking a favourto offer my father the loan ofall these things.  Well, I am sure he will be very glad to take chargeof them''And to use them,' said he, 'to use them; for that is the sure way ofkeeping them in order.''But perhaps the new keeper may not be so friendly?''Oh, I will take care about that,' said he confidently; 'and in any caseyou know it was his lordship said your father might have a day on theMudal-Water whenever he liked.  And what do you think, now, about thelittle skin there?''I think I will keep it as it isjust as you have given it to me,' shesaid simply.In due course they had tea together; but that afternoon or evening mealis a substantial affair in the north-cold beef, ham, scones, oatmealcake, marmalade, jam, and similar things all making their appearanceandone not to be lightly hurried over.  And Meenie was so much at home now;and there was so much to talk over; and she was so hopeful.  Of course,Ronald must have holiday-times, like other people; and where would hespend these, if he did not come back to his old friends?  And he wouldhave such chances as no mere stranger could have, coming through on themail-cart and asking everywhere for a little trout-fishing.  Ronaldwould have a day or two's stalking from Lord Ailine; and there was theloch; and Mudal-Water; and if the gentlemen were after the grouse, wouldthey not be glad to have an extra gun on the hill for a day or two, justto make up a bag for them?'And then,' said Meenie, with a smile, 'who knows but that Ronald may intime be able to have a shooting of his own?  Stranger things havehappened.'When tea was over and the things removed he lit his pipe, and the girlstook to their knitting.  And never, he thought, had Meenie looked sopretty and pleased and quickly responsive with her clear and happy eyes.He forgot all about Mrs. Douglas's forecast as to the future estate ofher daughter; he forgot all about the Stuarts of Glengask and Orosay;this was the Meenie whom Mudal knew, whom Clebrig had charge of, who wasthe friend and companion of the birds and the wild-flowers and thesummer streams.  What a wonderful thing it was to see her small fingersso deftly at work; when she looked up the room seemed full of light andentrancement; her sweet low laugh found an echo in the very core of hisheart.  And they all of them, for this one happy evening, seemed toforget that soon there was to be an end.  They were together; the worldshut out; the old harmony re-established, or nearly re-established; andMeenie was listening to his reading of 'the Eve of St. Agnes'in thebreathless hush of the little roomor she was praying, and in vain, forhim to bring his pipes and play 'Lord Lovat's Lament,' or they weremerely idly chatting and laughing, while the busy work of the fingerswent on.  And sometimes he sate quite silent, listening to the othertwo; and her voice seemed to fill the room with music; and he wonderedwhether he could carry away in his memory some accurate recollection ofthe peculiar, soft, rich tone, that made the simplest things soundvaluable.  It was a happy evening.But when she rose to go away she grew graver; and as she and Ronald wentalong the road togetherit was very dark, though there were a few starsvisible here and thereshe said to him in rather a low voice'Well, Ronald, the parting between friends is not very pleasant, but Iam sure I hope it will all be for the best, now that you have made upyour mind to it.  And every one seems to think you will do well.''Oh, as for that,' said he, 'that is all right.  If the worst comes tothe worst, there is always the Black Watch.''What do you mean?''Well, they're always sending the Forty-Second into the thick of it, nomatter what part of the world the fighting is, so that a man has a goodchance.  I suppose I'm not too old to get enlisted; sometimes I wish Ihad thought of it when I was a ladI don't know that I would likeanything better than to be a sergeant in the Black Watch.  And I'm sureI would serve three years for no pay at all if I could only get onesingle chance of winning the V.C.  But it comes to few; it's like thebig stagit's there when ye least expect it; and a man's hand is notjust always ready, and steady.  But I'm sure ye needna bother aboutwhat's going to happen to methat's of small account.''It is of very great account to your friends, at all events,' said shevaliantly, 'and you must not forget, when you are far enough away fromhere, that you have friends here who are thinking of you and alwayswishing you well.  It will be easy for you to forget; you will have allkinds of things to do, and many people around you; but the others heremay often think of you, and wish to hear from you.  It is the one thatgoes away that has the best of it, I thinkamong the excitement ofmeeting strange scenes and strange faces''But I am not likely to forget,' said he, rather peremptorily; and theywalked on in silence.Presently she said'I have a little album that I wish you would write something in beforeyou go away altogether.''Oh yes, I will do that,' said he, 'and gladly.''But I mean something of your own,' she said rather more timidly.'Why, but who told you'Oh, every one knows, surely!' said she.  'And why should you concealit?  There were the verses that you wrote about Mrs. Semple's littlegirlI saw them when I was at Tongue lastand indeed I think they arequite beautiful: will you write out a copy of them in my album?''Or something else, perhaps,' said hefor instantly it flashed upon himthat it was something better than a mere copy that was needed forMeenie's book.  Here, indeed, was a chance.  If there was anyinspiration to be gained from these wild hills and straths and lonelylakes, now was the time for them to be propitious; would not Clebrigthegiant Clebrigwhose very child Meenie wascome to his aid, that so hemight present to her some fragment of song or rhyme not unworthy to beadded to her little treasury?'I will send for the book to-morrow,' said he.'I hope it will not give you too much trouble,' said she, as theyreached the small gate, 'but it is very pleasant to turn over the leavesand see the actual writing of your friends, and think of when you lastsaw them and where they are now.  And that seems to be the way with mostof our friends; I suppose it is because we have moved about so; butthere is scarcely any one leftand if it was not for a letteroccasionally, or a dip into that album, I should think we were almostalone in the world.  Well, good-night, Ronaldor will you come in andhave a chat with my father?''I am afraid it is rather late,' he said.'Well, good-night.''Good-night, Miss Douglas,' said he, and then he walked slowly back tohis home.And indeed he was in no mood to turn to the scientific volumes that hadalready arrived from Glasgow.  His heart was all afire because of therenewal of Meenie's kindness; and the sound of her voice was still inhis ears; and quite naturally he took out that blotting-pad full ofsongs and fragments of songs, to glance over them here and there, andsee if amongst them there was any one likely to recall to him when hewas far away from Inver-Mudal the subtle mystery and charm of her mannerand look.  And then he began to think what a stranger coming toInver-Mudal would see in Meenie?  Perhaps only the obvious thingsthepretty oval of the cheek and chin, the beautiful proud mouth, thewide-apart contemplative eyes?  And perhaps these would be sufficient toattract?  He began to laugh with scorn at this strangerwho could onlysee these obvious thingswho knew nothing about Meenie, and thesweetness of her ways, her shrewd common-sense and the frank courage andhonour of her mind.  And what if she were to turn coquette under theinfluence of this alien admiration?  Or perhaps become sharply proud?Well, he set to workout of a kind of whimsicalityand in time hadscribbled out thisFLOWER AUCTION.Who will buy pansies?There are her eyes,Dew-soft and tender,Love in them lies.Who will buy roses?There are her lips,And there is the nectarThat Cupidon sips.Who will buy lilies?There are her cheeks,And there the shy blushingThat maidhood bespeaks.'Meenie, Love Meenie,What must one pay?''Good stranger, the market'sNot open to-day!'He looked at the verses again and again; and the longer he looked atthem the less he liked themhe scarcely knew why.  Perhaps they were alittle too literary?  They seemed to lack naturalness and simplicity; atall events, they were not true to Meenie; why should Meenie figure as aflippant coquette?  And so he threw them away and turned to hisbooksnot the scientific onesto hunt out something that was likeMeenie.  He came near it in Tannahill, but was not quite satisfied.  Averse or two in Keats held his fancy for a moment.  But at last he foundwhat he wanted in Wordsworth'A violet by a mossy stoneHalf hidden from the eye;Fair as a star, when only oneIs shining in the sky.'Yes; that was liker Meeniewho 'dwelt among the untrodden ways.'*CHAPTER V.**A LESSON IN FLY-FISHING.*Miss Carry Hodson returned from Paris in a very radiant mood; she hadhad what she called a real good time, and everything connected with thewedding had gone off most successfully.  Her dress, that she had orderedlong before she came to the Highlands, was a perfect fit; Lily Seldenmade the most charming and beautiful of brides; and no less a personthan a prince (rather swarthy, and hailing from some mysterious regioneast of the Carpathians) had proposed the health of the bridesmaids, andhad made especial mention of the young ladies who had travelled longdistances to be present on the auspicious occasion.However, on the morning after her return to Inver-Mudal her equanimitywas somewhat dashed.  When she went along the passage to the littlehallto see what the morning was like outsideshe found waiting there arespectable-looking elderly Highlander, with grizzled locks, who touchedhis cap to her, and who had her waterproof over his arm. This lastcircumstance made her suspicious; instantly she went back to her father.'Who is that man?' she asked.'What man?''Why, an old man, who is waiting there, and he has got my waterproofslung over his arm.''Well, I suppose that is the new gillie.''Isn't Ronald going down?' she said, with very evident disappointment.'Of course not,' her father said, with some sharpness. 'I think you havetaken up enough of his time.  And just now, when he is getting ready togo away, do you think I could allow him to waste day after day inattending to us? Seems to me it would be more to the point if you putyour small amount of brain into devising some means of squaring up withhim for what he has done already.''Oh, very well,' she saidor rather, what she did really say was 'Oh,vurry well'and the pretty, pale, attractive face resumed its ordinarycomplacency, and she went off to make friends with the new gillie.  Shewas on good terms with the old Highlander in about a couple of minutes;and presently they were on their way down to the loch, along with thelad John.  Her father was to follow as soon as he had finished hisletters.But she was now to discover, what she had never discovered before, thatsalmon-fishing on a loch is a rather monotonous affair, unless the fishare taking very freely indeed.  For one thing, the weather had settleddown into a fine, clear, spring-like calm and quiet that was not at allfavourable to the sport.  It was very beautiful, no doubt; for sometimesfor hours together the lake would be like a sheet of glassthe yellowshores and purple birch-woods all accurately doubled, with nearer athand the faint white reflections of the snow-peaks in the northstretching out into the soft and deep blue; and when a breath of wind,from some unexpected point of the compass, began to draw a sharp line ofsilver between earth and water, and then came slowly across the loch tothem, ruffling out that magic inverted picture on its way, the breezewas deliciously fresh and balmy, and seemed to bring with it tidings ofthe secret life that was working forward to the leafiness of summer.They kept well out into the midst of this spacious circle of loveliness,for old Malcolm declared they would be doing more harm than good bygoing over the fishing-ground; so she had a sufficiently ample view ofthis great panorama of water and wood and far mountain-slopes.  But itgrew monotonous. She began to think of Paris, and the brisk, busy daysahurry of gaiety and pleasure and interest using up every possibleminute.  She wished she had a booksome knittinganything.  Why, whenRonald was in the boatwith his quick sarcastic appreciation of everystory she had to tell, or every experience she had to describethere wasalways enough amusement and talking.  But this old man was hopeless.She asked him questions about his croft, his family, his sheep and cows;and he answered gravely; but she took no interest in his answers, as herfather might have done.  She was unmistakably glad to get ashore forlunchwhich was picturesque enough, by the way, with that beautifulbackground all around; and neither her father nor herself was in anyhurry to break up the small picnic-party and set to work again.Nor did they do much better in the afternoonthough her father managedto capture a small eight-pounder; and so, in the evening, before dinner,she went along to Ronald to complain.  She found him busy with hisbooks; his gun and cap and telescope lying on the table beside him,showed that he had just come in.'Ay,' said he, 'it's slow work in weather like this.  But will ye no sitdown?' and he went and brought her a chair.'No, I thank you,' said she; 'I came along to see if you thought therewas likely to be any change.  Is your glass a good one?''First-rate,' he answered, and he went to the small aneroid and tappedit lightly.  'It was given me by a gentleman that shot his first stag uphere.  I think he would have given me his head, he was so pleased.Well, no, Miss Hodson, there's not much sign of a change. But I'll tellye what we'll do, if you're tired of the loch, we'll try one or two ofthe pools on the Mudal.''You mean the river down there?''There's not much hope there eitherfor the water's low the now; but wemight by chance get a little wind, or there are some broken bits in thestream'But you mean with a flyhow could I throw a fly?' she exclaimed.'Ye'll never learn younger,' was the quiet answer.  'It there's nochange to-morrow I'll take ye up the river myselfand at least ye canget some practice in casting''Oh no, no,' said she hurriedly, 'thank you very much, but I must nottake up your time''I'm no so busy that I cannot leave the house for an hour or two,' saidheand she understood by his manner that he was 'putting his foot down,'in which case she knew she might just as well give in at once.  'But Iwarn ye that it's a dour river at the best, and not likely to be in goodply; however, we might just happen on one.'  And then he added, by wayof explanation, 'If we should, it will have to be sent to Lord Ailine,ye understand.''Why?''Because the river doesna belong to your fishing; it goes with theshooting.''Oh,' said she, somewhat coldly.  'And so, when Lord Ailine gives anyone a day's fishing he claims whatever fish they may catch?''When his lordship gives a day's fishing he does not; but when thekeeper doesthat's different,' was the perfectly simple and respectfulanswer.'Oh, I beg your pardon,' said she hastily, and sincerely hoping she hadsaid nothing to wound his feelings. Apparently she had not, for heproceeded to warn her about the necessity of her putting on a thick pairof boots; and he also gently hinted that she might wear on her headsomething less conspicuous than the bright orange Tam o' Shanter ofwhich she seemed rather fond.Accordingly, next morning, instead of sending him a message that she wasready, she walked along to the cottage, accoutred for a thorough stiffday's work.  The outer door was open, so she entered without ceremony;and then tapped at the door of the little parlour, which she proceededto open also.  She then found that Ronald was not alone; there was ayoung man sitting there, who instantly rose as she made her appearance.She had but a momentary glimpse of him, but she came to the conclusionthat the gamekeepers in this part of the world were a good-looking race,for this was a strongly-built young fellow, keen and active, apparently,with a rather pink and white complexion, closely-cropped head, brightyellow moustache, and singularly clear blue eyes.  He wore a plain tweedsuit; and as he rose he picked up a billycock hat that was lying on thetable.'I'll see you to-night, Ronald,' said he, 'I'm going off by the mailagain to-morrow.'And as he passed by Miss Carry, he said, very modestly and respectfully'I hope you will have good sport.''Thank you,' said she, most civilly, for he seemed a well-mannered youngman, as he slightly bowed to her in passing, and made his way out.Ronald had everything ready for the start.'I'm feared they'll be laughing at us for trying the river on so clear aday,' said he, as he put his big fly-book in his pocket.  'And there'sbeen no rain to let the fish get up.''Oh I don't mind about that,' said she, as he held the door open, andshe went out, 'it will be more interesting than the lake.  However, I'venothing to say against the lake fishing, for it has done such wondersfor my father.  I have not seen him so well for years.  Whether it isthe quiet life, or the mountain air, I don't know, but he sleepsperfectly, and he has entirely given up the bromide of potassium.  I dohope he will take the shooting and come back in the autumn.''His lordship was saying there were two other gentlemen after it,'remarked Ronald significantly.'Who was saying?''His lordshipthat was in the house the now when ye came in.''Was that Lord Ailine?' she saidand she almost paused in their walkalong the road.'Oh yes.''You don't say!  Why, how did he come here?''By the mail this morning.''With the country people?''Just like anybody else,' he said.'Well, I declare!  I thought he would have come with a coach andoutridersin state, you know''What for?' said he impassively.  'He had no luggage, I suppose, but abag and a waterproof.  It's different in the autumn, of course, when allthe gentlemen come up, and there's luggage and the rifles and thecartridge-boxesthen they have to have a brake or a waggonette.''And that was Lord Ailine,' she said, half to herself; and there was nofurther speaking between them until they had gone past the Doctor'scottage and over the bridge and were some distance up 'the strath thatMudal laves'to quote her companion's own words.'Now,' said he, as he stooped and began to put together the slendergrilse-rod, 'we'll just let ye try a cast or two on this bit of opengrassand we'll no trouble with a fly as yet.'He fastened on the reel, got the line through the rings, and drew out afew yards' length.  Then he gave her the rod; showed her how to hold it;and then stood just behind her, with his right hand covering hers.'Now,' said he, 'keep your left hand just about as steady as ye cananddon't jerkthis wayOf course it was really he who was making these few preliminary casts,and each time the line ran out and fell straight and trembling on thegrass.'Now try it yourself.'At first she made a very bad job of itespecially when she tried to doit by main force; the line came curling down not much more than therod's length in front of her, and the more she whipped the closer becamethe curls.'I'm afraid I don't catch on quite,' she said, unconsciously adoptingone of her father's phrases.'Patiencepatience,' said he; and again he gripped her hand in his andthe line seemed to run out clear with the gentlest possible forwardmovement.And then he put out more lineand still more and moreuntil everybackward and upward swoop of the rod, and every forward cast, wasaccompanied by a 'swish' through the air.  This was all very well; andshe was throwing a beautiful, clean line; but she began to wonder whenthe bones in her right hand would suddenly succumb and be crunched intoa jelly.  The weight of the rodwhich seemed a mighty engine to herdidnot tell on her, for his one hand did the whole thing; but his grip wasterrible; and yet she did not like to speak.'Now try for yourself,' said he, and he stepped aside.'Wait a minute,' she saidand she shook her hand, to get the life backinto it.'I did not hurt you?' said he, in great concern.'We learn in suffering what we teach in song,' she said lightly.  'If Iam to catch a salmon with a fly-rod, I suppose I have got to go throughsomething.'She set to work again; and, curiously enough, she seemed to succeedbetter with the longer line than with the short one.  There was lessjerking; the forward movement was more even; and though she was farindeed from throwing a good line, it was very passable for a beginner.'You know,' said she, giving him a good-humoured hint, 'I don't feellike doing this all day.''Well, then, we'll go down to the water now,' said he, and he took therod from her.They walked down through the swampy grass and heather to the banks ofthe stream; and here he got out his fly-booka bulged and baggy volumemuch the worse for wear.  And then it instantly occurred to her thatthis was something she could get for himthe most splendid fly-book andassortment of salmon flies to be procured in Londonuntil it just assuddenly occurred to her that he would have little use for these inGlasgow.  She saw him select a smallish black and gold andcrimson-tipped object from that bulky volume; and a few minutesthereafter she was armed for the fray, and he was standing by watching.Now the Mudal, though an exceedingly 'dour' salmon-river, is at leasteasy for a beginner to fish, for there is scarcely anywhere a bush alongits level banks.  And there were the poolssome of them deep and drumlyenough in all conscience; and no doubt there were salmon in them, ifonly they could be seduced from their lair.  For one thing, Ronald hadtaken her to a part of the stream where she could not, in any case, domuch harm by her preliminary whippings of the water.She begannot without some little excitement, and awful visions oftriumph and glory if she should really be able to capture a salmon byher own unaided skill.  Of course she caught in the heather behind hersometimes; and occasionally the line would come down in a ghastly heapon the water; but then again it would go fairly out and over to theother bank, and the letting it down with the current and drawing itacrossas he had shown her in one or two castswas a comparatively easymatter.  She worked hard, at all events, and obeyed implicitlyuntilalas! there came a catastrophe.'A little bit nearer the bank if you can,' said he; 'just a footnearer.'She clenched her teeth.  Back went the rod with all her mightandforward again with all her mightbut midway and overhead there was amighty crack like that of a horse-whip; and calmly he regarded the lineas it fell on the water.'The fly's gone,' said hebut with not a trace of vexation.'Oh, Ronald, I'm so sorry!' she cried, for she knew that these thingswere expensive, even where they did not involve a considerable outlay ofpersonal skill and trouble.'Not at all,' said he, as he quietly sate down on a dry bunch of heatherand got out his book again.  'All beginners do that.  I'll just show yein a minute or two how to avoid it.  And we'll try a change now.'Indeed she was in no way loth to sit down on the heather too; and evenafter he had selected the particular Childers he wanted, she took thebook, and would have him tell her the names of all the various flies,which, quite apart from their killing merits, seemed to her beautifuland interesting objects.  And finally she said'Ronald, my arms are a little tired.  Won't you try a cast or two?  I amsure I should learn as much by looking on.'He did as he was bid; and she went with him; but he could not stiranything.  The river was low; the day was clear; there was no wind.  Butat last they came to a part of the stream where there was a dark anddeep pool, and below that a wide bed of shingle, while between theshingle and the bank was a narrow channel where the water tossed andraced before breaking out into the shallows.  He drew her a little bitback from the bank and made her take the rod again.'If there's a chance at all, it's there,' he said.  'Do ye see thatstone over there?well, just try to drop the fly a foot above the stone,and let it get into the swirl.'She made her first castthe line fell in a tangled heap about threeyards short.'Ye've got out of the way of it,' said he, and he took the rod from her,let out a little more line, and then gave it to her again, standingbehind her, with his hand over-gripping hers.'Now!'The fly fell a foot shortbut clean.  The next cast it fell at theprecise spot indicated, and was swept into the current, and draggedslowly and jerkily across.  Again he made the cast for her, with thesame negative result; and then he withdrew his hand.'That's rightvery well done!' he said, as she continued.'Yes, but what's the use when you have tried'She had scarcely got the words out when she suddenly found the line heldtightand tightershe saw it cut its way through the water, up andtowards the bank of the pool aboveand down and down was the point ofthe rod pulled until it almost touched the stream.  All this hadhappened in one wild second.'Let the line go!what are ye doing, lassie?' he cried. The fact wasthat in her sudden alarm she had grasped both line and rod more firmlythan ever; and in another half second the fish must inevitably havebroken something. But this exclamation of his recalled her to hersensesshe let the line go freegot up the rodand then waitedeventswith her heart in her mouth.  She had not long to wait.  It verysoon appeared to her as if she had hooked an incarnate flash oflightning; for there was nothing this beast did not attempt to do; nowrushing down the narrow channel so close to the bank that a singleout-jutting twig must have cut the line; now lashing on the edge of theshallows; twice jerking himself into the air; and then settling down inthe deep pool, not to sulk, but to twist and tug at the line in a seriesof angry snaps.  And always it was 'Oh, Ronald, what shall I do now?' or'Ronald, what will he do next?''You're doing well enough,' said he placidly.  'But it will be a longfight; and ye must not let him too far down the stream, or he'll take yebelow the foot bridge.  And don't give him much line; follow him,rather.'She was immediately called on to act on this advice; for with onedetermined, vicious rush, away went the salmon down the streamshe afterhim as well as her woman's skirts would allow, and always and valorouslyshe was keeping a tight strain on the pliant rod.  Alas! all of a suddenher foot caught in a tuft of heatherdown she went, prone, her armsthrown forward so that nothing could save her.  But did she let go therod?  Not a bit!  She clung to it with the one hand; and when Ronaldhelped her to her feet again, she had no thought of herself at allallher breathless interest was centred on the salmon.  Fortunately thatcreature had now taken to sulking, in a pool farther down; and shefollowed him, getting in the line the while.'But I'm afraid you're hurt,' said he.'No, no.'Something was tickling the side of her face.  She shifted the grip ofthe rod, and passed the back of her right hand across her ear; a briefglance showed her that her knuckles were stained with blood.  But shetook no further heed; for she had to get both hands on the rod again.'She has pluck, that one,' Ronald said to himself; but he said nothingaloud, he wanted her to remain as self-possessed as possible.'And what if he goes down to the footbridge, Ronald?' she saidpresently.'But ye must not let him.''But if he will go?''Then ye'll give me the rod and I'll take it under the bridge.'The fish lay there as heavy and dead as a stone; nothing they could docould stir him an inch.'The beast has been at this work before,' Ronald said. 'That jagging toget the hook out is the trick of an old hand.  But this sulking willnever do at all.'He left her and went farther up the stream to the place where the riverran over the wide bed of shingle.  There he deliberately walked into thewaterpicking up a few pebbles as he wentand, with a running leap,crossed the channel and gained the opposite bank.  Then he quicklywalked down to within a yard or two of the spot where the 'dour' salmonlay.She thought this was very foolish child's play that he should go andfling little stones at a fish he could not see. But presently sheperceived that he was trying all he could to get the pebbles to dropvertically and parallel with the line.  And then the object of thisdevice was apparent. The salmon moved heavily forward, some few inchesonly. Another pebble was dropped.  This time the fish made a violentrush up stream that caused Miss Carry's reel to shriek; and off she setafter him (but with more circumspection this time as regards herfooting), getting in the line as rapidly as possible as she went.Ronald now came over and joined her, and this was comforting to hernerves.Well, long before she had killed that fish she had discovered thedifference between loch-fishing and river-fishing; but she did kill himin the end; and mightily pleased she was when she saw him lying on thesere wintry grass.  Ronald would have had her try again; but she had hadenough; it was past lunch time, and she was hungry; moreover, she wastired; and then again she did not wish that he should waste the wholeday.  So, when she had sate down for a while, and watched him tie thesalmon head and tail, they set out for the village again, very wellcontent; while as for the slight wound she had received by her earcatching on a twig of heather when she fell, that was quite forgottennow.'And ye are to have the fish,' said he.  'I told his lordship thismorning you were going to try your hand at the casting; and he said ifyou got one you would be proud of it, no doubt, and ye were to keep it,of course.''Well, that is very kind; I suppose I must thank him if I see him?'And she was very curious to know all about Lord Ailine; and why heshould come to Inver-Mudal merely for these few hours; and what kind ofpeople he brought with him in the autumn.  He answered her as well as hecould; and then they went on to other thingsall in a very gay and merrymood, for he was as proud as she was over this achievement.At the same moment Meenie Douglas was in her own little room, engaged ona work of art of a not very ambitious kind.  She had lying before her onthe table a pencil-sketch in outline of such features of the landscapeas could be seen from the windowthe loch, the wooded promontories, BenClebrig, and the little clump of trees that sheltered the inn; and shewas engaged in making a smaller copy of this drawing, in pen and ink, ona paper-cutter of brown wood. She was not much of an artist, perhaps;but surely these simple outlines were recognisable; and if they were tobe entitled 'A Souvenir,' and carried away to the south as a littleparting present, might they not in some idle moment of the future recallsome brief memory of these northern wilds? So she was at work on thistaskand very careful that the lines should be clear and precisewhenshe heard the sound of voices withoutor rather one voice, whichpresently she recognised to be Ronald's: she could not easily mistakeit. And if she were to go to the window and get him to stop for aminute, at the gate, and show him the sketch that she had just aboutfinishedperhaps he would be pleased?She went to the windowbut instantly drew back.  She had just caught aglimpse: it was the American young lady he was walking withat a timewhen he was supposed to be so busy; and he was carrying her rod for herand her ulster as well as the salmon; and they were laughing and gailytalking together, like a pair of lovers almost on this clear spring day.Meenie went slowly back to the tableher face perhaps a trifle palerthan usual; and she sate down, and began to look at the little drawingthat she had been rather proud of.  But her lips were proud and firm.Why should she give a drawing to any onemore especially to one who wasso ready with his friendship and so quick to consort with strangers?The lines on the brown wood seemed cold and uninteresting; she was nolonger anxious that they should suggest an accurate picture; nay, shepushed the thing away from her, and rose, and went back to the window,and stood idly gazing out there, her lips still proud, her mien defiant.And thenwell, Ronald was going away.  Was it worth while to let prideor self-love come between them and becloud these last few days, whenperhaps they might never see each other again?  For well she knew of hermother's aims and hopes with regard to herself; and well she knewthatwhatever she may have guessed from the verses of Ronald's whichassuredly had never been meant for her to seeit was neither for him norfor her to expect that the harsh facts and necessities of the worldshould give place and yield to a passing fancy, a dream, a kind ofwistful, half-poetic shadow of what otherwise might have been. But atleast Ronald and she might part friends; nay, they should part friends.And so she returned to the tableovermastering her momentary pride; andshe took up the discarded little drawing and regarded it with gentlereyes. For, after all (as she could not forget) Ronald was going away.*CHAPTER VI.**POETA ... NON FIT.*It soon became obvious that the salmon-fishers from the other side ofthe Atlantic had got into a long spell of deplorably fine weather; and agentle melancholy settled down upon the souls of the gillies.  In vain,morning after morning, the men searched every quarter of the heavens forany sign of even a couple of days' deluge to flood the rivers and sendthe kelts down and bring the clean salmon up from the sea.  This wildand bleak region grew to be like some soft summer fairyland; the blueloch and the yellow headlands, and the far treeless stretches of moorlay basking in the sunlight; Ben Loyal's purples and browns were clearto the summit; Ben Clebrig's snows had nearly all melted away.  Norcould the discontented boatmen understand how the two strangers shouldaccept this state of affairs with apparent equanimity.  Both were nowprovided with a book; and when the rods had been properly set so as tobe ready for any emergency, they could pass the time pleasantly enoughin this perfect stillness, gliding over the smooth waters, and drinkingin the sweet mountain air.  As for Miss Carry, she had again attackedthe first volume of Gibbonfor she would hot be beaten; and verystartling indeed it was when a fish did happen to strike the minnow, tobe so suddenly summoned back from Palmyra to this Highland loch.  Inperfect silence, with eyes and attention all absented, she would bereading thus'When the Syrian queen was brought into the presence of Aurelian, hesternly asked her, how she had presumed to rise in arms against theEmperor of Rome?  The answer of Zenobia was a prudent mixture of respectand firmness'when sharp would come the warning cry of Malcolm'Therehe is, Miss!there he is!'and she would dash down the historian to findthe rod being violently shaken and the reel screaming out its joyousnote.  Moreover, in this still weather, the unusual visitor notunfrequently brought some other element of surprise with him.  Sheacquired a considerable experience of the different forms offoul-hooking and of the odd manoeuvres of the fish in suchcircumstances.  On one occasion the salmon caught himself on the minnowby his dorsal fin; and for over an hour contented himself with rollingabout under water without once showing himself, and with such a strainthat she thought he must be the champion fish of the lake: when at lastthey did get him into the boat he was found to be a trifle under tenpounds.  But, taken altogether, this cultivation of literature, variedby an occasional 'fluke' of a capture, and these placid and dreamlikemornings and afternoons, were far from being as satisfactory as theformer and wilder days when Ronald was in the boat, even with all theirdiscomforts of wind and rain and snow.By this time she had acquired another grievance.'Why did you let him go, pappa, without a single word?' she would say,as they sate over their books or newspapers in the evening.  'It was myonly chance.  You could easily have introduced yourself to him byspeaking of the shooting''You know very well, Carry,' he would answertrying to draw her into thefields of common sense'I can say nothing about that till I see howmother's health is.''I am sure she would say yes if she saw what the place has done for you,pappa; salmon-fishing has proved better for you than bromide ofpotassium.  But that's not the trouble at all.  Why did you let him go?Why did you let him spend the evening at the Doctor's?and the nextmorning he went about the whole time with Ronald!  My only chance ofspurning a lord, too.  Do they kneel in this country, pappa, when theymake their declaration; or is that only in plays?  Never mind; it wouldbe all the same.  "No, my lord; the daughter of a free Republic cannotwed a relic of feudalism; farewell, my lord, farewell! I know that youare heart-broken for life; but the daughter of a free Republic must betrue to her manifest destiny."''Oh, be quiet!''And then the girls at home, when I got back, they would all have comecrowding around: "Do tell, now, did you get a British nobleman topropose, Carry?"  "What do you imagine I went to Europe for?"  "And yourejected him?"  "You bet your pile on that.  Why, you should have seenhim writhe on the floor when I spurned him!  I spurned him, I tell you Ididthe daughter of a free Republic"''Will you be quiet!''But it was really too bad, pappa!' she protested. 'There he waslounging around all the morning.  And all I heard him say was when hewas just goingwhen he was on the mail-car, "Ronald," he called out,"have you got a match about you?"and he had a wooden pipe in his hand.And that's all I know about the manners and conversation of the Britishnobility; and what will they say of me at home?''When does Ronald go?' he would ask; and this, at least, was one sureway of bringing her back to the paths of sanity and soberness; for thenearer that this departure came, the more concerned she was about it,having some faint consciousness that she herself had a share of theresponsibility.And in another direction, moreover, she was becoming a little anxious.No message of any kind had arrived from the Chicago Citizen.  Now shehad written to Miss Kerfoot before she left for Paris; her stay in theFrench capital had extended to nearly three weeks; there was the spaceoccupied in going and returning; so that if Jack Huysen meant to doanything with the verses it was about time that that should appear.  Andthe more she thought of it the more she set her heart on it, and hopedthat Ronald's introduction to the reading public would be a flatteringone and one of which he could reasonably be proud.  Her father had it inhis power to secure his material advancement; and that was well enough;but what if it were reserved for her to confer a far greater service onhim? For if this first modest effort were welcomed in a friendly way,might he not be induced to put forth a volume, and claim a widerrecognition?  It need not interfere with his more practical work; andthen, supposing it were successful?  Look at the status it would win forhima thing of far more value in the old country, where society isgradated into ranks, than in her country, where every one (except hotelclerks, as she insisted) was on the same plane. He would then be theequal of anybodyeven in this old England; she had at least acquired sofar a knowledge of English society.  And if he owed the first suggestionand impulse to her?if she were to be the means, in however small andtentative a fashion, of his ultimately establishing his fame?  That hecould do so if he tried, she never thought of doubting.  She saw himevery day, and the longer she knew him the more she was certain that theobvious mental force that seemed to radiate from him in the ordinaryconversation and discussion of everyday life only wanted to be put intoa definite literary channel to make its mark.  And was not the time ripefor a poet? And it was not Edinburgh, or Glasgow, or London that hadnowadays to decide on his merits, but two great continents ofEnglish-speaking people.At length came the answer to her urgent prayera letter from MissKerfoot and a copy of the Chicago Citizen. The newspaper she openedfirst; saw with delight that a long noticea very long notice indeedhadbeen accorded to the verses she had sent; and with a proud heart she putthe paper in her pocket, for careful reading when she should get down tothe lake.  Miss Kerfoot's letter she glanced over; but it did not saymuch; the writer observed that Mr. Jack Huysen had only seemed halfpleased when informed of Carry's extraordinary interest in thephenomenal Scotch gamekeeper; and, referring to the article in theCitizen, she said Jack Huysen had entrusted the writing of it to Mr.G. Quincy Regan, who was, she understood, one of the most cultured youngmen in Chicago, and likely to make quite a reputation for himself erelong.  There were some other matters mentioned in this letter; but theyneed not detain us here.Miss Carry was in very high spirits as she set forth from the inn withher father to walk down to the boats.  They met Ronald, too, on theirway; he was accompanied by the man who was to take his place after hisleaving; and Miss Carry could not help comparing the two of them as theycame along the road.  But, after all, it was not outward appearance thatmade the real difference between men; it was mental stature; she hadthat in her pocket which could show to everybody how Ronald was a headand shoulders over any of his peers.  And she took but little interestin the setting up of the rods or the selection of the minnows; shewanted to be out on the lake, alone, in the silence, to read line byline and word by word this introduction of her hero to the public.The following is the article:'A REMARKABLE LITERARY DISCOVERYOUR FELLOW-CITIZENS ABROADANOTHERRUSTIC POETCHICAGO CLAIMS HIM.  It may be in the recollection of someof our readers that a few years ago a small party of American tourists,consisting of Curtis H. Mack, who was one of our most distinguishedmajor-generals in the rebellion, and is now serving on the Indianfrontier; his niece, Miss Hettie F. Doig, a very talented lady andcontributor to several of our best periodicals; and John GrimsbyPatterson, editor of the Baltimore Evening News, were travelling inEurope, when they had the good fortune to discover an Irish poet,Patrick Milligan, who had long languished in obscurity, no doubt thevictim of British jealousy as well as of misrule. Major-General Mackinterested himself in this poor man, and, in conjunction with William B.Stevens, of Cleveland, Ohio, had him brought over to this country, wherethey were eventually successful in obtaining for him a postmastership inNew Petersburg, Conn., leaving him to devote such time as he pleased tothe service of the tuneful nine. Mr. Milligan's Doric reed has not pipedto us much of late years; but we must all remember the stirring verseswhich he wrote on the occasion of Colonel George W. Will's nominationfor Governor of Connecticut.  It has now been reserved for another partyof American travellers, still better known to us than the above, forthey are no other than our esteemed fellow-citizen, Mr. Josiah Hodsonand his brilliant and accomplished daughter, Miss Caroline Hodson, tomake a similar discovery in the Highlands of Scotland; and in view ofsuch recurring instances, we may well ask whether there be not in themental alertness of our newer civilisation a capacity for the detectionand recognition of intellectual merit which exists not among thedeadening influences of an older and exhausted civilisation. It hassometimes been charged against this country that we do not excel in artsand letters; that we are in a measure careless of them; that politicalproblems and material interests occupy our mind.  The present writer, atleast, is in no hurry to repel that charge, odious as it may seem tosome.  We, as Americans, should remember that the Athenian Republic,with which our western Republic has nothing to fear in the way ofcomparison, when it boasted its most lavish display of artistic andliterary culture, was no less conspicuous for its moral degeneracy andpolitical corruption.  It was in the age of Pericles and of Phidias, ofSocrates and Sophocles, of Euripides and Aristophanes and Thucydides,that Athens showed herself most profligate; private licence wasunbridled; justice was bought and sold; generals incited to war thatthey might fill their pockets out of the public purse; and all thisspectacle in striking contrast with the manly virtues of the rude andunlettered kingdom of Sparta, whose envoys were laughed at because theyhad not the trick of Athenian oratory and casuistry. We say, then, thatwe are not anxious to repel this charge brought against our greatwestern Republic, that we assign to arts and letters a secondary place;on the contrary, we are content that the over-cultivation of theseshould fatten on the decaying and effete nations of Europe, asphosphorus shines in rotten wood.'Now she had determined to read every sentence of this articleconscientiously, as something more than a mere intellectual treat; but,as she went on, joy did not seem to be the result.  The reference toPatrick Milligan and the postmastership in Connecticut she considered tobe distinctly impertinent; but perhaps Jack Huysen had not explainedclearly to the young gentleman all that she had written to Emma Kerfoot?Anyhow, she thought, when he came to Ronald's little Highland poem, hewould perhaps drop his Athenians, and talk more like a reasonable humanbeing.'That the first strain from the new singer's lyre should be placed atthe services of the readers of the Citizen, we owe to the patriotismof the well-known and charming lady whose name we have given above; norcould the verses have fallen into better hands.  In this case there isno need that Horace should cry to TyndarisO matre pulchr filia pulchrior,Quem criminosis cunque voles modumPones iambis, sive flammSive mari libet Hadriano.Moreover, we have received a hint that this may not be the last piece ofthe kind with which we may be favoured; so that we have again to thankour fair fellow-townswoman for her kindly attention.  But lest ourreaders may be growing weary of this prolegomenon, we will at oncequote this latest utterance of the Scottish muse which has come to usunder such favourable auspices:'Here followed Ronald's poor verses, that perhaps looked insignificantenough, after this sonorous trumpet-blaring. The writer proceeded:'Now certain qualities in this composition are so obvious that we needhardly specify them; we give the writer credit for simplicity, pathos,and a hearty sympathy with the victims of the tyrannical greed of thechase-loving British landlord.  But it is with no intent of looking agift-horse in the mouth (which would be a poor return for the courtesyof the lady who has interested herself in the rustic bard) if we proceedto resolve this piece into its elements, that we may the more accuratelycast the horoscope of this new applicant for the public applause.  Tobegin with, the sentiment of nostalgia is but a slender backbone for anywork of literary art.  In almost every case it is itself a fallacy.What were the conditions under which these peoplearbitrarily andtyrannically, it may have beenwere forced away from their homes?Either they were bad agriculturists or the land was too poor to supportthem; and in either case their transference to a more generous soilcould be nothing but a benefit to them.  Their life must have been fullof privations and cares.  Forsan et haec olim meminisse juvabit; butthe pleasure ought to lie in thinking of the escape; so that we maintainthat to base any piece of literary work on such a false sentiment asnostalgia is seen to be, leads us to suspect the veracity of thewriter and calls upon us to be on our guard.  Moreover, we maintain thatit is of the essence of pastoral and idyllic poetry to be cheerful andjocund; and it is to be observed that sadness prevails in poetry onlywhen a nation has passed its youth and becomes saturated with the regretof old age.  We prefer the stories toldWhere Corydon and Thyrsis metAre at their savoury dinner set;and the lyrist when he singsDulce ridentem Lalagen amabo,Dulce loquentem;and we hold that when the poets of a nation are permeated by alackadaisical sentimentwhen they have the candour to style themselvesthe idle singers of an empty daywhen the burden of their song is regretand weariness and a lamentation over former joysthen it is time forsuch poets and the nation they represent to take a back seat in thelecture halls of literature, and give way to the newer and stronger racethat is bound to dominate the future.'She read no farther; and it is a great pity that she did not; for thewriter by and by went on to say some very nice things about theseunlucky verses; and even hinted that here was a man who might bebenefited by coming to stay in Chicago,'the future capital of thefuture empire of the world,'and by having his eyes opened as to therate of progress possible in these modern days; and wound up with a mostelaborate compliment to the intellectual perspicacity and judgment ofMiss Carry herself.  She did not read beyond what is quoted above forthe simple reason that she was in a most violent rage, and alsoextremely mortified with herself for being so vexed.  She tore thenewspaper into shreds, and crushed these together, and flung them intothe bottom of the boat.  Her cheeks were quite pale; her eyes burning;and through all the anger of her disappointment ran the shame of theconsciousness that it was she who had exposed Ronald to this insult.What though he should never know anything about it?  Her friends inChicago would know.  And it was the man whom she wanted to glorify andmake a hero of who had, through her instrumentality, been subjected tothe pedantic criticism, the pretentious analyses, and, worst of all, theinsulting patronage of this unspeakable ass.  Suddenly she regretted thedestruction of the newspaper; she would like to have looked at it again,to justify her wrath.  No matter; she could remember enough; and shewould not forget Jack Huysen's share in this transaction.She was very silent and reserved at lunch time; and her father began tobelieve that, after all, in spite of her repeated assurances, theirill-luck with the fishing was weighing on her spirits.'You know, Carry,' said he, 'it is not in the nature of things thatweather like this can last in the Highlands of Scotland.  It isnotoriously one of the wettest places in the world.  There must berain coming soon; and then think of all the fish that will be rushing upin shoals, and what a time we shall have.''I am not disappointed with the fishing at all, pappa,' she said.  'Ithink we have done very well.''What is the matter, then?''Oh, nothing.'And then she said'Well, I will tell you, pappa.  I asked Jack Huysen to do me a veryparticular favour; and he did not do it; and when I next see JackHuysen, I think he will find it a very cold day.'The words were mysterious; but the tone was enough.And all the afternoon she sate in the stern of the coble and brooded,composing imaginary letters to the editor of the New York Herald, tothe editor of the Nation, to the editor of the Chicago Tribune, tothe editor of Puck, and a great many other journals, all of thesephantom epistles beginning 'As an American girl I appeal to you,' andproceeding to beg of the editor to hold up to merciless scorn a certainfeeble, shallow, and impertinent article (herewith enclosed) which hadappeared in the Chicago Citizen.  And on the way home, too, in theevening, she began to question her father as to his personalacquaintance with editors and journalists, which seemed to be of theslightest; and she at length admitted that she wanted some one toreplyand sharplyto an article that had been written about a friend ofhers.'You let that alone,' her father said.  'It's not very easy for any oneto meddle in the politics of our country without coming out more or lesstattooed; for they don't mind what they say about you; and you are verywell to be out of it.''It isn't politics at all,' she said.  'Andandthe article is writtenabout a friend of mineandI want to have the writer told what a fool heis.''But probably he would not believe it,' her father said quietly.'He would see that some one else believed it.''I am not sure that that would hurt him much,' was the unsatisfactoryanswer.When they drew near to Inver-Mudal she found herself quite afraid andashamed at the thought of their possibly meeting Ronald.  Had she notbetrayed him?  He had sought for no recognition; probably he was tooproud or too manly and careless about what any one might write of him;it was she who had put him into that suppliant attitude, and broughtupon him the insolent encouragement of a microcephalous fool.  This wasthe return she had made him for all his kindness to her father and toherself.  Why, he had told her to burn the verses!  And to think thatshe should have been the means of submitting them to the scrutiny andpatronage of this jackanapesand that Mr. J. C. Huysen should as good assay 'Well, this is what we think of your prodigy'all this was nearbringing tears of rage to her eyes.  For Miss Carry, it must berepeated, was 'a real good fellow,' and very loyal to her friends, andimpatient of injustice done them; and perhaps, unconsciously to herself,she may have felt some of the consternation of the wild animal whoseduty it is to protect her mate with her superior feminine watchfulness,and who, through neglect or carelessness, allows the destroyer to comein and slay.  In any case, it certainly promised to be 'a very cold day'for Mr. Jack Huysen when these two should meet in Chicago.That night, after dinner, father and daughter went out for a stroll; forby this time the moon was drawing to its full again; and all the worldlay peaceful and silent in the wan clear light.  They had not emergedfrom the trees in front of the inn on to the white pathway of the roadwhen a sound in the distance caught Miss Carry's ears, and instantly shetouched her father's arm and drew him back into the shadow.  She wantedto hear what song this was that Ronald was singing on his homeward way.At first she could make out nothing but fragments of the airclear andsoft and distant[Illustration: Music fragment]but as he drew nearer the words become more distinct:And kiss'd her ripe ros-es, and blest her black e'e;And aye since whene'er we meet, sing, for the sound is sweet,"I was a-sleep but ye've wak-en'd me.'[Illustration: Music fragment]So clear and penetrating and careless and joyous was this singing!herheart was stirred with pride as she listened; this was not the voice ofa man who would trouble himself with any whipper-snapper criticism;nay,she began to wonder that she had wasted so much indignation on sotrivial a thing.  Then there was a sudden silence, except for hisfootfall; and presently the dark figure appeared out there on the whiteroadhis shadow a sharp black in front of him, the little terriertrotting behind himand in a minute or so the long swinging stride hadcarried him past their ambush on his homeward way to the cottage.'What a splendid voice that fellow has got!' her father said, as theyalso now went out on to the white highway, and took the oppositedirection.'He seems to be very well contented with himself,' she said, ratherabsently.*CHAPTER VII.**A LAST DAY ON THE LOCH.*Ronald came down to the loch-side the next morning just as she was aboutto get into the cobleher father having started a few minutes before.'I hear you have not been doing very well with the fishing,' said he, inthat brisk, business-like fashion of his.'The salmon appear to have gone away somewhere,' she replied.'Oh, but that will never do,' said he cheerfully.  'We must try and makesome alteration.'He took the key of the kennels from his pocket.'Here, Johnnie lad, ye may go and take the dogs out for a run.'Was Ronald, then, coming with her?  Her eyes brightened withanticipation; there was a welcome in the look of her face that ought tohave been sufficient reward for him. Nor had she the courage toprotestthough she knew that his time was drawing short now.  As for thesalmonwell, it was not about salmon she was thinking exclusively.'They say a change of gillie sometimes brings a change of luck,' said hegood-naturedly; and he began to overhaul the tackle, substitutingsmaller minnows for those already on.  'And I think we will try down atthe other end of the loch this time.  We will make sure of some trout inany case.''But it is so far away, Ronald; are you certain you can afford thetime?' she was bound, in common fairness, to ask.'Oh yes, I can afford the time,' said he, 'even if this should have tobe my last day on the loch.  Besides, if we do not treat you well, maybeyou'll never come back.''And what is the use of our coming back, when you won't be here?' shewas on the point of saying, but she did not say it, fortunately.Then they set forth, on this still summer-like day; and they hailed theother boat in passing, and told them of their intended voyage ofexploration.  Indeed their prospects of sport at the setting out wereanything but promising; the long levels of the lake were mostly of apale glassy blue and white; and the little puffs of wind that stirredthe surface here and there into a shimmer of silver invariably died downagain, leaving the water to become a mirror once more of rock and treeand hill.  But she was well content. This was an unknown world intowhich they were now penetrating; and it was a good deal more beautifulthan the upper end of the lake (where the best fishing ground was) withwhich they had grown so familiar.  Here were hanging woods coming rightdown to the water's edge; and lofty and precipitous crags stretchingaway into the pale blue sky; and winding bays and picturesque shoreswhere the huge boulders, green and white and yellow with lichen, and therich velvet moss, and the withered bracken, and the silver-clear stemsof the birch trees were all brilliant in the sun.  The only livingcreatures that seemed to inhabit this strange silent region were thebirds.  A pair of eagles slowly circled round and round, but at so greata height that they were but a couple of specks which the eye was apt tolose; black-throated divers and golden-eyed divers, disturbed by theseunusual visitors, rose from the water and went whirring by to the upperstretches of the lake; a hen-harrier hovered in mid-air, causing afrantic commotion among the smaller birds beneath; the curlews, nowwheeling about in pairs, uttered their long warning whistle; the peewitscalled angrily, flying zig-zag, with audible whuffing of their softbroad wings; the brilliant little redshanks flew like a flash along theshore, just skimming the water; and two great wild-geese went byoverhead, with loud, harsh croak.  And ever it was Ronald's keen eyethat first caught sight of them; and he would draw her attention tothem; and tell her the names of them all.  And at lastas they werecoming out of one of the small glassy bays, and as he was idly regardingthe tall and rocky crags that rose above the birchwoodshe laughedlightly.'Ye glaiket things,' said he, as if he were recognising some oldfriends, 'what brings ye in among the sheep?''What is it, Ronald?' she askedand she followed the direction of hislook towards those lofty crags, but could make out nothing unusual.'Dinna ye see the hinds?' he said quietly.'Wherewhere?' she cried, in great excitement; for she had not seen asingle deer all the time of her stay.'At the edge of the brown corrienear the sky-line. There are three ofthemdinna ye see them?''No, I don't!' she said impatiently.'Do ye see the two sheep?''I see two white specksI suppose they're sheep.''Welljust above them.'But the boat was slowly moving all this time; and presently the gradualchange in their position brought one of the hinds clear into view on thesky-line.  The beautiful creature, with its graceful neck, small head,and upraised ears, was evidently watching them, but with no apparentintention of making off; and presently Miss Carry, whose eyes werebecoming better accustomed to the place, could make out the other twohinds, one of them lying on the grass, the other contentedly feeding,and paying no heed whatever to the passing boat.'I thought you said the sheep drove them away,' she said to him.'It's the men and the dogs mostly,' he answered.  'Sometimes they willcome in among the sheep like that, if the feeding tempts them.  My word,that would be an easy stalk nowif it was the season.'Very soon they found that the three hinds were no longer in view; butthere were plenty of other things to claim their attention on thissolitary voyage.  What, for example, was this great circular mass ofstones standing on a projecting promontory?  These were the remains, heexplained to her, of a Pictish fort.  Another, in better preservation,was on the opposite shore; and, if she cared to visit it, she might makeher way into the hollow passages constructed between the double line ofwall, if she were not afraid of adders, nor yet of some of theuncemented stones falling upon her.'And what are these?' she said, indicating the ruins of certain circlesformed on the hill-plateaux just above the loch.'They're down in the Ordnance Survey as "hut-circles,"' he said, 'butthat is all I know about them.''At all events, there must have been plenty of people living here at onetime?''I suppose so.''Well, I don't think I ever saw any place in our country looking quiteso lonely as that,' she said, regarding the voiceless solitudes of woodand hill and crag.  'Seems as if with us there was always some onearoundcamping out, or somethingbut I dare say in Dacotah or Idaho youwould get lonelier places than this even.  Well, now, what do they callit?' she asked, as an afterthought.'What?the strath here?''Yes.''I suppose they would call it part of Strath-Naver.'The mere mention of Strath-Naver struck a chill to her heart.  Itrecalled to her how she had betrayed him by sending those harmlessverses across the Atlantic, and subjecting them to the insolence of anincompoop's patronage. And if Ronald should ever get to know?  Mightnot some busybody send him a copy of the paper?  These Scotch people hadso many relatives and friends all through the States.  Or perhaps hisbrother in Glasgow might have some correspondent over there?  She darednot look him in the face, she felt so guilty; and once or twice she wasalmost on the point of confessing everything, and begging for hisforgiveness, and getting him to promise that he would not read thearticle should it ever be sent to him.And then it occurred to her as a very strange thing that from the momentof Ronald's appearance that morning at the loch-side until now she hadnever even given a thought to what had caused her so much annoyance theday before. His very presence seemed to bring with it an atmosphere ofrepose and safety and self-confidence.  When she had seen him gostalking by on the previous night, she had instantly said toherself'Oh, that is not the kind of man to worry about what is said ofhim.'  And this morning, when he came down to the boat, she had neverthought of him as a criticised and suffering poet, but aswell, as theRonald that all of them knew and were familiar withself-reliant,good-natured, masterful in his way, and ever ready with a laugh and asong and a jest, save when there was any young lady there, to make him alittle more demure and respectful in his manner.  Ronald a disappointedpoet?Ronald suffering agony because a two-for-a-quarter kind of acreature out there in Chicago did not think well of him?  She venturedto lift her eyes a little.  He was not looking her way at all.  He wasregarding the shore intently; and there was a quiet and humorous smileon the hard-set, sun-tanned face.'There are sixsevenblackcocks; do ye see them?''Oh yes; what handsome birds they are!' she said, with a curious senseof relief.'Ay,' said he, 'the lads are very friendly amongst themselves just now;but soon there will be wars and rumours of wars when they begin to setup house each for himself. There will be many a pitched battle on thoseknolls there. Handsome?  Ay, they're handsome enough; but handsome is ashandsome does.  The blackcock is not nearly as good a fellow as thegrousecock, that stays with his family, and protects them, and givesthem the first warning cry if there's danger.  These rascals therewander off by themselves, and leave their wives and children to get onas they can.  They're handsomebut they're ne'er-do-weels. There's onething: the villain has a price put on his head; for a man would ratherbring down one old cock thumping on the grass than fill his bag withgray hens.'A disappointed poet indeed!  And she was so glad to find him talking inhis usual half-bantering careless fashion (that he should talk in anyother way was only a wild suggestion of her own conscience, struck witha qualm on the mention of Strath-Naver) that she made many inquiriesabout the habits of black game and similar creatures; and was apparentlymuch interested; and all the while was vowing within herself that shewould think no more of the mortifying disappointment she had met with,but would give up this last day on the loch wholly to such fancies andquiet amusements as she would like to look back upon in after hours.And a very pleasant day they spent in this still, silent, beautifulregion, cut off from all of the world, as it were. There were plenty oftrout, and therefore there was plenty of occupation; moreover, one ortwo good-sized sea-trout added to the value of the basket.  Nor was thissolitary district quite so untenanted as she had supposed.  Aboutmid-day it occurred to her that she was becoming hungry and then thewild reflection flashed on her that the lunch was in the other boatsomeeight miles away.  She confided her perplexityher despairto Ronald.'It is my fault,' he said, with vexation very visible in his face.  'Ishould have remembered.  Butbut' he added timidlyfor he was notaccustomed to ministering to the wants of young ladies'I could get yesome bread and a drink of milk, if that would do.''What, right here?''Yes.''Why, nothing could be better!'They were rowing the boat ashore by this time; and when they had got toland, he leaped on to the beach, and presently disappeared.  In littlemore than a quarter of an hour he was back again, bringing with him asubstantial loaf of home-made bread and a large jug of milk.'Well done!' she said.  'There's plenty for all of us. Lend me yourknife, Ronald.''Oh no,' said he, 'it's for you.'And a hard fight she had of it ere she could get the two men to accept afair division; but she had her way in the end; and Ronald, seeing thatshe was determined they should share the milk also (she drank first, andhanded the jug to him quite as a matter of course), swiftly andstealthily pulled off the cup from his whisky-flask, and old Malcolm andhe drank from that, pouring the milk into it from the jug.  It was afrugal picnic; but she was very happy; and she was telling him that whenhe came to Chicago, and they were showing him the beauties of LakeMichigan, they might give him a grander luncheon than this, but nonemore comfortable.In the afternoon they set out for home, picking up a few more trout bythe way; and when they at length drew near to the upper waters of thelake they found the other boat still pursuing its unwearied round.Moreover Mr. Hodson's strict attention to business had been rewarded bythe capture of a handsome fish of sixteen pounds; whereas they hadnothing but a miscellaneous collection of brown and white trout.  But,just as they were thinking of going ashore, for the dusk was now comingon, a most extraordinary piece of luck befell them.  Miss Carry wasscarcely thinking of the rods when the sudden shriek of one of the reelsstartled her out of her idle contemplation.'Surely that is a salmon, Ronald!' she cried, as she instantly graspedthe rod and got it up.He did not stay to answer, for his business was to get in the other lineas fast as possible.  But he had just got this second rod into his handwhen lo! there was a tugging and another scream of a reelthere was nowa salmon at each of the lines!  It was a position of the direstdangerfor a single cross rush of either of the fish must inevitablybreak both offand how were they to be kept separate, with both rodsconfined to one boat?  Ronald did not lose his head.'Row ashore, Malcolmrow ashore, man!' he shouted'fast as ever ye can,man!'Nor did he wait until the bow had touched land; he slipped over the edgeof the boat while as yet the water was deep enough to take him up to thewaist; and away he waded, taking the one rod with him, and slowlyincreasing the distance between the two fish.  By the time he got ashorethere was a hundred yards or so between them, and he did not attempt toplay this salmon at all; he gave it plenty of law; and merely waited tosee the end of Miss Carry's struggle.She hardly knew what had happened, except that Ronald's going away hadleft her very nervous and excited and helpless.  How was she ever toland a fish unless he was at her shoulder directing her?  But by thistime old Malcolm had jammed the bow of the boat on to the beach, had gotin the oars, and now sate patiently waiting, clip in hand.The fish was not a very game one, though he was no kelt.'Put a good strain on him, Miss,' said old Malcolmwho had been taking asly look round.  'Ronald's keeping the other one for ye.''What do you say?' she called to himrather breathlessly.'Ronald will be wanting ye to play the other fish too,' said the oldman.  'And a wonderful fine thing, if we can get them bothoh yes,indeed.  It is not an ordinary thing to hook two salmon at once and landthem bothI wass neffer seeing that done except once before.''Beast!' she said, between her teethfor the fish made a desperate rushaway out into the loch, with a magnificent flourish in the air as afinish.  But no harm was done; indeed, it was about his last strongeffort to free himself. Yard after yard of the line was got in again;his struggles to get away grew less and less vigorous; at last the oldHighlander made an adventurous swoop with the clip, and was successfulin landing the brilliant creature in the bottom of the boat.'Now, Miss,' he cried, 'leave him to meleave him to me.  Quick, getashore, and try for the other one.  And will you take the clip?'He was greatly excited by this unusual adventure; and so was sheandbreathless, moreover; but she managed to do as she was bid.  She gotrather wet in getting ashore; for Ronald was not there to help her; butshe had no time to mind that; she made her way as rapidly as she couldalong the bank, and there was Ronald awaiting her, with a quiet smile onhis face.'This is better work,' said he placidly, as he gave her the rod.She was anxious no longer; she was triumphant.  Ronald was with her; ofcourse she would get this one also.  And who but Ronald would havebrought such a stroke of luck to the boat?'I would get in some of the line now,' said he calmly. 'I have beenletting him do as he liked; and he is a long way out.  And mind, you'llhave to watch him; he is quite fresh; there has been no fighting at allyet.''Oh, Ronald,' she said, with the pretty pale face grown quite rosy withthe excitement and the hard work, 'won't it be just too splendid foranything if we can get them both!''I hope ye may,' he said, 'for it's not likely to happen again in yourlifetime.'The fish now began to rebel against the new strain that was being put onhim, and indulged in a variety of audacious cantripsapparently at aconsiderable distance out.  By this time the other boat was also ashore,and Miss Carry's father came along to see how Ronald's pupil could playa salmon.  Just as he drew near, there was a pretty lively scrimmagegoing on.'Why, you want to have them all,' he complained.  'It is not fair sportto bag a brace of salmon right and left.'She did not answerin fact, she could not; she had enough to do.  Fornow the salmon seemed wanting to get right out to the middle of thelake; and the length of line that lay between her and her enemy draggedheavily on her arms.  And then he altered his tacticscoming rapidly tothe surface and trying to break the suddenly slackened line by furiouslashings of his tail.  But all this was in vain; and now, as he seemedyielding a little, she put a heavier strain on him, and began to reelup.  It was very well done, and without a word of admonition; for Ronaldwas proud of his pupil, and wished to show that he could leave her toherself.By and by the fish began to show himself a little more amenable, andpreparations were made for receiving him on shore.  Miss Carry steppedback a few yards; her father got out of the way altogether; Ronaldcrouched down, clip in hand.  Of course, when the salmon found himselfbeing guided into the shallows, he was off like a bolt; and again andagain he repeated these sullen rushes; but each time they were growingweaker; and at last, as the gleam of something white showed in thewater, Ronald made a sudden plunge with the clipand the salmon wasashore.He laughed.'I suppose this will be my last day on the loch, and a very good finishit is.'The men brought along the other fish, and these were all laid out on thegrass side by side, though it was now too dark to see much of them.  Asregards the three salmon, Mr. Hodson's, on being accurately weighed, wasfound to be sixteen and a half pounds, Miss Carry's two respectivelyfourteen pounds and eleven pounds.  She was a very happy young woman asshe walked home with her father and Ronald through the now rapidlygathering dusk.His last day on the lake:well, it would be something pleasant to lookback upon in after timesthe summer-like weather, the still water, thesilent and sunlit crags and woods and bays.  And perhaps, too, he wouldremember something of her bright society, her friendly disposition, andthe frank good-comradeship with which she shared her meal of milk andbread with two common boatmen.  Nay, he could not well help rememberingthatand with a touch of gratitude and kindness, tooeven though theyshould never meet again through the long years of life.*CHAPTER VIII.**THE PARTING.*Now amid all his preparations for departure nothing distressed him somuch as the difficulty he found in trying to write something worthy ofbeing placed in Meenie's book. It was to be his last gift to her; sheherself had asked for it; surely he ought to do his best?  And perhapsit was this very anxiety that baffled him.  Even of such small lyricalfaculty as he possessed, he was in no sense the master.  He could writeeasily enough at the instigation of some passing fancy; but the fancyhad to come uncalled-for; it was not of his summoning.  And now, in thishour of direst need, no kindly Ariel would come to help him. Walkingacross the lonely moors, with the dogs for his sole companions, or lyingon a far hillside, and tearing twigs of heather with his teeth, heworried his brain for a subject, and all to no purpose.  Perhaps, ifpraise of Meenie had been permissibleif he could have dared to writeanything about herself in her own bookhe might have found the task moreeasy; for that was the one direction in which his imagination was alwaysfacile enough.  One morning, indeed, when he was coming down the Clebrigslopes, he saw Miss Carry and Meenie walking together along the road;and he had not much difficulty in shaping out some such verses asthesejingling the rhymes together without much concern about the sense,and then scribbling the result on the back of an envelope to see how itlooked:By Mudal's river she idly strayed,And drank afresh the morning breeze:Tell me, you beautiful dark-eyed maid,That's come across the Atlantic seasSee you our winsome Sutherland flower,Her cheek the tint of the summer rose,Her gold-brown hair her only dower,Her soul as white as Ben Clebrig's snows;Blue as the ruffled loch her eyes,Sweet her breath as the blossoming heather:O do you think the whole world's skiesCan see aught fairer than you together?Sisters twainone slender and dark,Her cheek faint-tanned by the tropic south;One northern bred, her voice like a lark,The joy of the hills in her gladsome youth.Ben Clebrig shall judgenay, shall keep the two,And bind them in chains of love for ever;Look to it, Clebrig; guard them true:Sisters twainand why should they sever?But even here there was a false note; and he knew it. Perhaps he wasvaguely jealous of any alien interference: was not Meenie the sole andonly care of the giant mountain?  Anyhow, the verses were of no availfor Meenie's book; and otherwise he did not care for them; so theenvelope was crumpled up and thrown away.On the evening before the brother and sister were to leave for thesouth, Meenie came along to see them. Ronald had got quite accustomed tofind Miss Douglas in the house of late; for Maggie needed a good deal ofdirection and helpthe tearful little lass being sorely distraught atthe thought of going away.  But on this occasion it was himself she hadcome to seek.'I have made a little drawing for you, Ronald,' said sheand thebeautiful Highland eyes were downcast a little'as well as I could, ofthe loch and the hills and the river; and I want you to take it toGlasgow with you, and put it on the mantelpiece of your room, and thensometimes it will make you think of the old place and of us all.''I'm sure, it will not need a picture to make me do that,' said he, 'butall the same I am obliged to ye, and it will be the chief treasure inthe house''Oh no, oh no,' she said, with a rueful smileand she ventured to raiseher eyes.  'You must not think it a picture at allbut only a few linesscribbled on a paper-knife to make you remember the place when youhappen to find it lying about.  And you must not look at it until I havegone, because you would feel bound to praise it; and that would be asawkward for you as for mefor indeed it is nothing at all.  And here,'she added, producing a small slip of paper, 'is my sister's address inGlasgow; and I have written to her; and she will be very glad if youwill call on them when you have the time.''I don't know how to thank ye,' said he.  'It's when people are goingaway that they find out how many friends they are leaving behind.''In your case' said she, very modestly and prettily, 'it is notdifficult to countyou have only to say the whole country-side.'  Andthen she added: 'I heard of the lads that came all the way from Tongue.''The wild fellows!they had a long tramp here and back home again.'She looked at him rather hesitatingly.'There will be a great many coming to see you off to-morrow morning,Ronald,' she said.'I should think notI should think not,' he said.'Oh, but I know there will be.  Every one is talking of it.  And I wasthinkingif it was not too much troubleif you were not too busyI waswondering if you would come along and say good-bye to my father andmother this eveningI would rather have that thanthanwith a crowd ofpeople standing by''Oh yes, certainly,' he said, at once.  'When will I come?  Now, if yelike.''And Maggie too?''Yes, yes, why not?''And about my album, Ronald?''Well,' said he, with not a little embarrassment, 'I have not writtenanything in it yet; but I will give it to you in the morning; andand ifthere's nothing in it, then ye must just understand that I could not getanything good enough, and I will send something from Glasgow''Indeed no,' said she promptly.  'Why should you trouble about a thinglike that?  Write your name in the book, Ronald, and that will beenough.'The three of them now went outside, and the door was shut behind them.It was a beautiful night; the moon was slowly rising over the solitudesof Strath-Terry; and the lake was like a sheet of silver.  They wererather silent as they walked along the gray highway; to-morrow was tomake a difference to all of their lives.When they reached the Doctor's cottage, and when Ronald and Maggie wereushered into the parlour, it was clear that the visit had been expected;for there was cake on the table, and there were plates and knives, and adecanter of sherry, and a number of wine-glasses.  And not only was thebig good-humoured Doctor as friendly as ever, but even the awe-inspiringlittle Dresden-china lady condescended, in these unusual circumstances,to be gracious. Of course the talk was all about Ronald's going away,and his prospects in Glasgow, and so forth; and Mrs. Douglas took careto impress him with the fact that, on the occasion of Lord Ailine havingrecently spent an evening with them, his lordship had distinctlyapproved of the step Ronald had taken, and hoped it might turn out wellin every way.'Will there be any office work, Ronald?' the Doctor asked.'I suppose so, for a time.''You'll not like that, my lad.''I'll have to take what comes, like other folk,' was the simple answer.How pretty Meenie was on this last evening!  She did not say much; andshe hardly ever looked at him; but her presence, then as ever, seemed tobring with it an atmosphere of gentleness and sweetness; and when, bychance, she did happen to regard him, there was a kind of magic wonderin her eyes that for the moment rather bedazzled him and made hisanswers to these good people's inquiries somewhat inconsecutive.  Forthey were curious to know about his plans and schemes; and showed muchinterest in his welfare; while all the time he sate thinking of howstrange Glasgow would be without the chance of catching a glimpse ofMeenie anywhere; and wondering whether his dream-sweethearttheimaginary Meenie whom he courted and wooed and won in these idle versesof hiswould be nearer to him there, or would fade gradually away andfinally disappear.'In any case, Ronald,' said Mrs. Douglasand she thus addressed him forthe first time, 'you have a good friend in his lordship.''I know that.''I suppose I am breaking no confidence,' continued the little dame, inher grand way, 'in saying that he plainly intimated to us hiswillingness, supposing that you were not as successful as we all hopeyou may beI say, his lordship plainly intimated to us that he wouldalways have a place open for you somewhere.''Yes, I think he would do that,' Ronald said; 'but when a man has onceput his hand to the plough he must not go back.'And perhaps, for one feeble moment of indecision, he asked himself whathad ever tempted him to put his hand to the plough, and to go away fromthis quiet security and friendliness and peace.  But it was only for amoment. Of course, all that had been argued out before.  The step hadbeen taken; forwards, and not backwards, he must go. Still, to besitting in this quiet little roomwith the strange consciousness thatMeenie was so nearwatching the nimble, small fingers busy with herknittingand wondering when she would raise those beautiful, deep,tender, clear eyes; and to think that on the morrow hour after hourwould be placing a greater and greater distance between him and thepossibility of any such another eveningnay, that it was not only milesbut years, and perhaps a whole lifetime, that he was placing between herand himthat was no joyful kind of a fancy.  If it had been Meenie whowas going away, that would have been easier to bear.'Call her back, Clebrig; Mudal, call;Ere all of the young springtime be flown'he would have cried to hill and river and loch and glen, knowing thatsooner or later Love Meenie would come back from Glasgow Town.  But hisown going away was very differentand perhaps a final thing.By and by he rose, and begged to be excused.  Maggie might stay for awhile longer with Miss Douglas, if she liked; as for him, he had somematters to attend to. And so they bade him good-bye, and wished himwell, and hoped to hear all good things of him.  Thus they parted; andhe went out by himself into the clear moonlight night.But he did not go home.  A strange unrest and longing had seized him; adesire to be alone with the silence of the night; perhaps some angryimpatience that he could not make out so much as a few trivial versesfor this beautiful girl-friend whom he might never see again.  He couldwrite about his dream-sweetheart easily enough; and was there to benever a word for Meenie herself?  So he walked down to the river; andwandered along the winding and marshy banksstartling many wildfowl thewhileuntil he reached the lake.  There he launched one of the cobles,and pulled out to the middle of the still sheet of water; and took theoars in again.  By this time the redshank and curlews and plover hadquieted down once more; there was a deadly stillness all around; and hehad persuaded himself that he had only come to have a last look at thehills and the loch and the moorland wastes that Meenie had made magicalfor him in the years now left behind; and to bid farewell to these; andcarry away in his memory a beautiful picture of them.It was a lonely and a silent world.  There was not a sound save thedistant murmur of a stream; no breath of wind came down from the Clebrigslopes to ruffle the broad silver sweeps of moonlight on the water; thetiny hamlet half hidden among the trees gave no sign of life.  Thecottage he had leftthe white front of it now palely clear in thedistanceseemed a ghostly thing: a small, solitary, forsaken thing, inthe midst of this vast amphitheatre of hills that stood in awful communewith the stars.  On such a night the wide and vacant spaces can readilybecome peopled; phantoms issue from the shadows of the woods and growwhite in the open; an unknown wind may arise, bringing with it strangesinging from the northern seas. And if he forgot the immediate purposeof the verses that he wanted; if he forgot that he must not mention thename of Meenie; if he saw only the little cottage, and the moonlit loch,and the giant bulk of Clebrig that was keeping guard over the sleepinghamlet, and watching that no sprites or spectres should work their evilcharms within reach of Meenie's half-listening earwell, it was all afire in his blood and his brain, and he could not stay to consider.  Thephantom-world was revealed; the silence now was filled as with a cryfrom the lone seas of the far north; and, all impatient and eager andhalf bewildered, he seemed to press forward to seize those visions andthat weird music ere both should vanish and be mute:The moonlight lies on Loch Naver,And the night is strange and still;And the stars are twinkling coldlyAbove the Clebrig hill.And there by the side of the water,O what strange shapes are these!O these are the wild witch-maidensDown from the northern seas.And they stand in a magic circle,Pale in the moonlight sheen;And each has over her foreheadA star of golden green.O what is their song?of sailorsThat never again shall sail;And the music sounds like the sobbingAnd sighing that brings a gale.But who is she who comes yonder?And all in white is she;And her eyes are open, but nothingOf the outward world can she see.O haste you back, Meenie, haste you,And haste to your bed again;For these are the wild witch-maidensDown from the northern main.They open the magic circle;They draw her into the ring;They kneel before her, and slowlyA strange, sad song they singA strange, sad songas of sailorsThat never again shall sail;And the music sounds like the sobbingAnd sighing that brings a gale.O haste you back, Meenie, haste you,And haste to your bed again;For these are the wild witch-maidensDown from the northern main.'O come with us, rose-white Meenie,To our sea-halls draped with green:O come with us, rose-white Meenie,And be our rose-white queen!'And you shall have robes of splendour,With shells and pearls bestrewn;And a sceptre olden and golden,And a rose-white coral throne.'And by day you will hear the musicOf the ocean come nigher and nigher:And by night you will see your palaceAblaze with phosphor fire.'O come with us, rose-white Meenie,To our sea-halls draped with green;O come with us, rose-white Meenie,And be our rose-white queen!'But Clebrig heard; and the thunderDown from his iron hand sped;And the band of the wild witch-maidensOne swift shriek uttered, and fled.And Meenie awoke, and terrorAnd wonder were in her eyes;And she looked at the moon-white valley,And she looked to the starlit skies.O haste you back, Meenie, haste you,And haste to your bed again;For these are the wild witch-maidensDown from the northern main.O hear you not yet their singingCome faintly back on the breeze?The song of the wild witch-sistersAs they fly to the Iceland seas.O hark'tis a sound like the sobbingAnd sighing that brings a gale:A low, sad songas of sailorsThat never again shall sail!Slowly he pulled in to the shore again, and fastened up the boat; andslowly he walked away through the silent and moonlit landscape,revolving these verses in his mind, but not trying in the least toestimate their value, supposing them to have any at all.  Even when hehad got home, and in the stillness of his own roomfor by this timeMaggie had gone to bedwas writing out the lines, with apparent easeenough, on a large sheet of paper, it was with no kind of critical doubtor anxiety.  He could not have written them otherwise; probably he knewhe was not likely to make them any better by over-refining them.  Andthe reason why he put them down on the large sheet of paper was thatMeenie's name occurred in them; and she might not like that familiarityto appear in her album; he would fold the sheet of paper and place it inthe book, and she could let it remain there or burn it as she chose.And then he went and had his supper, which Maggie had left warm by thefire, and thereafter lit a pipeor rather two or three pipes, as itbefel, for this was the last night before his leaving Inver-Mudal, andthere were many dreams and reveries (and even fantastic possibilities)to be dismissed for ever.The next morning, of course, there was no time or room for poeticfancies.  When he had got Maggie to take along the little book to theDoctor's cottage, he set about making his final preparations, and herehe was assisted by his successor, one Peter Munro.  Finally he went tosay good-bye to the dogs.'Good-bye, doggies, good-bye,' said he, as they came bounding to thefront of the kennel, pawing at him through the wooden bars, and barkingand whining, and trying to lick his hand.  'Good-bye, Bess!  Good-bye,Lugarlad, lad, we've had many a day on the hill together.'And then he turned sharply to his companion.'Ye'll not forget what I told you about that dog, Peter?''I will not,' said the other.'If I thought that dog was not to be looked after, I would get out myrifle this very minute and put a bullet through his headthough it wouldcost me 7.  Mind what I've told ye now; if he's not fed separate, he'llstarve; he's that gentle and shy that he'll not go near the trough whenthe others are feeding.  And a single cross word on the hill will spoilhim for the daymind you tell any strange gentlemen that come up withhis lordshipsome o' them keep roaring at dogs as if they werebull-calves.  There's not a better setter in the county of Sutherlandthan that old Lugarbut he wants civil treatment.''I'll look after him, never fear, Ronald,' his companion said.  'And nowcome away, man.  Ye've seen to everything; and the mail-gig will be herein half an hour.'Ronald was still patting the dogs' heads, and talking to themhe seemedloth to leave them.'Come away, man,' his companion urged.  'All the lads are at the inn,and they want to have a parting glass with you. Your sister and everyone is there, and everything is ready.''Very well,' said he, and he turned away rather moodily.But when they were descended from the little plateau into the highway hesaw that Meenie Douglas was coming along the roadand rather quickly;and for a minute he hesitated, lest she should have some message forhim.'Oh, Ronald,' she said, and he hardly noticed that her face was ratherpale and anxious, 'I wanted to thank youI could not let you go awaywithout thanking youitit is so beautiful''I should beg your pardon,' said he, with his eyes cast down, 'formaking use of your short name''But, Ronald,' she said very bravely (though after a moment'shesitation, as if she had to nerve herself), 'whenever you think of anyof us here, I hope you will think of me by that name alwaysand now,good-bye!'He lifted his eyes to hers for but a secondfor but a second only, andyet, perhaps, with some sudden and unforeseen and farewell message onhis part, and on hers some swift and not overglad guessing.'Good-bye!'They shook hands in silence, and then she turned and went away; and herejoined his companion and then they went on together.  But Meenie didnot re-enter the cottage. She stole away down to the river, and lingeredby the bridge, listening.  For there were faint sounds audible in thestill morning air.The mail-cart from the north came rattling along, and crossed thebridge, and went on towards the inn, and again there was silence, butfor these faint sounds.  And now she could make out the thin echoes ofthe pipesno doubt one of the young lads was playingLochiel's away toFrance, perhaps, or A Thousand Blessings, for surely no one, on suchan occasion, would think of Macrimmon's Lament'Macrimmon shall no more returnOh! never, never more return!'It would be something joyous they were playing there to speed him on hisway; and the 'drink at the door'the Deoch an Dhoruiswould be goingthe round; and many would be the hand-shaking and farewell.  And then,by and by, as she sate there all alone and listening, she heard a faintsound of cheeringand that was repeated, in a straggling sort offashion; and thereafter there was silence. The mail-cart had driven awayfor the south.Nor even now did she go back to the cottage.  She wandered away throughthe wild moorland wasteshour after hour, and aimlessly; and when, bychance, a shepherd or crofter came along the road, she left the highwayand went aside among the heather, pretending to seek for wild-flowers orthe like: for sometimes, if not always, there was that in the beautiful,tender Highland eyes which she would have no stranger see.*CHAPTER IX.**SOUTHWARDS.*As for him, it was a sufficiently joyous departure; for some of the ladsabout were bent on accompanying him on the mail-car as far as Lairg; andthey took with them John Macalpine and his weather-worn pipes to cheerthem by the way; and at Crask they each and all of them had a glass ofwhisky; and on the platform at Lairg railway-station the clamour offarewell was great.  And even when he had got quit of that noisy crew,and was in the third-class compartment, and thundering away to thesouth, his thoughts and fancies were eager and ardent and glad enough;and his brain was busy with pictures; and these were altogether of ajoyful and hopeful kind.  Already he saw himself on that wideestatesomewhere or other in the Highlands he fondly trusted; drainingand planting and enclosing here; there pruning and thinning and felling;manufacturing charcoal and tar; planning temporary roads and bridges;stacking bark and faggots; or discussing with the head-keeper as to thedesirability or non-desirability of reintroducing capercailzie.  And ifthe young American lady and her father should chance to come that way,would he not have pleasure and pride in showing them over theplace?nay, his thoughts went farther afield, and he saw before himChicago, with its masts and its mighty lake, and himself not without afriendly grip of welcome on getting there.  As for Meenie, where wouldshe be in those coming and golden and as yet distant days?  Far awayfrom him, no doubt; and what else could he expect?for now he saw heramong the fine folk assembled at the shooting-lodge in Glengaskandcharming all of them with her sweet and serious beauty and her gentlewaysand again he pictured her seated on the white deck of SirAlexander's yacht, a soft south wind filling the sails, and the happygray-blue Highland eyes looking forward contentedly enough to the yellowline of the Orosay shore.  That was to be her futurefair and shining;for always he had associated Meenie with beautiful thingsroses, theclear tints of the dawn, the singing of a lark in the blue; and whocould doubt that her life would continue so, through these bright andfreshly-coming years?Yes, it was a glad enough departure for him; for he was busy and eager,and only anxious to set to work at once.  But by and by, when the firstnovelty and excitement of the travelling was beginning to wear off, hesuddenly discovered that the little Maggie, seated in the corner there,was stealthily crying.'What, what, lass?' said he cheerfully.  'What is it now?'She did not answer; and so he had to set to work to comfort her; makinglight of the change; painting in glowing colours all that lay beforethem; and promising that she should write to Miss Douglas a completeaccount of all her adventures in the great city.  He was not verysuccessful, for the little lass was sorely grieved over the parting fromthe few friends she had in the world; but at least it was an occupation;and perhaps in convincing her he was likewise convincing himself thatall was for the best, and proving that people should be well content toleave the monotony and dulness of a Highland village for the wideopportunities of Glasgow.But even he, with all his eager hopes and ambitions, was chilled to theheart when at last they drew near to the giant town.  They had spent thenight in Inverness, for he had some business to transact there on behalfof Lord Ailine; and now it was afternoonan afternoon dull and dismal,with an east wind blowing that made even the outlying landscape they hadcome through dreary and hopeless.  Then, as they got nearer to the city,such suggestions of the country as still remained grew more and moregrim; there were patches of sour-looking grass surrounded by damp stonewalls; gaunt buildings soot-begrimed and gloomy; and an ever-increasingblue-gray mist pierced by tall chimneys that were almost spectral in thedulled light.  He had been to Glasgow before, but chiefly on one or twoswift errands connected with guns and game and fishing-rods; and he didnot remember having found it so very melancholy-looking a place as thiswas.  He was rather silent as he got ready for leaving the train.He found his brother Andrew awaiting them; and he had engaged a cab, fora slight drizzle had begun. Moreover, he said he had secured for Ronalda lodging right opposite the station; and thither the younger brotherforthwith transferred his things; then he came down thehollow-resounding stone stair again, and got into the cab, and set outfor the Reverend Andrew's house, which was on the south side of thecity.And what a fierce and roaring Maelstrom was this into which they nowwere plunged!  The dusky crowds of people, the melancholy masses ofdark-hued buildings, the grimy flagstones, all seemed more or lessphantasmal through the gray veil of mist and smoke; but always therearose the harsh and strident rattle of the tram-cars and the waggons andcartsa confused, commingled, unending din that seemed to fill the brainsomehow and bewilder one.  It appeared a terrible place this, with itscold gray streets and hazy skies, and its drizzle of rain; when, incourse of time, they crossed a wide bridge, and caught a glimpse of theriver and the masts and funnels of some ships and steamers, these wereall ghost-like in the thin, ubiquitous fog.  Ronald did not talk much,for the unceasing turmoil perplexed and confused him; and so the stout,phlegmatic minister, whose bilious-hued face and gray eyes were far frombeing unkindly in their expression, addressed himself mostly to thelittle Maggie, and said that Rosina and Alexandra and Esther and theirbrother James were all highly pleased that she was coming to stay withthem, and also assured her that Glasgow did not always look so dull andmiserable as it did then.At length they stopped in front of a house in a long, unlovely,neutral-tinted street; and presently two rather weedy-looking girls, whoturned out to be Rosina and Alexandra, were at the door, ready toreceive the new-comers.  Of course it was Maggie who claimed their firstattention; and she was carried off to her own quarters to remove thestains of travel (and of tears) from her face; as for Ronald, he wasushered at once into the parlour, where his sister-in-lawa tall, thinwoman, with a lachrymose face, but with sufficiently watchfuleyesgreeted him in a melancholy way, and sighed, and introduced him tothe company.  That consisted of a Mr. M'Lachlana large, pompous-lookingperson, with a gray face and short-cropped white hair, whose cool stareof observation and lofty smile of patronage instantly made Ronald say tohimself, 'My good friend, we shall have to put you into your properplace;' Mrs. M'Lachlan, an insignificant woman, dowdily dressed; andfinally, Mr. Weems, a little, old, withered man, with a timid andappealing look coming from under bushy black eyebrowsthough the rest ofhis hair was gray.  This Mr. Weems, as Ronald knew, was in a kind offashion to become his coach.  The poor old man had been half-killed in arailway-accident; had thus been driven from active duty; and now, with ashattered constitution and a nervous system all gone to bits, managed tolive somehow on the interest of the compensation-sum awarded him by therailway-company.  He did not look much of a hardy forester; but if hisknowledge of land and timber measuring and surveying, and ofbook-keeping and accounts, was such as to enable him to give thisstalwart pupil a few practical lessons, so far well; and even themoderate recompense would doubtless be a welcome addition to his income.And now this high occasion was to be celebrated by a 'meat-tea,' for theReverend Andrew was no stingy person, though his wife had sighed andsighed again over the bringing into the house of a new mouth to feed.Maggie came downstairs, accompanied by the other members of the family;Mr. M'Lachlan was invited to sit at his hostess's right hand; the othersof them took their seats in due course; and the minister pronounced along and formal blessing, which was not without a reference or two tothe special circumstances of their being thus brought together.  And ifthe good man spoke apparently under the assumption that the Deity had aparticular interest in this tea-meeting in Abbotsford Place, it wasassuredly without a thought of irreverence; to himself the occasion wasone of importance; and the way of his life led him to have continualandeven familiarcommunion with the unseen Powers.But it was not Ronald's affairs that were to be the staple ofconversation at this somewhat melancholy banquet.  It very soon appearedthat Mr. M'Lachlan was an elderand a ruling elder, unmistakablyofAndrew Strang's church, and he had come prepared with a notable proposalfor wiping off the debt of the same.'Ah'm not wan that'll gang back from his word,' he said, in his pompousand raucous voice, and he leaned back in his chair, and crossed hishands over his capacious black satin waistcoat, and gazed loftily on hisaudience. 'Wan hundred poundsthere it is, as sure as if it was in mypocket this meenitand there it'll be when ye get fower ither members o'the congregation to pit doon their fifty pounds apiece.  Not but thatthere's several in the church abler than me to pit doon as much; but yeken how it is, Mr. Strang, the man makes the money and the woman spendsit; and there's mair than one family we ken o' that should come forriton an occasion like this, but that the money rins through the fingers o'a feckless wife. What think ye, noo, o' Mrs. Nicol setting up herpowny-carriage, and it's no nine years since Geordie had to make acomposition?  And they tell me that Mrs. Paton's lasses, when they gangdoon the waiterand not for one month in the year will they let thathouse o' theirs at Dunoonthey tell me that the pairties and dances theyhave is jist extraordinar' and the wastry beyond a' things.  Ay, it'sthem that save and scrimp and deny themselves that's expected to doeverything in a case like thisnotwithstanding it's a public debtmind,it's a public debt, binding on the whole congregation; but what ah sayah'll stand tothere's wan hundred pounds ready, when there's fowerithers wi' fifty pounds apiecethat's three hundred poundsand wi' suchan example before them, surely the rest o' the members will make up theremaining two hundred and fiftysurely, surely.''It's lending to the Lord,' said the minister's wife sadly, as shepassed the marmalade to the children.The conversation now took the form of a discussion as to which of themembers might reasonably be expected to come forward at such a juncture;and as Ronald had no part or interest in this matter he made bold toturn to Mr. Weems, who sate beside him, and engage him in talk on theirown account.  Indeed, he had rather taken a liking for this timorouslittle man, and wished to know more about him and his belongings andoccupations; and when Mr. Weems revealed to him the great trouble of hislifethe existence of a shrill-voiced chanticleer in the backyard of thecottage adjoining his own, out somewhere in the PollokshawsdirectionRonald was glad to come to his help at once.'Oh, that's all right,' said he.  'I'll shoot him for you.'But this calm proposal was like to drive the poor little man daft withterror.  His nervous system suffered cruelly from the skirling of theabominable fowl; but even that was to be dreaded less than a summons anda prosecution and a deadly feud with his neighbour, who was a drunken,quarrelsome, cantankerous shoemaker.'But, God bless me,' Ronald said, 'it's not to be thought of that anyhuman being should be tortured like that by a brute beast.  Well,there's another way o' settling the hash o' that screeching thing.  Youjust go and buy a pea-shooteror if one of the laddies will lend you atin whistle, that will do; then go and buy twopence-worth of antibiliouspillsindeed, I suppose any kind would serve; and then fire half a dozenover into the back-yard; my word, when the bantam gentleman has pickedup these bonny looking peas, and swallowed them, he'll no be forflapping his wings and crowing, I'm thinking; he'll rather be forsinging the tune of "Annie Laurie."  But maybe you're not a good shotwith a pea-shooter?  Well, I'll come over and do it for you early somemorning, when the beast's hungry.'But it was difficult for any one to talk, even in the most subdued andmodest way, with that harsh and strident voice laying down the law atthe head of the table.  And now the large-waistcoated elder was on thesubject of the temperance movement; arraigning the government for notsuppressing the liquor-traffic altogether; denouncing the callousselfishness of those who were inclined to temporise with the devil, andlaying at their door all the misery caused by the drunkenness of theirfellow-creatures; and proudly putting in evidence his own position inthe city of Glasgowhis authority in the churchthe regard paid to hisadviceand the solid, substantial slice of the world's gear that hepossessedas entirely due to the fact that he had never, not even as ayoung man, imbibed one drop of alcohol.  Now Ronald Strang wasordinarily a most abstemious personand no credit to him, nor to any onein the like case; for his firm physique and his way of living hithertohad equally rendered him independent of any such artificial aid (thougha glass of whisky on a wet day on the hillside did not come amiss tohim, and his hard head could steer him safely through a fair amount ofjollification when those wild lads came down from Tongue).  But he wasirritated by that loud and raucous voice; he resented the man'sarrogance and his domineering over the placid and phlegmatic Andrew, whoscarcely opened his mouth; and here and there he began to put in a sharpsaying or two that betokened discontent and also a coming storm. 'Theyused to say that cleanliness was next to godliness; but nowadays yewould put total abstinence half a mile ahead of it,' he would say, orsomething of the kind; and in due course these two were engaged in abattle-royal of discussion.  It shall not be put down here; for who wasever convincedin morals, or art, or literature, or anything elseby anargument? it needs only be said that the elder, being rather hardpressed, took refuge in Scriptural authority. But alas! this was not ofmuch avail; for the whole family of the East Lothian farmer (not merelythe student one of them) had been brought up with exceeding care, andtaught to give chapter and verse for everything; so that when Mr.M'Lachlan sought to crush his antagonist with the bludgeon of quotationhe found it was only a battledore he had got hold of.'"Wine is a mocker; strong drink is raging; and whosoever is deceivedthereby is not wise,"' he would say severely.'"Wine which cheereth God and man,"' the other would retort.  '"Winethat maketh glad the heart of man."  What make ye of these?''"Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath babbling?they that tarry longat the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine."  What better authoritycan we have?''Ay, man, the wise king said that; but it wasna his last word.  "Givestrong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those thatbe of heavy hearts.  Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and rememberhis misery no more."''The devil quoting Scripture for his own ends,' the Reverend Andrewinterposed, with a mild facetiousness.'It's a dreadful thing to hear in a minister's house,' said theminister's wife, appealing to her neighbour, Mrs. M'Lachlan.'What is?  A verse from the Proverbs of Solomon?' Ronald said, turningto her quite good-naturedly.But instantly he saw that she was distressed, and even more lachrymosethan ever; and he knew that nothing would convince her that he was not achild of wrath and of the devil; and he reproached himself for havingentered into any discussion of any kind whatever in this house, whereMaggie was to livehe hoped in perfect accord and amity. As for himself,he wished only to be out of it.  He was not in his right element.  Thevulgar complacency of the rich elder irritated him; the melancholyunreason of his sister-in-law depressed him.  He foresaw that not herewas any abiding-place for him while he sojourned in the great city.But how was he to get away?  They lingered and dawdled over theirtea-drinking in a most astonishing fashion; his brother being the mostintemperate of all of them, and obviously accounting thereby for hispallid and bilious cheeks.  Moreover, they had returned to that fruitfultopic of talkthe capability of this or the other member of thecongregation to subscribe to the fund for paying off the debt on thechurch; and as this involved a discussion of everybody's ways and means,and of his expenditure, and the manner of living of himself, his wife,his sons, and daughters and servants, the very air seemed thick withtrivial and envious tittle-tattle, the women-folk, of course, being moreloquacious than any.'Lord help us,' said Ronald to himself, as he sate there in silence,'this house would be a perfect paradise for an Income-tax Commissioner.'However, the fourth or fifth tea-pot was exhausted at last; the ministeroffered up a prolonged thanksgiving; and Ronald thought that now hemight get awayand out into the freer air.  But that was not to be asyet.  His brother observed that it was getting late; that all themembers of the household were gathered together; and they mightappropriately have family worship now.  So the two servant-girls weresummoned in to clear the table, and that done, they remained; theminister brought the family Bible over from the sideboard; and all satestill and attentive, their books in their hand, while he sought out thechapter he wanted.  It was the Eighth of the Epistle to the Romans; andhe read it slowly and elaborately, but without any word of comment orexpounding.  Then he said that they would sing to the praise of the Lordthe XCIII. Psalmhimself leading off with the fine old tune ofMartyrdom; and this the young people sang very well indeed, thoughthey were a little interfered with by the uncertain treble of themarried women and the bovine baritone of the elder.  Thereafter theminister offered up a prayer, in which very pointed reference was madeto the brother and sister who had come from the far mountains to dwellwithin the gates of the city; and then all of them rose, and themaidservants withdrew, and those remaining who had to go began to getready for their departure.'Come over and see us soon again,' the minister said to him, as theyfollowed him into the lobby; but the minister's wife did not repeat thatfriendly invitation.'Ronald,' the little Maggie whisperedand her lips were rathertremulous, 'if you hear from Meenie, will you let me know?''But I am not likely to hear from her, lass,' said he, with his handupon her shoulder.  'You must write to her yourself, and she willanswer, and send ye the news.''Mind ye pass the public-houses on the way gaun hame,' said the elder,by way of finishing up the evening with a joke: Ronald took no notice,but bade the others good-bye, and opened the door and went out.When he got into the street his first startled impression was that theworld was on fireall the heavens, but especially the southern heavens,were one blaze of soft and smoky blood-red, into which the roofs andchimney-stacks of the dusky buildings rose solemn and dark.  A pulsatingcrimson it was, now dying away slightly, again gleaming up with a suddenfervour; and always it looked the more strange and bewildering becauseof the heavy gloom of the buildings and the ineffectual lemon-yellowpoints of the gas-lamps.  Of course he remembered instantly what thismust bethe glow of the ironworks over there in the south; and presentlyhe had turned his back on that sullen radiance, and was making away forthe north side of the city.But when he emerged from the comparative quiet of the southernthoroughfares into the glare and roar of Jamaica Street and ArgyllStreet, all around him there seemed even more of bewilderment than inthe daytime. The unceasing din of tramway-cars and vans and carts stillfilled the air; but now there was everywhere a fierce yellow blaze ofgaslightglowing in the great stocked windows, streaming out across thecrowded pavements, and shining on the huge gilded letters and sprawlingadvertisements of the shops.  Then the peoplea continuous surge, as ofa river; the men begrimed for the most part, here and there two or threedrunk and bawling, the women with cleaner faces, but most of thembareheaded, with Highland shawls wrapped round their shoulders.  Thesuffused crimson glow of the skies was scarcely visible now; thishorizontal blaze of gas-light killed it; and through the yellow glarepassed the dusky phantasmagoria of a city's lifethe cars and horses,the grimy crowds.  Buchanan Street, it is true, was less noisy; and hewalked quickly, glad to get out of that terrible din; and by and by,when he got away up to Port Dundas Road, where his lodging was, he foundthe world grown quite quiet again, and gloomy and dark, save for thesolitary gas-lamps and the faint dull crimson glow sent across from thesouthern skies.He went up the stone stair, was admitted to the house, and shown intothe apartment that his brother had secured for him.  It had formerlybeen used as a sitting-room, with a bedroom attached; but now these wereseparated, and a bed was placed at one end of the little parlour, whichwas plainly and not untidily furnished.  When his landlady left heproceeded to unpack his things, getting out first his books, which heplaced on the mantel-shelf to be ready for use in the morning; then hemade some further disposition of his belongings; and thenthen somehowhe fell away from this industrious mood, and became more and moreabsent, and at last went idly to the window, and stood looking outthere.  There was not much to be seena few lights about the CaledonianRailway Station, some dusky sheds, and that faint red glow in the sky.ButInver-Mudal?  Well, if only he had reflected, Inver-Mudal must atthis moment have been just about as dark as was this railway station andthe neighbourhood surrounding itunless, indeed, it happened to be aclear starlit night away up there in the north, with the heavens shiningbeautiful and benignant over Clebrig, and the loch, and the littlehamlet among the trees.  However, that was not the Inver-Mudal he wasthinking of; it was the Inver-Mudal of a clear spring day, with sweetwinds blowing across the moors, and the sunlight yellow on Clebrig'sslopes, and Loch Naver's waters all a rippling and dazzling blue.  AndMr. Murray standing at the door of the inn, and smoking his pipe, andjoking with any one that passed; the saucy Nelly casting glances amongthe lads; Harry with dark suspicions of rats wherever he could find ahole in the wall of the barn; Maggie, under instruction of Duncan theploughman, driving the two horses hauling a harrow over the rough redland; everywhere the birds singing; the young corn showing green; andthenjust as the chance might beMeenie coming along the road, hergolden-brown hair blown by the wind, her eyes about as blue as LochNaver's shining waters, and herself calling, with laughter and scolding,to Maggie to desist from that tomboy work.  And where was it all gonenow?  He seemed to have shut his eyes upon that beautiful clear, joyousworld; and to have plunged into a hideous and ghastly dream.  The roarand yellow glarethe black housesthe lurid crimson in the skytheterrible loneliness and silence of this very roomwell, he could notquite understand it yet.  But perhaps it would not always seem sobewildering; perhaps one might grow accustomed in time?and teach one'sself to forget?  And then again he had resolved that he would not readover any more the verses he had written in the olden days about Meenie,and the hills and the streams and the straths that knew her and lovedherfor these idle rhymes made him dream dreams; that is to say, he hadalmost resolvedhe had very nearly resolvedthat he would not read overany more the verses he had written about Meenie.*CHAPTER X.**GRAY DAYS.*But, after all, that first plunge into city-life had had something ofthe excitement of novelty; it was the settling down thereafter to thedull monotonous round of labour, in this lonely lodging, with themelancholy gray world of mist surrounding him and shutting him in, thatwas to test the strength of his resolve.  The first day was not so bad;for now and again he would relieve the slow tedium of the hours by doinga little carpentering about the room; and the sharp sound of hammer andnail served to break in upon that hushed, slumberous murmur of the greatcity without that seemed a mournful, distant, oppressive thing. But thenext day of this solitary life (for it was not until the end of the weekhe was to see Mr. Weems) was dreadful. The dull, silent gray hours wouldnot go by.  Wrestling with Ewart's Agricultural Assistant, orBalfour's Elements of Botany, or with distressing problems inland-surveying or timber-measuring, he would think the time had passed;and then, going to the window for a moment's relief to eye and brain, hewould see by the clock of the railway station that barely half an hourhad elapsed since last he had looked at the obdurate hands.  How heenvied the porters, the cab-drivers, the men who were loading andunloading the waggons; they seemed all so busy and contented; they weregetting through with their work; they had something to show for theirlabour; they had companions to talk to and joke with; sometimes hethought he could hear them laughing.  And ah, how much more he enviedthe traveller who drove up and got leisurely out of the cab, and had hisluggage carried into the station, himself following and disappearingfrom view!  Whither was he going, then, away from this great, melancholycity, with its slow hours, and wan skies, and dull, continuous,stupefying murmur?  Whither, indeed!away by the silver links of Forth,perhaps, with the castled rock of Stirling rising into the windy blueand white; away by the wooded banks of Allan Water and the bonny Braesof Doune; by Strathyre, and Glenogle, and Glenorchy; and past thetowering peaks of Ben Cruachan, and out to the far-glancing waters ofthe western seas.  Indeed it is a sore pity that Miss Carry Hodson, in afit of temper, had crushed together and thrust into the bottom of theboat the newspaper containing an estimate of Ronald's little Highlandpoem; if only she had handed it on to him, he would have learned thatthe sentiment of nostalgia is too slender and fallacious a thing for anysensible person to bother his head about; and, instead of wasting histime in gazing at the front of a railway station, he would have goneresolutely back to Strachan's Agricultural Tables and the measuringand mapping of surface areas.On the third day he grew desperate.'In God's name let us see if there's not a bit of blue sky anywhere!' hesaid to himself; and he flung his books aside, and put on his Glengarrycap, and took a stick in his hand, and went out.Alas! that there were no light pattering steps following him down thestone stair; the faithful Harry had had to be left behind, under chargeof Mr. Murray of the inn.  And indeed Ronald found it so strange to begoing out without some companion of the kind that when he passed intothe wide, dull thoroughfare, he looked up and down everywhere to see ifhe could not find some homeless wandering cur that he could induce to gowith him.  But there was no sign of dog-life visible; for the matter ofthat there was little sign of any other kind of life; there was nothingbefore him but the wide, empty, dull-hued street, apparently terminatingin a great wilderness of india-rubber works and oil-works and the like,all of them busily engaged in pouring volumes of smoke through tallchimneys into the already sufficiently murky sky.But when he got farther north, he found that there were lanes and alleyspermeating this mass of public works; and eventually he reached a canal,and crossed that, deeming that if he kept straight on he must reach theopen country somewhere.  As yet he could make out no distance; blocks ofmelancholy soot-begrimed houses, timber-yards, and blank stone wallsshut in the view on every hand; moreover there was a brisk north windblowing that was sharply pungent with chemical fumes and also grittywith dust; so that he pushed on quickly, anxious to get some clean airinto his lungs, and anxious, if that were possible, to get a glimpse ofgreen fields and blue skies.  For, of course, he could not always be athis books; and this, as he judged, must be the nearest way out into thecountry; and he could not do better than gain some knowledge of hissurroundings, and perchance discover some more or less secluded sylvanretreat, where, in idle time, he might pass an hour or so with hispencil and his verses and his memories of the moors and hills.But the farther out he got the more desolate and desolating became thescene around him.  Here was neither town nor country; or rather, bothwere there; and both were dead.  He came upon a bit of hawthorn-hedge;the stems were coal-black, the leaves begrimed out of all semblance tonatural foliage.  There were long straight roads, sometimes fronted by astone wall and sometimes by a block of buildingsdwelling-houses,apparently, but of the most squalid and dingy description; the windowsopaque with dirt; the 'closes' foul; the pavements in front unspeakable.But the most curious thing was the lifeless aspect of this drearyneighbourhood.  Where were the people?  Here or there two or threeragged children would be playing in the gutter; or perhaps, in a dismallittle shop, an old woman might be seen, with some half-withered applesand potatoes on the counter.  But where were the people who at one timeor other must have inhabited these great, gaunt, gloomy tenements?  Hecame to a dreadful place called Saracen Crossa very picture ofdesolation and misery; the tall blue-black buildings showing hardly anysign of life in their upper flats; the shops below being for the mostpart tenantless, the windows rudely boarded over.  It seemed as if someblight had fallen over the land, first obliterating the fields, and thenlaying its withering hand on the houses that had been built on them. Andyet these melancholy-looking buildings were not wholly uninhabited; hereor there a face was visiblebut always of women or children; and perhapsthe men-folk were away at work somewhere in a factory.  Anyhow, underthis dull gray sky, with a dull gray mist in the air, and with a strangesilence everywhere around, the place seemed a City of the Dead; he couldnot understand how human beings could live in it at all.At last, however, he came to some open spaces that still bore somehalf-decipherable marks of the country, and his spirits rose a little.He even tried to sing 'O say, will you marry me, Nelly Munro?'to forcehimself into a kind of liveliness, as it were, and to prove to himselfthat things were not quite so bad after all.  But the words stuck in histhroat.  His voice sounded strangely in this silent and sickly solitude.And at last he stood stock-still, to have a look round about him, and tomake out what kind of a place this was that he had entered into.Well, it was a very strange kind of place.  It seemed to have beenforgotten by somebody, when all the other land near was being ploughedthrough by railway-lines and heaped up into embankments.  Undoubtedlythere were traces of the country still remainingand even ofagriculture; here and there a line of trees, stunted and nipped by thepoisonous air; a straggling hedge or two, withered and black; a patch ofcorn, of a pallid and hopeless colour; and a meadow with cattle feedingin it.  But the road that led through these bucolic solitudes was quitenew and made of cinders; in the distance it seemed to lose itself in anetwork of railway embankments; while the background of this strangesimulacrum of a landscapeso far as that could be seen through the pallof mist and smokeseemed to consist of further houses, ironworks, andtall chimney-stacks.  Anything more depressing and disconsolate he hadnever witnessed; nay, he had had no idea that any such God-forsakenneighbourhood existed anywhere in the world; and he thought he wouldmuch rather be back at his books than wandering through this dead andspectral land. Moreover it was beginning to raina thin, pertinaciousdrizzle that seemed to hang in the thick and clammy air; and so hestruck away to the right, in the direction of some houses, guessing thatthere he would find some way of getting back to the city other than thatghastly one he had come by.By the time he had reached these housesa suburb or village this seemedto be that led in a straggling fashion up to the crest of a smallhillit was raining heavily.  Now ordinarily a gamekeeper in theHighlands is not only indifferent to rain, but apparently incapable ofperceiving the existence of it.  When was wet weather at Inver-Mudalever known to interfere with the pursuits or occupations of anybody?Why, the lads there would as soon have thought of taking shelter fromthe rain as a terrier would.  But it is one thing to be walking over wetheather in knickerbocker-stockings and shoes, the water quite clean, andthe exercise keeping legs and feet warm enough, and it is entirelyanother thing to be walking through mud made of black cinders, withclammy trousers flapping coldly round one's ankles.  Nay, so miserablewas all this business that he took refuge in an entry leading into oneof those 'lands' of houses; and there he stood, in the cold stonepassage, with a chill wind blowing through it, looking out on theswimming pavements, and the black and muddy road, and the dull stonewalls, and the mournful skies.At length, the rain moderating somewhat, he issued out from thisshelter, and set forth for the town.  A tramway-car passed him, but hehad no mind to be jammed in amongst a lot of elderly women, all damp andwith dripping umbrellas.  Nay, he was trying to convince himself thatthe very discomfort of this dreary march homewardthrough mud anddrizzle and fogwas a wholesome thing. After that glimpse of the kind ofcountry that lay outside the townin this direction at leastthere wouldbe less temptation for him to throw down his books and go off for idlestrolls.  He assured himself that he ought to be glad that he found noverdant meadows and purling brooks; that, on the contrary, the aspect ofthis suburban territory was sufficiently appalling to drive him back tohis lodgings. All the same, when he did arrive there, he was somewhatdisheartened and depressed; and he went up the stone staircase slowly;and when he entered that solitary, dull little room, and sate down, hefelt limp and damp and tiredtired, after a few miles' walk!  And thenhe took to his books again, with his mouth set hard.Late that night he was sitting as usual alone, and rather absentlyturning over his papers; and already it had come to this that now, whenhe chanced to read any of these writings of his of former days, theyseemed to have been written by some one else.  Who was this man, then,that seemed to go through the world with a laugh and a song, as it were;rating this one, praising that; having it all his own way; and withnever a thought of the morrow?  But there was one piece in particularthat struck home.  It was a description of the little terrier; he hadpencilled it on the back of an envelope one warm summer day when he waslying at full length on the heather, with Harry not half a dozen yardsoff, his nose between his paws.  Harry did not know that his picture wasbeing taken.Auld, gray, and grizzled; yellow een;A nose as brown's a berry;A wit as sharp as ony preenThat's my wee chieftain Harry.Lord sakes!the courage of the man!The biggest barn-yard ratten,He'll snip him by the neck, o'er-han',As he the deil had gatten.And when his master's work on hand,There's none maun come anear him;The biggest Duke in all Scotland,My Harry's teeth would fear him.But ordinar' wise like fowl or freen,He's harmless as a kitten;As soon he'd think o' worryin'A hennie when she's sittin'.But Harry, lad, ye're growin' auld;Your days are gettin' fewer;And maybe Heaven has made a fauldFor such wee things as you are.And what strange kintra will that be?And will they fill your coggies?And whatna strange folk there will seeThere's water for the doggies?Ae thing I brawly ken; it's thisYe may hae work or play there;But if your master once ye miss,I'm bound ye winna stay there.It was the last verse that struck home.  It was through no failure ofdevotion on the part of the faithful Harry that he was now atInver-Mudal; it was his master that had played him false, and severedthe old companionship.  And he kept thinking about the little terrier;and wondering whether he missed his master as much as his master missedhim; and wondering whether Meenie had ever a word for him as she wentbyfor she and Harry had always been great friends.  Nay, perhaps Meeniemight not take it ill if Maggie wrote to her for news of the little dog;and then Meenie would answer; and might not her letter take a widerscope, and say something about the people there, and about herself?Surely she would do that; and some fine morning the answerin Meenie'shandwritingwould be delivered in Abbotsford Place; and he knew thatMaggie would not be long in apprising him of the same.  Perhaps, indeed,he might himself become possessed of that precious missive; and bring itaway with him; and from time to time have a glance at this or thatsentence of itin Meenie's own actual handwritingwhen the long dullwork of the day was over, and his fancy free to fly away to the northagain, to Strath-Terry and Clebrig and Loch Naver, and the neat smallcottage with the red blinds in the windows.  It seemed to him a longtime now since he had left all of these; he felt as though Glasgow hadengulfed him: while the day of his rescuethe day of the fulfilment ofhis ambitious designswas now growing more and more distant and vagueand uncertain, leaving him only the slow drudgery of these weary hours.But Meenie's letter would be a kind of talisman; to see her handwritingwould be like hearing her speak; and surely this dull little lodging wasquiet enough, so that in the hushed silence of the evening, he, readingthose cheerful phrases, might persuade himself that it was Meenie'svoice he was listening to, with the quiet, clear, soft laugh that sowell he remembered.And so these first days went by; and he hoped in time to get moreaccustomed to this melancholy life; and doggedly he stuck to the task hehad set before him.  As for the outcome of it allwell, that did notseem quite so facile nor so fine a thing as it had appeared before hecame away from the north; but he left that for the future to decide; andin the meantime he was above all anxious not to perplex himself by thedreaming of idle dreams.  He had come to Glasgow to work; not to buildimpossible castles in the air.*CHAPTER XI.**KATE.*And yet it was a desperately hard ordeal; for this man was by natureessentially joyous, and sociable, and fitted to be the king of all goodcompany; and the whole of his life had been spent in the open, in briskand active exercise; and sunlight and fresh air were to him as the verybreath of his nostrils.  But here he was, day after day, week afterweek, chained to these dismal tasks; in solitude; with the far whitedream of ambition becoming more and more distant and obscured; and witha terrible consciousness ever growing upon him that in coming away fromeven the mere neighbourhood of Meenie, from the briefest companionshipwith her, he had sacrificed the one beautiful thing, the one preciouspossession, that his life had ever held for him or would hold.  Whatthough the impalpable barrier of Glengask and Orosay rose between himand her? He was no sentimental Claude Melnotte; he had common sense; heaccepted facts.  Of course Meenie would go away in due time.  Of courseshe was destined for higher things.  But what then?  What of themeanwhile?  Could anything happen to him quite so wonderful, or worththe striving for, as Meenie's smile to him as she met him in the road?What for the time being made the skies full of brightness, and made thepulses of the blood flow gladly, and the day become charged with a kindof buoyancy of life?  And as for these vague ambitions for the sake ofwhich he had bartered away his freedom and sold himself intoslaverytowards what did they tend?  For whom? The excited atmospherethe Americans had brought with them had departed now: alas! this otheratmosphere into which he had plunged was dull and sad enough, in allconscience; and the leaden days weighed down upon him; and the slow andsolitary hours would not go by.One evening he was coming in to the town by way of the Pollokshaws road;he had spent the afternoon hard at work with Mr. Weems, and was makinghome again to the silent little lodging in the north.  He had now been amonth and more in Glasgow; and had formed no kind of society orcompanionship whatever.  Once or twice he had looked in at hisbrother's; but that was chiefly to see how the little Maggie was goingon; his sister-in-law gave him no over-friendly welcome; and, indeed,the social atmosphere of the Reverend Andrew's house was far from beingcongenial to him.  As for the letter of introduction that Meenie hadgiven him to her married sister, of course he had not had thepresumption to deliver that; he had accepted the letter, and thankedMeenie for itfor it was but another act of her always thoughtfulkindness; but Mrs. Gemmill was the wife of a partner in a largewarehouse; and they lived in Queen's Crescent; and altogether Ronald hadno thought of calling on themalthough to be sure he had heard that Mrs.Gemmill had been making sufficiently minute and even curious inquirieswith regard to him of a member of his brother's congregation whom shehappened to know.  No; he lived his life alone; wrestling with theweariness of it as best he might; and not quite knowing, perhaps, howdeeply it was eating into his heart.Well, he was walking absently home on this dull gray evening, watchingthe lamp-lighter adding point after point to the long string of goldenstars, when there went by a smartly appointed dog-cart.  He did notparticularly remark the occupants of the vehicle, though he knew theywere two women, and that one of them was driving; his glance fell ratheron the well-groomed cob, and he thought the varnished oak dog-cartlooked neat and business-like. The next second it was pulled up; therewas a pause, during which time he was of course drawing nearer; and thena woman's voice called to him'Bless me, is that you, Ronald?'He looked up in amazement.  And who was this, then, who had turned herhead round and was now regarding him with her laughing, handsome, boldblack eyes?  She was a woman apparently of five-and-thirty or so, butexceedingly well preserved and comely; of pleasant features and freshcomplexion; and of rather a manly build and carriagean appearance thatwas not lessened by her wearing a narrow-brimmed little billycock hat.And then, even in this gathering dusk, he recognised her; andunconsciously he repeated her own words'Bless me, is that you, Mrs.Mrs.Menzies' for in truth he had almostforgotten her name.'Mrs. This or Mrs. That!' the other cried.  'I thought my name wasKateit used to be anyway.  Well, I declare! Come, give us a shake ofyour handauntie, this is my cousin Ronald!and who would hae thought ofmeeting you in Glasgow, now!''I have been here a month and more,' Ronald said, taking the profferedhand.'And never to look near me oncethere's friendliness! Eh, and what a manyou've grown toye were just a bit laddie when I saw ye lastbut ayeafter the lasses, thoughoh ayebless me, what changes there hae beensince then!''Well, Katie, it's not you that have changed much anyway,' said he, forhe was making out again the old familiar girlish expression in thefirmer features of the mature woman.'And what's brought ye to Glasgow?' said shebut then she correctedherself: 'No, no; I'll have no long story wi' you standing on thepavement like that.  Jump up behind, Ronald, lad, and come home wi' us,and we'll have a crack thegither''Katie, dear,' said her companion, who was a little, white-faced,cringing and fawning old woman, 'let me get down and get up behind.Your cousin must sit beside ye'But already Ronald had swung himself on to the after seat of thevehicle; and Mrs. Menzies had touched the cob with her whip; and soonthey were rattling away into the town.'I suppose ye heard that my man was dead?' said she presently, andpartly turning round.'I think I did,' he answered rather vaguely.'He was a good man to me, like Auld Robin Gray,' said this strappingwidow, who certainly had a very matter-of-fact way in talking about herdeceased husband.  'But he was never the best of managers, poor man.I've been doing better ever since.  We've a better business, and not apenny of mortgage left on the tavern.''Weel ye may say that, Katie,' whined the old woman. 'There never wassuch a manager as younever.  Ay, and the splendid furnitureit wasnever thought o' in his timebless 'm!  A good man he was, and a kindman; but no the manager you are, Katie; there's no such another tavernin a' Glesca.'Now although the cousinship with Ronald claimed by Mrs. Menzies did notexist in actual fact,there was some kind of remote relationship,however,still, it must be confessed that it was very ungrateful andinconstant of him to have let the fate and fortunes of the pretty KateBurnside (as she was in former days) so entirely vanish from his mindand memory.  Kate Burnside was the daughter of a small farmer in theLammermuir district; and the Strangs and Burnsides were neighbours aswell as remotely related by blood.  But that was not the only reason whyRonald ought to have remembered a little more about the stalwart,black-eyed, fresh-cheeked country wench who, though she was some sevenor eight years or more his senior, he had boldly chosen for hissweetheart in his juvenile days.  Nay, had she not been the firstinspirer of his muse; and had he not sung this ox-eyed goddess in many alaboured verse, carefully constructed after the manner of Tannahill orMotherwell or Allan Cunningham?  The 'lass of Lammer Law' he called herin these artless strains; and Kate was far from resenting this frankdevotion; nay, she even treasured up the verses in which her radiantbeauties were enumerated; for why should not a comely East Lothian wenchtake pleasure in being told that her cheeks outshone the rose, and thatthe 'darts o' her bonnie black een' had slain their thousands, and thather faithful lover would come to see her, ay, though the Himalayasbarred his way?  But then, alas!as happens in the worldthe faithfullover was sent off into far neighbourhoods to learn the art and mysteryof training pointers and setters; and Kate's father died, and the familydispersed from the farm; Kate went into service in Glasgow, and thereshe managed to capture the affections of an obese and elderly publicanwhomshe being a prudent and sensible kind of a creatureshe forthwithmarried; by and by, through partaking too freely of his own wares, heconsiderately died, leaving her in sole possession of the tavern (he hadcalled it a public-house, but she soon changed all that, and the placetoo, when she was established as its mistress); and now she was ahandsome, buxom, firm-nerved woman, who could and did look well afterher own affairs; who had a flourishing business, a comfortable bankaccount, and a sufficiency of friends of her own way of thinking; andwhose raven-black hair did not as yet show a single streak of gray.  Itwas all this latter part of Kate Burnside'sor rather, Mrs.Menzies'scareer of which Ronald was so shamefully ignorant; but shespeedily gave him enough information about herself as they drove throughthe gas-lit streets, for she was a voluble, high-spirited woman, whocould make herself heard when she chose.'Ay,' said she, at length, 'and where have ye left the good wife,Ronald?''What goodwife?' said he.'Ye dinna tell me that you're no married yet?''Not that I know of,' said he.'What have ye been about, man?  Ye were aye daft about the lasses; andye no married yet?  What have ye been about, man, to let them a' escapeye?''Some folk have other things to think of,' said he evasively.'Dinna tell me,' she retorted.  'I ken weel what's upper-most in themind o' a handsome lad like you.  Weel, if ye're no married, ye're thenext door to it, I'll be bound. What's she like?''I'll tell ye when I find her,' said he drily.'Ye're a dark one; but I'll find ye out, my man.'She could not continue the conversation, for they were about to crossthe bridge over the Clyde, and the congested traffic made her careful.And then again Jamaica Street was crowded and difficult to steerthrough; but presently she left that for a quieter thoroughfare leadingoff to the right; and in a few moments she had pulled up in front of alarge tavern, close by a spacious archway.'Auntie, gang you and fetch Alec to take the cob round, will ye?' saidshe; and then Ronald, surmising that she had now reached home, leapt tothe ground, and went to the horse's head.  Presently the groom appeared,and Kate Menzies descended from her chariot.Now in Glasgow, for an establishment of this kind to be popular, it musthave a side entrancethe more the merrier, indeedby which people canget into the tavern without being seen; but besides this it soonappeared that Mrs. Menzies had a private right of way of her own.  Shebade Ronald follow her; she went through the archway; produced a key andopened a door; and then, passing along a short lobby, he found himselfin what might be regarded as the back parlour of the public-house, butwas in reality a private room reserved by Mrs. Menzies for herself andher intimate friends.  And a very brilliant little apartment it was;handsomely furnished and shining with stained wood, plate glass, andvelvet; the gas-jets all aglow in the clear globes; the table in themiddle laid with a white cloth for supper, all sparkling with crystaland polished electro-plate.  Moreover (for business is business) thisluxurious little den commanded at will complete views of the frontpremises; and there was also a door leading thither; but the door wasshut, and the red blinds were drawn over the two windows, so that theroom looked quite like one in a private dwelling.'And now, my good woman,' said Mrs. Menzies, as she threw her hat andcloak and dog-skin gloves into a corner, 'just you mak' them hurry upwi' supper; for we're just home in time; and we'll want another place atthe table. And tell Jeannie there's a great friend o' mine come in, ifshe can get anything specialLord's sake, Ronald, if I had kent I wasgoing to fall in with you I would have looked after it mysel'.''Ye need not bother about me,' said he, 'for supper is not much in mywaynot since I came to the town. Without the country air, I think onewould as lief not sit down to a table at all.''Oh, I can cure ye o' that complaint,' she said confidently; and sherang the bell.Instantly the door was opened, and he caught a glimpse of a vastpalatial-looking place, with more stained wood and plate glass andvelvet, and with several smartly-dressed young ladies standing or movingbehind the long mahogany counters; moreover, one of thesea tall andserious-eyed maidennow stood at the partly opened door.'Gin and bitters, Mary,' said Mrs. Menzies brisklyshe was at thismoment standing in front of one of the mirrors, complacently smoothingher hair with her hands, and setting to rights her mannish littlenecktie.The serious-eyed handmaiden presently reappeared, bringing a smallsalver, on which was a glass filled with some kind of a fluid, which shepresented to him.'What's this?' said he, appealing to his hostess.'Drink it and find out,' said she; 'it'll make ye jump wi' hunger, asthe Hielanman said.'He did as he was bid; and loudly she laughed at the wry face that hemade.'What's the matter?''It's a devil of a kind of thing, that,' said he; for it was a firstexperience.'Ay, but wait till ye find how hungry it will make ye,' she answered;and then she returned from the mirror.  'And I'm sure ye'll no mind myhair being a wee thing camstrairy, Ronald; there's no need for ceremonybetween auld freens, as the saying is''But, look here, Katie, my lass,' said hefor perhaps he was a littleemboldened by that fiery fluid, 'I'm thinking that maybe I'm makingmyself just a little too much at home. Now, some other time, when ye'veno company, I'll come in and see ye'But she cut him short at once, and with some pride.'Indeed, I'll tell ye this, that the day that Ronald Strang comes intomy houseand into my own house toothat's no the day that he's gaun outo't without eating and drinking. Ma certes, no!  And as for company, whythere's none but auld mother PatersonI ca' her auntie; but she's nomore my auntie than you areye see, my man, Ronald, a poor, unprotectedhelpless widow woman maun look after appearancesfor the world's uncogiven to leein', as Shakespeare says. There, Ronald, that's anotherthing,' she added suddenly'ye'll take me to the theatre!my word, we'llhave a box!'But these gay visions were interrupted by the reappearance of Mrs.Paterson, who was followed by a maidservant bearing a dish on which wasa large sole, smoking hot. Indeed, it soon became apparent that this wasto be a very elaborate banquet, such as Ronald was not at all familiarwith; and all the care and flattering attention his hostess could payhim she paid him, laughing and joking with him, and insisting on hishaving the very best of everything, and eager to hand things to himevenif she rather ostentatiously displayed her abundant rings in doing so.And when mother Paterson said'What will ye drink, Katie dear?  Some aleor some porter?'The other stormily answered'Get out, ye daft auld wife!  Ale or porter the first day that my cousinRonald comes into my own house?  Champagne's the word, woman; and thebest!  What will ye have, Ronaldwhat brand do ye like?Moett andShandon?'Ronald laughed.'What do I know about such things?' said he.  'And besides, there's noreason for such extravagance.  There's been no stag killed the day.''There's been no stag killed the day,' she retorted, 'but RonaldStrang's come into my house, and he'll have the best that's in it, or myname's no Kate Burnsideor Kate Menzies, I should say, God forgie me!Ring the bell, auntie.'This time the grave-eyed barmaid appeared.'A bottle of Moett and Shandon, Mary.''A pint bottle, m'm?''A pint bottleye stupid idiot?' she said (but quite good-naturedly).'A quart bottle, of course!'And then when the bottle was brought and the glasses filled, she said'Here's your health, Ronald; and right glad am I to see you looking soweelye were aye a bonnie laddie, and ye've kept the promise o'tay,indeed, the whole o' you Strangs were a handsome familyexcept yourbrother Andrew, maybe''Do ye ever see Andrew?' Ronald said; for a modest man does not like tohave his looks discussed, even in the most flattering way.Then loudly laughed Kate Menzies.'Me?  Me gang and see the Reverend Andrew Strang? No fears!  He's no oneo' my kind.  He'd drive me out o' the house wi' bell, book, and candle.I hae my ain friends, thank yeand I'm going to number you amongst themso long as ye stop in this town.  Auntie, pass the bottle to Ronald!'And so the banquet proceededa roast fowl and bacon, an apple-tart,cheese and biscuits and what not following in due succession; and allthe time she was learning more and more of the life that Ronald had ledsince he had left the Lothians, and freely she gave him of herconfidences in return.  On one point she was curiously inquisitive, andthat was as to whether he had not been in some entanglement with one orother of the Highland lasses up there in Sutherlandshire; and there wasa considerable amount of joking on that subject, which Ronald boregood-naturedly enough; finding it on the whole the easier way to let hersurmises have free course.'But ye're a dark one!' she said at length.  'And ye would hae mebelieve that a strapping fellow like you hasna had the lasses rinnin'after him?  I'm no sae daft.''I'll tell ye what it is, Katie,' he retorted, 'the lasses in theHighlands have their work to look after; they dinna live a' in clover,like the Glasgow dames.''Dinna tell medinna tell me,' she said.And now, as supper was over and the table cleared, she went to a smallmahogany cabinet and opened it.'I keep some cigars here for my particular friends,' said Mrs. Menzies,'but I'm sure I dinna ken which is the best. Come and pick for yourself,Ronald lad; if you're no certain the best plan is to take the biggest.''This is surely living on the fat of the land, Katie,' he protested.'And what for no?' said she boldly.  'Let them enjoy themselves that'searned the right to it.''But that's not me,' he said.'Well, it's me,' she answered.  'And when my cousin Ronald comes into myhouse, it's the best that's in it that's at his serviceand no greatwonder either!'Well, her hospitality was certainly a little stormy; but the handsomewidow meant kindly and well; and it is scarcely to be marvelled atifunder the soothing influences of the fragrant tobaccohe was ratherinclined to substitute for this brisk and business-like Kate Menzies ofthese present days the gentler figure of the Kate Burnside of earlieryears, more especially as she had taken to talking of those times, andof all the escapades the young lads and lasses used to enjoy onHallowe'en night or during the first-footing at Hogmanay.'And now I mind me, Ronald,' she said, 'ye used to be a fine singer whenye were a lad.  Do ye keep it up still?''I sometimes try,' he answered.  'But there's no been much occasionsince I came to this town.  It's a lonely kind o' place, for a' thenumber o' folk in it.''Well, now ye're among friends, give us something!''Oh, that I will, if ye like,' said he readily; and he laid aside hiscigar.And then he sangmoderating his voice somewhat, so that he should not beheard in the front premisesa verse or two of an old favourite'The sun rase sae rosy, the gray hills adorning,Light sprang the laverock, and mounted sae high,'and if his voice was quiet, still the clear, penetrating quality of itwas there; and when he had finished Kate Menzies said to himafter asecond of irresolution'Ye couldna sing like that when ye were a lad, Ronald. It's maist liketo gar a body greet.'But he would not sing any more that night; he guessed that she must haveher business affairs to attend to; and he was resolved upon going, inspite of all her importunacy. However, as a condition, she got him topromise to come and see her on the following evening.  It was Saturdaynight; several of her friends were in the habit of dropping in on thatnight; finally, she pressed her entreaty so that he could not wellrefuse; and, having promised, he left.And no doubt as he went home through the great, noisy, lonely city, hefelt warmed and cheered by this measure of human companionship that hadbefallen him. As for Kate Menzies, it would have been a poor return forher excessive kindness if he had stopped to ask himself whether herrobust camaraderie did not annoy him a little. He had had plenty ofopportunities of becoming acquainted with the manners and speech andways of refined and educated women; indeed, there are few gamekeepers inthe Highlands who have not at one time or another enjoyed thatprivilege.  Noble and gracious ladies who, in the south, would as soonthink of talking to a door-mat as of entering into any kind of generalconversation with their butler or coachman, will fall quite naturallyinto the habitwhen they are living away in the seclusion of a Highlandglen with the shooting-party at the lodgeof stopping to have a chatwith Duncan or Hector the gamekeeper when they chance to meet, himcoming along the road with his dogs; and, what is more, they find himworth the talking to.  Then, again, had not Ronald been an almost dailyspectator of Miss Douglas's sweet and winning mannersand that continuedthrough years; and had not the young American lady, during the brieferperiod she was in the north, made quite a companion of him in her frankand brave fashion?  He had almost to confess to himself that there wasjust a little too much of Mrs. Menzies's tempestuous good nature; andthen again he refused to confess anything of the kind; and quarrelledwith himself for being so ungrateful.  Why, the first bit of real,heartfelt friendliness that had been shown him since he came to thisgreat city; and he was to examine it; and be doubtful; and wish that thekeeper of a tavern should be a little more refined!'Ronald lad,' he was saying to himself when he reached his lodging inthe dusky Port Dundas Road, 'it's over-fed stomachs that wax proud.You'll be better minded if you keep to your books and plainer living.'*CHAPTER XII.**A SOCIAL EVENING.*Looking forward to this further festivity he worked hard at his studiesall day, and it was not until nearly nine o'clock in the evening that hewent away down through the roaring streets to keep his engagement withKate Menzies.  And very snug and comfortable indeed did the littleparlour look, with its clear glass globes and warmly-cushioned seats andbrilliant mirrors and polished wood.  Kate herself (who was quiteresplendent in purple velvet and silver necklace and bangles) wasreading a sporting newspaper; old mother Paterson was sewing; there werecigar-boxes on the table.'And what d'ye mean,' cried the handsome widow gaily, when he made hisappearance, 'by coming at this hour? Did not I tell ye we would expectye to supper?''Would ye have me eat you out o' house and home, woman?' he said.'Besides, I had some work to get through.''Well, sit down and make yerself happy; better late than never; there'sthe cigars'I would as lief smoke a pipe, Katie, if ye don't objectonly that I'mshamed to smoke in a fine place like this''What is't for, man?  Do ye think I got it up for an exhibitionto beput in a glass case!  And what'll ye drink now, Ronaldsome Moett andShandon?''Indeed no,' said he.  'If I may light my pipe I want nothing else.''But I canna bear an empty table,' said she.  'Here, auntie, get yourflounces and falderals out o' the roadbless us, woman, ye make theplace look like a milliner's shop!  And bring out the punch-bowl fraethe chiffonnierI want ye to see it, Ronald, for it was gien to mygudeman by an auld freend o' his in Ayr, that got it from the last ofthe lairds o' Garthlie.  And if ane or twa o' them happen to come into-night we'll try a brewfor there's naething so wholesome, after a',as the wine o' the country, and I can gie ye some o' the real stuff.Will ye no try a drop the noo?''No thank ye, no thank ye,' said he, for he had lit his pipe, and waswell content.'Well, well, we'll have one o' the lasses in to set the tumblers and theglasses, for I canna thole to see a bare table; and in the meantime,Ronald, you and me can hae a crack be oursels, and ye can tell me whatye mean to do when ye get your certificate''If I get it, ye mean, lass.''No fears,' she said confidently; 'ye were aye one o' the clever ones;I'll warrant ye there's na skim-milk in your head where the brainsshould be.  But I want to ken what ye're ettling at after you've got thecertificate, and what's your plans, and the like; for I've been thinkingabout it; and if there was any kind o' a starting neededthe loan of abit something in the way of a nest-egg, ye seeweel, I ken a place whereye might get that, and ye wouldna have to whistle long at the yetteither.'Now there was no mistaking the generosity of this offer, however darklyit might be veiled by Kate Menzies's figurative manner of speech; and itwas with none the less gratitude that he answered her and explained thata head-forester traded with the capital of his employer, though, to besure, he might on entering a new situation have to find sureties forhim.'Is it caution-money ye mean, Ronald?' she said frankly.'Well, if a man had no one to speak for himno one whose word they wouldtake,' he said to her (though all this was guess-work on his part),'they might ask him for security.  There would be no payment of money,of course, unless he robbed his employer; and then the sureties wouldhave to make that good as far as they had undertaken. But it's a longway off yet, Katie, and hardly worth speaking about.  I daresay LordAiline would say a word for me.''And is that a'?' she said, with a laugh.  'Is that a' the money'swanted forto guarantee the honesty o' one o' the Strangs o'Whittermains?  Weel, I'm no a rich woman, Ronaldfor my money's maistlysunk in the tavernand doing weel enough there toobut if it's a suretyye want, for three hunder pounds, ay, or five hunder pounds, just youcome to me, and the deil's in't if we canna manage it somehow.''I thank ye for the offer anyway; I'm sure you mean it,' said he.'That lawyer o' mine,' she continued, 'is a dour chiel; he'll no let medo this; and he's grumbling at that; and a poor widow woman is supposedto hae nae soul o' her ain. I'm sure the fuss that he makes about thatcob, and only fifty-five guineas, and come o' the best Clydesdalestock''But it was no the expense, it was no the expense, Katie dear,' whinedthe old woman, 'it was the risk to your life frae sae high-mettled abeast.  Just think o't, at your time o' life, wi' a grand business, andyoursel' the manager o' it, and wi' sae mony freends, think what itwould be if ye broke your neck''Broke your grandmother's fiddlestrings!' said she. 'The beast's asquiet's a lamb.  But that auld man, Peter Gunn.  I suppose he's a goodlawyerindeed, every one says thatbut he's as pernickety as an auldwoman; and he'd mak' ye think the world was made o' silk paper, and yedaurna stir a step for fear o' fa'in through.  But you just give me theword, Ronald, when the security's wanted; and we'll see if auld Petercan hinder me frae doing what I ought to do for one o' my own kith andkin.'They were thus talking when there came a knock at the outer door; thenthere was a clamour of voices in the little lobby; and presently therewere ushered into the room three visitors, who were forthwith introducedto Ronald, with a few words of facetious playfulness from the widow.There was first a Mr. Jaap, a little old man with Jewish features, baldon the top of his head, but with long, flowing gray hair behind; amild-looking old man, but with merry eyes neverthelessand indeed all ofthem seemed to have been joking as they came in.  Then there was a Mr.Laidlaw, a younger man, of middle height, and of a horsey type;stupid-looking, rather, but not ill-natured.  The third was CaptainM'Taggart, a large heavy man, with a vast, radiant, Bardolphian face,whose small, shrewd, twinkling blue eyes had the expression rather of aClyde skipper given to rough jesting and steady rum-drinking (and he wasall that) than of the high-souled, child-hearted sailor of romance.'Sit ye down, sit ye down,' their hostess said gaily. 'Here, captain, isa job for ye; here's the punch-bowl that we only have on great days, yeken; and your brew is famouswhether wi' old Jamaica or Long John.  Setto work nowhere's the sugar and the lemons ready for yefor ye maun a'drink the health o' my cousin here that's come frae Sutherland.''Frae Sutherland, say ye, Mistress?' the big skipper said, as he reachedover for the lemons.  'Ye should ca' him your kissin frae the Hielansthen.  Do ye ken that story, Laidlaw?  D'ye ken that yin about theHielan kissins, Jaap?  Man, that's a gude yin! have ye no heard it?Have ye no heard it, Mistress?''Tell us what it is first, and we'll tell you afterwards,' said shesaucily.'Weel, then,' said heand he desisted from his preparations for thepunch-making, for he was famous along the Broomielaw as a story-teller,and liked to keep up his reputation, 'it was twa young lasses, twacousins they were, frae the west side o' Skyeand if there's ony placemair Hielan than that, it's no me that ever heard o'tand they wereta'en into service in an inn up about the Gairloch or Loch Inver, or oneo' they lochs.  Both o' them were good-looking lasses, mind ye; but oneo' them just unusual handsome.  Well, then, there happened to come tothe inn an English tourista most respectable old gentleman he was; andit was one o' they two lassesand no the brawest o' them eitherthat hadto wait on him: but he was a freendly auld man; and on the mornin' o'his gaun awa he had to ring for something or other, and when she broughtit to him, he said to her, jist by way o' compliment, ye ken, "You are avery good-looking girl, do you know, Flora?"  And of course the lass wasvery well pleased; but she was a modest lassie too; and she said, "Ohno, sir; but I hef heard them say my kissin was peautiful!"  "Yourwhat?" said he.  "My kissin, sir"  "Get away, you bold hussy!  Off withyou at once, or I'll ring for your masteryou brazen baggage!"and tothis very day, they tell me, the poor lass do'esna ken what on earth itwas that made the auld man into a madman; for what harm had she done intelling him that her cousin was better-looking than herself?'This recondite joke was received with much laughter by the company; andeven Ronald had to admit that the Clyde skipper's imitation of theHighland accent was very fairly well done.  But joke-making is dull workwith empty glasses; and so Captain M'Taggart set himself seriously tothe business of brewing that bowl of punch, while Kate Menzies polishedthe silver ladle to an even higher extreme of brilliancy.Now these three old cronies of the widow's had betrayed a littlesurprise on finding a stranger installed in their favourite howf; andperhaps they might have been inclined to resent the intrusion had notKate Menzies very speedily intimated her views upon the subject inunmistakable language.  Her 'cousin Ronald' was all her cry; it wasRonald this and Ronald that; and whatever Ronald said, that was enough,and decisive.  For, of course, after a glass or so of punch, thenewcomers had got to talking politicsor what they took to be politics;and Ronald, when he was invited to express his opinion, proved to be onthe unpopular side; nor did he improve his position by talking with openscorn of a great public agitation then going onindeed, he so far forgothimself as to define stump-oratory as only another form offoot-and-mouth disease.  But at least he had one strenuous backer, andneither Mr. Laidlaw nor Mr. Jaap nor the big skipper was anxious toquarrel with a controversialist who had such abundant stores ofhospitality at her command.  Moreover, Kate Menzies was in the habit ofspeaking her mind; was it not better, for the sake of peace andquietness, to yield a little?  This cousin of hers from the Highlandscould parade some book-learning it is true; and he had plenty ofcut-and-dried theories that sounded plausible enough; and his apparentknowledge of the working of American institutions was sufficiently goodfor an argumentso long as one could not get at the real facts; but theyknew, of course, that, with time to get at these facts and to furnishforth replies to his specious reasonings, they could easily prove theirown case.  In the meantime they would be magnanimous. For the sake ofgood fellowshipand to oblige a ladythey shifted the subject.Or rather she did.'I suppose you'll be going to the Harmony Club to-night?' she said.'For a while, at least,' replied the captain.  'Mr. Jaap's new song isto be sung the nicht; and we maun get him an encore for't.  Not that itneeds us; "Caledonia's hills and dales" will be a' ower Glasgow before afortnight's out; and it's young Tam Dalswinton that's to sing it.Tam'll do his best, no fear.''It's little ye think,' observed Mrs. Menzies, with a kind of superiorair, 'that there's somebody not a hundred miles frae here that can singbetter than a' your members and a' your professionals put thegither.The Harmony Club! If the Harmony Club heard him, they might tak tentand learn a lesson.''Ay, and wha's he when he's at hame, Mistress?' Captain M'Taggart said.'He's not fifty miles away frae here anyway,' she said. 'And if I was totell ye that he's sitting not three yards away frae ye at this meenit?''Katie, woman, are ye daft?' Ronald said, and he laughed, but hisforehead grew red all the same.'No, I'm no,' she answered confidently.  'I ken what I'm saying as weelas most folk.  Oh, I've heard some o' the best o' themno at the HarmonyClub, for they're too high and mighty to let women bodies inbut at theCity Hall concerts and in the theatres; and I've got a good enough ear,too; I ken what's what; and I ken if my cousin Ronald were to stand upat the Saturday Evening Concerts, and sing the song he sung in this veryroom last night, I tell ye he would take the shine out o' some o' them!''He micht gie us a screed now,' Mr. Laidlaw suggestedhis somewhatlack-lustre eyes going from his hostess to Ronald.'Faith, no!' Ronald said, laughing, 'there's been ower great a flourishbeforehand.  The fact is, Mrs. Menzies here''I thought I telled ye my name was Kate?' she said sharply.'Kate, Cat, or Kitten, then, as ye like, woman, what I mean to say isthat ower long a grace makes the porridge cold.  Some other timesomeother time, lass.''Ay, and look here, Mr. Jaap,' continued the widow, who was determinedthat her cousin's superior qualifications should not be hidden, 'ye areaye complaining that ye canna get anything but trash to set your tunesto.  Well, here's my cousin; I dinna ken if he still keeps at the trade,but as a laddie he could just write ye anything ye liked right aff thereel, and as good as Burns, or better.  There's your chance now.Everybody says your music's jist splendidand the choruses taken up in ameenitbut you just ask Ronald there to gie ye something worth whilemaking a song o'.'Now not only did the old man express his curiosity to see some ofRonald's work in this way, and also the gratification it would give himto set one of his songs to music, but Ronald was likewise well pleasedwith the proposal. His own efforts in adapting tunes to his verses heknew were very amateurish; and would it not be a new sensationa littlepride commingled with the satisfaction perhapsto have one of his songspresented with an original air all to itself, and perhaps put to thetest of being sung before some more or less skilled audience?  He knewhe had dozens to choose from; some of them patriotic, others convivial,others humorous in a kind of way: from any of these the musician waswelcome to select as he liked.  The love songs about Meenie were a classapart.And now that they had got away from the thrashed-out straw of politicsto more congenial themes, these three curiously assorted boon-companionsproved to be extremely pleasant and good-natured fellows; and when, atlength, they said it was time for them to be off to the musical club,they cordially invited Ronald to accompany them.  He was nothing loth,for he was curious to see the place; and if Mrs. Menzies grumbled alittle at being left alone she consoled herself by hinting that herprotg could teach them a lesson if he chose to do so.'When ye've listened for a while to their squalling, Ronald, my man,jist you get up and show them how an East Lothian lad can do the trick.''What's that, Mistress?  I thought ye said your cousin was frae theHielans,' the skipper broke in.'Frae the Hielans?  Frae East Lothian, I tell ye; where I come fraemysel'; and where ye'll find the brawest lads and lasses in the breadtho' Scotland,' she added saucily.'And they dinna stay a' at hame either,' remarked the big skipper, withmuch gallantry, as the visitors prepared to leave.They went away through the noisy, crowded, glaring streets, and atlength entered a spacious dark courtyard, at the head of which was asmall and narrow entrance.  The skipper led the way; but as they passedup the staircase they became aware of a noise of music overhead; andwhen they reached the landing, they had to pause there, so as not tointerrupt the proceedings within.  It was abundantly clear what thesewere.  A man's voice was singing 'Green grow the rashes, O' to a smartand lively accompaniment on the piano; while at the end of each versejoined in a sufficiently enthusiastic chorus:'Green grow the rashes, O,Green grow the rashes, O,The sweetest hours that e'er I spent,Were spent among the lasses, O.'and that was repeated:'Green grow the rashes, O,Green grow the rashes, O,The sweetest hours that e'er I spen',Were spent among the lasses, O.'Then there was silence.  The skipper now opened the door; and, as theyentered, Ronald found himself near the head of a long andloftily-ceilinged apartment, the atmosphere of which was of a pale bluecast, through the presence of much tobacco smoke.  All down this longroom were twin rows of small tables, at which little groups of friendsor acquaintances saterespectable looking men they seemed, many of themyoung fellows, more of them of middle age, and nearly all of themfurnished with drinks and pipes or cigars.  At the head of the room wasa platform, not raised more than a foot from the floor, with a piano atone end of it; and in front of the platform was a special semicirculartable, presided over by a bland rubicund gentleman, to whom Ronald wasforthwith introduced.  Indeed, the newcomers were fortunate enough tofind seats at this semicircular table; and when beverages were calledfor and pipes lit, they waited for the further continuance of theproceedings.These were of an entirely simple and ingenuous character, and had notaint whatsoever of the ghastly make-believe of wit, the mean swagger,and facetious innuendo of the London music hall.  Now a member of theClub, when loudly called upon by the general voice, would step up to theplatform and sing some familiar Scotch ballad; and again one of theprofessional singers in attendance (they did not appear in swallow-tailand white tie, by the way, but in soberer attire) would 'oblige' withsomething more ambitious; but throughout there was a prevailing tendencytowards compositions with a chorus; and the chorus grew more universaland more enthusiastic as the evening proceeded.  Then occasionallybetween the performances there occurred a considerable interval, duringwhich the members of the Club would make brief visits to the othertables; and in this way Ronald made the acquaintance of a good number ofthose moderately convivial souls.  For, if there was a tolerable amountof treating and its corresponding challenges, there was no drunkennessapparent anywhere; there was some loud talking; and Captain M'Taggartwas unduly anxious that everybody should come and sit at the President'stable; but the greatest hilarity did not exceed bounds. It was to beobserved, however, that, as the evening drew on, it was the extremelysentimental songs that were the chief favouritesthose that mourned thebygone days of boyhood and youth, or told of the premature decease ofsome beloved Annie or Mary.Ronald was once or twice pressed to sing; but he good-naturedly refused.'Some other time, if I may have the chance, I will try to screw up mycourage,' he said.  'And by that time ye'll have forgotten what Mrs.Menzies said: the East Lothian folk are wonderful for praising their ownkith and kin.'As to letting old Mr. Jaap have a song or two to set to music, that wasanother and simpler matter; and he promised to hunt out one or two ofthem.  In truth, it would not be difficult, as he himself perceived, tofind something a little better than the 'Caledonia's hills and dales'which was sung that night, and which was of a very familiar patternindeed.  And Ronald looked forward with not a little naturalsatisfaction to the possibility of one of his songs being sung in thatresounding hall; a poet must have his audience somewhere; and this, atleast, was more extensive than a handful of farm lads and lassescollected together in the barn at Inver-Mudal.At about half-past eleven the entire company broke up and dispersed; andRonald, after thanking his three companions very heartily for theirhospitality during the evening, set off for his lodgings in the north ofthe city.  He was quite enlivened and inspirited by this unusual whirlof gaiety; it had come into his sombre and lonely life as a startlingsurprise.  The rattle of the pianothe resounding chorusesthe eagertalk of these boon-companionsall this was of an exciting nature; and ashe walked away through the now darkened thoroughfares, he began towonder whether he could not write some lilting verses in the oldhaphazard way.  He had not even tried such a thing since he came toGlasgow; the measurement of surface areas and the classification ofDicotyledons did not lead him in that direction.  But on such agala-night as this, surely he might string some lines togetheraboutGlasgow lads and lasses, and good-fellowship, and the delights of aroaring town? It would be an experiment, in any case.Well, when he had got home and lit the gas, and sate down to thejingling task, it was not so difficult, after all. But there was anundernote running through these verses that he had not contemplated whenhe set out.  When the first glow of getting them together was over, helooked down the page, and then he put it away; in no circumstances couldthis kind of song find its way into the Harmony Club; and yet he was notaltogether disappointed that it was so.O Glasgow lasses are fair enough,And Glasgow lads are merry;But I would be with my own dear maid,A-wandering down Strath-Terry.And she would be singing her morning song,The song that the larks have taught her;A song of the northern seas and hills,And a song of Mudal-Water.The bands go thundering through the streets,The fifes and drums together;Far rather I'd hear the grouse-cock crowAmong the purple heather;And I would be on Ben Clebrig's brow,To watch the red-deer stealingIn single file adown the glenAnd past the summer sheiling.O Glasgow lasses are fair enough,And Glasgow lads are merry;But ah, for the voice of my own dear maid,A-singing adown Strath-Terry!*CHAPTER XIII.**INDUCEMENTS.*Ronald's friendship with the hospitable widow and his acquaintanceshipwith those three boon-companions of hers grew apace; and many a merryevening they all of them had together in the brilliant little parlour,Ronald singing his own or any other songs without stint, the big skippertelling elaborately facetious Highland stories, the widow bountiful withher cigars and her whisky-toddy.  And yet he was ill, ill at ease.  Hewould not admit to himself, of course, that he rather despised these newacquaintancesfor were they not most generous and kind towards him?noryet that the loud hilarity he joined in was on his part at times atrifle forced.  Indeed, he could not very well have defined the cause ofthis disquietude and restlessness and almost despair that was present tohis consciousness even when the laugh was at its loudest and the glassesgoing round most merrily.  But the truth was he had begun to lose heartin his work.  The first glow of determination that had enabled him towithstand the depression of the dull days and the monotonous labour hadsubsided now.  The brilliant future the Americans had painted for himdid not seem so attractive.  Meenie was away; perhaps never to be metwith more; and the old glad days that were filled with the light of herpresence were all gone now and growing ever more and more distant. Andin the solitude of the little room up there in the Port Dundas Roadwiththe gray atmosphere ever present at the windows, and the dull rumble ofthe carts and waggons withouthe was now getting into a habit of pushingaside his books for a while, and letting his fancies go far afield;insomuch that his heart seemed to grow more and more sick within him,and more and more he grew to think that somehow life had gone all wrongwith him.There is in Glasgow a thoroughfare familiarly known as Balmanno Brae.It is in one of the poorer neighbourhoods of the town; and is in truthrather a squalid and uninteresting place; but it has the one strikingpeculiarity of being extraordinarily steep, having been built on theside of a considerable hill.  Now one must have a powerful imaginationto see in this long, abrupt, blue-gray thoroughfarewith its grimypavements and house-fronts, and its gutters running with dirty wateranyresemblance to the wide slopes of Ben Clebrig and the carolling rillsthat flow down to Loch Naver; but all the same Ronald had a curiousfancy for mounting this long incline, and that at the hardest pace hecould go.  For sometimes, in that little room, he felt almost like acaged animal dying for a wider air, a more active work; and here atleast was a height that enabled him to feel the power of his knees;while the mere upward progress was a kind of inspiriting thing, onealways having a vague fancy that one is going to see farther in gettinghigher.  Alas!  there was but the one inevitable termination to theserepeated climbings; and that not the wide panorama embracing Loch Loyaland Ben Hope and the far Kyle of Tongue, but a wretched little lanecalled Rotten Rowa double line of gloomy houses, with here and there anolder-fashioned cottage with a thatched roof, and with everywherepervading the close atmosphere an odour of boiled herrings.  And thenagain, looking back, there was no yellow and wide-shining Strath-Terry,with its knolls of purple heather and its devious rippling burns, butonly the great, dark, grim, mysterious city, weltering in its smoke, anddully groaning, as it were, under the grinding burden of its monotonoustoil.As the Twelfth of August drew near he became more and more restless.  Hehad written to Lord Ailine to say that, if he could be of any use, hewould take a run up to Inver-Mudal for a week or so, just to see thingsstarted for the season; but Lord Ailine had considerately refused theoffer, saying that everything seemed going on well enough, except,indeed, that Lugar the Gordon setter was in a fair way of being spoilt,for that, owing to Ronald's parting injunctions, there was not a man orboy about the place would subject the dog to any kind of chastisement ordiscipline whatever.  And it sounded strange to Ronald to hear that hewas still remembered away up there in the remote little hamlet.On the morning of the day before the Twelfth his books did not get muchattention.  He kept going to the window to watch the arrivals at therailway station opposite, wondering whether this one or that was off andaway to the wide moors and the hills.  Then, about mid-day, he saw ayoung lad bring up four dogsa brace of setters, a small spaniel, and abig brown retrieverand give them over in charge to a porter.  Well,human nature could not stand this any longer.  His books were no longerthought of; on went his Glengarry cap; and in a couple of minutes he wasacross the road and into the station, where the porter was hauling thedogs along the platform.'Here, my man, I'll manage the doggies for ye,' he said, getting hold ofthe chains and straps; and of course the dogs at once recognised in hima natural ally and were less alarmed.  A shambling, bow-legged porterhauling at them they could not understand at all; but in the straightfigure and sun-tanned cheek and clear eye of the newcomer theyrecognised features familiar to them; and then he spoke to them as if heknew them.'Ay, and what's your name, then?Bruce, or Wallace, or Soldier?butthere'll no be much work for you for a while yet.  It's you, you twobonnie lassies, that'll be amongst the heather the morn; and well I cansee ye'll work together, and back each other, and just set an example tohuman folk.  And if ye show yourselves just a wee bit eager at thebeginning o' the daywell, well, well, we all have our faults, and thatone soon wears off.  And what's your names, then?Lufra, or Nell, orBess, or Fan?  And you, you wise auld chielI'm thinking ye could get agrip o' a mallard that would make him imagine he had got back into hismother's nestyou're a wise onethe Free Kirk elder o' the lot'for,indeed, the rest of them were all pawing at him, and licking his hands,and whimpering their friendship.  The porter had to point out to himthat he, the porter, could not stand there the whole day with 'a wheendogs;' whereupon Ronald led these new companions of his along to thedog-box that had been provided for them, and there, when they had beenproperly secured, the porter left him.  Ronald could still talk to themhowever, and ask them questions; and they seemed to understand wellenough: indeed, he had not spent so pleasant a half-hour for many andmany a day.There chanced to come along the platform a little, wiry, elderly man,with a wholesome-looking weather-tanned face, who was carrying a bundleof fishing-rods over his shoulder; and seeing how Ronald was engaged hespoke to him in passing and began to talk about the dogs.'Perhaps they're your dogs?' Ronald said.'No, no, our folk are a' fishing folk,' said the little old man, who wasprobably a gardener or something of the kind, and who seemed to takereadily to this new acquaintance. 'I've just been in to Glasgow to get arod mended, and to bring out a new one that the laird has bought forhimself.'He grinned in a curious sarcastic way.'He's rather a wee man; and this rodLord sakes, ye never saw such athing! it would break the back o' a Samsonbless ye, the butt o't's likea weaver's beam; and for our gudeman to buy a thing like thatwell, richfolk hae queer ways o' spending their money.'He was a friendly old man; and this joke of his master having bought sotremendous an engine seemed to afford him so much enjoyment that whenRonald asked to be allowed to see this formidable weapon he said atonce'Just you come along outside there, and we'll put it thegither, andye'll see what kind o' salmon-rod an old man o' five foot five thinks hecan cast wi'''If it's no taking up too much of your time,' Ronald suggested, buteager enough he was to get a salmon-rod into his fingers again.'I've three quarters of an hour to wait,' was the reply, 'for I cannamake out they train books ava.'They went out beyond the platform to an open space, and very speedilythe big rod was put together.  It was indeed an enormous thing; but avery fine rod, for all that; and so beautifully balanced and sobeautifully pliant that Ronald, after having made one or two passesthrough the air with it, could not help saying to the old man, andrather wistfully too'I suppose ye dinna happen to have a reel about ye?''That I have,' was the instant answer, 'and a brand new hundred-yardline on it too.  Would ye like to try a cast? I'm thinking ye kensomething about it.'It was an odd kind of place to try the casting-power of a salmon-rod,this dismal no-man's-land of empty trucks and rusted railway-points andblack ashes; but no sooner had Ronald begun to send out a goodlinetaking care to recover it so that it should not fray itself alongthe gritty groundthan the old man perceived he had to deal with noamateur.'Man, ye're a dab, and no mistake!  As clean a line as ever I saw cast!It's no the first time you've handled a salmon-rod, I'll be bound!''It's the best rod I've ever had in my hand,' Ronald said, as he beganto reel in the line again.  'I'm much obliged to ye for letting me try acastit's many a day now since I threw a line.'They took the rod down and put it in its case.'I'm much obliged to ye,' Ronald repeated (for the mere handling of thisrod had fired his veins with a strange kind of excitement).  'Will yecome and take a dram?''No, thank ye, I'm a teetotaller,' said the other; and then he glancedat Ronald curiously.  'But ye seem to ken plenty about dogs and aboutfishing and so onwhat are ye doing in Glasgow and the morn the Twelfth?Ye are not a town lad?''No, I'm not; but I have to live in the town at present,' was theanswer.  'Well, good-day to ye; and many thanks for the trial o' therod.''Good-day, my lad; I wish I had your years and the strength o' yourshouthers.'In passing Ronald said good-bye again to the handsome setters and thespaniel and the old retriever; and then he went on and out of thestation, but it was not to return to his books.  The seeing of so manypeople going away to the north, the talking with the dogs, the trial ofthe big salmon-rod, had set his brain a little wild.  What if he were togo back and beg of the withered old man to take him with himay, even asthe humblest of gillies, to watch, gaff in hand, by the side of thebroad silver-rippling stream, or to work in a boat on a blue-ruffledloch!  To jump into a third-class carriage and know that the firminevitable grip of the engine was dragging him away into the clearerlight, the wider skies, the glad free air!  No wonder they said thatfisher folk were merry folk; the very jolting of the engine would insuch a case have a kind of music in it; how easily could one make a songthat would match with the swing of the train!  It was in his head now,as he rapidly and blindly walked away along the Cowcaddens, and alongthe New City Road, and along the Western Roadrandom rhymes, randomverses, that the jolly company could sing together as the enginethundered alongOut of the station we rattle away,Wi' a clangour of axle and wheel;There's a merrier sound that we knew in the northThe merry, merry shriek of the reel!O you that shouther the heavy iron gun,And have steep, steep braes to speelWe envy you not; enough is for usThe merry, merry shriek of the reel!When the twenty-four pounder leaps in the air,And the line flies out with a squealO that is the blessedest sound upon earth,The merry, merry shriek of the reel!So here's to good fellows!for them that are not,Let them gang and sup kail wi' the deil!We've other work hereso look out, my lads,For the first, sharp shriek of the reel!He did not care to put the rough-jolting verses down on paper, for thefarther and the more rapidly he walked away out of the town the more washis brain busy with pictures and visions of all that they would be doingat this very moment at Inver-Mudal.'God bless me,' he said to himself, 'I could almost swear I hear thedogs whimpering in the kennels.'There would be the young lads looking after the panniers and the ponies;and the head-keeper up at the lodge discussing with Lord Ailine the bestway of taking the hill in the morning, supposing the wind to remain inthe same direction; and Mr. Murray at the door of the inn, smoking hispipe as usual; and the pretty Nelly indoors waiting upon the shootingparty just arrived from the south and listening to all their wants.  AndHarry would be wondering, amid all this new bustle and turmoil, why hismaster did not put in an appearance; perhaps scanning each succeedingdog-cart or waggonette that came along the road; and then, not soblithe-spirited, making his way to the Doctor's house. Comfort awaitedhim there, at all events; for Ronald had heard that Meenie had takenpity on the little terrier, and that it was a good deal oftener with herthan at the inn. Only all this seemed now so strange; the great duskcity lay behind him like a nightmare from which he had but partiallyescaped, and that with tightened breath; and he seemed to be straininghis ears to catch those soft and friendly voices so far away.  And thenlater on, as the darkness fell, what would be happening there?  The ladswould be coming along to the inn; lamps lit, and chairs drawn in to thetable; Mr. Murray looking in at times with his jokes, and perhaps with abit of a treat on so great an occasion.  And surelysurelyas they beginto talk of this year and of last year and of the changessurely some onewill sayperhaps Nelly, as she brings in the alebut surely some onewill sayas a mere word of friendly remembrance'Well, I wish Ronald washere now with his pipes, to play us The Barren Rocks of Aden?  Only asingle friendly word of remembranceit was all that he craved.He struck away south through Dowanhill and Partick, and crossed theClyde at Govan Ferry; then he made his way back to the town and JamaicaStreet bridge; and finally, it being now dusk, looked in to see whetherMrs. Menzies was at leisure for the evening.'What's the matter, Ronald?' she said instantly, as he entered, for shenoticed that his look was careworn and strange.'Well, Katie, lass, I don't quite know what's the matter wi' me, but Ifeel as if I just couldna go back to that room of mine and sit there bymyselfat least not yet; I think I've been put a bit daft wi' seeing thepeople going away for the Twelfth; and if ye wouldna mind my sittinghere for a while with ye, for the sake o' company''Mind!' she said.  'Mind!  What I do mind is that you should be gangingto that lodging-house at a', when there's a roomand a comfortable room,though I say it that shouldn'tin this very house at your disposal,whenever ye like to bring your trunk till it.  There it isan emptyroom, used by nobodyand who more welcome to it than my ain cousin?I'll tell ye what, Ronald, my lad, ye're wearing yoursel' away on agowk's errand.  Your certificate!  How do ye ken ye'll get yourcertificate? How do ye ken ye will do such great things with it when yeget it?  You're a young man; you'll no be a young man twice; what I sayis, take your fling when ye can get it!  Look at Jimmy Laidlawhe's offthe first thing in the morning to the Mearns15 for his share of theshootingdo ye think he can shoot like you?and why should ye no havehad your share too?''Well, it was very kind of you, Katie, woman, to make the offer;butbutthere's a time for everything.''Man, I could have driven ye out every morning in the dog-cart! andwelcome.  I'm no for having young folk waste the best years of theirlife, and find out how little use the rest o't's to themno that Iconsider mysel' one o' the auld folk yet''You, Katie dear!' whined old mother Paterson from her millinery corner.'Youjust in the prime o' youth, one micht say! you one o' the auldfolk?ay, in thirty years' time maybe!''Take my advice, Ronald, my lad,' said the widow boldly.  'Dinna slaveaway for naethingbecause folk have put fancy notions into your head.Have a better opinion o' yoursel'!  Take your chance o' life when ye canget itbooks and books, what's the use o' books?''Too late nowI've made my bed and maun lie on it,' he said gloomily;but then he seemed to try to shake off this depression.  'Well, well,lass, Rome was not built in a day.  And if I were to throw aside mybooks, what then?  How would that serve?  Think ye that that would makeit any the easier for me to get a three-weeks' shooting wi' JimmyLaidlaw?''And indeed ye might have had that in any case, and welcome,' said KateMenzies, with a toss of her head. 'Who is Jimmy Laidlaw, I wonder!  Butit's no use arguin' wi' ye, Ronald, lad; he that will to Cupar maun toCupar;' only I dinna like to see ye looking just ill.''Enough said, lass; I didna come here to torment ye with my wretchedaffairs,' he answered; and at this moment the maidservant entered to laythe cloth for supper, while Mrs. Menzies withdrew to make herselfgorgeous for the occasion.He was left with old mother Paterson.'There's none so blind as them that winna see,' she began, in herwhining voice.'What is't?''Ay, ay,' she continued, in a sort of maundering soliloquy, 'a brawwoman like thatand free-handed as the dayshe could have plenty offersif she liked; But there's none so blind as them that winna see.  There'sMr. Laidlaw there, a good-looking man, and wan wi' a good penny at thebank; and wouldna he just jump at the chance, if she had a nod or a winkfor him?  But Katie was aye like thatheadstrong; she would aye have herain wayand there she is, a single woman, a braw, handsome, youngwomanand weel provided forweel provided foronly it's no every onethat takes her fancy.  A prize like that, to be had for the asking! Dearmebut there's nane so blind as them that winna see.'It was not by any means the first time that mother Paterson had managedto drop a few dark hintsand much to his embarrassment, moreover, for hecould not pretend to ignore their purport.  Nay, there was somethingmore than that.  Kate Menzies's rough-and-ready friendliness for hercousin had of late become more and more pronouncedalmost obtrusive,indeed.  She wanted to have the mastery of his actions altogether.  Shewould have him pitch his books aside and come for a drive with herwhether he was in the humour or no.  She offered him the occupancy of aroom which, if it was not actually within the tavern, communicated withit.  She seemed unable to understand why he should object to her paying15 to obtain for him a share in a small bit of conjoint shooting out atthe Mearns.  And so forth in many ways. Well, these things, taken bythemselves, he might have attributed to a somewhat tempestuousgood-nature; but here was this old woman, whenever a chance occurred,whining about the folly of people who did not see that Katie dear was sohandsome and generous and so marvellous a matrimonial prize.  Nor couldhe very well tell her to mind her own business, for that would beadmitting that he understood her hints.However, on this occasion he had not to listen long; for presently Mrs.Menzies returned, smiling, good-natured, radiant in further finery; andthen they all had supper together; and she did her best to console hercousin for being cooped up in the great city on the eve of the Twelfth.And Ronald was very grateful to her; and perhaps, in his eager desire tokeep up this flow of high spirits, and to forget what was happening atInver-Mudal and about to happen, he may have drunk a little too much; atall events, when Laidlaw and Jaap and the skipper came in they found himin a very merry mood, and Kate Menzies equally hilarious and happy.Songs?he was going to no Harmony Club that night, he declaredhe wouldsing them as many songs as ever they likedbut he was not going toforsake his cousin.  Nor were the others the least unwilling to remainwhere they were; for here they were in privacy, and the singing wasbetter, and the liquor unexceptionable.  The blue smoke rose quietly inthe air; the fumes of Long John warmed blood and brain; and then fromtime to time they heard of the brave, or beautiful, or heart-brokenmaidens of Scotch songMaggie Lauder, or Nelly Munro, or Barbara Allan,as the chance might beand music and good fellowship and whisky allcombined to throw a romantic halo round these simple heroines.'But sing us one o' your own, Ronald, my ladthere's none better, andthat's what I say!' cried the widow; and as she happened to be passinghis chair at the timegoing to the sideboard for some more lemons, sheslapped him on the shoulder by way of encouragement.'One o' my own?' said he.  'But whichwhichlass? Oh, well, here's one.'He lay back in his chair, and quite at haphazard and carelessly andjovially began to singin that clearly penetrating voice that neithertobacco smoke nor whisky seemed to affectRoses white, roses red,Roses in the lane,Tell me, roses red and white,Where isAnd then suddenly something seemed to grip his heart. But the stumblewas only for the fiftieth part of a second. He continued:Where is Jeannie gane?And so he finished the careless little verses.  Nevertheless, KateMenzies, returning to her seat, had noticed that quick, instinctivepulling of himself up.'And who's Jeannie when she's at home?' she asked saucily.'Jeannie?' he said, with apparent indifference.  'Jeannie? There'splenty o' that name about.''Ay; and how many o' them are at Inver-Mudal?' she asked, regarding himshrewdly, and with an air which he resented.But the little incident passed.  There was more singing, drinking,smoking, talking of nonsense and laughing. And at last the time came forthe merry companions to separate; and he went away home through the darkstreets alone.  He had drunk too much, it must be admitted; but he had ahard head; and he had kept his wits about him; and even now as heascended the stone stairs to his lodgings he remembered with a kind ofshiver, and also with not a little heartfelt satisfaction, how he hadjust managed to save himself from bringing Meenie's name before thatcrew.*CHAPTER XIV.**ENTANGLEMENTS.*And then came along the great evening on which the first of Ronald'ssongs that Mr. Jaap had set to music was to be sung at the Harmony Club.Ronald had unluckily got into the way of going a good deal to that club.It was a relief from weary days and vain regrets; it was a way of escapefrom the too profuse favours that Kate Menzies wished to shower uponhim.  Moreover, he had become very popular there.  His laugh was hearty;his jokes and sarcasms were always good-natured; he could drink with thebest without getting quarrelsome.  His acquaintanceship rapidlyextended; his society was eagerly bid for, in the rough-and-readyfashion that prevails towards midnight; and long after the club wasclosed certain of these boon-companions would 'keep it up' in this orthe other bachelor's lodgings, while through the open window there rangout into the empty street the oft-repeated chorus'We are na fou', we're nae that fou',But just a drappie in our e'e;The cock may craw, the day may daw,And aye we'll taste the barky bree!'The night-time seemed to go by so easily; the daytime was so slow.  Hestill did his best, it is true, to get on with this work that had socompletely lost all its fascination for him; and he tried hard to banishdreams.  For one thing, he had gathered together all the fragments ofverse he had written about Meenie, and had added thereto the littlesketch of Inver-Mudal she had given him; and that parcel he hadresolutely locked away, so that he should no longer be tempted to wastethe hours in idle musings, and in useless catechising of himself as tohow he came to be in Glasgow at all.  He had forborne to ask from Maggiethe answer that Meenie had sent to her letter.  In truth, there weremany such; for there was almost a constant correspondence between thesetwo; and as the chief subject of Maggie's writings was always and everRonald, there were no doubt references to him in the replies that camefrom Inver-Mudal.  But he only heard vaguely of these; he did not calloften at his brother's house; and he grew to imagine that the nextdefinite news he would hear about Meenie would be to the effect that shehad been sent to live with the Stuarts of Glengask, with a view to herpossible marriage with some person in their rank of life.There was a goodly to-do at the Harmony Club on the evening of theproduction of the new song; for Ronald, as has been said, was much of afavourite; and his friends declared that if Jaap's music was at all upto the mark, then the new piece would be placed on the standard andpermanent list.  Mr. Jaap's little circle, on the other hand, who hadheard the air, were convinced that the refrain would be caught at once;and as the success of the song seemed thus secure, Mrs. Menzies hadresolved to celebrate the occasion by a supper after the performance,and Jimmy Laidlaw had presented her, for that purpose, with some gamewhich he declared was of his own shooting.'What's the use o' making such a fuss about nothing?' Ronald grumbled.'What?' retorted the big skipper facetiously.  'Naething? Is bringingout a new poet naething?'Now this drinking song, as it turned out, was a very curious kind ofdrinking song.  Observe that it was written by a young fellow ofeight-and-twenty; of splendid physique, and of as yet untouched nerve,who could not possibly have had wide experience of the vanities anddisappointments of human life.  What iron had entered into his soul,then, that a gay and joyous drinking song should have been written inthis fashion?Good friends and neighbours, life is short,And man, they say, is made to mourn;Dame Fortune makes us all her sport,And laughs our very best to scorn:Well, well; we'll have, if that be so,A merry glass before we go.The blue-eyed lass will change her mind,And give her kisses otherwhere;And she'll be cruel that was kind,And pass you by with but a stare:Well, well; we'll have, if that be so,A merry glass before we go.The silly laddie sits and fillsWi' dreams and schemes the first o' life;And then comes heap on heap o' ills,And squalling bairns and scolding wife:Well, well; we'll have, if that be so,A merry glass before we go.Come stir the fire and make us warm;The night without is dark and wet;An hour or twa 'twill do nae harmThe dints o' fortune to forget:So now will have, come weal or woe,Another glass before we go.To bonny lasses, honest blades,We'll up and give a hearty cheer;Contention is the worst of tradesWe drink their health, both far and near:And so we'll have, come weal or woe,Another glass before we go.And here's ourselves!no much to boast;For man's a wean that lives and learns;And some win hame, and some are lost;But stillwe're all John Thomson's bairns!So here, your hand!come weal or woe,Another glass before we go!'And some win hame, and some are lost'this was a curious note tostrike in a bacchanalian song; but of course in that atmosphere oftobacco and whisky and loud-voiced merriment such minor touches werealtogether unnoticed.'Gentlemen,' called out the rubicund chairman, rapping on the table,'silence, if you please.  Mr. Aikman is about to favour us with a newsong written by our recently-elected member, Mr. Ronald Strang, themusic by our old friend Mr. Jaap.  Silencesilence, if you please.'Mr. Aikman, who was a melancholy-looking youth, with a white face,straw-coloured hair, and almost colourless eyes, stepped on to theplatform, and after the accompanist had played a few bars of prelude,began the song.  Feeble as the young man looked, he had,notwithstanding, a powerful baritone voice; and the air was simple, witha well-marked swing in it; so that the refrainat first rather uncertainand experimentalbecame after the first verse more and more general,until it may be said that the whole room formed the chorus.  And fromthe very beginning it was clear that the new song was going to be agreat success. Any undercurrent of reflectionor even of sadnesstheremight be in it was not perceived at all by this roaring assemblage; therefrain was the practical and actual thing; and when once they hadfairly grasped the air, they sang the chorus with a will.  Nay, amid theloud burst of applause that followed the last verse came numerous criesfor an encore; and these increased until the whole room was clamorous;and then the pale-faced youth had to step back on to the platform andget through all of the verses again.'So here, your hand!come weal or woe,Another glass before we go!'roared the big skipper and Jimmy Laidlaw with the best of them; and thenin the renewed thunder of cheering that followed'Man, I wish Kate Menzies was here,' said the one; and'Your health, Ronald, lad; ye've done the trick this time,' said theother.'Gentlemen,' said the chairman, again calling them to silence, 'Ipropose that the thanks of the club be given to these two members whom Ihave named, and who have kindly allowed us to place this capital song onour permanent list.''I second that, Mr. Chairman,' said a little, round, fat man, with abeaming countenance and a bald head; 'and I propose that we sing thatsong every night just afore we leave.'But this last suggestion was drowned amidst laughter and cries ofdissent.  'What?instead of "Auld Lang Syne"?' 'Ye're daft, JohnCampbell.'  'Would ye hae the ghost o' Robbie Burns turning up?'Indeed, the chairman had to interpose and suavely say that while thesong they had just heard would bring any such pleasant evenings as theyspent together to an appropriate close, still, they would not disturbestablished precedent; there would be many occasions, he hoped, for themto hear this production of two of their most talented members.In the interval of noise and talk and laughter that followed, it seemedto Ronald that half the people in the hall wanted him to drink withthem.  Fame came to him in the shape of unlimited proffers of glasses ofwhisky; and he experienced so much of the delight of having become apublic character as consisted in absolute strangers assuming the rightto make his acquaintance off-hand.  Of course they were all members ofthe same club; and in no case was very strict etiquette observed withinthese four walls; nevertheless Ronald found that he had immediately andindefinitely enlarged the circle of his acquaintance; and that thismeant drink.'Another glass?' he said, to one of those strangers who had thuscasually strolled up to the table where he sate. 'My good friend, therewas nothing said in that wretched song about a caskful.  I've had toomany other ones already.'However, relief came; the chairman hammered on the table; the businessof the evening was resumed; and the skipper, Jaap, Laidlaw, and Ronaldwere left to themselves.Now there is no doubt that this little circle of friends was highlyelated over the success of the new song; and Ronald had been pleasedenough to hear the words he had written so quickly caught up and echoedby that, to him, big assemblage.  Probably, too, they had all of them,in the enthusiasm of the moment, been somewhat liberal in their cups; atall events, a little later on in the evening, when Jimmy Laidlawstormily demanded that Ronald should sing a song from the platformtoshow them what East Lothian could do, as Kate Menzies had saidRonalddid not at once, as usual, shrink from the thought of facing so large anaudience.  It was the question of the accompaniment, he said.  He hadhad no practice in singing to a piano.  He would put the man out.  Whyshould he not sing hereif sing he mustat the table where they weresitting?  That was what he was used to; he had no skill in keepingcorrect time; he would only bother the accompanist, and bewilderhimself.'No, I'll tell ye what it is, Ronald, my lad,' his friend Jaap said tohim.  'I'll play the accompaniment for ye, if ye pick out something I'mfamiliar wi'; and don't you heed me; you look after yourself.  Even ifye change the keyand that's not likelyI'll look after ye.  Is't abargain?'Well, he was not afraidon this occasion.  It was announced from thechair that Mr. Ronald Strang, to whom they were already indebted, wouldfavour the company with 'The MacGregors' Gathering,' accompanied by Mr.Jaap; and in the rattle of applause that followed this announcement,Ronald made his way across the floor and went up the couple of stepsleading to the platform.  Why he had consented he hardly knew, nor didhe stay to ask.  It was enough that he had to face this long hall, andits groups of faces seen through the pale haze of the tobacco smoke; andthen the first notes of the piano startled him into the necessity ofgetting into the same key.  He begana little bewildered, perhaps, andhearing his own voice too consciously'The moon's on the lake, and the mist's on the brae,And the clan has a name that is nameless by day.''Louder, man, louder!' the accompanist muttered, under his breath.Whether it was this admonition, or whether it was that he gainedconfidence from feeling himself in harmony with the firm-struck notes ofthe accompaniment, his voice rose in clearness and courage, and he gotthrough the first verse with very fair success.  Nay, when he came tothe second, and the music went into a pathetic minor, the sensitivenessof his ear still carried him through bravely'Glenorchy's proud mountains, Colchurn and her towers,Glenstrae and Glen Lyon no longer are oursWe're landless, landless, landless, Gregalach.'All this was very well done; for he began to forget his audience alittle, and to put into his singing something of the expression that hadcome naturally enough to him when he was away on the Clebrig slopes orwandering along Strath-Terry.  As for the audiencewhen he had finishedand stepped back to his seatthey seemed quite electrified. Not oftenhad such a clear-ringing voice penetrated that murky atmosphere.  Butnothing would induce Ronald to repeat the performance.'What made me do it?' he kept asking himself.  'What made me do it?Bless me, surely I'm no fou'?''Ye've got a most extraordinarily fine voice, Mr. Strang,' the chairmansaid, in his most complaisant manner, 'I hope it's not the last timeye'll favour us.'Ronald did not answer this.  He seemed at once moody and restless.Presently he said'Come away, lads, come away.  In God's name let's get a breath o' freshairthe smoke o' this place is like the bottomless pit.''Then let's gang down and have a chat wi' Kate Menzies,' said JimmyLaidlaw at once.'Ye're after that supper, Jimmy!' the big skipper said facetiously.'What for no?  Would ye disappoint the woman; and her sae anxious tohear what happened to Strang's poetry? Come on, Ronaldshe'll be asproud as Punch.  And we'll tell her about "The MacGregors'Gathering"'she said East Lothian would show them something.''Very well, thenvery well; anything to get out o' here,' Ronald said;and away they all went down to the tavern.The widow received them most graciously; and very sumptuous indeed wasthe entertainment she had provided for them.  She knew that the drinkingsong would be successfulif the folk had common sense and ears.  And hehad sung 'The MacGregors' Gathering' too?well, had they ever heardsinging like that before?'But they have been worrying you?' she said, glancing shrewdly at him.'Or, what's the matterye look down in the mouthindeed, Ronald, ye'venever looked yoursel' since the night ye came in here just before thegrouse-shooting began.  Here, man, drink a glass o' champagne; that'llrouse ye up.'Old mother Paterson was at this moment opening a bottle.'Not one other drop of anything, Katie, lass, will I drink this night,'Ronald said.'What?  A lively supper we're likely to have, then!' the widow cried.'Where's your spunk, man?  I think ye're broken-hearted about somelassiethat's what it is! Here, now.'She brought him the foaming glass of champagne; but he would not look atit.'And if I drink to your health out o' the same glass?'She touched the glass with her lips.''There, now, if you're a man, ye'll no refuse noo.'Nor could he.  And then the supper came along; and there was eating andtalking and laughing and further drinking, until a kind of galvanisedhilarity sprang up once more amongst them.  And she would have Ronalddeclare to them which of the lasses in Sutherlandshire it was who hadbroken his heart for him; and, in order to get her away from thatsubject, he was very amenable in her hands, and would do anything shebade him, singing first one song and then another, and not refusing thedrinking of successive toasts.  As for the others, they very prudentlydeclined having anything to do with champagne.  But Ronald was her pet,her favourite; and she had got a special box of cigars for himallwrapped up in silverfoil and labelled; and she would have them tell herover and over again how Ronald's voice sounded in the long hall when hesang'Glenstrae and Glen Lyon no longer are ours?and she would have them tell her again of the thunders of cheering thatfollowed'Well, well; we'll have, if that be so,Another glass before we go.'Nay, she would have them try a verse or two of it there and thenled byMr. Jaap; and she herself joined in the chorus; and they clinked theirglasses together, and were proud of their vocalisation and their goodcomradeship. Indeed, they prolonged this jovial evening as late as thelaw allowed them; and then the widow said gaily'There's that poor man thinks I'm gaun to allow him to gang away to thatwretched hole o' a lodging o' his, where he's just eating his heart outwi' solitariness and a wheen useless books.  But I'm not.  I ken betterthan that, Ronald, my lad.  Whilst ye've a' been singing and roaring,I've had a room got ready for ye; and there ye'll sleep this night, mymanfor I'm not going to hae ye march away through the lonely streets,and maybe cut your throat ere daybreak; and ye can lock yourself in, ifye're feared that any warlock or bogle is likely to come and snatch ye;and in the morning ye'll come down and have your breakfast wi' auntiePaterson and meand thenwhat then?  What do ye think?  When thedog-cart's at the door, and me gaun to drive ye oot to Campsie Glen?There, laddie, that's the programme; and wet or dry is my motto.  Ifit's wet we'll sing "Come under my plaidie"; and we'll take a drop o'something comfortable wi' us to keep out the rain.''I wish I was gaun wi' ye, Mistress,' the big skipper said.'Two's company and three's none,' said Kate Menzies, with a frank laugh.'Is't a bargain, Ronald?''It's a bargain, lass; and there's my hand on't,' he said. 'Now, where'sthis roomfor I don't know whether it has been the smoke, or thesinging, or the whisky, or all o' them together, but my head's like aship sailing before the wind, without any helm to steer her.''Your head!' she said proudly.  'Your head's like iron, man; there'snothing the matter wi' ye.  And here's Aleche'll show you where yourroom is; and in the morning ring for whatever ye want; mind ye, a glasso' champagne and angostura bitters is just first-rate; and we'll havebreakfast at whatever hour ye pleaseand then we'll be off to CampsieGlen.'The little party now broke up, each going his several way; and Ronald,having bade them all good-night, followed the ostler-lad Alec along oneor two gloomy corridors until he found the room that had been preparedfor him.  As he got to bed he was rather sick and sorry about the wholenight's proceedings, he scarcely knew why; and his thinking faculty wasin a nebulous condition; and he only vaguely knew that he would rathernot have pledged himself to go to Campsie Glen on the following morning.No matter'another glass before we go,' that was the last of the songthey had all shouted: he had forgotten that other line'and some winhame, and some are lost.'*CHAPTER XV.**CAMPSIE GLEN.*The next morning, between nine and ten o'clock, there was a rapping athis door, and then a further rapping, and then he awokeconfused,uncertain as to his whereabouts, and with his head going like athreshing machine.  Again there came the loud rapping.'Come in, then,' he called aloud.The door was opened, and there was the young widow, smiling and jocundas the morn, and very smartly attired; and alongside of her was aservant-lass bearing a small tray, on which were a tumbler, a pintbottle of champagne, and some angostura bitters.'Bless me, woman,' he said, 'I was wondering where I was.  And what'sthis now?do ye want to make a drunkard o' me?''Not I,' said Kate Menzies blithely, 'I want to make a man o' ye.  Ye'lljust take a glass o' this, Ronald, my lad; and then ye'll get up andcome down to breakfast; for we're going to have a splendid drive.  Theweather's as bright and clear as a new shilling; and I've been up sinceseven o'clock, and I'm free for the day now.  Here ye are, lad; this'llput some life into ye.'She shook a few drops of bitters into the tumbler, and then poured out afoaming measure of the amber-coloured wine, and offered it to him.  Herefused to take it.'I canna look at it, lass.  There was too much o' that going lastnight.''And the very reason you should take a glass now!' she said.  'Well,I'll leave it on the mantelpiece, and ye can take it when ye get up.Make haste, Ronald, lad; it's a pity to lose so fine a morning.'When they had left, he dressed as rapidly as possible, and went down.Breakfast was awaiting himthough it did not tempt him much.  And then,by and by, the smart dog-cart was at the door; and a hamper was put in;and Kate Menzies got up and took the reins.  There was nosick-and-sorriness about her at all events.  She was radiant andlaughing and saucy; she wore a driving-coat fastened at the neck by ahorse-shoe brooch of brilliants, and a white straw hat with awide-sweeping jet-black ostrich feather.  It was clear that the tavernwas a paying concern.'And why will ye aye sit behind, Mr. Strang?' old mother Patersonwhined, as she made herself comfortable in front.  'I am sure Katiewould rather have ye here than an auld wife like me.  Ye could talk toher ever so much better.''That would be a way to go driving through Glasgow town,' he said, as heswung himself up on the back seat; 'a man in front and a woman behind!Never you fear; there can be plenty of talking done as it is.'But as they drove away through the cityand even Glasgow looked quitebright and cheerful on this sunny morning, and there was a stirring ofcool air that was grateful enough to his throbbing templesit appearedthat the buxom widow wanted to have most of the talking to herself.  Shewas very merry; and laughed at his penitential scorn of himself; and wasfor spurring him on to further poetical efforts.'East Lothian for ever!' she was saying, as they got away out by thenorth of the town.  'Didna I tell them? Ay, and ye've got to dosomething better yet, Ronald, my lad, than the "other glass before wego."  You're no at that time o' life yet to talk as if everything hadgone wrong; and the blue-eyed lasswhat blue-eyed lass was it, I wonder,that passed ye by with but a stare?  Let her, and welcome, the hussy;there's plenty others.  But no, my lad, what I want ye to write is asong about Scotland, and the East Lothian part o't especially.  Ye've nolived long enough in the Hielans to forget your ain country, have ye?and where's there a song about Scotland nowadays? "Caledonia's hills anddales"?stuff!I wonder Jaap would hae bothered his head about rubbishlike that.  No, no; we'll show them whether East Lothian canna do thetrick!and it's no the Harmony Club but the City Hall o' Glasgow thatye'll hear that song sung inthat's better like!  Ye mind what Robbiesays, Ronald, my lad?'E'en then a wish, I mind its powerA wish that to my latest hourShall strongly heave my breastThat I for poor auld Scotland's sake,Some usefu' plan or book could make,Or sing a sang at least.'That's what ye've got to do yet, my man.'And so they bowled along the wide whinstone road, out into this openlandscape that seemed to lie behind a thin veil of pale-blue smoke.  Itwas the country, no doubt; but a kind of sophisticated country; therewere occasional grimy villages and railway-embankments and canals andwhat not; and the pathway that ran alongside the wide highway was ofblack ashesnot much like a Sutherlandshire road.  However, as they gotstill farther away from the town matters improved.  There were hedgesand woodsgetting a touch of the golden autumn on their foliage now; thelandscape grew brighter; those hills far ahead of them rose into afairly clear blue sky.  And then the brisk motion and the fresher airseemed to drive away from him the dismal recollections of the previousnight; he ceased to upbraid himself for having been induced to singbefore all those people; he would atone for the recklessness of hispotations by taking greater care in the future. So that when in duecourse of time they reached the inn at the foot of Campsie Glen, and hadthe horse and trap put up, and set out to explore the beauties of thatnot too savage solitude, he was in a sufficiently cheerful frame ofmind, and Kate Menzies had no reason to complain of her companion.They had brought a luncheon basket with them; and as he had refused theproffered aid of a stable-lad, he had to carry this himself, and KateMenzies was a liberal provider. Accordingly, as they began to make theirway up the steep and slippery ascentfor rain had recently fallen, andthe narrow path was sloppy enoughhe had to leave the two women to lookafter themselves; and a fine haphazard scramble and hauling andpushingwith screams of fright and bursts of laughterensued.  This washardly the proper mood in which to seek out Nature in her sylvanretreats; but the truth is that the glen itself did not wear a veryromantic aspect.  No doubt there were massive boulders in the bed of thestream; and they had to clamber past precipitous rocks; and overhead wasa wilderness of foliage. But everything was dull-hued somehow, anddamp-looking, and dismal; the green-mossed boulders, the stems of thetrees, the dark red earth were all of a sombre hue; while here and therethe eye caught sight of a bit of newspaper, or of an empty soda-waterbottle, or perchance of the non-idyllic figure of a Glasgow youth seatedastride a fallen bough, a pot-hat on his head and a Manilla cheroot inhis mouth.  But still, it was more of the country than the Broomielaw;and when Kate and her companion had to pause in their panting struggleup the slippery path, and after she had recovered her breathsufficiently to demand a halt, she would turn to pick ferns from thedripping rocks, or to ask Ronald if there were any more picturesqueplace than this in Sutherlandshire.  Now Ronald was not in the leastafflicted by the common curse of travellersthe desire for comparison;he was well content to say that it was a 'pretty bit glen'; for onething his attention was chiefly devoted to keeping his footing, for theheavy basket was a sore encumbrance.However, after some further climbing, they reached certain drieraltitudes; and there the hamper was deposited, while they looked out forsuch trunks or big stones as would make convenient seats.  The old womanwas speechless from exhaustion; Kate was laughing at her ownbreathlessness, or miscalling the place for having dirtied her boots andher skirts; while Ronald was bringing things together for their comfort,so that they could have their luncheon in peace.  This was not quite thesame kind of a luncheon party as that he had attended on the shores ofthe far northern lochwith Miss Carry complacently regarding thesilver-clear salmon lying on the smooth, dry greensward; and theAmerican talking in his friendly fashion of the splendid future that laybefore a capable and energetic young fellow in the great country beyondthe seas; while all around them the sweet air was blowing, and the clearlight shining, and the white clouds sailing high over the Clebrigslopes.  Things were changed with him since thenhe did not himself knowhow much they had changed.  But in all circumstances he was abundantlygood-natured and grateful for any kindness shown him; and as KateMenzies had projected this trip mainly on his account, he did his bestto promote good-fellowship, and was serviceable and handy, and took herraillery in excellent part.'Katie dear,' whimpered old mother Paterson, as Ronald took out thethings from the hamper, 'ye jist spoil every one that comes near ye.Such extravagancesuch wastemany's the time I wish ye would getmarried, and have a man to look after ye''Stop your haveringwho would marry an auld woman like me?' said Mrs.Menzies with a laugh.  'Ay, and what's the extravagance, noo, that hasdriven ye oot o' your mind?''Champagne again!' the old woman said, shaking her head.  'Champagneagain!  Dear me, it's like a Duke's house''What, ye daft auld craytur?  Would ye have me take my cousin Ronald forhis first trip to Campsie Glen, and bring out a gill o' whisky in asoda-water bottle?''Indeed, Katie, lass, ye needna have brought one thing or the other forme,' he said.  'It's a drop o' water, and nothing else, that will servemy turn.''We'll see about that,' she said confidently.Her provisioning was certainly of a sumptuous naturefar more sumptuous,indeed, than the luncheons the rich Americans used to have carried downfor them to the lochside, and a perfect banquet as compared with thefrugal bit of cold beef and bread that Lord Ailine and his friendsallowed themselves on the hill.  Then, as regards the champagne, shewould take no refusalhe had to submit. She was in the gayest of moods;she laughed and joked; nay, at one point, she raised her glass aloft,and waved it round her head, and sang'O send Lewie Gordon hame,And the lad I daurna name;Though his back be at the wa',Here's to him that's far awa'!''What, what, lass?' Ronald cried grimly.  'Are ye thinking ye're in aHighland glen?  Do ye think it was frae places like this that the ladswere called out to follow Prince Charlie?''I carenaI carena!' she said; for what had trivial details of historyto do with a jovial picnic in Campsie Glen?  'Come, Ronald, lad, tuneup!  Hang the Harmony Club!give us a song in the open air!''Here goes, then'It was about the Martinmas time,And a gay time it was then, O,That our guidwife had puddins to mak',And she boiled them in the fan, O'and then rang out the chorus, even the old mother Paterson joining inwith a feeble treble'O the barrin' o' our door, weel, weel, weel,And the barrin' o' our door, weel!''Your health and song, Ronald!' she cried, when he had finishedorrather when they all had finished.  'Man, if there was just a laddiehere wi' a fiddle or a penny whistle I'd get up and dance a HighlandSchottische wi' yeauld as I am!'After luncheon, they set out for further explorations (having depositedthe basket in a secret place) and always Kate Menzies's laugh was theloudest, her jokes the merriest.'Auld, say ye?' mother Paterson complained.  'A lassiea very lassie!Ye can skip about like a twa-year-auld colt.'By and by they made their devious and difficult way down the glen again;and they had tea at the inn; and then they set out to drive back toGlasgowand there was much singing the while.  That is, up to a certainpoint; for this easy homeward drive, as it turned out, was destined tobe suddenly and sharply stopped short, and that in a way that might haveproduced serious consequences.  They were bowling merrily along, takingvery little heed of anything on either side of them, when, as itchanced, a small boy who had gone into a field to recover a kite thathad dropped there, came up unobserved behind the hedge, and threw thekite over, preparatory to his struggling through himself.  The suddenappearance of this white thing startled the cob; it swerved to the otherside of the road, hesitated, and was like to rear, and then getting anincautious cut from Kate's whip, away it tore along the highway, gettingcompletely the mastery of her.  Ronald got up behind.'Give me the reins, lass,' he called to her.'I'll manage himthe stupid beast!' she said; with her teeth shut firm.But all her pulling seemed to make no impression on the animalnay, thetrap was now swaying and jolting about in a most ominous manner.'If ye meet anything, we're done for, Katerun the wheel into thehedge.'It was excellent advice, if it could have been properly followed; butunluckily, just at the very moment when, with all her might and main,she twisted the head of the cob to the side of the road, there happenedto be a deep ditch there.  Over the whole thing wentRonald and Mrs.Menzies being pitched clean into the hedge; mother Paterson, not hangingon so well, being actually deposited on the other side, but in a gradualfashion.  Oddly enough, the cob, with one or two pawings of hisforefeet, got on to the road again, and the trap righted itself; while afarm-lad who had been coming along ran to the beast's head and held him.As it turned out, there was no harm done at all.But that, at first, was apparently not Kate Menzies's impression.'Ronald, Ronald,' she cried, and she clung to him frantically, 'I'mdyingI'm dyingkiss me!'He had got a grip of her, and was getting her on to her feet again.'There's nothing the matter wi' ye, woman,' he said, with unnecessaryroughness.'Ronald, RonaldI'm hurtI'm dyingkiss me!' she cried, and she wouldhave fallen away from him, but that he gathered her up, and set herupright on the road.'There's nothing the matter wi' yewhat? tumbling into a hawthornhedge?pull yourself together, woman! It's old mother Paterson that mayhave been hurt.'He left her unceremoniously to get over to the other side of the hedge,and as he went off she darted a look of angerof violent rage,eventowards him, which happily he did not see.  Moreover, she had tocalm herself; the farm lad was looking on.  And when at length motherPatersonwho was merely terrified, and was quite uninjuredwas hoistedover or through the hedge, and they all prepared to resume their seatsin the trap, Kate Menzies was apparently quite collected and mistress ofherself, though her face was somewhat pale, and her manner wasdistinctly reserved and cold.  She gave the lad a couple of shillings;got up and took the reins; waited until the others were seated, and thendrove away without a word.  Mother Paterson was loud in her thankfulnessover such a providential escape; she had only had her wrists scratchedslightly.Ronald was sensible of her silence, though he could not well guess thecause of it.  Perhaps the fright had sobered down her high spirits; atall events, she was now more circumspect with her driving; and, as herattention was so much devoted to the cob, it was not for him tointerfere. As they drew near Glasgow, however, she relaxed the coldseverity of her manner, and made a few observations; and when they camein sight of St. Rollox, she even condescended to ask him whether hewould not go on with them to the tavern and have some supper with themas usual.'I ought to go back to my work,' said he, 'and that's the truth.  But itwould be a glum ending for such an unusual holiday as this.''Your prospects are not so very certain,' said Kate, who could talkexcellent English when she chose, and kept her broad Scotch for familiaror affectionate intercourse.  'An hour or two one way or the other isnot likely to make much difference.''I am beginning to think that myself,' he said, rather gloomily.And then, with a touch of remorse for the depressing speech she hadmade, she tried to cheer him a little; and, in fact, insisted on hisgoing on with them.  She even quoted a couplet from his own song to him'An hour or twa 'twill do nae harm,The dints a' fortune to forget';and she said that, after the long drive, he ought to have a famousappetite for supper, and that there would be a good story to tell abouttheir being shot into a hawthorn hedge, supposing that the skipper andLaidlaw and Jaap came in in the evening.Nevertheless, all during the evening there was a certain restraint inher manner.  Altogether gone was her profuse friendship and her pride inEast Lothian, although she remained as hospitable as ever.  Sometimesshe regarded him sharply, as if trying to make out something.  On hispart, he thought she was probably a little tired after the fatigues ofthe day; perhaps, also, he preferred her quieter manner.Then again, when the 'drei Gesellen' came in, there was a little lesshilarity than usual; and, contrary to her wont, she did not press themto stay when they proposed to adjourn to the club.  Ronald, who had beenvaguely resolving not to go near that haunt for some time to come, foundthat that was the alternative to his returning to his solitary lodgingand his books at a comparatively early hour of the evening.  Doubtlesshe should have conquered his repugnance to this later course; but thetemptationafter a long day of pleasure-makingto finish up the lasthour or so in the society of these good fellows was great. He went tothe Harmony Club, and was made more welcome than ever; and somehow, inthe excitement of the moment, he was induced to sing another song, andthere were more people than ever claiming his acquaintance, andchallenging him to have 'another one.'*CHAPTER XVI.**THE DOWNWARD WAY.*With a fatal certainty he was going from bad to worse; and there was noone to warn him; and if any one had warned him, probably he would nothave cared.  Life had come to be for him a hopeless and useless thing.His own instinct had answered true, when the American was urging him togo and cast himself into the eager strife of the world, and pressforward to the universal goal of wealth and ease and independence.  'I'drather be "where the dun deer lie,"' he had said.  Kingsley's poem hadtaken firm root in his mind, simply because it found natural soil there.'Nor I wadna be a clerk, mither, to bide aye ben,Scrabbling ower the sheets o' parchment with a weary, weary pen:Looking through the lang stane windows at a narrow strip o' sky,Like a laverock in a withy cage, until I pine away and die.Ye'll bury me 'twixt the brae and the burn, in a glen far away,Where I may hear the heathcock craw and the great harts bray;And gin my ghaist can walk, mither, I'll go glowering at the sky,The livelong night on the black hillsides where the dun deer lie.'His way of existence up there on the far hillsidesunlike that of theluckless outlawhad been a perfectly happy and contented one.  His soundcommon sense had put away from him that craving for fame which hasrendered so miserable the lives of many rustic verse writers; he wasproud of his occupation, grateful to the good friends around him, andalways in excellent health and spirits.  Another thing has to be saidtopacify the worthy folk who imagine that ambition must necessarily fillthe mind of youth: had he come away from that sphere of careless contentwith a sufficient aim to strive for, perhaps affairs might have gonedifferently.  If it could have been said to him: 'Fight your way to theworldly success that the Americans have so liberally prophesied for you;and then come back, and you will find Meenie Douglas awaiting you; andyou shall win her and wear her, as the rose and crown of your life, inspite of all the Stuarts of Glengask'then the little room in PortDundas Road would no longer have been so gray; and all the future wouldhave been filled with light and hope; and the struggle, however arduousand long, would have been glad enough.  But with no such hope; withincreasing doubts as to his ultimate success; and with a moredangerously increasing indifference as to whether he should ever reachthat success, the temptations of the passing hour became irresistiblystrong.  And he became feebler to resist them. He did not care.  Afterall, these gay evenings at the Harmony Club were something to lookforward to during the long dull days; with a full glass and a good-goingpipe and a roaring chorus the hours passed; and then from time to timethere was the honour and glory of hearing one of his own songs sung.  Hewas a great figure at these gatherings now; that kind of fame at leasthad come to him, and come to him unsought; and there were not wanting asufficiency of rather muddle-headed creatures who declared that he wasfit to rank with very distinguished names indeed in the noble roll-callof Scotland's poets; and who, unfortunately, were only too eager toprove the faith that was in them by asking him to drink at theirexpense.In this rhyming direction there was one very curious point: when hebegan to turn over the various pieces that might be made available forMr. Jaap, he was himself astonished to find how little melody there wasin them. Whatever little musical faculty he had seemed to be all lockedup in the love-verses he had written about Meenie. Many of the fragmentshad other qualitieshomely common sense; patriotism; a great affectionfor dumb animals; here and there sometimes a touch of humour or pathos;but somehow they did not sing.  It is true that the following pieceSHOUTHER TO SHOUTHER.From Hudson's Bay to the Rio Grand',The Scot is ever a rover;In New South Wales and in Newfoundland,And all the wide world over;Chorus: But it's shouther to shouther, my bonnie lads,And let every Scot be a brither;And we'll work as we can, and we'll win if we can,For the sake of our auld Scotch mither.She's a puir auld wife, wi' little to give;And she's rather stint o' caressing;But she's shown us how honest lives we may live,And she's sent us out wi' her blessing.Chorus: And it's shouther to shouther, etc.Her land's no rick; and her crops are slim;And I winna say much for the weather;But she's given us legs that can gaily clim'Up the slopes o' the blossoming heather.Chorus: And it's shouther to shouther, etc.And she's given us hearts that, whatever they say(And I trow that we might be better)There's one sair fault they never will haeOur mither, we'll never forget her!Chorus: And it's shouther to shouther, my bonnie lads,And let every Scot be a brither;And we'll work as we can, and we'll win if we can,For the sake of our auld Scotch mither!had attained a great success at the Harmony Club; but that was merelybecause Mr. Jaap had managed to write for it an effective air, thatcould be easily caught up and sung in chorus; in itself there was nosimple, natural 'lilt' whatever.  And then, again, in his epistolaryrhymes to friends and acquaintances (alas! that was all over now) therewere many obvious qualities, but certainly not the lyrical one.  Here,for example, are some verses he had sent in former days to a certainJohnnie Pringle, living at Tongue, who had had his eye on a young lassdown Loch Loyal way:O Johnnie, leave the lass alane;Her mother has but that one wean;For a' the others have been ta'en,As weel ye ken, Johnnie.'Tis true her bonnie e'en would riveThe heart o' any man alive;And in the husry[#] she would thriveI grant ye that, Johnnie.[#] 'Husry,' housewifery.But wad ye tak' awa the lass,I tell ye what would come to pass,The mother soon would hae the grassBoon her auld head, Johnnie.They've got some gear, and bit o' landThat well would bear another hand;Come down frae Tongue, and take your standBy Loyal's side, Johnnie!Ye'd herd a bit, and work the farm,And keep the widow-wife frae harm:And wha would keep ye snug and warmIn winter-time, Johnnie?The lass hersel'that I'll be sworn!And bonnier creature ne'er was born:Come down the strath the morrow's morn,Your best foot first, Johnnie!Well, there may be wise and friendly counsel in verses such as these;but they do not lend themselves readily to the musician who would adaptthem for concert purposes. No; all such lyrical faculty as he possessedhad been given in one direction.  And yet not for one moment was hetempted to show Mr. Jaap any of those little love-lyrics that he hadwritten about Meeniethose careless verses that seemed to singthemselves, as it were, and that were all about summer mornings, and redand white roses, and the carolling of birds, and the whispering ofClebrig's streams.  Meenie's praises to be sung at the Harmony Club!hecould as soon have imagined herself singing there.One wet and miserable afternoon old Peter Jaap was passing through St.Enoch Square when, much to his satisfaction, he ran against the bigskipper, who had just come out of the railway station.'Hallo, Captain,' said the little old man, 'back already?''Just up frae Greenock; and precious glad to be ashore again, I can tellye,' said Captain M'Taggart.  'That Mary Jane 'll be my grave, mark mywords; I never get as far south as the Mull o' Galloway withoutwondering whether I'll ever see Ailsa Craig or the Tail o' the Bankagain. Well, here I am this time; and I was gaun doon to hae a glass onthe strength o'tto the widow's''We'll gang in some other place,' Mr. Jaap said.  'I want to hae a wordwi' ye about that young fellow Strang.'They easily discovered another howf; and soon they were left bythemselves in a little compartment, two big tumblers of ale before them.'Ay, and what's the matter wi' him?' said the skipper.'I dinna rightly ken,' the little old musician said, 'but something is.Ye see, I'm feared the lad has no' muckle siller''It's a common complaint, Peter!' the skipper said, with a laugh.'Ay; but ye see, the maist o' us hae some way o' leevin. That's no thecase wi' Ronald.  He came to Glasgow, as I understand it, wi' a sma' bitnest-egg; and he's been leevin on that ever sinceevery penny coming outo' his capital, and never a penny being added.  That's enough to make ayoung fellow anxious.''Ay?''But there's mair than that.  He's a proud kind o' chiel.  It's justwonderfu' the way that Mrs. Menzies humours him, and pretends this andthat so he'll no be at any expense; and when they gang out driving shetakes things wi' herand a lot o' that kind o' way o' working; but a'the same there's sma' expenses that canna be avoided, and deil a bitshesayswill he let her pay.  And the sma' things maun be great things tohim, if he's eating into his nest-egg in that way.''It's easy getting out o' that difficulty,' said the big skipper, whowas of a less sympathetic nature than the old musician.  'What for doeshe no stay at hame?  He doesna need to gang driving wi' her unless helikes.''It's no easy getting away frae Mrs. Menzies,' the old man saidshrewdly, 'if she has a mind to take ye wi' her.  And she hersel' seesthat he canna afford to spend money even on little things; and yet she'sfeared to say anything to him.  Man, dinna ye mind when she wanted himto take a room in the house?what was that but that she meant him tohave his board free?  But nothe deevil has got some o' the Hielan pridein him; she was just feared to say anything mair about it.  And at theclub, too, it's no every one he'll drink wi' though there's plenty readyto stand Sam, now that Ronald is kent as a writer o' poetry.  Not thatbut wi' ithers he's ower freeay, confound him, he's getting thereputation o' a harum-scarum deilif he takes a liking to a man, he'llgang off wi' him and his neighbours for the time being, and goodnessknows when or where they'll stop.  A bottle o' whisky in their pocket,and off they'll make; I heard the other week o' him and some o' themfinding themselves at daybreak in Helensburghnaught would do the rascalthe night before but that he maun hae a sniff o' the saut sea-air; andoff they set, him and them, the lang night through, until the daylightfound them staring across to Roseneath and Kempoch Point.  He's no inthe best o' hands, that's the fact.  If he would but marry the widow''What would Jimmy Laidlaw say to that?' the skipper said, with a loudlaugh.'Jimmy Laidlaw?  He hasna the ghost o' a chance so long as this youngfellow's about.  Kate's just daft about him; but he's no inclined thatway, I can seeunless hunger should tame him.  Weel, M'Taggart, I dinnalike to see the lad being led away to the mischief.  He's got into illhands.  If it's the want o' a settled way o' leevin that's worrying him,and driving him to gang wild and reckless at times, something should bedone.  I'm an auld man now; I've seen ower many young fellows like thatgang to auld Harry; and I like this ladI'm no going to stand by andlook on without a word.''Ay, and what would ye hiv me dae, Peter?  Take him as a hand on boardthe Mary Jane?''Na, na.  The lad maun gang on wi' his surveying and that kind o'thingthough he seems less and less to think there'll be any solidoutcome frae it.  But what think ye o' this?  There's Mr. Jackson payingthey professionals from week to week; and here's a fellow wi' a finernatural voice than any o' themif it had but a little training.  Well,now, why shouldna Jackson pay the lad for his singing?''Not if he can get it for nothing, Peter!''But he cannathat's just the thing, man,' retorted the other.  'It'sonly when Ronald has had a glass and is in the humour that he'll singanything.  Why shouldna he be engaged like the others?  It would be astand-by.  It would take up none o' his time.  And it might make him awee thing steadier if he kent he had to sing every night.''Very well, then, ask Tom Jackson about it,' the big skipper said.  'Yemay say it would please the membersI'll back ye up wi' that.  Confoundhim, I didna ken the deevil had got his leg ower the trace.'The old man answered with a cautious smile:'Ye're rough and ready, M'Taggart; but that'll no do. Ronald's acamstrairy chiel.  There's Hielan blood in his veins; and ye never kenwhen his pride is gaun to bleeze oot and be up the lum wi'm in a fluff.''Beggars canna be choosers, my good freen''Beggars?  They Hielan folk are never beggars; they'll rob and plunderye, and fling ye ower a hedge, and rifle your pockets, but deil a bit o'them 'll beg.  Na, na; we'll have to contrive some roundabout way to seehow he'll take it.  But I'll speak to Jackson; and we'll contrivesomething, I doubtna.  Sae finish up your beer, Captain; and if ye'regaun doon to see Mrs. Menzies, I'll gang as far wi' ye; I havena beenthere this nicht or twa.'Now that was an amiable and benevolent, but, as it turned out, mostunfortunate design.  That same night Ronald did show up at the HarmonyClub; and there was a little more than usual of hilarity and goodfellowship over the return of the skipper from the perils of the deep.Laidlaw was there too; and he also had been acquainted with the way inwhich they meant to approach Ronald, to see whether he could not beinduced to sing regularly at these musical meetings for a stipulatedpayment.Their first difficulty was to get him to sing at all; and for a longtime he was good-humouredly obdurate, and they let him alone.  But lateron in the evening one of his own songs was sung'The fisher lads arebound for hame'and was received with immense applause, which naturallypleased him; and then there was a good deal of talking and laughing andconviviality; in the midst of which the skipper called to him'Now, Ronald, lad, tune up; I havena heard a song frae ye this threeweeks and mair; man, if I had a voice like yours wouldna I give them'"The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith,Fu' loud the wind blaws frae the ferry;The ship rides by the Berwick Law,And I maun leave my bonnie mary!"'And indeed he did, in this loud and general hum, sing these lines, intones resembling the sharpening of a rusty saw.'Very well, then,' Ronald said.  'But I'll sing it where I amoncethere's quietness.  I'm not going up on that platform.'Of course, the chairman was glad enough to make the announcement, forRonald's singing was highly appreciated by the members; moreover therewas a little experiment to be tried.  So peace was restored; theaccompanist struck a few notes; and Ronald, with a little indecision atfirst, but afterwards with a clear-ringing courage, sang that gayest ofall parting songs.  In the hubbub of applause that followed none but theconspirators saw what now took place.  The chairman called a waiter, andspoke a few words to him in an undertone; the waiter went over to thetable where Ronald was sitting and handed him a small package; and thenRonald, naturally thinking that this was merely a written message orsomething of the kind, opened the folded piece of white paper.There was a message, it is true,'with T. Jackson's compliments,'andthere was also a sovereign and a shilling.  For an instant Ronaldregarded this thing with a kind of bewilderment; and then his eyesblazed; the money was dashed on to the ground; and, without a word or alook to any one in the place, he had clapped on his hat and stalked tothe door, his mouth firm shut, his lips pale. This glass door was aprivate door leading to an outer passage formerly described; the handleseemed stiff or awkward; so by main force he drove it before him, andthe door swinging back into the lobby, smashed its glass panels againstthe wall.  The 'breenge'for there is no other wordcaused by thisviolent departure was tremendous; and the three conspirators could onlysit and look at each other.'The fat's in the fire now,' said the skipper.'I wonder if the guinea 'll pay for the broken glass,' said JimmyLaidlaw.But it was the little old musician, whose scheme this had been, who wasmost concerned.'We'll have to get hold o' the lad and pacify him,' said he.  'TheHielan deevil!  But if he doesna come back here, he'll get among a worselot than we arewe'll have to get hold o' him, Captain, and bring him tohis senses.'Well, in the endafter a day or twoRonald was pacified; and he did goback to the club, and resumed his relations with the friends andacquaintances he had formed there.  And that was how it came about thatMeenie's married sisterwho happened to know certain members of the Rev.Andrew Strang's congregation, and who was very curious to discover whyit was that Meenie betrayed such a singular interest in this meregamekeeper, and was repeatedly referring to him in hercorrespondenceadded this postscript to a letter which she was sendingto Inver-Mudal:'I don't know whether it may interest you to hear that Ronald Strang,Mr. Strang's brother, whom you have several times asked about, isdrinking himself to death, and that in the lowest of low company.'*CHAPTER I.**A MESSAGE.*Clear and brilliant in their blue and white are these shining northernskies; and the winds that come blowing over the moorland arehoney-scented from the heather; and the wide waters of the loch are allof a ruffled and shimmering silver, with a thin fringe of foam along thecurving bays. And this is Love Meenie that comes out from the cottageand comes down to the road; with perhaps less of the wild-rose tint inher cheeks than used to be there, and less of the ready light ofgladness that used to leap into her blue-gray eyes; but still with thatconstant gentleness of expression that seems to bring her into accordwith all the beautiful things in the landscape around her.  And, indeed,on this particular morning she is cheerful enough; walking briskly,chatting to the ancient terrier that is trotting at her side, andequably regarding now the velvet-soft shadows that steal along thesunlit slopes of Clebrig, and now the wheeling and circling of somepeewits that have been startled from their marshy haunts by the side ofthe stream.'And who knows but that there may be a message or a bit of news for usthis morning?' she says to the faithful Harry.  'For yonder comes themail.  And indeed it's well for you, my good little chap, that you can'tunderstand how far away Glasgow is; I suppose you expect to see yourmaster at any minute, at every turn of the road.  And if he should sendyou a messageor Maggie eitherhow am I to tell you?'The pretty Nelly is at the door of the inn, scattering food to thefowls.'It's a peautiful moarning, Miss Douglas,' she says.And here is Mr. Murray, with his pipe, and his occultly humorous air.'And are you come along for your letters, Miss Meenie?' he says.  'Ay,ay, it is not an unusual thing for a young leddy to be anxious about aletterit is not an unusual thing at ahl.'And now the mail-car comes swinging up to the door; the one or twopassengers alight, glad to stretch their legs; the letter bags arehauled down, and Miss Douglas follows them indoors.  Mrs. Murray, whoacts as post-mistress, is not long in sorting out the contents.'Two for me?' says Meenie.  'And both from Glasgow? Well, now, that doesnot often happen.'But of course she could not further interrupt the post-mistress in theperformance of her duties; so she put the letters in her pocket; passedout from the inn and through the little crowd of loiterers; and made forthe high-road and for home.  She was in no hurry to open these budgetsof news.  Such things came but once in a while to this remote hamlet;and when they did come they were leisurely and thoroughly perusednotskimmed and thrown aside. Nevertheless when she got up to the high-roadshe thought she would pause there for just a second, and run her eyeover the pages, lest there might be some mention of Ronald's name.  Shehad heard of him but little of late; and he had never once written toherperhaps he had no excuse for doing so.  It was through Maggie thatfrom time to time she got news of him; and now it was Maggie's letterthat she opened first.Well, there was not much about Ronald.  Maggie was at school; Ronald wasbusy; he seldom came over to the minister's house.  And so Meenie, witha bit of a sigh, put that letter into her pocket, and turned to theother.  But now she was indifferent and careless.  It was not likelythat her sister had anything to say about Ronald; for he had not yetcalled at the house.  Moreover, Mrs. Gemmill, from two or threeexpressions she had used, did not seem anxious to make his acquaintance.And then the girl's breath caught, and she became suddenly pale.'Drinking himself to death, in the lowest of low company'these werethe words confronting her startled eyes; and the next instant she haddarted a glance along the road, and another back towards the inn, as ifwith a sudden strange fear that some one had overseen.  No, she was allalone; with the quickly closed letter in her trembling hand; her brainbewildered; her heart beating; and with a kind of terror on her face.And then, rather blindly, she turned and walked away in the otherdirectionnot towards her own home; and still held the letter tightlyclasped, as if she feared that some one might get at this ghastlysecret.'Ronald!Ronald!'there was a cry of anguish in her heart; for thiswas all too sharp and sudden an end to certain wistful dreams andfancies.  These were the dreams and fancies of long wakeful nights, whenshe would lie and wonder what was the meaning of his farewell looktowards her; and wonder if he could guess that his going away was tochange all her life for her; and wonder whether, if all things were togo well with him, he would come back and claim her lovethat was thereawaiting him, and would always await him, whether he ever came back orno.  And sometimes, indeed, the morning light brought a joyous assurancewith it; she knew well why he had not ventured to hand her thattell-tale message that he had actually written out and addressed to her;but in the glad future, when he could come with greater confidence anddeclare the truthwould she allow father, or mother, or any one else tointerfere?  On these mornings the Mudal-Water seemed to laugh as it wentrippling by; it had a friendly sound; she could hear it'Move the sweet forget-me-notsThat grow for happy lovers.'And at such times her favourite and secret reading was of women who hadbeen bold and generous with their love; and she feared she had beentimid and had fallen in too easily with her mother's schemes for her;but now that she understood herself betternow that her heart hadrevealed itself plainly to hersurely, if ever that glad time were tocomeif ever she were to see him hasten along to the littlegarden-gateon the very first moment of his arrivalshe would not stinther welcome of him?  White, white were the mornings on which suchfancies filled her head; and the Mudal laughed along its clear brownshallows; and there was a kind of music in the moorland air.'Drinking himself to death, in the lowest of low company:' black nightseemed to have fallen upon her, and a wild bewilderment, and a crushingsense of hopelessness that shut out for ever those fair visions of thefuture.  She did not stay to ask whether this might not be a woman'sexaggeration or the mere gossip of a straitlaced set; the blow hadfallen too suddenly to let her reason about it; she only knew that thevery pride of her life, the secret hope of her heart, had been in amoment extinguished.  And RonaldRonald that was ever the smartest andhandsomest of them allthe gayest and most audacious, the very king ofall the company whithersoever he wentwas it this same Ronald who had inso short a time become a bleared and besotted drunkard, shunning thepublic ways, hiding in ignoble haunts, with the basest of creatures forhis only friends? And shethat had been so proud of himthat had been soassured of his futurenay, that had given him the love of her life, andhad sworn to herself that, whether he ever came to claim it or no, noother man should take his place in her heartshe it was who had becomepossessed of this dreadful secret, while all the others were stillimagining that Ronald was as the Ronald of yore.  She dared not go backto Inver-Mudalnot yet, at least.  She went away along the highway; andthen left that for a path that led alongside a small burn; and by andby, when she came to a place where she was screened from all observationby steep and wooded banks, she sat down there with some kind of vaguenotion that she ought more carefully to read this terrible news; butpresently she had flung herself, face downward, on the heather, in anutter agony of grief, and there she lay and sobbed and cried, with herhead buried in her hands.  'Ronald!  Ronald!' her heart seemed to callaloud in its despair; but how was any appeal to be carried to himawayto Glasgow town?  And was this the end?  Was he never coming back?  Theproud young life that promised so fair to be sucked under and whirledaway in a black current; and as for herfor her the memory of a fewhappy days spent on Mudal's banks, and years and years of lonelythinking over what might have been.A sharp whistle startled her; and she sprang to her feet, and hastilydried her eyes.  A Gordon setter came ranging through the strip ofbirch-wood, and then its companion; both dogs merely glanced at hertheywere far too intent on their immediate work to take further notice.  Andthen it quickly occurred to her that, if this were Lord Ailine who wascoming along, perhaps she might appeal to himshe might beg of him towrite to Ronaldor even to go to Glasgowfor had not these two beencompanions and friends?  And he was a manhe would know what to dowhatcould she do, a helpless girl?  Presently Lord Ailine appeared, comingleisurely along the banks of the little stream in company with a keeperand a young lad; and when he saw her, he raised his cap and greeted her.'Don't let us disturb you, Miss Douglas,' said he. 'Gathering flowersfor the dinner-table, I suppose?''I hope I have done no harm,' said she, though her mind was so agitatedthat she scarcely knew what she said. 'II have not seen any birdsnor ahare either.''Harm?  No, no,' he said good-naturedly.  'I hope your mamma is quitewell.  There's a haunch of a roe-buck at the lodge that Duncan can takealong this afternoon''Your lordship,' said the keeper reprovingly, 'there's Bella drawing onto something.''Good morning, Miss Douglas,' he said quickly, and the next moment hewas off.But even during that brief interview she had instinctively arrived atthe conclusion that it was not for her to spread about this bruit inInver-Mudal.  She could not.  This news about Ronald to come from herlipswith perhaps this or that keeper to carry it on to the inn and makeit the topic of general wonder there?  They would hear of it soonenough.  But no onenot even any one in her own householdwould be ableto guess what it meant to her; as yet she herself could hardly realiseit, except that all of a sudden her life seemed to have grown dark.She had to get back to the cottage in time for the mid-day dinner, andshe sate at table there, pale and silent, and with a consciousness as ofguilt weighing upon her.  She even did her best to eat something, inorder to avoid their remarks and looks; but she failed in that, and wasglad to get away as soon as she could to the privacy of her own room.'I'm sure I don't know what's the matter with Williamina,' Mrs. Douglassaid with a sigh.  'She has not been looking herself for many a dayback; and she seems going from bad to worseshe ate hardly a scrap atdinner.'Of course it was for the Doctor to prescribe.'She wants a change,' he said.'A change,' the little dame retorted with some asperity, for this was asore subject with her.  'She would have had a change long before now,but for her and you together. Three months ago I wanted her sent toGlasgow''Glasgowfor any one in indifferent health' the highland Doctor managedto interpolate; but she would not listen.'I'm sure I don't understand the girl.  She has no proper pride.  Anyother girl in her position would be glad to have such chances, and eagerto make use of them. But noshe would sooner go looking after a lot ofcottar's children than set to work to qualify herself for taking herproper place in society; and what is the use of my talking when youencourage her in her idleness?''I like to have the girl at home,' he said, rather feebly.'There,' she said, producing a letter and opening italthough he hadheard the contents a dozen times before. 'There it isin black andwhitea distinct invitation. "Could you let Meenie come to us for amonth or six weeks when we go to Brighton in November?"''Well,' said the good-natured Doctor, 'that would be a better kind of achange.  Sea-airsunlightplenty of society and amusement.''She shall not go there, nor anywhere else, with my cousin and hisfamily, until she has fitted herself for taking such a position,' saidthe little woman peremptorily.  'Sir Alexander is good-nature itself,but I am not going to send him a half-educated Highland girl that hewould be ashamed of.  Why, the best families in England go to Brightonfor the winterevery one is there.  It would be worse than sending herto London.  And what does this month or six weeks mean?Surely it isplain enough.  They want to try her.  They want to see what heraccomplishments are. They want to see whether they can take her abroadwith them, and present her at Paris and Florence and Rome. Every yearnow Sir Alexander goes abroad at Christmas time; and of course if shesatisfied them she would be asked to go alsoand there, think of thatchance!''The girl is well enough,' said he.She was on the point of retorting that, as far as he knew anything aboutthe matter, Williamina was well enough. But she spared him.'No, she has no proper pride,' the little Dresden-china woman continued.'And just now, when everything is in her favour.  Agatha never had suchchances.  Agatha never had Williamina's good looks.  Of course, I saynothing against Mr. Gemmillhe is a highly respectable manand if thebusiness is going on as they say it is going, I don't see why theyshould not leave Queen's Crescent and take a larger houseup by the WestEnd Park.  And he is an intelligent man, too; the society they have isclever and intellectualyou saw in Agatha's last letter about theartists' party she hadwhy, their names are in every newspaperquitedistinguished people, in that way of life.  And, at all events, it wouldbe a beginning. Williamina would learn something.  Agatha is a perfectmusicianyou can't deny that.'But here the big Doctor rebelled; and he brought the weight of hisprofessional authority to bear upon her.'Now, look here, Jane, when I said that the girl wanted a change, Imeant a change; but not a change to singing-lessons, and music-lessons,and German lessons, and Italian lessons, and not a change to anatmosphere like that of Glasgow.  Bless my soul, do you think thatkind of change will bring back the colour to her cheek, and give her anappetite, and put some kind of cheerfulness into her? Queen's Crescent!She's not going to Queen's Crescent with my will.  Brighton, if youlike.''Brighton?  To get herself laughed at, and put in the background, as ahalf-educated ignorant Highland peasant girl?  So long as she is whatshe is, she shall not go to Brighton with my will.'So here was an absolute dead-lock so far as Meenie's future wasconcerned; but she knew nothing of it; and if she had known she wouldnot have heeded much.  It was not of her own future she was thinking.And it seemed so terrible to her to know that there was nothing shewould not have adventured to save this man from destruction, and to knowthat she was incapable of doing anything at all.  If she could but seehim for a momentto make an appeal to him; if she could but take hishand in hers; would she not say that there had been timidity, doubt,misapprehension in the past, but that now there was no time for any ofthese; she had come to claim him and save him and restore him tohimselfno matter what he might think of her?  Indeed she tried to putall thought of herself out of the matter.  She would allow no self-prideto interfere, if only she could be of the smallest aid to him, if shecould stretch out her hand to him, and appeal to him, and drag him back.But how?  She seemed so helpless.  And yet her anxiety drove her to theconsideration of a hundred wild and impossible schemes, insomuch thatshe could not rest in her own room, to which she had retreated forsafety and quiet.  She put on her bonnet again and went outstill withthat guilty consciousness of a secret hanging over her; and she wentdown the road and over the bridge; and then away up the solitary valleythrough which the Mudal flows.  Alas! there was no laughing over thebrown shallows now; there was no thinking of'the sweet forget-me-nots,That grow for happy lovers';all had become dark around her; and the giant grasp of Glasgow had takenhim away from her, and dragged him down, and blotted out for ever thevisions of a not impossible future with which she had been wont tobeguile the solitary hours.  'Drinking himself to death, in the lowestof low company:' could this be Ronald, that but a few months ago hadbeen the gayest of any, with audacious talk of what he was going to tryfor, with health and happiness radiant in his eyes?  And it seemed toher that her sister Agatha had been proud of writing these words, andproud of the underlining of them, and that there was a kind of vengeancein them; and the girl's mouth was shut hard; and she was making vagueand fierce resolutions of showing to all of themfar and nearthat shewas not ashamed of her regard for Ronald Strang, gamekeeper or nogamekeeper, if ever the chance should serve. Ashamed!  He had been forher the very king of menin his generosity, his courage, his gentleness,his manliness, his modesty, and his staunch and unfaltering fealty tohis friends.  And was he to fall away from that ideal, and to become awreck, a waif, an outcast; and she to stand by and not stretch out ahand to save?But what could she do?  All the day she pondered; all the evening; andthrough the long, silent, and wakeful night.  And when, at last, as thegray of the dawn showed in the small window, she had selected one ofthese hundred bewildered plans and schemes, it seemed a fantastic thingthat she was about to do.  She would send him a piece of white heather.He would know it came from herhe would recognise the postmark, and alsoher handwriting. And if he took it as a message and an appeal, as atoken of good wishes and friendliness, and the hope of better fortune?Or ifand here she fell a-trembling, for it was a little cold in theseearly hoursif he should take it as a confession, as an unmaidenlydeclaration?  Oh, she did not care.  It was all she could think ofdoing; and do something she must.  And she remembered with a timid andnervous joy her own acknowledged influence over himhad not Maggietalked of it a thousand times?and if he were to recognise this messagein its true light, what then?  'Ronald!  Ronald!' her heart was stillcalling, with something of a tremulous hope amid all its grief and pity.She was out and abroad over the moorland long before any one was astir,and searching with an anxious diligence, and as yet without success.White heather is not so frequently met with in the North as in the WestHighlands; and yet in Sutherlandshire it is not an absolute rarity; manya time had she come across a little tuft of it in her wanderings overthe moors.  But now, search as she might, she could not find thesmallest bit; and time began to press; for this was the morning for themail to go southif she missed it, she would have to wait two more days.And as half-hour after half-hour went by, she became more anxious andnervous and agitated; she went rapidly from knoll to knoll, seeking thelikeliest places; and all in vain.  It was a question of minutes now.She could hear the mail-cart on the road behind her; soon it would passher and go on to the inn, where it would remain but a brief while beforesetting out again for Lairg.  And presently, when the mail-cart did comealong and go by, then she gave up the quest in despair; and in a kind ofbewildered way set out for home. Her heart was heavy and full of itsdisappointment; and her face was paler a little than usual; but at leasther eyes told no tales.And then, all of a sudden, as she was crossing the Mudal bridge, shecaught sight of a little tuft of gray away along the bank and not farfrom the edge of the stream.  At first she thought it was merely a patchof withered heather; and then a wild hope possessed her; she quicklyleft the bridge and made her way towards it; and the next moment she wasjoyfully down on her knees, selecting the whitest spray she could find.And the mail-cart?it would still be at the innthe inn was little morethan half a mile offcould she run hard and intercept them after all,and send her white-dove message away to the south?  To think of it wasto try it, at all events; and she ran as no town-bred girl ever ran inher lifepast the Doctor's cottage, along the wide and empty road, pastthe keeper's house and the kennels, across the bridge that spans thelittle burn.  Alas! there was the mail-cart already on its way.'Johnnie, Johnnie!' she called.Happily the wind was blowing towards him; he heard, looked back, andpulled up his horses.'Wait a minuteI have a letter for you to take!' she called, though herstrength was all gone now.And yet she managed to get quickly down to the inn, and astonished Mrs.Murray by breathlessly begging for an envelope.'Tell Nellytell Nelly,' she said, while her trembling fingers wrote theaddress, 'to come and take this to the mail-cartthey're waitingJohnniewill post it at Lairg.'And then, when she had finished the tremulous address, and carefullydried it with the blotting-paper, and given the little package to Nelly,and bade her runquick, quickto hand it to the driver, then the girlsank back in the chair and began laughing in a strange, half-hystericalway, and then that became a burst of crying, with her face hidden in herhands.  But the good-hearted Mrs. Murray was there; and her arms wereround the girl's neck; and she was saying, in her gentle Highland way'Well, well, now, to think you should hef had such a run to catch themail-cartand no wonder you are dead-beatay, ay, and you not looking sowell of late, Miss Meenie. But you will just rest here a while; andNelly will get you some tea; and there is no need for you to go backhome until you have come to yourself better.  No, you hef not beenlooking well lately; and you must not tire yourself like thisdear me,the place would be quite different althogether if anything was to makeyou ill.'*CHAPTER II.**IN GLASGOW TOWN.*It was as late as half-past ten o'clockand on a sufficiently gray anddull and cheerless morningthat Ronald's landlady, surprised not to haveheard him stirring, knocked at his room.  There was no answer.  Then sheknocked again, opened the door an inch or two, and dropped a letter onthe floor.'Are ye no up yet?'The sound of her voice aroused him.'In a minute, woman,' he said sleepily; and, being thus satisfied, thelandlady went off, shutting the door behind her.He rose in the bed and looked around him, in a dazed fashion.  He wasalready partially dressed, for he had been up two hours before, but hadthrown himself down on the bed again, over-fatigued, half-stupefied, andaltogether discontented.  The fact is, he had come home the night beforein a reckless mood, and had sate on through hour after hour until it wasnearly dawn, harassing himself with idle dreams and idle regrets,drinking to drown care, smoking incessantly, sometimes scrawlinghalf-scornful rhymes.  There were all the evidences now on the tablebefore hima whisky-bottle, a tumbler, a wooden pipe and plenty ofashes, a sheet of paper scrawled over in an uncertain hand.  He took upthat sheet to recall what he had written:King Death came striding along the road,And he laughed aloud to seeHow every rich man's mother's sonWould take to his heels and flee.Duke, lord, or merchant, off they skipped,Whenever that he drew near;And they dropped their guineas as wild they ran,And their faces were white with fear.But the poor folk labouring in the fieldsWatched him as he passed by;And they took lo their spades and mattocks again,And turned to their work with a sigh.Then farther along the road he sawAn old man sitting alone;His head lay heavy upon his hands,And sorrowful was his moan.Old age had shrivelled and bent his frame;Age and hard work togetherHad scattered his locks, and bleared his eyesAge and the winter weather.'Old man,' said Death, 'do you tremble to knowThat now you are near the end?'The old man looked: 'You are Death,' said he,'And at last I've found a friend.'It was a strange kind of mood for a young fellow to have fallen into;but he did not seem to think so.  As he contemplated the scrawledlineswith rather an absent and preoccupied airthis was what he wassaying to himself'If the old gentleman would only come striding along the Port DundasRoad, I know one that would be glad enough to go out and meet him andshake hands with him, this very minute.'He went to the window and threw it open, and sate down: the outer airwould be pleasanter than this inner atmosphere, impregnated with thefumes of whisky and tobacco; and his head was burning, and his pulsesheavy. But the dreariness of this outlook!the gray pavements, the grayrailway station, the gray sheds, the gray skies; and evermore the dullslumberous sound of the great city already plunged in its multitudinousdaily toil.  Then he began to recall the events of the precedingevening; and had not Mrs. Menzies promised to call for him, abouteleven, to drive him out to see some of her acquaintances at Milngavie?Well, it would be something to do; it would be a relief to get into thefresher airto get away from this hopeless and melancholy neighbourhood.Kate Menzies had high spirits; she could laugh away remorse anddiscontent and depression; she could make the hours go by somehow.  Andnow, as it was almost eleven, he would finish his dressing and be readyto set out when she called; as for breakfast, no thought of that enteredhis mind.Then he chanced to see something white lying on the flooranenvelopeperhaps this was a note from Kate, saying she was too busy thatmorning and could not come for him?  He went and took up the letter; andinstantlyas he regarded the address on ita kind of bewilderment,almost of fear, appeared on his face.  For well he knew Meenie'shandwriting: had he not pondered over every characteristic of ittheprecise small neatness of it, the long loops of the l's, the Germanlook of the capital R? And why should Meenie write to him?He opened the envelope and took out the bit of white heather that Meeniehad so hastily despatched: there was no message, not the smallest scrapof writing.  But was not this a messageand full of import, too; forsurely Meenie would not have adopted this means of communicating withhim at the mere instigation of an idle fancy?  And why should she havesent itand at this moment?  Had she heard, then?  Had any gossip abouthim reached Inver-Mudal?  And how much had she heard?  There was a kindof terror in his heart as he went slowly back to the window, and satedown there, still staring absently at this token that had been sent him,and trying hard to make out the meaning of it.  What was in Meenie'smind?  What was her intention?  Not merely to give him a sprig of whiteheather with wishes for good luck; there was more than that, as heeasily guessed; but how much more? And at first there was little of joyor gladness or gratitude in his thinking; there was rather fear, and awondering as to what Meenie had heard of him, and a sickening sense ofshame.  The white gentleness of the message did not strike him; it wasrather a reproacha recalling of other daysMeenie's eyes were regardinghim with proud indignationthis was all she had to say to him now.A man's voice was heard outside; the door was brusquely opened; JimmyLaidlaw appeared.'What, man, no ready yet?  Are ye just out o' your bed?  Where's yourbreakfast?  Dinna ye ken it's eleven o'clock?'Ronald regarded him with no friendly eye.  He wished to be alone; therewas much to think of; there was more in his mind than the prospect of arattling, devil-may-care drive out to Milngavie.'Is Kate below?' said he.'She is that.  Look sharp, man, and get on your coat. She doesna like tokeep the cob standing.''Look here, Laidlaw,' Ronald said, 'I wish ye would do me a good turn.Tell her thatthat I'll be obliged if she will excuse me; I'm no up tothe mark; ye'll have a merrier time of it if ye go by yourselves; therenow, like a good fellow, make it straight wi' her.''Do ye want her to jump doon ma throat?' retorted Mr. Laidlaw, with alaugh.  'I'll tak' no sic message. Come, come, man, pull yoursel'thegither.  What's the matter?  Hammer and tongs in your head?the freshair 'll drive that away.  Come along!''The last word's the shortest,' Ronald said stubbornly. 'I'm not going.Tell her not to take it illI'mI'm obliged to her, tell her''Indeed, I'll leave you and her to fight it out between ye,' saidLaidlaw.  'D'ye think I want the woman to snap my head off?'He left, and Ronald fondly hoped that they would drive away and leavehim to himself.  But presently there was a light tapping at the door.'Ronald!'He recognised the voice, and he managed to throw a coat over hisshouldersjust as Kate Menzies, without further ceremony, made herappearance.'What's this now?' exclaimed the buxom widowwho was as radiant andgood-natured and smartly dressed as ever'what does this daft fellowLaidlaw mean by bringing me a message like that?  I ken ye better,Ronald, my lad. Down in the mouth?take a hair o' the dog that bit ye.Here, see, I'll pour it out for ye.'She went straight to the bottle, uncorked it, and poured out about athird of a tumblerful of whisky.'Ronald, Ronald, ye're an ill lad to want this in the morning; but whatmust be, must; here, put some life into ye.  The day'll be just splendidoutside the town; and old Jaap's with us too; and I've got a hamper; andsomewhere or other we'll camp out, like a band of gypsies. Dinna fear,lad; I'll no drag ye into the MacDougals' house until we're on the wayback; and then it'll just be a cup o' tea and a look at the bairns, andon we drive again to the town.  What's the matter?  Come on, mylad!we'll have a try at "Cauld Kail in Aberdeen" when we get away fraethe houses.''Katie, lass,' said he, rather shamefacedly, 'I'mI'm sorry that Ipromisedbut I'll take it kind of ye to excuse meI'm no in the humoursomewayand ye'll be better by yourselves''Ay, and what good 'll ye do by pu'ing a wry mouth?' said shetauntingly.  '"The devil was ill, the devil a saint would be."  Here,man! it's no the best medicine, but it's better than none.'She took the whisky to him, and gave him a hearty slap on the shoulder.There was a gleam of sullen fire in his eye.'It's ill done of ye, woman, to drive a man against his will,' he said,and he retreated from her a step or two.'Oh,' said she proudly, and she threw the whisky into the coal-scuttle,and slammed the tumbler down on the table, for she had a temper too, 'ifye'll no be coaxed, there's them that will.  If that's what Long Johndoes for your temper, I'd advise you to change and try Talisker.  Goodmorning to ye, my braw lad, and thank ye for your courtesy.'She stalked from the room, and banged the door behind her when she left.But she was really a good-hearted kind of creature; before she hadreached the outer door she had recovered herself; and she turned andcame into the room again, a single step or so.'Ronald,' she said, in quite a different voice, 'it 'll no be for yourgood to quarrel wi' me'I wish for no quarrel wi' ye, Katie, woman''For I look better after ye than some o' them.  If ye'll no come for thedrive, will ye look in in the afternoon or at night, if it suits yebetter?  Seven o'clock, sayto show that there's no ill feeling betweenus.''Yes, I will,' said hemainly to get rid of her; for, indeed, he couldscarcely hear what she was saying to him for thinking of this strangeand mysterious message that had come to him from Meenie.And then, when she had gone, he rapidly washed and dressed, and wentaway out from the houseout by the Cowcaddens, and Shamrock Street, andWest Prince's Street, and over the Kelvin, and up to Hillhead, tocertain solitary thoroughfares he had discovered in his deviouswanderings; and all the time he was busy with various interpretations ofthis message from Meenie and of her reasons for sending it.  At first,as has been said, there was nothing for him but shame andself-abasement; this was a reproach; she had heard of the condition intowhich he had fallen; this was to remind him of what had been. Andindeed, it was now for the first time that he began to be conscious ofwhat that condition was.  He had fled to those boon-companions as a kindof refuge from the hopelessness of the weary hours, from the despairwith regard to the future that had settled down over his life.  He hadlaughed, drunk, smoked, and sung the time away, glad to forget.  Whenhaunting memories came to rebuke, then there was a call for anotherglass, another song.  Nay, he could even make apologies to himself whenthe immediate excitement was over.  Why should he do otherwise?  Thedreams conjured up by the Americans had no more charms for him.  Whyshould he work towards some future that had no interest for him?Death is the end of life; ah, whyShould life all labour be?And so Kate Menzies's dog-cart became a pleasant thing, as it rattledalong the hard stony roads; and many a merry glass they had at thewayside inns; and then home again in the evening to supper, and singing,and a good-night bacchanalian festival at the Harmony Club.  The hourspassed; he did not wish to think of what his life had become; enough if,for the time being, he could banish the horrors of the aching head, thehot pulse, the trembling hands.But if Meenie had heard of all this, how would it appear to her? and hemade no doubt that she had heard.  It was some powerful motive that hadprompted her to do this thing.  He knew that her sister had been makinginquiries about him; his brother's congregation was a hot-bed of gossip;if any news of him had been sent by that agency, no doubt it was theworst.  And still Meenie did not turn away from him with a shudder?  Hetook out the envelope again.  What could she mean?  Might he dare tothink it was thisthat, no matter what had happened, or what she hadheard, she still had some little faith in him, that the recollection oftheir old friendship was not all gone away? Reproach it might bebutperhaps also an appeal?  And if Meenie had still some interest in whathappened to him?He would go no farther than that.  It was characteristic of the manthat, even with this white token of goodwill and remembrance and goodwishes before his eyeswith this unusual message just sent to him fromone who was generally so shy and reservedhe permitted to himself nowildly daring fancies or bewildering hopes.  Nor had the majesty of theStuarts of Glengask and Orosay anything to do with this restraint: itwas the respect that he paid to Meenie herself.  And yetand yet thiswas a friendly token; it seemed to make the day whiter somehow; it waswith no ill-will she had been thinking of him when she gathered it fromone of the knolls at the foot of Clebrig or from the banks ofMudal-Water.  So white and fresh it was; it spoke of clear skies andsweet moorland winds: and there seemed to be the soft touch of herfingers still on it as she had pressed it into the envelope; and it wasMeenie's own small white hand that had written that rather trembling'Mr. Ronald Strang.'  A gentle message; he grew to think that therewas less of reproach in it; if she had heard evil tidings of him,perhaps she was sorry more than anything else; Meenie's eyes might havesorrow in them and pain, but angernever.  And her heartwell, surelyher heart could not have been set bitterly against him, or she would nothave sent him this mute little token of remembrance, as if to recall theolden days.And then he rose and drove against the bars that caged him in.  Whyshould the ghastly farce be played any longer?  Why should he go throughthat dull mechanical routine in which he had no interest whatever?  Letothers make what money they choose; let others push forward to anyfuture that they might think desirable; let them aim at being first inthe world's fight for wealth, and having saloon-carriages, andsteam-yachts on Lake Michigan, and cat-boats on Lake George: but as forhim, if Lord Ailine, now, would only let him go back to the littlehamlet in the northern wilds, and give him charge of the dogs again, andfreedom to ask Dr. Douglas to go with him for a turn at the mountainhares or for a day's salmon-fishing on the Mudalin short, if only hecould get back to his old life again, with fair skies over him, andfresh blowing winds around him, and wholesome blood running cheerilythrough his veins?  And then the chance, at some hour or other of thelong day, of meeting Meenie, and finding the beautiful, timid, Highlandeyes fixed on his: 'Are you going along to the inn, Ronald?' he couldalmost hear her say.  'And will you be so kind as to take these lettersfor me?'But contracted habits are not so easily shaken off as all that; and hewas sick and ill at ease; and when the hour came for him to go down andsee Kate Menzies and her friends, perhaps he was not altogether sorrythat he had made a definite promise which he was bound to keep.  He leftthe envelope, with its piece of white heather, at home.Nevertheless, he was rather dull, they thought; and there was somefacetious raillery over his not having yet recovered from the frolic ofthe previous night; with frequent invitations to take a hair of the dogthat had bitten him. Kate was the kindest; she had been a little alarmedby the definite repugnance he had shown in the morning; she was glad tobe friends with him again.  As for himwell, he was as good-natured asever; but rather absent in manner; for sometimes, amid all theirboisterous camaraderie, he absolutely forgot what they were saying;and in a kind of dream he seemed to see before him the sunlitStrath-Terry, and the blue waters of the loch, and Mudal's streamwinding through the solitary moorland wasteand a young girl therestooping to pick up something from the heather.*CHAPTER III.**A RESOLVE.*The days passed; no answer came to that mute message of hers; nay, howcould she expect any answer?  But these were terrible days to herofmental torture, and heart-searching, and unceasing and unsatisfiedlonging, and yearning, and pity.  And then out of all this confusion ofthinking and suffering there gradually grew up a clear and definiteresolve.  What if she were to make of that bit of white heather but anavant-courier?  What if she were herself to go to Glasgow, and seekhim out, and confront him, and take him by the hand?  She had notoverrated her old influence with him: well she knew that.  And how couldshe stand by idle and allow him to perish?  The token she had sent himmust have told him of her thinking of him; he would be prepared; perhapshe would even guess that she had come to Glasgow for his sake?  Well,she did not mind that much; Ronald would have gentle thoughts of her,whatever happened; and this need was far too sore and pressing to permitof timid and sensitive hesitations.One morning she went to her father's room and tapped at the door.'Come in!'She was rather pale as she entered.'Father,' she said, 'I would like to go to Glasgow for a while.'Her father turned in his chair and regarded her.'What's the matter with ye, my girl?' he said.  'You've not been lookingyourself at all for some time back, and these last few days you'vepractically eaten nothing.  And yet your mother declares there's nothingthe matter. Glasgow?  I dare say a change would do you goodcheer you upa bit, and that; butGlasgow?  More schooling, more fees, that would bethe chief result, I imagine; and that's what your mother's driving at.I think it's nonsense: you're a grown woman; you've learned everythingthat will ever be of any use to you.''I ought to have, any way, by this time,' Meenie said simply.  'Andindeed it is not for that, father.  II should like to go to Glasgow fora while.''There's Lady Stuart would have ye stay with them at Brighton for a fewweeks; but your mother seems to think you should go amongst them as akind of Mezzofantiit's precious little of that there's about SirAlexander, as I know well.  However, if you're not to go to them untilyou are polished out of all human shape and likeness, I suppose I mustsay nothing''But I would rather go and stay with Agatha, father,' the girl said.He looked at her again.'Well,' said he, 'I do think something must be done. It would be a finething for youyou of all creatures in the worldto sink into a hopelessanmic condition. Lassie, where's that eldritch laugh o' yours gone to?And I see you go dawdling along the roadyou that could beat a youngroedeer if you were to try.  Glasgow?well, I'll see what your mothersays.''Thank you, father,' she said, but she did not leave at once.  'I thinkI heard you say that Mr. Blair was going south on Monday,' she timidlysuggested.This Mr. Blair was a U.P. minister from Glasgow, who was taking awell-earned holiday up at Tonguefishing in the various lochs in thatneighbourhoodand who was known to the Douglases.'You're in a deuce of a hurry, Miss,' her father said, butgood-naturedly enough.  'You mean you could go to Glasgow under hisescort?''Yes.''Well, I will see what your mother saysI suppose she will be for makinga fuss over the necessary preparations.'But this promise and half permission had instantly brought to the girl akind of frail and wandering joy and hope; and there was a brief smile onher face as she said'Well, you know, father, if I have to get any things I ought to get themin Glasgow.  The preparations at Inver-Mudal can't take much time.''I will see what your mother thinks about it,' said the big,good-humoured Doctor, who was cautious about assenting to anything untilthe ruler and lawgiver of the house had been consulted.The time was short, but the chance of sending Meenie to Glasgow undercharge of the Rev. Mr. Blair was opportune; and Mrs. Douglas had noscruple about making use of this temporary concern on the part of herhusband about Meenie's health for the working out of her own ends.  Ofcourse the girl was only going away to be brightened up by a littlesociety.  The change of air might possibly do her good.  There could beno doubt she had been looking ill; and in her sister's house she wouldhave every attention paid her, quite as much as if she were in her ownhome.  All the same, Mrs. Douglas was resolved that this opportunity forfinally fitting Meenie for that sphere in which she hoped to see hermove should not be lost.  Agatha should have private instructions. AndAgatha herself was a skilled musician.  Moreover, some little societyofa kindmet at Mr. Gemmill's house; the time would not be entirely lost,even if a little economy in the matter of fees was practised, indeference to the prejudices and dense obtuseness of one who ought tohave seen more clearly his duty in this matterthat is to say, ofMeenie's father.And so it was that, when the Monday morning came round, Meenie had saidgood-bye to every one she knew, and was ready to set out for the south.Not that she was going by the mail.  Oh no, Mr. Murray would not hear ofthat, nor yet of her being sent in her father's little trap.  No; Mr.Murray placed his own large waggonette and a pair of horses at herdisposal; and when the mail-cart came along from Tongue, Mr. Blair'sluggage was quickly transferred to the more stately vehicle, andimmediately they started.  She did not look like a girl going away for aholiday.  She was pale rather, and silent; and Mr. Blair, who hadmemories of her as a bright, merry, clear-eyed lass, could notunderstand why she should be apparently so cast down at the thought ofleaving her father's home for a mere month or so.  As for old JohnMurray, he went into the inn, grumbling and discontented.'It is a strange thing,' he said,for he was grieved and offended attheir sending Meenie away, and he knew that Inver-Mudal would be a quitedifferent place with her not there,'a strange thing indeed to send ayoung girl away to Glasgow to get back the roses into her cheeks.  Ay,will she get them there?  A strange thing indeed.  And her father adoctor too.  It is just a teffle of a piece of nonsense.'The worthy minister, on the other hand, was quite delighted to have sopretty a travelling companion with him on that long journey to thesouth; and he looked after her with the most anxious paternalsolicitude, and from time to time he would try to cheer her with therecital of ancient Highland anecdotes that he had picked up during hisfishing excursions.  But he could see that the girl was preoccupied; hereyes were absent and her manner distraught; sometimes her colour cameand went in a curious way, as if some sudden fancy had sent a tremor toher heart.  Then, as they drew near to the great cityit was apallid-clear morning, with some faint suggestions of blue overhead thatgave the wan landscape an almost cheerful lookshe was obviouslysuffering from nervous excitement; her answers to him were inconsequent,though she tried her bravest to keep up the conversation. The good manthought he would not bother her.  No doubt it would be a greatchangefrom the quiet of Inver-Mudal to the roar and bustle of the vastcity; and no doubt the mere sight of hundreds and hundreds of strangerswould in itself be bewildering.  Meenie, as he understood, had been inGlasgow before, but it was some years ago, and she had not had a longexperience of it; in any case, she would naturally be restless andnervous in looking forward to such a complete change in her way of life.As they slowed into the station, moreover, he could not help observinghow anxiously and eagerly she kept glancing from stranger to stranger,as they passed them on the platform.'There will be somebody waiting for you, Miss Meenie?' he said at aventure.'No, no,' she answered, somewhat hurriedly and shame-facedly as hethoughtand the good minister was puzzled; 'Agatha wrote that Mr.Gemmill would be at the warehouse, andand she would be busy in thehouse on a Monday morning, and I was just to take a cab and come on toQueen's Crescent.  Oh!  I shall manage all right,' she added, with somebravado.And yet, when they had seen to their luggage, and got along to theplatform outside the station, she seemed too bewildered to heed what wasgoing on.  Mr. Blair called a cab and got her boxes put on the top; butshe was standing there by herself, looking up and down, and regardingthe windows of the houses opposite in a kind of furtive andhalf-frightened way.'This is Port Dundas Road?' she said to the minister (for had notMaggie, in her voluminous communications about Ronald, described theexact locality of his lodging, and the appearance of the station fromhis room?).'It is.'She hesitated for a second or two longer; and then, recalling herselfwith an effort, she thanked the minister for all his kindness, and badehim good-bye, and got into the cab.  Of course she kept both windowsdown, so that she could command a view of both sides of thethoroughfares as the man drove her away along the Cowcaddens and the NewCity Road.  But alas! how was she ever to find Ronaldby accident, asshe had hopedin that continuous crowd?  She had pictured to herself hersuddenly meeting him face to face; and she would read in his eyes howmuch he remembered of Inver-Mudal and the olden days.  But among thismultitude, how was such a thing possible?  And then it was so necessarythat this meeting should be observed by no third person.However, these anxious doubts and fears were forcibly driven from herhead by her arrival at Queen's Crescent, and the necessity of meetingthe emergencies of the moment.  She had but a half recollection of thissecluded little nook, with its semicircle of plain, neat, well-kepthouses, looking so entirely quiet and respectable; and its pretty littlegarden, with its grass-plots, and its flower-plots, and its trim walksand fountainall so nice and neat and trim, and at this minute lookingquite cheerful in the pallid sunshine.  And here, awaiting her at thejust opened door, was her sister Agathaa sonsy, sufficientlygood-looking young matron, who had inherited her buxom proportions fromher father, but had got her Highland eyes, which were like Meenie's,from her mother.  And also there were a smaller Agathaa self-importantlittle maiden of tenand two younger children; and as the advent of thispretty young aunt from Sutherlandshire was of great interest to them,there was a babble of inquiries and answers as they escorted her intothe house.'And such a surprise to hear you were coming,' her sister was saying.'We little expected itbut ye're none the less welcomeand Walter's justquite set up about it. Ay, and ye're not looking so well, my fathersays?let's see.'She took her by the shoulders and wheeled her to the light.  But, ofcourse, the girl was flushed with the excitement of her arrival, andpleased with the attentions of the little people, so that for the momentthe expression of her face was bright enough.'There's not much wrong,' said the sister, 'but I don't wonder at yourbeing dull in yon dreadful hole.  And I suppose there's no chance ofmoving now.  If my father had only kept to Edinburgh or Glasgow, and goton like anybody else, we might all have been together, and among friendsand acquaintances; but it was aye the samegive him the chance of aplace where there was a gun or a fishing-rod handy, and that was enough.Well, well, Meenie, we must wake ye up a bit if you've been feelingdull; and Walterhe's as proud as a peacock that you're come; I declareit's enough to make any other woman than myself jealous, the way heshows your portrait to anybody and everybody that comes to the house;and I had a hint from him this morning that any bit things ye mightneedmother's letter only came on Saturdaythat they were to be apresent from him, and there's nothing stingy about Wat, though I say itwho shouldn't.  And you'll have to share Aggie's bed for a night or twountil we have a room got ready for you.''If I had only known that I was going to put you about, Agatha''Put us about, you daft lassie!' the elder sister exclaimed. 'Come away,and I'll show you where your things will have to be stored for thepresent.  And my father says there are to be no finishing lessons, oranything of that kind, for a while yet; you're to walk about and amuseyourself; and we've a family-ticket for the Botanic Gardensyou can takea book there or some knitting; and then you'll have to help me in thehouse, for Walter will be for showing you off as his Highlandsister-in-law, and we'll have plenty of company.'And so the good woman rattled on; and how abundantly and secretly gladwas Meenie that not a word was said of Ronald Strang!  She had feltguilty enough when she entered the house; she had come on a secreterrand that she dared not disclose; and one or two things in hersister's letters had convinced her that there were not likely to be veryfriendly feelings towards Ronald in this little domestic circle.  Butwhen they had gone over almost every conceivable topic, and not a singlequestion had been asked about Ronald, nor any reference even made tohim, she felt immensely relieved.  To them, then, he was clearly of noimportance.  Probably they had forgotten that she had once or twiceasked if he had called on them.  Or perhaps her sister had taken it forgranted that the piece of news she had sent concerning him wouldeffectually and for ever crush any interest in him that Meenie may havefelt. Anyhow, his name was not even mentioned; and that was so far well.But what a strange sensation was thiswhen in the afternoon she went outfor a stroll with the smaller Agathato feel that at any moment, at theturning of any corner, she might suddenly encounter Ronald.  Thatever-moving crowd had the profoundest interest for her; these rathergrimy streets a continuous and mysterious fascination.  Of course thelittle Agatha, when they went forth from the house, was for going up tothe West End Park or out by Billhead to the Botanic Gardens, so that thepretty young aunt should have a view of the beauties of Glasgow.  ButMeenie had no difficulty in explaining that green slopes and trees andthings of that kind had no novelty for her, whereas crowded streets andshops and the roar of cabs and carriages had; and so they turnedcity-wards when they left the house, and went away in by CambridgeStreet and Sauchiehall Street to Buchanan Street.  And was this the way,then, she asked herself (and she was rather an absent companion for herlittle niece), that Ronald would take on leaving his lodgings to getover to the south side of the city, where, as she understood from hissister's letters, lived the old forester who was superintending hisstudies?  But there were so many people here!and all seeminglystrangers to each other; scarcely any two or three of them stopping tohave a chat together; and all of them apparently in such a hurry. ArgyllStreet was even worse; indeed, she recoiled from that tumultuousthoroughfare; and the two of them turned north again.  The lamplighterwas beginning his rounds; here and there an orange star gleamed in thepallid atmosphere; here and there a shop window glowed yellow. When theygot back to Queen's Crescent they found that Mr. Gemmill had returned;it was his tea-time; and there was a talk of the theatre for the olderfolk.Well, she did not despair yet.  For one thing, she had not been anxiousto meet Ronald during that first plunge into the great city, for Agathawas with her.  But that was merely because the little girl had obtaineda holiday in honour of her aunt's coming; thereafter she went to schoolevery morning; moreover, the household happened to be a maidservantshort, and Mrs. Gemmill was busy, so that Meenie was left to do prettymuch as she liked, and to go about alone.  And her walks did not takeher much to the Botanic Gardens, nor yet to the West End Park and KelvinGrove; far rather she preferred to go errands for her sister, and oftenthese would take her in by Sauchiehall Street and the top of BuchananStreet; and always her eyes were anxious and yet timorous, seeking andyet half-fearing to find.  But where was Ronald?  She tried differenthours.  She grew to know every possible approach to that lodging in thePort Dundas Road.  And she had schooled herself now so that she couldsearch long thoroughfares with a glance that was apparently carelessenough; and she had so often pictured to herself their meeting, that sheknew she would not exhibit too great a surprise nor make too open aconfession of her joy.And at last her patient waiting was rewarded.  It was in Renfield Streetthat she suddenly caught sight of hima long way off he was, but comingtowards her, and all unconscious of her being there.  For a moment herschooling of herself gave way somewhat; for her heart was beating sowildly as almost to choke her; and she went on with her eyes fixed onthe ground, wondering what she should say, wondering if he would findher face grown paler than it used to be, wondering what he would thinkof her having sent him the bit of white heather.  And then she forcedherself to raise her eyes; and it was at the very same instant that hecaught sight of herthough he was yet some distance offand for thebriefest moment she saw his strange and startled look.  But what wasthis?  Perhaps he fancied she had not seen him; perhaps he had reasonsfor not wishing to be seen; at all events, after that one swiftrecognition of her, he had suddenly slunk awaydown some lane orotherand when she went forward, in rather a blind and bewilderedfashion, behold! there was no Ronald there at all.  She lookedaroundwith a heart as if turned to stonebut there was no trace of him.And then she went on, rather proudlyor perhaps, rather, trying to feelproud and hurt; but there was a gathering mist coming into her eyes; andshe scarcely knewnor caredwhither she was walking.*CHAPTER IV.**A BOLDER STEP.*As for him, he slunk aside hurriedly and all abashed and dismayed.  Hedid not pause until he was safe away from any pursuit; and there was alowering expression on his face, and his hand shook a little.  He couldonly hope that she had not seen him.  Instantly he had seen her, he knewthat he dared not meet the beautiful clear eyes, that would regard him,and perhaps mutely ask questions of him, even if there was no indignantreproach in them.  For during these past few days he had gradually beenbecoming conscious of the squalor and degradation into which he hadsunk; and sometimes he would strive to raise himself out of that; andsometimes he would sink back despairing, careless of what might becomeof him or his poor affairs.  But always there was there in his room thatmystic white token that Meenie had sent him; and at least it kept himthinkinghis conscience was not allowed to slumber; and sometimes itbecame so strong an appeal to himthat is to say, he read into themessage such wild and daring and fantastic possibilitiesthat he wouldonce more resume that terrible struggle with the iron bands of habitthat bound him.'What is the matter wi' Ronald?' Kate Menzies asked of her cronies.  'Hehasna been near the house these three or four days.''I'm thinking he's trying to earn the Blue Ribbon,' said old Mr. Jaap.'And no thriving weel on't, poor lad,' said Jimmy Laidlaw.  'Down in themouth's no the word.  He's just like the ghost o' himsel'.''I tell ye what, Mistress,' said the big skipper, who was contemplatingwith much satisfaction a large beaker of hot rum and water, 'the bestthing you could do would be just to take the lad in hand, and marry himright off.  He would have somebody to look after him, and so would you;as handsome a couple as ever stepped along Jamaica Street, I'll take myoath.'The buxom widow laughed and blushed; but she was bound to protest.'Na, na, Captain, I ken better than that.  I'm no going to throw away abusiness like this on any man.  I'll bide my ain mistress for a whilelonger, if ye please.'And then mother Patersonwho had a handy gift of facileacquiescencestruck in'That's right, Katie dear!  Ye're sich a wise woman. To think ye'd throwaway a splendid place like this, and a splendid business, on any man,and make him maister!  And how long would it be before he ate and drankye out o' house and ha'?set him up with a handsome wife and a splendidbusiness thrown at his heed, and scarcely for the asking! Na, na, Katie,woman, ye ken your own affairs better than that; ye're no for any one tocome in and be maister here.''But I'm concerned about the lad,' said Kate Menzies, a little absently.'He met wi' none but friends here.  He might fa' into worse hands.''Gang up yersel', Mistress, and hae a talk wi' him,' said the skipperboldly.Kate Menzies did not do that; but the same evening she wrote Ronald abrief note.  And very well she could write tooin a dashing, freehandwriting; and gilt-edged was the paper, and rose-pink was theenvelope.'DEAR RONALDSurely there is no quarrel between us. If I have offendedyou, come and tell me; don't go away and sulk.  If I have done or saidanything to offend you, I will ask your pardon.  Can I do anything morethan that?  Your cousin and friend,'KATE MENZIES.'Of course he had to answer such an appeal in person: he went down thenext morning.'Quarrel, woman?  What put that into your head?  If there had beenanything of that kind, I would have told you fast enough; I'm not one ofthe sulking kind.''Well, I'm very glad to ken we're just as good friends as before,' saidKate, regarding him, 'but I'm not glad to see the way ye're looking,Ronald, my lad.  Ye're not yourself at all, my manwhat's got yewhitey-faced, limp, shaky-looking like that?  See here.'She went to the sideboard, and the next instant there was on the table abottle of champagne, with a couple of glasses, and a flask of angosturabitters.'No, no, Katie, lass, I will not touch a drop,' said he: and he rose andtook his cap in his hand.'You will not?' she said.  'You will not?  Why, man, you're illyou'reill, I tell ye.  It's medicine!'He gripped her by the hand, and took the bottle from her, and put itdown on the table.'If I'm ill, I deserve to be, and that's the fact, lass. Let belet be,woman; I'm obliged to yesome other timesome other time.''Then if you winna, I will,' she said, and she got hold of the bottleand opened it and poured out a glass of the foaming fluid.'And dinna I ken better what's good for ye than ye do yersel'?' said sheboldly.  'Ay, if ye were ruled by me, and drank nothing but what ye getin this house, there would be little need for ye to be frightened atwhat a wean might drink.  Ye dinna ken your best friends, my lad.''I know you wish me weel, Katie, lass,' said he, for he did not wish toappear ungrateful, 'but I'm better without it.''Yes,' said she tauntingly.  'Ye're better without sitting up a' nightwi' a lot o' roystering fellows, smoking bad tobacco and drinking badwhisky.  What mak's your face sae white?  It's fusel-oil, if ye maunken.  Here, Ronald, what canna hurt a woman canna hurt a man o' yourbuildtry it, and see if ye dinna feel better.'She put a good dash of bitters into the glass, and poured out thechampagne, and offered it to him.  He did not wish to offend her; and hehimself did not believe the thing could hurt him; he took the glass andsipped about a teaspoonful, and then set it down.Kate Menzies looked at him, and laughed aloud, and took him by theshoulders and pushed him back into his chair.'There's a man for ye!  Whatna young ladies' seminary have ye beenbrought up at?''I'll tell ye, lass,' he retorted.  'It was one where they taught folkno to force other folk to drink against their will.''Then it was different frae the one where I was brought up, for there,when the doctor ordered anybody to take medicine, they were made to takeit.  And here's yours,' she said; and she stood before him with theglass in her hand.  She was good-natured; it would have been ungraciousto refuse; he took the glass from her and drank off the contents.Now a glass of champagne, even with the addition of a little angosturabitters, cannot be called a very powerful potion to those accustomed tosuch things; but the fact was that he had not touched a drop of anyalcoholic fluid for two days; and this seemed to go straight to thebrain. It produced a slight, rather agreeable giddiness; a sense ofcomfort was diffused throughout the system; he was not so anxious to getaway.  And Kate began talkingupbraiding him for thinking that shewanted to see him otherwise than well and in his usual health, anddeclaring that if he were guided by her, there would be no need for himto torture himself with total abstinence, and to reduce himself to thisabject state.  The counsel (which was meant in all honesty) fell onyielding ears; Kate brought some biscuits, and filled herself outanother glass.'That's what it is,' she said boldly, 'if you would be ruled by myadvice there would be no shaking hands and white cheeks for ye.  Feelingbetter, are ye?ay, I warrant ye!  Here, man, try this.'She filled his glass again, adding a good dose of bitters.'This one I will, but not a drop more,' said he.  'Ye're a desperatecreature, lass, for making folk comfortable.''I ken what's the matter wi' you better than ye ken yoursel', Ronald,'said she, looking at him shrewdly.  'You're disappointedyou're out o'heartbecause thae fine American friends o' yours hae forgotten you; andyou've got sick o' this new work o' yours; and you've got among a lot o'wild fellows that are leading ye to the devil.  Mark my words.Americans!  Better let a man trust to his ain kith and kin.''Well, Katie, lass, I maun say this, that ye've just been ower kind tome since ever I came to Glasgow.''Another glass, Ronald''Not one dropthank ye'and this time he rose with the definite resolveto get away, for even these two glasses had caused a swimming in hishead, and he knew not how much more he might drink if he stayed.'Better go for a long walk, then,' said Kate, 'and come back at threeand have dinner with us.  I'll soon put ye on your legs againtrust tome.'But when he went out into the open air, he found himself so giddy andhalf-dazed and bewildered that, instead of going away for any long walk,he thought he would go back home and lie down.  He felt less happy now.Why had he taken this accursed thing after all his resolves?And then it wasas he went up Renfield Streetthat he caught his firstglimpse of Meenie.  No wonder he turned and slunk rapidly awayanxiousto hide anywherehoping that Meenie had not seen him.  And what astrange thing was thisMeenie in Glasgow town!  Oh, if he could only befor a single day as once he had beenas she had known him in the happytimes when life went by like a laugh and a songhow wonderful it wouldbe to go along these thoroughfares hoping every moment to catch sight ofher face!  A dull town?no, a radiant town, with music in the air, andjoy and hope shining down from the skies!  But nowhe was a coweringfugitivesick in body and sick in mindtrembling with the excitement ofthis sudden meetingand anxious above all other things that he shouldget back to the seclusion of his lodging unseen.Well, he managed that, at all events; and there he sate down, wonderingover this thing that had just happened. Meenie in Glasgow town!and why?And why had she sent him the white heather?  Nay, he could not doubt butthat she had heard; and that this was at once a message of reproach andan appeal; and what answer had he to give supposing that some day orother he should meet her face to face?  How could he win back to hisformer state, so that he should not be ashamed to meet those clear, kindeyes?  If there were but some penance nowno matter what suffering itentailedthat would obliterate these last months and restore him tohimself, how gladly would he welcome that!  But it was not only thebodily sicknesshe believed he could mend that; he had still a finephysique; and surely absolute abstention from stimulants, no matter withwhat accompanying depression, would in time give him back his healthitwas mental sickness and hopelessness and remorse that had to be cured;and how was that to be attempted?  Or why should he attempt it? Whatcare had he for the future?  To be sure, he would stop drinking,definitely; and he would withdraw himself from those wild companions;and he would have a greater regard for his appearance; so that, if heshould by chance meet Meenie face to face, he would not have to bealtogether so ashamed.  But after?  When she had gone away again?  Forof course he assumed that she was merely here on a visit.And all this time he was becoming more and more conscious of how far hehad fallenof the change that had come over himself and hiscircumstances in these few months; and a curious fancy got into his headthat he would like to try to realise what he had been like in thoseformer days.  He got out his blotting-pad of fragmentsnot thosededicated to Meenie, that had been carefully put asideand about thevery first of them that he chanced to light upon, when he looked downthe rough lines, made him exclaim'God bless me, was I like thatand no longer ago than last January?'The piece was called 'A Winter Song'; and surely the man who could writein this gay fashion had an abundant life and joy and hope in his veins,and courage to face the worst bleakness of the winter, and a gladlooking-forward to the coming of the spring?Keen blows the wind upon Clebrig's side,And the snow lies thick on the heather;And the shivering hinds are glad to hideAway from the winter weather.Chorus: But soon the birds will begin to sing,And we will sing too, my dear,To give good welcoming to the springIn the primrose time o' the year!Hark how the black lake, torn and tost,Thunders along its shores;And the burn is hard in the grip of the frost,And white, snow-white are the moors.Chorus: But soon the birds will begin to sing, etc.O then the warm west winds will blow,And all in the sunny weather,It's over the moorlands we will go,You and I, my love, together.Chorus: And then the birds will begin to sing,And we will sing too, my dear,To give good welcoming to the spring,In the primrose-time o' the year!Why, surely the blood must have been dancing in his brain when he wrotethat  and the days white and clear around him; and life merry andhopeful enough.  And now? Well, it was no gladdening thing to think of:he listlessly put away the book.And then he rose and went and got a pail of water and thrust his headinto thatfor he was glad to feel that this muzzy sensation was going;and thereafter he dried and brushed his hair with a little more carethan usual; and put on a clean collar.  Nay, he began to set the littleroom to rightsand his life in Highland lodges had taught him how to dothat about as well as any woman could; and he tried to brighten thewindow panes a little, to make the place look more cheerful; and hearranged the things on the mantel-shelf in better orderwith the bit ofwhite heather in the middle.  Then he came to his briar-root pipe; andpaused.  He took it up, hesitating.'Yes, my friend, you must go too,' he said, with firm lips; and hedeliberately broke it, and tossed the fragments into the grate.And then he remembered that it was nearly three o'clock, and as hefeared that Kate Menzies might send some one of her friends to fetchhim, or even come for him herself, he put on his cap, and took a stickin his hand, and went out.  In half an hour or so he had left the citybehind him and was lost in that melancholy half-country that lies aroundit on the north; but he cared little now how the landscape looked; hewas wondering what had brought Meenie to Glasgow town, and whether shehad seen him, and what she had heard of him.  And at Inver-Mudal too?Well, they might think the worst of him there if they chose.  But hadMeenie heard?He scarcely knew how far he went; but in the dusk of the evening he wasagain approaching the city by the Great Western Road; and as he camenearer to the houses, he found that the lamps were lit, and the greattown settling down into the gloom of the night.  Now he feared nodetection; and so it was that when he arrived at Melrose Street hepaused there.  Should he venture into Queen's Crescent?it was but astone's throw away.  For he guessed that Meenie must be staying with hersister; and he knew the address that she had given him, though he hadnever called; nay, he had had the curiosity, once or twice in passing,to glance at the house; and easily enough he could now make it out if hechose.  He hesitated for a second or two; then he stealthily made hisway along the little thoroughfare; and entered the crescentbut keepingto the opposite side from Mrs. Gemmill's dwellingand there quietlywalked up and down.  He could see the windows well enough; they were allof them lit; and the house seemed warm and comfortable; Meenie would beat home there, and among friends, and her bright laugh would be heardfrom room to room.  Perhaps they had company toosince all the windowswere ablaze; rich folk, no doubt, for the Gemmills were themselveswell-to-do people; and Meenie would be made much of by these strangers,and they would come round her, and the beautiful Highland eyes would beturned towards them, and they would hear her speak in her quiet, gentle,quaint way.  Nor was there any trace of envy or jealousy in this man'scompositionoutcast as he now deemed himself.  Jealousy of Meenie?why,he wished the bountiful heavens to pour their choicest blessings uponher, and the winds to be for ever soft around her, and all sweet andgracious things to await her throughout her girlhood and her womanhoodand her old age.  No; it did not trouble him that these rich folk werefortunate enough to be with her, to listen to her, to look at the clear,frank eyes; it might have troubled him had he thought that they mightnot fully understand the generous rose-sweetness of her nature, norfully appreciate her straightforward, unconscious simplicity, nor besufficiently kind to her.  And it was scarcely necessary to considerthat; of course they all of them would be kind to her, for how couldthey help it?But his guess that they might be entertaining friends was wrong.  By andby a cab drove up; in a few minutes the door was opened; he ventured todraw a little nearer; and then he saw three figuresone of them almostassuredly Meeniecome out and enter the vehicle.  They drove off; nodoubt they were going to some concert or theatre, he thought; and he wasglad that Meenie was being amused and entertained so; and was amongfriends.  And as for himself?'Well,' he was inwardly saying, as he resumed his walk homeward, 'thedreams that look so fine when one is up among the hills are knocked onthe head sure enough when one comes to a town.  I'll have no more to dowith these books; nor with the widow Menzies and her friends either.To-morrow morning I'm off to the recruiting-sergeantthat's the bestthing for me now.'By the time he had got home he was quite resolved upon this.  But therewas a note lying there on the table for him. 'That woman again,' he saidto himself.  'Katie, lass, I'm afraid you and I must part, but I hopewe'll part good friends.'And then his eyes grew suddenly startled.  He took up the note, staringat the outside, apparently half afraid. And then he opened it andreadbut in a kind of wild and breathless bewildermentthese two orthree lines, written in rather a shaky hand'DEAR RONALDI wish to see you.  Would it trouble you to be at thecorner of Sauchiehall Street and Renfield Street to-morrow morning ateleven?I will not detain you more than a few minutes.  Yours sincerely,'MEENIE DOUGLAS.'There was not much sleep for him that night.*CHAPTER V.**A MEETING.*Indeed there was no sleep at all for him that night.  He knew not whatthis summons might mean; and all the assurance and self-confidence offormer days was gone now; he was nervous, distracted, easily alarmed;ready to imagine evil things; and conscious that he was in no fit stateto present himself before Meenie.  And yet he never thought of slinkingaway.  Meenie desired to see him, and that was enough.  Always and everhe had been submissive to her slightest wish.  And if it were merely toreproach him, to taunt him with his weakness and folly, that she had nowsent for him, he would go all the same.  He deserved that and more.  Ifonly it had been some one elsenot Meeniewhose resolute clear eyes hehad to meet!That brief interview overand then for the Queen's shilling: this waswhat was before him now, and the way seemed clear enough.  But sounnerved was he that the mere idea of having to face this timid girlmade him more and more restless and anxious; and at last, towards threeo'clock in the morning, he, not having been to bed at all, opened thedoor and stole down the stair and went out into the night.  The blackheavens were pulsating from time to time with a lurid red sent over fromthe ironworks in the south; somewhere there was the footfall of apoliceman unseen; the rest was darkness and a terrible silence.  Hewandered away through the lonely streets, he scarcely knew whither.  Hewas longing that the morning should come, and yet dreading its approach.He reached the little thoroughfare that leads into Queen's Crescent: buthe held on his way without turning aside; it was not for this poortrembling ghost and coward to pass under her window, with 'Sleep dwellupon thine eyes, peace in thy breast' as his unspoken benediction.  Heheld on his way towards the open country, wandering quite aimlessly, andbusy only with guesses and forebodings and hopeless desires that hemight suddenly find before him the dark-rolling waters of Lethe, andplunge into them, and wash away from him all knowledge and recollectionof the past. When at length he turned towards the city, the gray dawnwas breaking in the dismal skies; the first of the milk-carts cameslowly crawling into the town; and large waggons laden with vegetablesand the like.  He got back to his lodgings; threw himself on the bed;and there had an hour or two of broken and restless sleep.When he awoke he went quickly to the window.  The skies were heavy;there was a dull drizzle in the thick atmosphere; the pavements werewet.  It was with a sudden sense of relief that he saw what kind of aday it was. Of course Meenie would never think of coming out on so wetand miserable a morning.  He would keep the appointment, doubtless; shewould not appeartaking it for granted he would not expect her; andthenthen for the recruiting-sergeant and a final settlement of allthese ills and shames.  Nevertheless he dressed himself with scrupulousneatness; and brushed and rebrushed his clothes; and put on hisdeerstalker's capfor the sake of old days. And then, just as he wasleaving, he took a little bit of the white heather, and placed it in hiswaistcoat pocket; if the talisman had any subtle power whatever, all thegood luck that he could wish for was to find Meenie not too bitter inher scorn.He made his way to the corner of Sauchiehall Street some little timebefore the appointed hour.  But it was actually raining now; of courseMeenie would not come. So he idly paced up and down; staring absently atthe shop windows; occasionally looking along the street, but with nogreat expectation; and thinking how well content and satisfied withthemselves these people seemed to be who were now hurrying by undertheir streaming umbrellas. His thoughts went far afield.VimieraSalamancaCiudad RodrigoBalaklavaAlmaLucknowAlumbaghthesewere the names and memories that were in his head. An old schoolcompanion of his own had got the V.C. for a conspicuous act of daring atthe storming of the Redan, and if that were not likely to be his proudfate, at least in this step he was resolved upon he would find safetyand a severance from degrading bonds, and a final renunciation of futileambitions and foolish and idle dreams.He was looking into a bookseller's window.  A timid hand touched hisarm.'Ronald!'And oh! the sudden wonder and the thrill of finding before him thosebeautiful, friendly, glad eyes, so true, so frank, so full of allwomanly tenderness and solicitude, and abundant and obvious kindness!Where was the reproach of them?  They were full of a kind of half-hiddenjoytimid and reluctant, perhaps, a littlebut honest and clear andunmistakable; and as for himwell, his breath was clean taken away bythe surprise, and by the sudden revulsion of feeling from a listlessdespair to the consciousness that Meenie was still his friend; and allhe could do was to take the gentle hand in both of his and hold it fast.'II heard that you were notnot very well, Ronald,' she managed to say.And then the sound of her voicethat brought with it associations ofyearsseemed to break the spell that was on him.'Bless me, Miss Douglas,' he said, 'you will get quite wet!  Will younot put up your umbrellaoror take shelter somewhere?''Oh, I do not mind the rain,' she said, and there was a kind oftremulous laugh about her lips, as if she were trying to appear veryhappy indeed.  'I do not mind the rain.  We did not heed the rain muchat Inver-Mudal, Ronald, when there was anything to be done.  Andand soglad I am to see you!  It seems so long a time since you left theHighlands.''Ay; and it has been a bad time for me,' he said; and now he wasbeginning to get his wits together again.  He could not keep MissDouglas thus standing in the wet. He would ask her why she had sent forhim; and then he would bid her good-bye and be off; but with a glad,glad heart that he had seen her even for these few seconds.'And there are so many things to be talked over after so long a time,'said she; 'I hope you have a little while to spare, Ronald''But to keep you in the rain, Miss Douglas''Oh, but this will do,' said she (and whatever her inward thoughts were,her speech was blithe enough).  'See, I will put up the umbrella, andyou will carry it for meit is not the first time, Ronald, that you andI have had to walk in the rain together, and without any umbrella.  Anddo you know why I do not care for the rain?' she added, glancing at himagain with the frank, affectionate eyes; 'it's because I am so glad tofind you looking not so ill after all, Ronald.''Not so ill, maybe, as I deserve to be,' he answered; but he took theumbrella and held it over her; and they went down Renfield Street alittle way and then into West Regent Street; and if she did not put herhand on his arm, at least she was very close to him, and the thrill ofthe touch of her dress was magnetic and strange.  Strange, indeed; andstrange that he should find himself walking side by side with Meeniethrough the streets of Glasgow town; and listening mutely and humbly thewhile to all her varied talk of what had happened since he leftInver-Mudal.  Whatever she had heard of him, it seemed to be her wish toignore that.  She appeared to assume that their relations to each othernow were just as they had been in former days. And she was quite brightand cheerful and hopeful; how could he know that the first glance at hishaggard face had struck like a dagger to her heart?Moreover, the rain gradually ceased; the umbrella was lowered; a lightwest wind was quietly stirring; and by and by a warmer light began tointerfuse itself through the vaporous atmosphere.  Nay, by the time theyhad reached Blythswood Square, a pallid sunshine was clearly shining onthe wet pavements and door-steps and house-fronts; and far overhead, anddimly seen through the mysteriously moving pall of mist and smoke, therewere faint touches of blue, foretelling the opening out to a joyfullerday.  The wide square was almost deserted; they could talk to each otheras they chose; though, indeed, the talking was mostly on her side.Something, he scarcely knew what, kept him silent and submissive; buthis heart was full of gratitude towards her; and from time to timeforhow could he help it?some chance word or phrase of appeal would bringhim face to face with Meenie's eyes.So far she had cunningly managed to avoid all reference to his ownaffairs, so that he might get accustomed to this friendly conversation;but at length she said'And now about yourself, Ronald?''The less said the better,' he answered.  'I wish that I had never cometo this town.''What?' she said, with a touch of remonstrance in her look.  'Have youso soon forgotten the fine prospects you started away with?  Surely not!Why, it was only the other day I had a letter from Miss Hodsonthe youngAmerican lady, you rememberand she was asking all about you, andwhether you had passed the examination yet; and she said her father andherself were likely to come over next spring, and hoped to hear you hadgot the certificate.'He seemed to pay no heed to this news.'I wish I had never left Inver-Mudal,' he said.  'I was content there;and what more can a man wish for anywhere? It's little enough of thatI've had since I came to this town. But for whatever has happened to me,I've got myself to blame; andand I beg your pardon, Miss Douglas, Iwill not bother you with any poor concerns of mine''But if I wish to be bothered?' she said quickly.  'Ronald, do you knowwhy I have come from the Highlands?'Her face was blushing a rosy red; but her eyes were steadfast and clearand kind; and she had stopped in her walk to confront him.'I heard the news of youyes, I heard the news,' she continued; and itwas his eyes, not hers, that were downcast; 'and I knew you would domuch for meat least, I thought so,and I said to myself that if I wereto go to Glasgow, and find you, and ask you for my sake to give me apromise''I know what ye would say, Miss Douglas,' he interposed, for she wasdreadfully embarrassed.  'To give up the drink.  Well, it's easilypromised and easily done, nowindeed, I've scarce touched a drop sinceever I got the bit of heather you sent me.  It was a kind thing to thinkofmaybe I'm making too bold to think it was you that sent it''I knew you would know that it was I that sent itI meant you to know,'she said simply.'It was never any great love of the drink that drove me that way,' hesaid.  'I think it was that I might be able to forget for a while.''To forget what, Ronald?' she asked, regarding him.'That ever I was such a fool as to leave the only people I cared for,'he answered frankly, 'and come away here among strangers, and bindmyself to strive for what I had no interest in.  But bless me, MissDouglas, to think I should keep ye standing heretalking about my pooraffairs''Ronald,' she said calmly, 'do you know that I have come all the way toGlasgow to see you and to talk about your affairs and nothing else; andyou are not going to hurry away?  Tell me about yourself.  What are youdoing?  Are you getting on with your studies?'He shook his head.'No, no.  I have lost heart that way altogether.  Many's the time I havethought of writing to Lord Ailine, and asking to be taken back, if itwas only to look after the dogs. I should never have come to this town;and now I am going away from it, for good.''Going away?  Where?' she said, rather breathlessly.'I want to make a clean break off from the kind of life I have beenleading,' said he, 'and I know the surest way. I mean to enlist into oneof the Highland regiments that's most likely to be ordered off onforeign service.''Ronald!'She seized his hand and held it.'Ronald, you will not do that!'Well, he was startled by the sudden pallor of her face; and bewilderedby the entreaty so plainly visible in the beautiful eyes; and perhaps hedid not quite know how he answered.  But he spoke quickly.'Oh, of course I will not do that,' he said, 'of course I will not dothat, Miss Douglas, so long as you are in Glasgow.  How could I?  Why,the chance of seeing you, even at a distancefor a moment evenI wouldwait days for that.  When I made up my mind to enlist, I had no thoughtthat I might ever have the chance of seeing you. Oh no; I will waituntil you have gone back to the Highlandshow could I go away fromGlasgow and miss any single chance of seeing you, if only for a moment?''Yes, yes,' she said eagerly, 'you will do nothing until then, anyway;and in the meantime I shall see you often'His face lighted up with surprise.'Will you be so kind as that?' he said quickly.  And then he dropped herhand.  'No, no.  I am so bewildered by the gladness of seeing youthatthat I forgot.  Let me go my own way.  You were always so generousin your good nature that you spoiled us all at Inver-Mudal; herehere itis different.  You are living with your sister, I suppose? and of courseyou have many friends, and many things to do and places to visit.  Youmust not trouble about me; but as long as you are in Glasgowwell, therewill always be the chance of my catching a glimpse of youand if youknew what it wasto me'But here he paused abruptly, fearful of offending by confessing toomuch; and now they had resumed their leisurely walking along thehalf-dried pavements; and Meenie was revolving certain little schemesand artifices in her brainwith a view to their future meeting.  And themorning had grown so much brighter; and there was a pleasant warmth ofsunlight in the air; and she was glad to know that at least for a timeRonald would not be leaving the country.  She turned to him with asmile.'I shall have to be going back home now,' she said, 'but you will notforget, Ronald, that you have made me two promises this morning.''It's little you know, Miss Douglas,' said he, 'what I would do for you,if I but knew what ye wished.  I mean for you yourself.  For my ownself, I care but little what happens to me.  I have made a mistake in mylife somehow.  I''Then will you promise me more, Ronald?' said she quickly; for she wouldnot have him talk in that strain.'What?''Will you make me a promise that you will not enlist at all?''I will, if it is worth heeding one way or the other.''But make me the promise,' said she, and she regarded him with nounfriendly eyes.'There's my hand on't.''And anotherthat you will work hard and try and get the forestrycertificate?''What's the use of that, lass?' said he, forgetting his respect for her.'I have put all that away now.  That's all away beyond me now.''No,' she said proudly.  'No.  It is not.  Oh, do you think that thepeople who know you do not know what your ability is?  Do you think theyhave lost their faith in you?  Do you think they are not still lookingforward and hoping the time may come that they may be proud of yoursuccess, andandcome and shake hands with you, Ronaldand say how gladthey are?  And have you no regard for them, or heed for theirtheiraffection towards you?'Her cheeks were burning red, but she was far too much in earnest tomeasure her phrases; and she held his hand in an imploring kind of way;and surely, if ever a brave and unselfish devotion and love looked outfrom a woman's eyes, that was the message that Meenie's eyes had for himthen.'I had a kind of fancy,' he said, 'that if I could get abroadwith oneo' those Highland regimentsthere might come a time when I could havethe chance of winning the V.C.the Victoria Cross, I mean; ay, and itwould have been a proud day for me the day that I was able to send thathome to you.''To me, Ronald?' she said, rather faintly.'Yes, yes,'said he.  'Whatever happened to me after that day would notmatter much.''But you have promised''And I will keep that promise, and any others you may ask of me, MissDouglas.''That you will call me Meenie, for one?' she said, quite simply andfrankly.'No, no; I could not do that,' he answeredand yet the permissionsounded pleasant to the ear.'We are old friends, Ronald,' she said.  'But that is a small matter.Well, now, I must be getting back home; and yet I should like to see youagain soon, Ronald, for there are so many things I have to talk overwith you. Will you come and see my sister?'His hesitation and embarrassment were so obvious that she instantlyrepented her of having thrown out this invitation; moreover, it occurredto herself that there would be little chance of her having any privatespeech of Ronald (which was of such paramount importance at this moment)if he called at Queen's Crescent.'No, not yet,' she said, rather shamefacedly and with downcast eyes;'perhaps, sincesince there are one or two private matters to talk over,wewe could meet just as now? It is nottaking up too much of your time,Ronald?''Why,' said he, 'if I could see you for a moment, any daymerely to say"good morning"that would be a well-spent day for me; no more than thatused to make many a long day quite happy for me at Inver-Mudal.''Could you be here to-morrow at eleven, Ronald?' she asked, looking upshyly.'Yes, yes, and gladly!' he answered; and presently they had saidgood-bye to each other; and she had set out for Queen's Crescent byherself; while he turned towards the east.And now all his being seemed transfused with joy and deep gratitude; andthe day around him was clear and sweet and full of light; and all theworld seemed swinging onward in an ether of happiness and hope.  Thedreaded interview!where was the reproach and scorn of it? Instead ofthat it had been all radiant with trust and courage and true affection;and never had Meenie's eyes been so beautiful and solicitous with allgood wishes; never had her voice been so strangely tender, every tone ofit seeming to reach the very core of his heart.  And how was he torequite her for this bountiful care and sympathythat overawed himalmost when he came to think of it? Nay, repayment of any kind was allimpossible: where was the equivalent of such generous regard?  But atleast he could faithfully observe the promises he had madeyes, theseand a hundred more; and perhaps this broken life of his might still beof some small service, if in any way it could win for him a word ofMeenie's approval.And then, the better to get away from temptation, and to cut himselfwholly adrift from his late companions, he walked home to his lodgingsand packed up his few things and paid his landlady a fortnight's rent inlieu of notice, as had been agreed upon.  That same night he wasestablished in new quarters, in the Garscube Road; and he had left noaddress behind him; so that if Kate Menzies, or the skipper, or any ofhis cronies of the Harmony Club were to wonder at his absence and seekto hunt him out, they would seek and hunt in vain.*CHAPTER VI.**CONFESSION.*That night he slept long and soundly, and his dreams were all aboutInver-Mudal and the quiet life among the hills; and, strangely enough,he fancied himself there, and Meenie absent; and always he was wonderingwhen she was coming back from Glasgow town, and always he kept lookingfor her as each successive mail-cart came through from the south.  Andthen in the morning, when he awoke, and found himself in the great cityitself, and knew that Meenie was there too, and that in a few hours theywere to meet, his heart was filled with joy, and the day seemed rich andfull of promise, and the pale and sickly sunlight that struggled inthrough the window panes and lit up the dusty little room seemed aglorious thing, bringing with it all glad tidings. 'You, fortunateGlasgow town!' he had rhymed in the olden days; and this was the welcomethat Glasgow town had for Meeniesunlight, and perhaps a glimpse of bluehere and there, and a light west wind blowing in from the heights ofDowanhill and Hillhead.He dressed with particular care; and if his garments were not of thenewest fashionable cut, at least they clung with sufficient grace andsimplicity of outline to the manly and well-set figure.  And he knewhimself that he was looking less haggard than on the previous day.  Hewas feeling altogether better; the long and sound sleep had proved apowerful restorative; and his heart was light with hope.  The happysunlight shining out there on the gray pavements and the gray fronts ofthe houses!was there ever in all the world a fairer and joyfuller citythan this same Glasgow town?He was in Blythswood Square long before the appointed hour; and she alsowas a little early.  But this, time it was Meenie who was shy andembarrassed; she was not so earnest and anxious as she had been the daybefore, for much of her errand was now satisfactorily accomplished; andwhen, after a moment's hesitation, he asked her whether she would not goand have a look at the terraces and trees in the West End Park, itseemed so like two lovers setting out for a walk together that theconscious blood mantled in her cheeks, and her eyes were averted.  Butshe strove to be very business-like; and asked him a number of questionsabout Mr. Weems; and wondered that the Americans had said nothingfurther about the purchase of an estate in the Highlands, of which therehad been some little talk.  In this wayand with chance remarks andinquiries about Maggie, and the Reverend Andrew, and Mr. Murray, andHarry the terrier, and what notthey made their way through variousthoroughfares until they reached the tall gates of the West End Park.Here there was much more quietude than in those noisy streets; and whenthey had walked along one of the wide terraces, until they came to aseat partly surrounded by shrubs, Meenie suggested that they might sitdown there, for she wished to reason seriously with him.  He smiled alittle; but he was very plastic in her hands.  Nay, was it not enoughmerely to hear Meenie speakno matter what the subject might be?  Andthen he was sitting by her side, with all that wide prospect stretchedout before themthe spacious terraces, the groups of trees, the curvingriver, and the undulating hills beyond.  It was a weird kind of amorning, moreover; for the confused and wan sunlight kept strugglingthrough the ever-changing mist, sometimes throwing a coppery radiance onthe late autumn foliage, or again shining pale and silver-like as thefantastic cloud-wreaths slowly floated onward.  The view before them wasmysterious and vast because of its very vagueness; and even the newUniversity buildingsover there on the heights above the riverlookedquite imposing and picturesque, for they loomed large and dusky andremote through the bewildering sunlit haze.'Now, Ronald,' she said, 'I want you to tell me how it was you came tolose heart so, and to give up what you undertook to do when you leftInver-Mudal.  Why, when you left you were full of such high hopes; andevery one was sure of your success; and you were all anxiety to begin.''That's true, Miss Douglas,' he answered, rather absently. 'I think myhead must have been in a kind of a whirl at that time.  It seemed sofine and easy a thing to strive for; and I did not stop to ask what useit would be to me, supposing I got it.''The use?' she said.  'A better position for yourselfisn't it naturalto strive for that?  And perhaps, if you did not care much to have moremoney for yourselffor you have very strange notions, Ronald, about somethingsyou must see how much kindness can be done to others by peoplewho are well off.  I don't understand you at all''Well, then,' said he, shifting his ground, 'I grew sick and tired ofthe town life.  I was never meant for that. Every day''But, Ronald,' she said, interrupting him in a very definite tone ofremonstrance, 'you knew that your town life was only a matter of months!And the harder you worked the sooner it would be over!  What reason wasthat?''There may have been other reasons,' he said, but rather unwillingly.'What were they?''I cannot tell you.''Ronald,' she said, and the touch of wounded pride in her voice thrilledhim strangely, 'I have come all the way from the Highlandsandand donewhat few girls would have donefor your sake; and yet you will not befrank with mewhen all that I want is to see you going straight towardsa happier future.''I dare not tell you, you would be angry.''I am not given to anger,' she answered, calmly, and yet with a littlesurprised resentment.  For she could but imagine that this was someentanglement of debt, or something of the kind, of which he was ashamedto speak; and yet, unless she knew clearly the reasons that had inducedhim to abandon the project that he had undertaken so eagerly, how wasshe to argue with him and urge him to resume it?'Well, then, we'll put it this way,' said he, after a second or two ofhesitationand his face was a little pale, and his eyes were fixed onher with an anxious nervousness, so that, at the first sign ofdispleasure, he could instantly stop. 'There was a young lass that Iknew therein the Highlandsand she was, oh yes, she was out of mystation altogether, and away from meand yet the seeing her from time totime, and a word now and again, was a pleasure to me, greater maybe thanI confessed to myselfthe greatest that I had in life, indeed.'She made no sign, and he continued, slowly and watchfully, and stillwith that pale earnestness in his face.'And then I wrote things about herand amused myself with fancieswell,what harm could that do to her?so long as she knew nothing about it.And I thought I was doing no harm to myself either, for I knew it wasimpossible there could be anything between us, and that she would begoing away sooner or later, and I too.  Yes, and I did go away, and inhigh feather, to be sure, and everything was to be for the best, and Iwas to have a fight for money like the rest of them.  God help me,lassie, before I was a fortnight in the town, my heart was like tobreak.'She sate quite still and silent, trembling a little, perhaps, her eyesdowncast, her fingers working nervously with the edge of the small shawlshe wore.'I had cut myself away from the only thing I craved for in theworldjust the seeing and speaking to her from time to time, for I hadno right to think of more than that; and I was alone and down-hearted;and I began to ask myself what was the use of this slavery.  Ay, theremight have been a use in itif I could have said to myself, "Well, now,fight as hard as ye can, and if ye win, who knows but that ye might goback to the north, and claim her as the prize?"  But that was not to bethought of.  She had never hinted anything of the kind to me, nor I toher; but when I found myself cut away from her like that, the days wereterrible, and my heart was like lead, and I knew that I had cast awayjust everything that I cared to live for. Then I fell in with somecompanionsa woman cousin o' mine and some friends of hersand theyhelped to make me forget what I didna wish to think of, and so the timepassed.  Well, now, that is the truth; and ye can understand, MissDouglas, that I have no heart to begin again, and the soldiering seemedthe best thing for me, and a rifle-bullet my best friend.  Butbut Iwill keep the promise I made to yethat is enough on that score; oh yes,I will keep that promise, and any others ye may care to ask; only Icannot bide in Glasgow.'He heard a faint sob; he could see that tears were gliding stealthilydown her half-hidden face; and his heart was hot with anger againsthimself that he had caused her this pain.  But how could he go away?  Atimid hand sought his, and held it for a brief moment with a tremulousclasp.'I am very sorry, Ronald,' she managed to say, in a broken voice.  'Isuppose it could not have been otherwiseI suppose it could not havebeen otherwise.'For some time they sate in silencethough he could hear an occasionalhalf-stifled sob.  He could not pretend to think that Meenie did notunderstand; and this was her great pity for him; she did not drive himaway in angerher heart was too gentle for that.'Miss Douglas,' said he at length, 'I'm afraid I've spoiled your walkfor you wi' my idle story.  Maybe the best thing I can do now is just toleave you.''Nostay,' she said, under her breath; and she was evidently trying toregain her composure.  'You spokeyou spoke of that girlO Ronald, Iwish I had never come to Glasgow!I wish I had never heard what you toldme just now!'And then, after a second'But how could I help itwhen I heard what was happening to you, and allthe wish in the world I had was to know that you were brave and well andsuccessful and happy?  I could not help it! ... And nowand nowRonald,'she said, as if with a struggle against that choking weight of sobs; formuch was demanded of her at this moment; and her voice seemed powerlessto utter all that her heart prompted her to say, 'ifif that girl youspoke ofif she was to see clearly what is best for her life and foryoursif she was to tell you to take up your work again, and work hard,and hard, and hardand then, some day, it might be years after this,when you came back again to the north, you would find her stillwaiting?''Meenie!'He grasped her hand: his face was full of a bewilderment of hopenotjoy, not triumph, but as if he hardly dared to believe what he hadheard.'O Ronald,' she said, in a kind of wild way,and she turned her wet eyestowards him in full, unhesitating abandonment of affection and trust,nor could she withdraw the hand that he clasped so firmly,'what willyou think of me?what will you think of me?but surely there should beno hiding or false shame, and surely there is for you and for me in theworld but the one end to hope for; and if not thatwhy, then, nothing.If you go away, if you have nothing to hope for, it will be the oldmisery back again, the old despair; and as for mewell, that is not ofmuch matter.  But, RonaldRonaldwhatever happensdon't think too hardlyof meI know I should not have said so muchbut it would just break myheart to think you were left to yourself in Glasgowwith nothing to carefor or hope for''Think of you!' he cried, and in a kind of wonder of rapture he wasregarding Meenie's tear-filled eyes, that made no shame of meeting hislook.  'I think of youand ever willas the tenderest and kindest andtruest-hearted of women.'  He had both her hands now; and he held themclose and warm.  'Even nowat this minutewhen you have given yourselfto meyou have no thought of yourself at allit is all about me, that amnot worth it, and never was.  Is there any other woman in the world sobrave and unselfish!  Meenie, lassno, for this onceand no one willever be able to take the memory away from mefor this once let me callyou my love and my darlingmy true-hearted love and darling!well, now,that's said and done with; and many a day to come I will think overthese few minutes, and think of sitting here with you in this West EndPark on the bench here, and the trees around, and I will say to myselfthat I called Meenie my love and my darling, and she was not angrynotangry.''No, not angry, Ronald,' and there was a bit of a strange and tendersmile shining through the tears in the blue-gray eyes.'Ay, indeed,' said he, more gravely, 'that will be something for me;maybe, everything.  I can scarcely believe that this has justhappenedmy heart's in a flame, and my head's gone daft, I think; and itseems as if there was nothing for me but to thank God for having sentyou into the world and made you as unselfish and generous as you are.But that's not the way of looking at it, mymy good lass.  You have toolittle thought for yourself.  Why, what a coward I should be if I didnot ask you to think of the sacrifice you are making!''I am making no sacrifice, Ronald,' she said, simply and calmly.  'Ispoke what my heart felt; and perhaps too readily.  But I am going backto the Highlands.  I shall stay there till you come for me, if ever youcome for me.  They spoke of my going for a while to my mother's cousins;but I shall not do that; no, I shall be at Inver-Mudal, or wherever myfather is, and you will easily get to know that, Ronald.  But if thingsgo ill, and you do not come for meoror, if ye do not care to come formewell, that is as the world goes, and no one can tell before-hand. Ormany years may go by, and when you do come for me, Ronald, you may findme a gray-haired womanbut you will find me a single woman.'She spoke quite calmly; this was no new resolve; it was his lips, nothers, that were tremulous, for a second or so.  But only for a second;for now he was all anxiety to cheer her and comfort her as regards thefuture.  He could not bring himself to ask her to consider again; theprize was too precious; rather he spoke of all the chances and hopes oflife, and of the splendid future that she had placed before him.  Nowthere was something worth striving forsomething worth the winning.  Andalready, with the wild audacity that was now pulsating in his veins, hesaw the way cleara long way, perhaps, and tedious, but all filled withlight and strewn with blossoms here or there (these were messages, or alook, or a smile, from Meenie), and at the end of it, waiting to welcomehim, Love-Meenie, Rose-Meenie, with love-radiance shining in her eyes.He almost talked her into cheerfulness (for she had grown a littledespondent after that first devotion of self-surrender); and by and byshe rose from the bench.  She was a little pale.'I don't know whether I have done well or ill, Ronald,' she said, in alow voice, 'but I do not think I could have done otherwise.  It is foryou to show hereafter that I have done right.''But do you regret?' he said quickly.She turned to him with a strange smile on her face.'Regret?  No.  I do not think I could have done otherwise.  But it isfor you to show to all of them that I have done right.''And if it could only be done all at once, Meenie; that's where thesoldier has his chance''No, it is not to be done all at once,' she said; 'it will be a hard anddifficult waiting for you, and a slow waiting for me''Do you think I care for any hardness or difficulty now?' he said.'Dear Meenie, you little know what a prize you have set before me.  Why,now, here, every moment that I pass with you seems worth a year; and yetI grudge every one''But why?' she said, looking up.'I am going over to Pollokshaws the instant I leave you to try to pickup the threads of everything I had let slip. Dear lass, you have madeevery quarter of an hour in the day far too short; I want twelve hoursin the day to be with you, and other twelve to be at my work.''We must see each other very little, Ronald,' she said, as they set outto leave the Park.  'People would only talk''But to-morrow''No.  My sister is going down to Dunoon to-morrow to see about theshutting up of the house for the winter, and I am going with her.  Buton Fridayif you were in the Botanic Gardensearly in theforenoonperhaps I could see you then?''Yes, yes,' said he eagerly; and as they went down towards the WoodlandRoad he strove to talk to her very cheerfully and brightly indeed, forhe could not but see that she was a little troubled.Then, when they were about to part, she seemed to try to rouse herself alittle, and to banish whatever doubts and hesitations may have beenharassing her mind.'Ronald,' she said, with a bit of a smile, 'when you told me of thatgirl in the Highlands that you knew, you said youyou had never saidanything to her that would lead her to imagine you were thinking of her.But you wrote her a letter.''What?''Yes; and she saw it,' Meenie continued; but with downcast eyes.  'Itwas not meant for her to see; but she saw it.  It was some versesverypretty they werebutbut rather daringconsidering that''Bless me,' he exclaimed, 'did you see that?'She nodded.  And then his mind went swiftly back to that period.'Meenie, that was the time you were angry with me.'She looked up.'And yet not so very angry, Ronald.''But Love from Love towards school with hoary looks.'  Not always.Five miles an hour or so was the pace at which Ronald sped over toPollokshaws: and very much astonished was the nervous little Mr. Weemsover the new-found and anxious energy of his quondam pupil.  Ronaldremained all day there, and, indeed, did not leave the cottage until itwas very late.  As he walked back into the town all the world around himlay black and silent; no stars were visible; no crescent moon; nor anydim outline of cloud; but the dusky heavens were flushed with the redfires of the ironworks, as the flames shot fiercely up, and sent theirsullen splendour across the startled night. And that, it may haveoccurred to him, was as the lurid glare that had lit up his own life fora while, until the fires had gone down, and the world grown sombre anddead; but surely there was a clear dawn about to break by and by in theeastclear and silvery and luminouslike the first glow of the mornalong the Clebrig slopes.*CHAPTER VII.**AT THE PEAR-TREE WELL.*He was almost glad that Meenie was going away for these two days, for hewas desperately anxious to make up for the time he had lost; and thegood-natured little Mr. Weems, instead of showing any annoyance orresentment, rather aided and abetted this furious zeal on the part ofhis pupil.  All the same, Ronald found occasion to be within easydistance of the railway station on the morning of Meenie's departureand about a few minutes to eight he saw herself and her sister step outof one of the cabs that were being driven up.  If only he could havesignalled a good-bye to her!  But he kept discreetly in the background;glad enough to see that she was looking so fresh and bright andcheerfuleven laughing she was, over some little mishap, as he imagined.And then so trim and neat she was in her travelling attire; and sodaintily she walkedthe graceful figure moving (as he thought) as if toa kind of music.  The elder sister took the tickets; then they enteredone of the carriages; and presently the train had slowly rolled awayfrom the platform and was gone.That glimpse of Meenie had filled his heart with unutterable delight; hescarcely knew what he was doing when he got out into the open air again.The day seemed a festal day; there was gladness abroad in the veryatmosphere; it was a day for good-companionship, and the drinking ofhealths, and the wishing of good wishes to all the world.  His thoughtswere all with Meeniein that railway carriage flying away down toGreenock; and yet here, around him, there was gladness and happinessthat seemed to demand some actual expression and recognition! Almostunconsciouslyand with his brain busy with very distant mattershewalked into a public-house.'Give me a glass of Highland whisky, my lad,' said he to the young manstanding behind the counter: 'Talisker, if ye have it.'The whisky was measured out and placed before him. He did not look atit.  He was standing a little apart. And now Meenie would be out byPollokshields, in the whiter air; by and by she would pass throughPaisley's smoke; then through the placid pastoral country until shewould come in sight of Dumbarton's castled crags and the long widevalley of the Clyde.  And then the breezy waters of the Firth; and thebig steamboat; and Meenie walking up and down the white deck, anddrawing the sealskin coat a little tighter round the slight and gracefulfigure. There would be sunlight there; and fresh sea-winds blowing upfrom Arran and Bute, from Cumbrae and Cantire. And MeenieBut at this moment his attention was somehow drawn to the counter, andhe was startled into a consciousness of where he was and what he wasdoing.  He glanced at the whiskywith a kind of shiver of fright.'God forgive meI did not want it,' he said to the astonished youth whowas looking at him, 'but here's the money for 't.'He put down the few coppers on the counter and hurriedly left the place.But the sudden fright was all.  As he sped away out to Pollokshaws hewas not haunted by any consciousness of having escaped from danger.  Hewas sure enough of himself in that direction.  If a mortal craving fordrink had seized him, he would almost have been glad of the fight; itwould be something to slay the dragon, for Meenie's sake.  But he hadnaturally a sound and firm constitution; his dissipation had not lastedlong enough to destroy his strength of will; and indeed this incident ofthe public-house, so far from terrifying him with any doubts as to thefuture, only served to remind him that dreams and visionsand brainsgone 'daft' with access of joyare not appropriate to the thoroughfaresof a business city.No; as he walked rapidly away from the town, by way of Strathbungo andCrossmyloof and Shawlands, what he was chiefly busy with was thehammering out of some tune that would fit the winter song he had chancedupon a few days before.  And now he did not regard those gay andgalloping verses with a stupefied wonder as to how he ever came to writethem; rather he tried to reach again to that same pitch oflight-heartedness; and of course it was for Meenie's delight, and forhers only, that this tune had to be got at somehow.  It was a laughing,glad kind of a tune that he wanted:O then the warm west winds will blow,And all in the sunny weatherIt's over the moorlands we will go,You and I, my love, together.Chorus: And then the birds will begin to sing,And we will sing too, my dear,To give good welcoming to the spring,In the primrose-time o' the yearIn the primrose-time,In the primrose-time,In the primrose-time o' the yearTo give good welcoming to the spring.In the primrose-time o' the year.Yes; and it was in the coming spring-time that he was to try for thecertificate in forestry; and thereafterif he were so fortunate as toget thathe might set forth on the path that the Americans had soconfidently sketched out for himthe path that was now to lead him toMeenie, as the final crown and prize.  'You may find me a gray-hairedwoman, Ronald,' she had said, 'but you will find me a single woman.'But still he was young in years; and there was hope and courage in hisveins; and what if he were to win to her, after all, before there was asingle streak of middle age in the beautiful and abundant brown tresses?Then, again, on the evening before the morning on which he was to meether in the Botanic Gardens, he undid the package containing thatanthology of verse devoted to Meenie; and began to turn the pieces over,wondering which, or if any of them, would please her, if he took them toher.  But this was rather a visionary Meenie he found in these verses;not the real and actual Meenie who had sate beside him on a bench in theWest End Park, and placed her hand in his, and pledged her life to him,while the beautiful, tear-filled eyes sought his so bravely.  And couldhe not write something about this actual Meenie; and about Glasgow; andthe wonder she had brought into the great, prosaic city?  He tried hishand at it, anyway, for a little while:The dim red fires of yonder gleaming forgeNow dwell triumphant on the brow of night;A thousand chimneys blackest smoke disgorge,Repelling from the world the stars' pale light:A little taper shines adown the street,From out her casement where she lingers stillTo listen to the sound of passing feet,That all the night with leaden echoes fillBut he soon stopped.  This was not like Meenie at allMeenie, who wasever associated in his mind with flowers and birds and fair sunlight andthe joy of the summer hills. He threw that spoiled sheet into the fire;and sought among the old pieces for one that he might copy out fairlyfor her; and this is what he eventually chose:All on a fair May morningThe roses began to blow;Some of them tipped with crimson,Some of them tipped with snow.But they looked the one to the other,And they looked adown the glen;They looked the one to the other,And they rubbed their eyes again,'O there is the lark in the heavens,And the mavis sings in the tree;And surely this is the summer,But Meenie we cannot see.'Surely there must be summerComing to this far clime;And has Meenie, Love Meenie, forgotten,Or have we mistaken the time?'Then a foxglove spake to the roses:'O hush you and cease your din;For I'm going back to my sleeping,Till Meenie brings summer in.'Well, it was but a trifle; but trifles are sometimes important thingswhen seen through lovers' eyes.Next morning he went along to the Botanic Gardens; paid his sixpencewith equanimity (for he had dispensed with the ceremony of dining theprevious day) and entered. It was rather a pleasant morning; and atfirst sight he was rather shocked by the number of peoplenursemaids andchildren, most of themwho were idly strolling along the trimly-keptwalks or seated in front of the wide open parterres.  How was he to findMeenie in such a great place; and, if he did find her, were they to walkup and down before so many eyes?  For he had guessed that Meenie wouldbe in no hurry to tell her sister of what had happeneduntil the futureseemed a little more clear and secure; it would be time enough topublish the news when that had assumed a more definite character.But on and on he wentwith glances that were keen and sharp enoughuntilsuddenly, just as he had passed the greenhouses, he came almost face toface with Meenie, who was seated on a bench, all by herself, with a bookbefore her.  But she was not reading.  'O and proudly rose she up'; andyet shyly, too; and as he took her hand in his, the joy with which sheregarded him needed no confession in wordsit was written there in theclear tender eyes.'Indeed I am so glad to see you, Ronald!' she said. 'I have been somiserable these two days'But why?' he asked.'I don't know, hardly.  I have been wondering whether I had done right;and then to go about with my sister, keeping this secret from her; andthen I was thinking of the going away back to Inver-Mudal, and neverseeing you, and not knowing how you were getting on.  But nownow thatyou are here, it seems all quite right and safe. You look as if youbrought good news.  What does he think, Ronald?''He?' he repeated.  'Who?''The old man out there at Pollokshaws, is it?'Ronald laughed.'Oh, the old gentleman seems pretty confident; but for very shame's sakeI had to let him have a holiday to-day.  I am not going over tillto-morrow.''And he thinks you will pass?''He seems to think so.''I wish the time were here now, and that it was all well over,' shesaid.  'Oh, I should be so proud, Ronald; and it will be something tospeak of to every one; and thenthen that will be but the beginning; andday by day I shall be expecting to hear the news.  But what a long, longtime it seems to look forward to.''Ay, lass; and it will be worse for you than for me; for there will bethe continual trying and hoping for me, and for you nothing but theweary waiting.  Well''Oh, but do you think I am afraid?' she said bravely. 'No.  I have faithin you, Ronald.  I know you will do your best.''I should deserve to be hanged and buried in a ditch if I did not,' saidhe.  'But we will leave all that for a while, Meenie; I want you to comefor a stroll along the banks over the Kelvin.  Would ye wonder to findsome sea-gulls flying about?they're there, though; or they were there aweek or two ago.  And do you know that I got a glimpse of you at therailway station on Wednesday morning?''I did not see you, Ronald,' she said, with some surprise.'No, no; I kept out o' the way.  It's not for me, lass, it's for you tosay when any of your folk are to be told what we are looking forward to;and for my part I would as lief wait till I could put a clearer planbefore themsomething definite.''And that is my opinion too, Ronald,' she answered, in rather a lowvoice.  'Let it be merely an understanding between you and me.  I amcontent to wait.''Well, then,' said he, as they reached the top of the high bankoverhanging the river, and began to make their way down the narrowlittle pathways cut through the trees and shrubs, 'here is a confession:I was so glad to see you on that morningand so glad to see you lookingso wellthat I half lost my senses, I think; I went away through thestreets in a kind o' dream; and, sure as I'm here, I walked into apublic-house and ordered a glass of whisky'She looked up in sudden alarm.'No, no, no,' said he contentedly, 'you need not fear that, my goodlassie; it was just that I was bewildered with having seen ye, andthinking of where ye were going. I walked out o' the place withouttouching it.  Ay, and what think ye o' Dunoon?  And what kind of a daywas it when ye got out on the Firth?'So she began to tell him of all her adventures and experiences; and bythis time they had got down near to the water's edge; and hereof whatvalue would his knowledge of forestry have been otherwise?he managed tofind a seat for her.  They were quite alone herethe brown river beforethem; several sea-gulls placidly paddling on its surface, others flyingand dipping overhead; and if this bank of the stream was in shadow, theotherwith some small green meadows backed by clumps of elms andmapleswas bright and fair enough in the yellow autumn sunshine.  Theywere in absolute silence, too, save for the continual soft murmur of thewater, and the occasional whirring by of a blackbird seeking safetyunderneath a laurel bush.'Meenie,' said he, putting one hand on her shoulder, 'here are someverses I copied out for ye last nightthey're not much worthbut theywere written a long time ago, when little did I think I should ever dareto put them into your hand.'She read them; and there was a rose colour in her face as she did so:not that she was proud of their merit, but because of the revelationthey contained.'A long time ago?' she said, with averted eyesbut her heart was beatingwarmly.'Oh,' he said, 'there are dozens and dozens of similar things, if everye care to look at them.  It was many a happy morning on the hill, andmany a quiet night at home, they gave me; but somehow, lass, now that Ilook at them, they hardly seem to grip ye fast enough.  I want somethingthat will bind ye closer to myselfsomething that ye can read when youare back in the Highlandssomething that is known only to our twoselves.  Well, now, these things that I have written from time totimeyou're a long way off in them somehowthe Meenie that's in them isnot this actual Meenie, warm and kind and generous and breathing''And a little bit happy, Ronald, just at present,' she said, and shetook his hand.'And some day, when I get through with busier work, I must try to writeyou something for yourself''But, Ronald, all these pieces you speak of belong to me,' she saidpromptly, 'and I want them, every oneevery, every one.  Yes, and Ispecially want that letterif you have not kept it, then you mustremember it, and write it out for me again''I came across it last night,' said he, with an embarrassed laugh.'Indeed I don't wonder you were angry.''I have told you before, Ronald, that I was not angry,' she said, with atouch of vexation.  'Perhaps I was a littlea little frightenedandscarcely knowing how much you meant''Well, you know now, Meenie dear; but last night, when I was going overthose scraps of things, I can tell you I was inclined to draw back.  Ikept saying to myself"What! is she really going to see herself talkedabout in this way?"  For there's a good deal of love-making in them,Meenie, and that's a fact; I knew I could say what I liked, since no onewould be any the wiser, but, last night, when I looked at some of them,I said"No; I'm not going to provoke a quarrel with Meenie. She wouldfling things about, as the American used to say, if she saw all thisaudacious song-writing about her."''I'll chance that quarrel, Ronald,' she answered to this, 'for I wantevery, every, every one of them; and you must copy them all, for I amgoing to take them with me when I leave Glasgow.''And, indeed,' said he, 'you'll understand them better in the Highlands;for they're all about Ben Loyal, and the Mudal, and Loch Naver, andClebrig.''And to think you hid them from me all that time!''Why, Meenie darling, you would have called on the whole population todrive me out of the place if I had shown them to you.  Think of theeffect produced by a single glance at one of them!you tortured me forweeks wondering how I had offended you.''Well, you can't offend me now, Ronald, that way,' said she, veryprettily.And so their lovers' talk went on, until it was time for Meenie to thinkof returning home.  But just beyond these Botanic Gardens, and down in asecluded nook by the side of the river, there is a little spring that isvariously known as the Three-Tree Well and the Pear-Tree Well.  It is alimpid little stream, running into the Kelvin; it rises in a tiny cavernand flows for a few yards through a cleft in the rocks.  Now theserocks, underneath the overarching trees, have been worn quite smooth(except where they are scored with names) by the footsteps of generationafter generation of lovers who, in obedience to an old and fond custom,have come hither to plight their troth while joining hands over thebrooklet.  Properly the two sweethearts, each standing on one side,ought to join their hands on a Bible as they vow their vows, andthereafter should break a sixpence in twain, each carrying away thehalf; but these minor points are not necessary to the efficacy of thisprobably pagan rite.  And sosupposing that Ronald had heard of thisplace of sacred pilgrimage, and had indeed discovered its whereabouts inhis rambles around Glasgowand supposing him to have got a friendlyunder-gardener to unlock a gate in the western palisades of theGardensand then, if he were to ask Meenie to step down to theriver-side and walk along to the hallowed well?  And yet he made of itno solemn ceremony; the morning was bright and clear around them; andMeenie was rather inclined to smile at the curious old custom.  But shewent through it nevertheless; and then he slept across the rill again;and said he'There's but this remaining now, Meenie darling"Ae fond kiss and thenwe sever."'She stepped back in affright.'Ronald, not with that song on your lips!  Don't you remember what itgoes on to say?''Well, I don't,' he answered good-naturedly; for he had quoted thephrase at random.'Why, don't you remember?"Had we never loved sae kindly,Had we never loved sae blindly,Never metor never parted,We had ne'er been broken-hearted."'My good-hearted lass,' said he, interlinking his arm with hers, 'yemust not be superstitious.  What's in a song? There'll be no severancebetwixt you and methe Pear-Tree Well has settled that.''And that is not at all superstition?' said she, looking up with asmileuntil she suddenly found her blushing face overshadowed.*CHAPTER VIII.**THE COMING OF TROUBLES.*These were halcyon days.  Those two had arrived at a pretty accurateunderstanding of the times of each other's comings and goings; and ifthey could snatch but five minutes together, as he was on his way overto the south, well, that was something; and not unfrequently thelingering good-bye was lengthened out to a quarter of an hour; and thenagain when high fortune was in the ascendant, a whole golden hour wastheirsthat was as precious as a year of life.  For theirhastily-snatched interviews the most convenient and secret rendezvouswas Hill Street, Garnet Hill; a quiet little thoroughfare, too steep forcabs or carriages to ascend.  And very cheerful and bright and pleasantthis still neighbourhood looked on those October mornings; for there wasyet some crisp and yellow foliage on the trees; and the little patchesof green within the railings lay warm in the light; and on the northernside of the street the house-fronts were of a comfortable sunny gray.Ordinarily there were so few people about that these two could walk handin hand, if they chose; or they could stand still, and converse face toface, when some more than usually interesting talk was going forward.And it was quite astonishing what a lot of things they had to say toeach other, and the importance that attached to the very least of them.But one piece of news that Meenie brought to these stolen interviews wasby no means insignificant: she was now receiving marked attentions froma young Glasgow gentlemanattentions that her sister had perceived at avery early period, though Meenie had striven to remain blind to them.Nor was there anything very singular in this.  Mr. Gemmill wasexceedingly proud of his pretty sister-in-law; he had asked lots ofpeople to the house for the very purpose of meeting her; she was thecentre of interest and attraction at these numerous gatherings; and whatmore natural than that some susceptible youth should have his minddisturbed by an unwitting glance or two from those clear Highland eyes?And what rendered this prospect so pleasing to the Gemmills was this:the young man who had been stricken by these unintentional darts was noother than the only son of the founder of the firm in which Mr. Gemmillwas a junior partnerthe old gentleman having retired from the businesssome dozen years before, carrying with him a very substantial fortuneindeed, to which this son was sole heir. In more ways than one thismatch, if it were to be a match, would be highly advantageous; and Mrs.Gemmill, while saying little, was secretly rejoiced to see everythinggoing on so well.  If Meenie chanced to ask what such and such a piecewas (Mr. Frank Lauder played a little), even that slight expression ofinterest was inevitably followed by her receiving the sheet of music bypost next morning.  Flowers, again: one cannot very well refuse toaccept flowers; they are not like other gifts; they may mean nothing.Then, it was quite remarkable how often he found himself going to thevery same theatre or the very same concert that the Gemmills hadarranged to take Meenie to; and naturallyas it chanced he had no onegoing with himhe asked to be allowed to go with them.  He even talkedof taking a seat in Maple Street Church (this was the church that theGemmills attended), for he said that he was tired to death of thepreaching of that old fogey, Dr. Teith, and that Mr. Smilie's lastvolume of poems (Mr. Smilie was the Maple Street Church minister) hadaroused in him a great curiosity to hear his sermons.And as for Mr. Frank Lauder himselfwell, he was pretty much as otheryoung Glasgow men of fashion; though, to be sure, these form a race bythemselves, and a very curious race too.  They are for the most part agood-natured set of lads; free and generous in their ways; not anythinglike the wild Lotharios which, amongst themselves, they profess to be;well dressed; a little lacking in repose of manner; many of them givento boating and yachtingand some of them even expert seamen; nearly allof them fond of airing a bit of Cockney slang picked up in a Londonmusic hall during a fortnight's visit to town.  But their most oddcharacteristic is an affectation of knowingnessas if they had read thebook of nature and human nature through to the last chapter; whereasthese well-dressed, good-natured, but rather brainless young men are asinnocently ignorant of that book as of most other books. Knowing but onelanguageand that imperfectlyis no doubt a bar to travel; but surelynowhere else on the face of the globe could one find a set of youngfellowswith similar opportunities set before themcontent to remain sothoroughly untutored and untravelled; and nowhere else a set of youthswho, while professing to be men of the world, could show themselves soabsolutely unversed in the world's ways.  But they (or some of them)understand the lines of a yacht; and they don't drink champagne as sweetas they used to do; and no doubt, as they grow into middle age, theywill throw aside the crude affectations of youth, and assume arespectable gravity of manner, and eventually become solid andsubstantial pillars of the Free, U.P., and Established Churches.This Frank Lauder was rather a favourable specimen of his class;perhaps, in his extreme desire to ingratiate himself with Meenie, heassumed a modesty of demeanour that was not quite natural to him.  Buthis self-satisfied jocosity, his mean interpretation of human motives,his familiarly conventional opinions in all matters connected with thearts, could not always be hidden beneath this mask of meekness; andMeenie's shrewd eyes had discerned clearly of what kind he was at a veryearly period of their acquaintance.  For one thing, her solitary life inthe Highlands had made of her a diligent and extensive reader; while herassociation with Ronald had taught her keen independence of judgment;and she was almost ashamed to find how absolutely unlettered this youthwas, and how he would feebly try to discover what her opinion was, inorder to express agreement with it.  That was not Ronald's way. Ronaldtook her sharply to task when she fell away from his standardor rathertheir conjoint standardin some of her small preferences.  Even inmusic, of which this young gentleman knew a little, his tastes were thetastes of the mob.'Why do you always get away from the room when Mr. Lauder sits down tothe piano?' her sister said, with some touch of resentment.'I can endure a little Offenbach,' she answered saucily, 'when I'mstrong and in good health.  But we get a little too much of it when hecomes here.'Of course Ronald was given to know of these visits and of their obviousaim; but he did not seem very deeply concerned.'You know I can't help it, Ronald,' she said, one morning, as they wereslowly climbing the steep little Randolph Terrace together, her handresting on his arm. 'I can't tell him to go away while my sister keepsasking him to the house.  They say that a girl can always show by hermanner when any attention is displeasing to her. Well, that depends.  Ican't be downright rudeI am staying in my sister's house.  And then, Iwouldn't say he was conceitedI wouldn't say that, Ronaldbutbut he ispretty well satisfied with himself; and perhaps not so sensitive aboutone's manner towards him as some might be.  As for you, Ronald,' shesaid, with a laugh, 'I could send you flying, like a bolt from a bow,with a single look.''Could you, lass?' said he.  'I doubt it.  Perhaps I would refuse tobudge.  I have got charge of you now.''Ah, well, I am not likely to try, I think,' she continued. 'But aboutthis Mr. Lauder, Ronaldyou see, he is a very important person in Mr.Gemmill's eyes; for he and his father have still some interest in thewarehouse, I suppose; and I know he thinks it is time that Mr. Gemmill'sname should be mentioned in the firmnot mere "Co."  And that wouldplease Agatha too; and so they're very polite to him; and they expect meto be very polite to him too.  You see, Ronald, I can't tell him to goaway until he says somethingeither to me or to Agatha; and he won'ttake a hint, though he must see that I would rather not have him sendflowers and music and that; and then, again, I sometimes think it is notfair to you, Ronald, that I should allow anything of the kind to goonmerely through the difficulty of speaking'He stopped, and put his hand over the hand that lay on his arm: therewas not a human being in sight.'Tell me this, Meenie darling: does his coming to the house vex you andtrouble you?''Oh nonot in the least,' said she, blithely and yet seriously.  'I amrather pleased when he comes to the house.  When he is there of anevening, and I have the chance of sitting and looking at him, it makesme quite happy.'This was rather a startling statement, and instantly she saw a quick,strange look in his eyes.'But you don't understand, Ronald,' she said placidly, and withouttaking away her eyes from his.  'Every time I look at him I think ofyou, and it's the difference that makes me glad.'Halcyon days indeed; and Glasgow became a radiant golden city in thishappy autumn time; and each meeting was sweeter and dearer than itspredecessor; and their twin lives seemed to be floating along togetheron a river of joy. With what a covetous care she treasured up eachfragment of verse he brought her, and hid it away in a little thinleathern case she had herself made, so that she could wear it next herheart.  He purchased for her little presentssuch as he could affordtoshow her that he was thinking of her on the days when they could notmeet; and when she took these, and kissed them, it was not of theirpecuniary value she was thinking.  As for her, she had vast schemes asto what she was going to make for him when she got back to theHighlands.  Here, in Glasgow, nothing of the kind was possible.  Hersister's eyes were too sharp, and her own time too much occupied.Indeed, what between the real lover, who was greedy of every moment shecould spare for these secret interviews, and the pseudo lover, who keptthe Queen's Crescent household in a constant turmoil of engagements andentertainments and visits, Rose Meenie found the hours sufficientlyfull; and the days of her stay in Glasgow were going by rapidly.'But Scripture saith, an ending to all fine things must be;' and theending, in this case, was the work of the widow Menzies.  Kate feltherself at once aggrieved and perplexed by Ronald's continued absence;but she was even more astonished when, on sending to make inquiries, shefound he had left his lodgings and gone elsewhere, leaving no address.She saw a purpose in this; she leapt to the conclusion that a woman hadsomething to do with it; and in her jealous anger and mortification shedetermined on leaving no stone unturned to discover his whereabouts. Buther two cronies, Laidlaw and old Jaap (the skipper was away at seaagain), seemed quite powerless to aid her. They knew that Ronaldoccasionally used to go over to Pollokshaws; but further than that,nothing.  He never came to the Harmony Club now; and not one of hisformer companions knew anything about him.  Old Mr. Jaap hoped that noharm had come to the lad, whom he liked; but Jimmy Laidlaw was none sosorry over this disappearance: he might himself have a better chancewith the widow, now that Kate's handsome cousin was out of the way.It was Kate herself who made the discovery, ami that in the simplestmanner possible.  She and mother Paterson had been away somewhereoutside the town for a drive: and they were returning by the GreatWestern Road, one evening towards dusk, when all at once the widowcaught sight of Ronald, at some distance off, and just as he was in theact of saying good-bye to a womanto a young girl apparently.  Katepulled up the cob so suddenly that she nearly pitched her companionheadlong into the street.'What is it, Katie dear?'She did not answer; she let the cob move forward a yard or two, so as toget the dog-cart close in by the pavement; and then she waitedwatchingwith an eager scrutiny this figure that was now coming along.  Meeniedid not notice her; probably the girl was too busy with her ownthoughts; but these could not have been sad ones, for the bright youngface, with its tender colour rather heightened by the sharpness of theevening air, seemed happy enough.'Flying high, he is,' was Kate Menzies's inward comment as she markedthe smart costume and the well-bred air and carriage of this young lady.And then, the moment she had passed, Kate said quickly'Here, auntie, take the reins, and wait here.  Never mind how long.He'll no stir; if you're feared, bid a laddie stand by his head.''But what is't, Katie dear?'She did not answer; she got down from the trap; and then, at firstquickly, and afterwards more cautiously, she proceeded to follow thegirl whom she had seen parting from Ronald.  Nor had she far to go, asit turned out. Meenie left the main thoroughfare at Melrose StreetKateMenzies keeping fairly close up to her now; and almost directly afterwas standing at the door of her sister's house in Queen's Crescent,waiting for the ringing of the bell to be answered.  It needed noprofound detective skill on the part of Mrs. Menzies to ascertain thenumber of the house, so soon as the girl had gone inside; and thereaftershe hurried back to the dog-cart, and got up, and continued her driving.'Well, that bangs Banagher!' she said, with a loud laugh, as she smartlytouched the cob with the whip.  'The Great Western Road, of a' places inthe world!  The Great Western Roadand he goes off by the New CityRoadthere's a place for twa lovers to forgather!"We'll meet beside the dusky glen, on yon burn side,Where the bushes form a cosie den, on yon burn side."But the Great Western Roadbless us a', and the laddie used to writepoetry!''But what is it, Katie?''Why, it's Ronald and his lass, woman: didna ye see them?  Oh ay, he'scarried his good looks to a braw marketset her up wi' her velvet hatand her sealskin coat, and living in Queen's Crescent forbye.  Ay, ay,he's ta'en his pigs to a braw market''It's no possible, Katie dear!' exclaimed mother Paterson, who affectedto be very much shocked.  'Your cousin Ronald wi' a sweetheart?and himso much indebted to you''The twa canary birds!' she continued, with mirth that sounded not quitereal.  'But never a kiss at parting, wi' a' they folk about.  And that'swhy ye've been hiding yourself away, my lad?  But I jalouse that thatbraw young leddy o' yours would laugh the other side of her mouth if herfriends were to find out her pranks.'And indeed that was the thought that chiefly occupied her mind duringthe rest of the drive home.  Arrived there, she called for thePost-Office Directory, and found that the name of the people living inthat house in Queen's Crescent was Gemmill.  She asked her cronies, whenthey turned up in the evening, who this Gemmill was; but neither of themknew.  Accordingly, being left to her own resources, and without lettingeven mother Paterson know, she took a sheet of paper and wrote asfollows'SIRWho is the young lady in your house who keeps appointments withRonald Strang, formerly of Inver-Mudal? Keep a better look-out.  Yours,A Friend.'And this she enclosed in an envelope, and directed it to Mr. Gemmill ofsuch and such a number, Queen's Crescent, and herself took it to thepost.  It was a mere random shot, for she had nothing to go upon but herown sudden suspicions; but she was angry and hot-headed; and in no case,she considered, would this do any harm.She succeeded far better than she could have expected. Mr. Gemmillhanded the anonymous note to his wife with a brief laugh of derision.But Agatha (who knew more about Ronald Strang than he) looked startled.She would not say anything.  She would not admit to her husband thatthis was anything but an idle piece of malice. Nevertheless, when Mr.Gemmill left for the city, she began to consider what she should do.Unfortunately, as it happened that morning, Meenie just played into hersister's hand.'Aggie dear, I am going along to Sauchiehall Street for some more ofthat crimson wool: can I bring you anything?''No, thank you,' she said; and then instantly it occurred to her thatshe would go out and follow her sister, just to see whether there mightbe any ground for this anonymous warning.  It certainly was a strangething that any one should know that Meenie and Ronald Strang were evenacquainted.And at firstas she kept a shrewd eye on the girl, whom she allowed toprecede her by some distanceall seemed to go well.  Meenie lookedneither to the right nor to the left as she walked, with some quickness,along St. George's Road towards Sauchiehall Street.  When she reachedthe wool shop and entered, Mrs. Gemmill's conscience smote herwhyshould she have been so quick to harbour suspicions of her own sister?But she would still watch her on the homeward wayjust to make sure.When Meenie came out again from the shop she looked at her watch; and itwas clear that she was now quickening her pace as she set forth.  Whythis hurry, Mrs. Gemmill asked herself?the girl was not so busy athome.  But the solution of the mystery was soon apparent.  Meeniearrived at the corner of Hill Street; gave one quick glance up the quietlittle thoroughfare; the next moment Mrs. Gemmill recognised wellenoughfor she had seen him once or twice in the Highlandswho thiswell-built, straight-limbed young fellow was who was now coming down thesteep little street at such a swinging pace. And Meenie went forward tomeet him, with her face upturned to his; and she put her hand on his armquite as if that were her familiar custom; and away these twowentslowly, it is true, for the ascent was steepand clearly they wereheeding not anything and not anybody around.Agatha turned away and went home; she had seen enough.  To say that shewas deeply shocked would hardly be true; for there are very few youngwomen who have not, at some time or other in their lives, made aninnocent little arrangement by which they might enjoy an unobservedinterview with the object of their choice; and, if there are any suchextremely proper young persons, Agatha Gemmill knew that she had notbeen in the category herself.  But she was resolved upon being bothindignant and angry. It was her duty.  There was this girl wilfullythrowing away all the chances of her life.  A gamekeeper!that hersister should be for marrying a gamekeeper just at the time that Mr.Gemmill expected to have his name announced as a partner in the greatfirm!  Nay, she made no doubt that Meenie had come to Glasgow for thevery purpose of seeking him out.  And what was to become of young FrankLauder?  Indeed, by the time Meenie returned home, her sister hadsucceeded in nursing up a considerable volume of wrath; for sheconsidered she was doing well to be angry.But when the battle-royal did begin, it was at first all on one side.Meenie did not seek to deny anything.  She quite calmly admitted thatshe meant to marry Ronald, if ever their circumstances should be sofavourable.  She even confessed that she had come to Glasgow in the hopeof seeing him.  Had she no shame in making such an avowal?no, she said,she had none; none at all.  And what had she meant by encouraging Mr.Lauder?she had not encouraged him in any way, she answered; she wouldrather have had none of his attentions.But it was when the elder sister began to speak angrily andcontemptuously of Ronald that the younger sister's eyes flashed fire andher lips grew pale.'A gentleman?' she retorted.  'I might marry a gentleman? I tell youthere is no such gentlemanin manner, in disposition, in educationI saythere is no such gentleman as he is comes to this house!''Deary me!' said Agatha sarcastically, but she was rather frightened bythis unwonted vehemence.  'To think that a gamekeeper''He is not a gamekeeper!  He will never be a gamekeeper again.  But ifhe were, what should I care?  It was as a gamekeeper that I learnt toknow him.  It was as a gamekeeper that I gave him my love.  Do you thinkI care what occupation he follows when I know what he is himself?''Hoity-toity!  Here's romance in the nineteenth century!and from you,Meenie, that were always such a sensible girl!  But I'll have nothing todo with it.  Back you pack to the Highlands, and at once; that's what Ihave got to say.''I am quite willing to go back,' the girl said proudly.'Ah, because you think you will be allowed to write to him; and that allthe fine courting will go on that way; and I've no doubt you're thinkinghe's going to make money in Glasgowfor a girl as mad as you seem to bewill believe anything.  Well, don't believe that.  Don't believe youwill have any fine love-making in absence, and all that kind of stuff.Mother will take good care.  I should not wonder if she sent you to aschool in Germany, if the expense were not too greathow would you likethat?''But she will not.''Why, then?''Because I will not go.''Here's bravery!  I suppose you want something more heroicdrowningyourself because of your lost loveor locking yourself up in a conventto escape from your cruel parentssomething that will make the paperswrite things about you?  But I think you will find a difference afteryou have been two or three months at Inver-Mudal.  Perhaps you will havecome to your senses then.  Perhaps you will have learnt what it was tohave had a good prospect of settling yourself in lifewith a respectablewell-conducted young manof good familythe Lauders of Craig themselvesare not in the least ashamed that some of the family have been inbusinessyes, you will think of that, and that you threw the chance awaybecause of an infatuation about a drunken ne'er-do-weel''He is nothe is not!' she said passionately; and her cheeks were white;but there was something grasping her heart, and like to suffocate her,so that she could not protest more.'Anyway, I will take care that I shall have nothing to do with it,' theelder sister continued; 'and if you should see him again before you go,I would advise you to bid him good-bye, for it will be the last time.Mother will take care of that, or I am mistaken.'She left the room; and the girl remained aloneproud and pale andrebellious; but still with this dreadful weight upon her heart, ofdespair and fear that she would not acknowledge.  If only she could seeRonald!  One word from himone lookwould be enough.  But if this weretrue?if she were never to be allowed to hear from him again?they mighteven appeal to himself, and who could say what promise they might notextract from him, if they were sufficiently cunning of approach?  Theymight say it was for her welfarethey might appeal to his honourtheymight win some pledge from himand she knowing nothing of it all!  Ifonly she could see him for one moment! The very pulses of her bloodseemed to keep repeating his name at every throbyearning towards him,as it were; and at last she threw herself down on the sofa and buriedher head in the cushion, and burst into a wild and long-continued fit ofweeping and sobbing.  But this in time lightened the weight at herheart, at any rate; and when at length she rosewith tear-stained cheeksand tremulous lips and dishevelled hairthere was still something in herlook that showed that the courage with which she had faced her sisterwas not altogether gone; and soon the lips had less of tremulousnessabout them than of a proud decision; and there was that in the verycalmness of her demeanour that would have warned all whom it mightconcern that the days of her placid and obedient girlhood were over.*CHAPTER IX.**IN OTHER CLIMES.*Never was there a gayer party than this that was walking from the hoteltowards the shores of Lake George, on a brilliant and blue-skied Octobermorning.  Perhaps the most demureor the most professedly demurewasMiss Carry Hodson herself, who affected to walk apart a little; andswung carelessly the fur cape she carried in her hand; and refused allkinds of attentions from a tall, lank, long-haired young man who humblyfollowed her; and pretended that she was wholly engrossed with the airof'I'm in love, sweet Mistress Prue,Sooth I can't conceal it;My poor heart is broke in two-You alone can heal it.'As for the others of this light-hearted and laughing group of youngfolk, they were these: Miss Kerfoot, a fresh-coloured, plump,pleasant-looking girl, wearing much elaborate head-gear rather out ofproportion to her stature; her married sister, Mrs. Lalor, a grass-widowwho was kind enough to play chaperon to the young people, but whoseeffective black eyes had a little trick of roving on their ownaccountperhaps merely in quest of a joke; Dr. Thomas P. Tilley, anadolescent practitioner, who might have inspired a little moreconfidence in his patients had he condescended to powder his profusechestnut-brown hair; and, finally, the long and lank gentleman whowaited so humbly on Miss Hodson, and who was Mr. J. C. Huysen, of theChicago Citizen. Miss Carry had at lengthand after abundant meekintercession and explanations and expressions of remorsepardoned therepentant editor for his treatment of Ronald. It was none of his doing,he vowed and declared.  It was some young jackass whom the proprietorsof the paper had introduced to him.  The article had slipped in withouthis having seen it first.  If only her Scotch friend would writesomething more, he would undertake that the Chicago Citizen wouldtreat it with the greatest respect.  And so forth.  Miss Carry was for along time obdurate, and affected to think that it was poetical jealousyon his part (for the lank-haired editor had himself in former dayswritten and published sentimental versea fact which was not forgottenby one or two of the wicked young men on the staff of the N. Y. Sunwhen Mr. Huysen adventured into the stormy arena of politics); but inthe end she restored him to favour, and found him more submissive thanever. And in truth there was substantial reason for his submission.  TheChicago Citizen paid well enough, no doubt; but the editor of thatjournal had large views; and Miss Hodson's husbandif all stories weretruewould find himself in a very enviable position indeed.'Mayn't I carry your cape for you, Miss Hodson?' the tall editor said,in the most pleading way in the world.'No, I thank you,' she answered, civilly enough; but she did not turnher head; and she made believe that her mind was wholly set on'I'm in love, sweet Mistress Prue,Sooth I can't conceal it.'This timid prayer and its repulse had not escaped the sharp observationof Miss Kerfoot.'Oh,' said she, 'there's no doing anything with Carry, ever since wecame to Fort George.  Nothing's good enough for her; the hills are nothigh enough; and the place is not wild enough; and there's no catchingof salmon in drenching rainso there's no amusement for her. Amusement?I know where the trouble is; I know what amusement she wants; I knowwhat makes her grumble at the big hotels, and the decent clothes thatpeople prefer to wear, and the rattlesnakes, and all the rest.  Ofcourse this lake can't be like the Scotch lake; there isn't a handsomeyoung gamekeeper here for her to flirt with.  Flirtation, was it?  Well,I suppose it was, and no more.  I don't understand the manners andcustoms of savage nations. Look at her now.  Look at that thing on herhead.  I've heard of girls wearing true-love knots, and rings, andthings of that kind, to remind them of their sweethearts; but I neverheard of their going about wearing a yellow Tam-o'-Shanter.'Miss Carry smiled a superior smile; she would pay no heed to theseribald remarks; apparently she was wholly engrossed with'I'm in love, sweet Mistress Prue.''It isn't fair of you to tell tales out of school, Em,' the young matronsaid.'But I wasn't there.  If I had been, there would have been a littlebetter behaviour.  Why, I never!  Do you know how they teach girls touse a salmon-rod in that country?'The question was addressed to Mr. Huysen; but Miss Kerfoot's eyes werefixed on Miss Carry.'No, I don't,' he answered.'Oh, you don't know,' she said.  'You don't know. Really.  Well, I'lltell you.  The gamekeeperand the handsomer the betterstandsoverlooking the girl's shoulder; and she holds the rod; and he grips herhand and the rod at the same time.''But I know how,' the young Doctor interposed. 'See heregive me yourhandI'll show you in a minute.''Oh no, you shan't,' said she, instantly disengaging herself; 'this is arespectable country.  We don't do such things in New York State.  Ofcourse, over there it's different.  Oh yes; if I were theremyselfandand if the gamekeeper was handsome enoughand if he asked meto have a lesson in salmon-fishingdon't you think I would go?  Why, Ishould smile!'But here Miss Carry burst out laughing; for her friend had been caught.These two girls were in the habit of talking the direst slang betweenthemselves (and occasionally Miss Carry practised a little of it on herpapa), but this wickedness they did in secret; outsiders were notsupposed to know anything of that.  And now Dr. Tilley did not seem verymuch pleased at hearing Miss Kerfoot say 'I should smile'; and MissKerfoot looked self-conscious and amused and a little embarrassed; andCarry kept on laughing.  However, it all blew over; for now they weredown at the landing stage; and presently the Doctor was handing theminto the spick and span new cat-boat that he had just had sent throughfrom New York that autumn.Indeed it was a right joyous party that now went sailing out on theclear lapping waters; for there was a brisk breeze blowing; and twopairs of sweethearts in one small boat's cargo make a fair proportion;and Lake George, in October, before the leaves are beginning to fall, isjust about as beautiful a place as any one can want. The far low hillswere all red and brown and yellow with maple and scrub oak, except wherethe pines and the hemlocks interposed a dark blue-green; and nearer athand, on the silvery surface of the lake, were innumerable small woodedislands, with a line of white foam along the windward shores; andoverhead a perfectly cloudless sky of intense and brilliant blue.  Andif these were not enough for the gay voyagers, then there were otherthingslaughter, sarcasm, subtle compliments, daring or stolen glances;until at last the full tide of joy burst into song. Who can tell whichof them it was that started'I'se gwine back to Dixie, no more I'se gwine to wander,My heart's turned back to Dixie, I can't stay here no longer'?No matter; nor was it of much consequence whether the words of the songwere of a highly intellectual cast, nor whether the music was of themost distinguished character, so long as there was a chorus admirablyadapted for soprano, alto, tenor, and bass.  It was very speedily clearthat this was not the first time these four had practised the chorus(Mrs. Lalor was allowed to come in just where she pleased), nor wasthere any great sadness in their interpretation of the wordsI'se gwine back to Dix-ie, I'se gwine back toDix-ie, I's gwine where to or-ange blos-soms grow, ...... For I hear the chil-dren call-ing, I see their sad tearsfall-ing, My heart's turn'd back to Dix-ie, And I must go.[Illustration: Music fragment]It is impossible to say how often they repeated the chorus; until Mrs.Lalor asked the girls why they were so fond of singing about orangeblossoms, and then presently they turned to something else.All this time they were beating up against a stiff but steady head-wind;the Doctor at the tiller; the lank editor standing by the mast at thebow; the girls and their chaperon snugly ensconced in the capaciouscockpit, but still having to dodge the enormously long boom when theboat was put about.  The women-folk, of course, paid no attention to thesailing; they never do; they were quite happy in leaving the wholeresponsibility on the owner of the craft; and were entirely wrapped upin their own petty affairs.  Nay, so recklessly inconsiderate were theythat they began to be angry because Dr. Tilley would not get out hisbanjowhich was in the tiny cabin, or rather locker, at the bow.  Theywanted to sing 'Dancing in the Barn,' they said.  What was the use ofthat without a banjo to play the dance music?'Very well,' said the complaisant Doctor, 'we'll run into some quietcreek in one of the islands; and then I'll see what I can do for you.'No, no, they said; they wanted to sing sailing; they did not wish to goashore, or near the shore.  Well, the amiable Doctor scarce knew how toplease them, for he could not steer the boat and play the banjo at thesame time; and he was not sure about entrusting the safety of soprecious a cargo to the uncertain seamanship of the editor.  However,they were now a long way from Fort George; they might as well take a runback in that direction; and sothe boat having been let away from thewind and put on a fair course for the distant landing-stageMr. Huysenwas called down from the bow and directed as to how he should steer; andthen the Doctor went forward and got out the banjo.Now this 'Dancing in the Barn' (the words are idiotic enough) has a verycatching air; and no sooner had the Doctorwho was standing up on thebit of a deck forward, where Jack Huysen had beenbegun the tinklingprelude than the girls showed little movements of hands and feet, as ifthey were performing an imaginary 'cake-walk.''Oh, we'll meet at the ball in the evening,Kase I love to pass the time away'they were all singing at it now; they did not wait for any chorus; andMiss Carry had caught Miss Em's hand, and was holding it on high, andkeeping time to the music, as if she were in reality leading her downthe barn.As we move so grace-ful-lyWe're as hap-py as can beDen swing you partners all to-[Illustration: Music fragment]ge-ther, Kase now's the time for you to larn, Ban-josring-ing, Nig-gers sing-ing, And danc-ing in the barn.[Illustration: music fragment]Then came in the rippling danceplayed as a solo on the banjo; and socatching was it that the two girls stood up, and made believe to dance alittle.  You see, the boat was running free before the wind, and therewas scarcely any appreciable motion, though she was going at a goodspeed, for her mainsail was enormously large and the breeze was brisk.'I say, Huysen,' the Doctor called, while he was playing the dance,'look what you're about.  Never mind the singing.  Keep her bow straightfor the landing-stage.'Then the next verse began'Den we's off to work in de morning,Singing as we go out to de field,'and they all went at it with a will.  And then the chorus; and then thelight rippling dance[Illustration: music fragment]and the two girls were on their feet again, making believe to posture alittle, while the sharp clear notes of the banjo tinkled and tinkled,amid the steady swishing noise of the water along the side of the boat.But all of a sudden there was a startled cry of warningthe banjo wasdropped on the deck, and the Doctor sprung aft in a vain effort to checkwhat he had seen was coming; the next moment the great boom came heavilyswinging along, accelerating its pace as it went out to leeward, untilthere was a frightful crash that seemed to tear the whole craft topieces.  And then, in this wild lurch, what had happened?  Tilley wasthe first to see.  There was something in the water.  He tore off hiscoat and slipped over the boat's sideheeding nothing of the piercingscreams of those he had left, but shaking the wet from his eyes and noseand mouth, and looking all around him like a Newfoundland dog.  Then hecaught sight of a small floating objectsome dozen yards awayand hemade for that: it was the yellow Tam-o'-Shanter, he could see; then heheard a half-stifled cry just behind him, and turning round was justable to catch hold of Carry Hodson before she sank a second time.However, she was quite passiveperhaps she had been stunned by a blowfrom the boom; and he was an excellent swimmer; and he could easily keepher afloatif only Jack Huysen knew enough about sailing to get the boatback speedily.  It was in vain to think of swimming with her to theshore; the land was too far off; and the weight of her wet clothes wasincreasing.  He looked after the boat; it seemed a terrible distanceaway; but as far as he could make outthrough the water that wasblinding his eyesthey had got her round into the wind again and were nodoubt trying to make for him.Meanwhile, Jack Huysen had been so thunderstruck by what had occurred;when his own carelessness or an awkward gust of wind had caused thegreat boom to gybe, that for some seconds he seemed quite paralysed, andof course all this time the little craft was swinging along before thebreeze.  The shrieks of the women bewildered him, moreover.  And then itoccurred to him that he must get backsomehow, anyhow; and more byinstinct than of knowledge he jammed down the helm, and rounded the boatinto the wind, where the big sail began to flop about with the loosemainsheet dragging this way and that.  And then he set about tryinglittle experimentsand in a frantic nervousness all the same; he knew,or he discovered, that he must needs get in the mainsheet; andeventually the boat began to make uncertain progressuncertain, becausehe had been terrified, and was afraid to keep proper way on her, so thatshe staggered up into the wind incessantly.  But this at all events keptthem near the course they had come; and from time to time she got aheada bit; and the women had ceased their shrieking, and had subsided, theone into a terrified silence, the other into frantic weeping andclasping of her hands.'Can't youcan't you look out?  Why don't you look out for them?' hecried, though he scarce knew what he said, so anxious was he about thetiller and those puffs of wind that made the boat heel over whenever heallowed the sail to fill.And then there was a cryfrom Mrs. Lalor.'Looklookthis wayyou're going away from them.'He could only judge by the direction of her gaze; he put the boat about.She began to laugh, in a hysterical fashion.'Oh yes, yes, we are getting nearerwe are getting nearerhe sees usEm,Em, look!poor Carry!Oh, quick, quick with the boatquick, quick,quick!'But the wringing of her hands was of little avail; and indeed when theydid eventually draw cautiously close to the two people in the water, thebusiness of getting them dragged on board proved a difficult and anxiousmatter, for the girl was quite unconscious and lay in their hands like acorpse.  The young Doctor was very much exhausted too; but at least hepreserved his senses.  He sat down for a minute to recover his breath.'Jack,' he gasped, 'put my coat round herwrap her warmMrs. Lalor, getoff her boots and stockingschafe her feet and handsquick.'And then he rose and went to where she was lying and stooped over her.'Yes, yes, her heart is beatingcome away with that coat, man.'But it was his own coat that Jack Huysen had quickly taken off; and whenCarry Hodson was wrapped in it, and when the women were doing what theycould to restore her circulation, he fetched the other coat for theyoung Doctor, and made him put that on, though the latter declared hewas all right now.  And then the Doctor took the tiller, slacked out themainsheet, and once more they were running before the wind towards FortGeorge.  Not a word had been said about the cause of the mishap or itspossible consequences.These at firstand to Jack Huysen's inexpressible joyseemed to betrivial enough.  Immediately she had recovered consciousness she sateup, and began to say a few wordsthough with some difficulty; andindeed, so brave was she, and so determined to do something to relievethe obvious anxiety of these good friends of hers, that when at lengththey reached the landing-stage and got ashore she declared that she wasquite recovered, that she could walk to the hotel as well as any ofthem, that she had never felt better in her born days.  Nay, she made ajoke of the whole matter, and of her heavy skirts, and of the possiblecontents of Jack Huysen's coat-pockets; and when they did reach thehotel, and when she had changed her wet garments, she came down againlooking perfectly wellif a little bit tired.It was not until the afternoon that she began to complain of shiverings;and then again, when dinner time arrived, Mrs. Lalor came down with themessage that Carry had a slight headache, and would rather remain in herroom.  Next morning, too, she thought she would rather not get up; shehad a slight cough, and her breathing was difficult; she had most reliefwhen she lay quite still.'What does this mean, Tom?' Jack Huysen saidand as if he feared theanswer.'I hope it means nothing at all,' was the reply; but the young Doctorlooked grave, and moved away, as if he did not wish to have any furthertalking.However, there was no perceptible change for the worse that day; andMiss Carry, when she could speak at all, said that she was doing verywell, and implored them to go away on their usual excursions, and leaveher to herself. A servant might sit outside in the passage, she said; ifshe wanted her, she could ring.  Of course, this only sufficed to setEmma Kerfoot into a fit of weeping and sobbingthat Carry should thinkthem capable of any such heartlessness.But on the following morning matters were much more serious.  She couldhardly speak at all; and when she did manage to utter a few pantingwords she said it was a pain in her chest that was troubling hernotmuch; no, no, not much, she said; she wished they would all go away andamuse themselves; the pain would leave; she would be all right by andby.'Jack, look here,' said the young Doctor, when they were together; 'I'mafraid this is pneumoniaand a sharp attack too.''Is it dangerous?' Huysen said quickly, and with rather a pale face.The answer to this was another question;'She left her mother at home, didn't she?''Yes,' said he breathlessly.  'Do you want to send for her?  But thatwould be no use.  Her mother could not travel just now; she's too muchof an invalid; why, it was she who sent Carry away on this holiday.''Her father, then?''Why, yes, he's at home just now.  Shall I telegraph for him?''Nonot yetI don't want to frighten her.  We'll see in the morning.'But long before the morning came they discovered how things were goingwith her.  Late that night Mrs. Lalor, who had undertaken to sit up tillher sister should come to relieve her, stole noiselessly along to theroom of the latter and woke her.'Em, darling, who is Ronald?' she whispered.'Ronald?  I don't know,' was the answerfor she was still somewhatconfused.'Carry is asking that one Ronald should be sent fordo come and see her,EmI think she's wandering a littleshe says there's never any luck inthe boat except when Ronald is in itI don't understand it at all''But I doI do now,' said the girl, as she hastily got up and put adressing-gown and some wraps around her.'And you'll have to send for the Doctor at once, Maryhe said he wouldnot be in bed till two.  She must be in a feverthat's deliriumif shethinks she is in the Highlands again.'And delirium it was, though of no violent kind.  No, she lay quiteplacidly; and it was only at times that she uttered a few indistinctwords; but those around her now perceived that her brain had mixed upthis Lake George with that other Scotch lake they had heard of, and theyguessed that it was about salmon-fishing she was thinking when she saidthat it was Ronald that always brought good luck to the boat.*CHAPTER X.**A CHALLENGE.*On the evening of the day on which Agatha Gemmill had made herportentous discovery about the secret interviews between her sister andRonald, Mr. Gemmilla little, red-headed man with shrewd blue eyescamehome in very good spirits.'Look here, Aggiehere's an invitation for you,' he was beginningwhenhe saw-that something was wrong. 'What is it now?' he asked.And then the story was told himand not without a touch of indignationin the telling.  But Mr. Gemmill did not seem so horror-stricken as hiswife had expected; she began to emphasise the various points; and wasinclined to be angry with him for his coolness.'Girls often have fancies like thatyou know well enough, Agatha,' hesaid.  'All you have to do is to take a gentle way with her, and talkcommon sense to her, and it will be all right.  If you make a row, youwill only drive her into obstinacy.  She will listen to reason; she'snot a fool; if you take a quiet and gentle way with her''A quiet and gentle way!' his wife exclaimed.  'I will take no way withher at allnot I!  I'm not going to have any responsibility of the kind.Back she goes to the Highlands at oncethat's all the way I mean to takewith her.  See, there's a letter I've written to mother.''Then you mean to make a hash of this affair amongst you,' said he, withcalm resignation.  'You will merely drive the girl into a corner; andher pride will keep her there''Oh yes, men always think that women are so easily persuaded,' his wifebroke in.  'Perhaps you would like to try arguing with her yourself?But, any way, I wash my hands of the whole matter.  I shall have herpacked off home at once.''I don't think you will,' the husband said quietly. 'I was going to tellyou: the Lauders are giving a big dinner-party on the 27ththat is afortnight hence; and here is an invitation for the three of us; andFrank Lauder as good as admitted this morning that the thing was got upfor the very purpose of introducing Meenie to the old folk. Well, then,I have already written and accepted; and I will tell you thisI'm notgoing to offend the old gentleman just because you choose to quarrelwith your sister.''Quarrel?' she retorted.  'Oh yesshe never can do any wrong.  She hasmade a fool of you with her pretty eyesas she does to every man thatcomes to the house. Why, they're like a set of great babies when she'sin the room; and you would think from the way they go on that she wasthe Queen of Shebainstead of the ill-tempered little brat she is.'But Mrs. Gemmill was a sensible woman too.'Of course we can't offend the old people.  She'll have to stay.  But assoon as that is over, off she goes to the Highlands again; and there shecan stop until she has recovered her senses.'However, this invitation was but an additional grievance. She went withit at once to Meenie's room.'Look at that.  Read that.'The girl glanced at the formal notewith no great interest.'Do you know what that means?  That was meant to introduce you to FrankLauder's family and friends.''I do not wish to go,' Meenie said perversely.'But you'll have to go, for we have accepted for you. We can't offendand insult people simply because you are bent on making a fool ofyourself.  But this is what I want to say: I had intended sending youback to Inver-Mudal at once; but now you will have to stay with usanother fortnight.  Very well, during that time I forbid you to have anycommunication with that man, of any kind whateverdo you hear?'She sate silent.'Do you hear?''Yes, I hear,' she said.'Well?''Very well.''But it is not very well,' the elder sister said angrily. 'I want toknow what you mean to do.'The answer was given with perfect calmness.'I mean to do precisely as I have been doing.  I am not ashamed ofanything I have done.''What?  You are not ashamed?  Do you mean to tell me that you will keepon meeting that manin the public streetsmaking a spectacle of yourselfin the streets of Glasgowand bringing disgrace on yourself and yourfamily?''You are talking like a mad woman,' Meenie said proudly.'You will see whether I act like one.  I say you shall not be allowed tomisconduct yourself while you are under this roofthat I will make sureof.''What will you do?' the girl said, in a strangely taunting tone: indeed,one could scarcely have believed that this was Meenie that was speaking.'Lock me up in my room? They only do that in books.  Besides, Mr.Gemmill would prevent your doing anything so ridiculous.''Oh, it's he that would come to let you out?' the elder sister said.'You've discovered that, have you?  What more, I wonder!'But here the scene, which threatened to become more and more stormy,came to a sudden end.  There was a sharp call from belowMr. Gemmillhaving doubtless overheard some of these wild words.'Agatha, come downstairs at once!'So the girl was left once more aloneproud and pale and trembling alittle, but with her mind more obdurate than ever.  Nor would she godown to supper that night. Mr. Gemmill went twice to the door of herroom (his wife would not budge a foot) and begged her to comedownstairs. The first time she said she did not wish for any supper.The second time she said that if her conduct had been so disgraceful shewas not fit to associate with his family.  And so, being by nature akindly-hearted man, he went away and got some food for her, and carriedthe little tray to her room with his own handsa proceeding that onlymade his wife the angrier.  Why should she be spoilt and petted withsuch foolish indulgence?  Starvation was the best cure for her pride.But of course he was like the rest of the menmade simpletons of by apair of girl's gray eyes.Alas! all her pride and courage went from her in the long dark hours ofthe night, and her sister's threats assumed a more definite and terriblemeaning.  It was true she had a fortnight's respiteduring thatfortnight she was her own mistress and could do as she pleasedbutafter?  Would she be shut up in that little hamlet in the northernwilds, with absolutely no means of learning anything about Ronald, notpermitted to mention his name, cut off from him as though he were inanother world?  She saw month after month go byor year after yearevenwith no word or message coming to keep alive the fond hope in herbreast.  He might even be dead without her knowing.  And how all tooshort this fortnight seemed, during which she might still have somechance of seeing him and gaining from him some assurance with regard toa future that looked more than ever uncertain and vague.The next day it had been arranged between them that they were not tomeet, for he was to be at home all that day and busy; but her anxietywas too great; she resolved to go to his lodgings and ask for him.  Shehad never done that before; but now the crisis was too serious to lether heed what any one might sayindeed she did not think for a momentabout it.  So all the morning she went about the house, performing suchsmall duties as had been entrusted to her, and wondering when the heavyrain would leave off.  At last, about noon, when the dismal skies gaveno sign of clearing, she got her ulster and deerstalker's cap, put on athick pair of boots, and, armed with a stout umbrella, went out into theblack and dripping world.  No one had attempted to hinder her.And yet it was with some curious sense of shame that she timidly rangthe bell when she reached these obscure lodgings.  The door was in adusky entry; the landlady who answered the summons did not notice howthe girl's cheeks were unusually flushed when she asked if Mr. RonaldStrang were at home.'Yes, he is,' the woman said; and then she hesitated, apparently notquite knowing whether she should ask the young lady to step within ornot.'Will you tell him that I should like to see him for a momenthere!' shesaid.In less than a minute Ronald was with herand he had brought his cap inhis hand; for he had guessed who this was; and instinctively he knewthat he could not ask her to come within doors.  But when she said shehad something to say to him, and turned to face the dismal day outside,he could not but glance at the swimming pavements and the murkyatmosphere.'On such a morning, Meenie'Oh, but I am well wrapped up,' she said, quite happilyfor the meresight of him had restored her courage, 'and you shall have theumbrellayesI insisttake itwell, then, I ask you to take it as afavour, for I am not going to have you get wet on my account.'Of course he took the umbrellato hold over her; and so they went outinto the wet streets.'I am so glad to see you, Ronald,' she said, looking up with a face thattold its own story of joy and confidence; 'don't blame me; I have beenmiserable; I could not help coming to ask you for a littlea littlecomfort, I think, and hope''But what have you been doing to your eyes, Meenie, darling?  What kindof a look is that in them?''Well, I cried all last nightall the night through, I believe,' saidshe simply; but there was no more crying in her eyes, only light andlove and gladness.  'And now, the moment I see you I think I must havebeen so foolish.  The moment I see you everything seems right; I am nolonger afraid; my heart is quite light and hopeful again.''Ay, and what has been frightening you, then?'And then she told him all the storyas they walked along the wetpavements, with the bedraggled passers-by hurrying through the rain, andthe tramway-cars and omnibuses and carts and cabs keeping up theirunceasing roar.  But Agatha's threats were no longer so terrible tohernow that she had hold of Ronald's arm; she glanced up at him fromtime to time with eyes full of courage and confidence; a single glimpseof him had driven away all these dire spectres and phantoms.  Indeed, ifthe truth were known, it was he who was most inclined to take this newsseriously; though, of course, he did not show that to her.  No; heaffected to laugh at the idea that they could be kept from communicatingwith each other; if she were to be sent back to Inver-Mudal, he said,that was only anticipating what must have happened in any case; it wouldno doubt be a pity to miss these few stolen minutes from time to time;but would not that be merely a spur to further and constant exertion?'Ay, lass,' said he, 'if I could have any reasonable and fair prospectto put before them, I would just go to your friends at once; but all thewishing in the world, and all the work in the world, will not make nextspring come any the quicker; and until I'm a certificated forester I'mloth to bother Lord Ailine, or anybody else, about a place.  But what o'that?  It's not a long time; and unless Mr. Weems is making a desperatefool o' me, I've a good chance; and Lord Ailine will do his best for meamong his friends, that I know well.  In the meantime, if they will notlet you write to me''But, Ronald, how can they help my writing to you, or coming to see you,if I wish?''I was not thinking of your sister and her folk,' he answeredand hespoke rather gravely.  'I was thinking of your father and mother.  Well,it is not a nice thing for a young lass to be in opposition to her ownfolk; it's a sore trouble to both sides; and though she may be braveenough at first, time will tell on herespecially when she sees her ownfather and mother suffering through her defiance of them.''Then I am not to write to you, Ronald, if they say no?' she askedquickly, and with her face grown anxious again.Well, it was a difficult question to answer off-hand; and the noise inthe streets bothered him; and he was terribly troubled about Meeniehaving to walk through the rain and mud.'Will you do this for me, Meenie?' he said.  'I cannot bear to have yegetting wet like this.  If we were to get into an omnibus, now, and godown the town, I know a restaurant where we could go in and have acomfortable corner, and be able to talk in peace and quiet.  You and Ihave never broken bread together, quite by ourselves. Will you do that?'She did not hesitate for a moment.'Yesif you think soif you wish it,' she said.And so they went down to the restaurant, which was rather a big place,cut into small compartments; and one of these they had to themselves,for it was but half-past twelve as yet; and by and by a frugal littlelunch was before them.  The novelty of the situation was so amusingtoMeenie at leastthat for a time it drove graver thoughts awayaltogether.  She acted as mistress of the feast; and would insist on hishaving this or that; and wondered that he had never even tastedWorcester sauce; and was altogether tenderly solicitous about him;whereas he, on the other hand, wished not to be bothered by any of thesethings, and wanted only to know what Meenie meant to do when she wentback to Inver-Mudal.'But you must tell me what you would have me do,' she said timidly.'Well, I don't want you to quarrel with your mother and father on myaccount, and be living in constant wretchedness.  If they say you arenot to write to me, don't write''But you said a little while ago there would be no difficulty in ourhearing from each other,' she said, with wide open eyes.'I have been thinking about it, good lass,' said he, 'and I don't wantyou to anger your folk and have a heavy heart in consequence.  In themeantime you must look to themyou must do what they say.  By and by itmay be different; in the meantime I don't want you to get intotrouble''Then it's little you know how this will end, Ronald,' she said, rathersadly.  'I have thought over it more than you have.  If I go back toInver-Mudal prepared to do everything they wish me to doI mean mymother, not my father, for I don't know what he might saythen it isn'tonly that you will never hear from me, and that I shall never hear aword from you; there's more than that: I shall never see you again inthis world.'He turned very pale; and, scarcely knowing what he did, he stretched hishand over the narrow little table, and seized her hand, and held itfirm.'I will not let you go, then.  I will keep you here in Glasgow, with me,Meenie.  Do you think I can let you go away for ever?  For you are mine.I don't care who says ay or no; you are mine; my own true-hearted girl;the man or woman is not born that will sunder us two.'Of course he had to speak in a low tone; but the grip of his hand wassufficient emphasis.  And then he said, regarding her earnestly and yethalf-hesitatingly'There is one way that would give you the right to judge what was bestfor yourselfthat would give you the right to act or say what youpleasedeven to leave your father's house, if that was necessary.  Willyou become my wife, Meenie, before you go back to Inver-Mudal?'She started, as well she might; but he held her hand firm.'The thing is simple.  There is my brother the minister. We could walkover to his house, go through the ceremony in a few minutes, and youcould go back to your sister's, and no one be a bit the wiser.  And thensurely you would be less anxious about the future; and if you thought itright to send me a letter, you would be your own mistress as to that'It's a terrible thing, Ronald!''I don't see that, Meenie, dear; I've heard of more than one youngcouple taking their fate in their own hand that way.  And there's onething about itit "maks sikker."'They had some anxious talk over this sudden projecthe eager, shefrighteneduntil the restaurant began to get crowded with its usualmiddle-day customers.  Then Ronald paid his modest score, and they left;and now, as they made away for the western districts of the city, theday was clearing up somewhat, and at times a pale silvery gleam shonealong the wet pavements.  And still Meenie was undecided; and sometimesshe would timidly steal a glance at him, as if to assure herself andgain courage; and sometimes she would wistfully look away along thisbusy Sauchiehall Street, as if her future and all the coming years weresomehow at the end of it.  As for him, now that he had hit upon thisdaring project, he was eager in defence of it; and urged her to give herconsent there and then; and laboured to prove to her how much happiershe would be at Inver-Mudalno matter what silence or space of timemight interpose between themwith the knowledge that this indissolublebond united them.  Meenie remained silent for the most part, withwistful eyes; but she clung to his arm as if for protection; and theydid not hasten their steps on their homeward way.When they parted she had neither said yes nor no; but she had promisedto write to him that night, and let him know her decision.  And in themorning, he got this brief messagethe handwriting was not a littleshaky, but he had scarcely time to notice that, so rapid was the glancehe threw over the trembling lines:'DEAR RONALDIf it can be done quite, quite secretlyyes.  L.M.'The signature, it may be explained, consisted of the initials of a petname that he had bestowed on her.  She had found it first of all in someof those idle verses that he now copied out for her from time to time;and she had asked him how he had dared to address her in that way, whileas yet they were but the merest acquaintances. However, she did not seemvery angry.*CHAPTER XI.**A WEDDING.*This golden-radiant city of Glasgow!with its thousand thousandactivities all awakening to join the noise and din of the joyousmorning, and its over-arching skies full of a white light of hope andgladness and fair assurance of the future.  The clerks and warehousemenwere hurrying by to their desks and counters; work-folk were leisurelygetting home for their well-earned breakfast; smart young men andslim-waisted women were already setting the shop windows to rights;great lorries were clattering their loads of long iron bars through thecrowded streets; and omnibuses and tramway-cars and railway-trains werebringing in from all points of the compass their humming freight ofeager human bees to this mighty and dusky hive.  But dusky it did notappear to him, as he was speedily making his way across the town towardshis brother's house.  It was all transfigured and glorifiedtheinterminable thoroughfares, the sky-piercing chimneys, the masses ofwarehouses, the overhead network of telegraph-lines, the red-funnelledsteamers moving slowly away through the pale blue mist of theBroomielaw: all these were spectral in a strange kind of way, and yetbeautiful; and he could not but think that the great mass of this busymultitude was well content with the pleasant morning, and the nebulouspale-golden sunlight, and the glimpses of long cirrus cloud hanging farabove the city's smoke.  For the moment he had ceased to hang hishappiness on the chance of his succeeding with the Highland andAgricultural Society.  Something far more importantand wonderfulwasabout to happen.  He was about to secure Meenie to himself for ever andever.  Not a certificate in forestry, but Meenie's marriage-linesthatwas what would be in his pocket soon!  And after?well, the long months,or even years, might have to go by; and she might be far enough awayfrom him, and condemned to silencebut she would be his wife.And then, just as he had reached the south side of the river, hepausedpaused abruptly, as if he had been struck. For it had suddenlyoccurred to him that perhaps, after all, this fine project was notfeasible.  He had been all intent on gaining Meenie's acquiescence; and,having got that, had thought of nothing but winning over the ReverendAndrew into being an accomplice; but now he was quickly brought up bythis unforeseen obstaclecould Meenie, not being yet twenty-one, gothrough even this formal ceremony without the consent of her parents?It seemed to him that she could notfrom his reading of books.  He knewnothing of the marriage law of Scotland; but it appeared to him, fromwhat he could recollect of his reading, that a girl under twenty-onecould not marry without her parents' consent.  And this was but theletting in of waters. There were all kinds of other thingsthe necessityof having lived a certain time in this or that parish; the proclamationof bannswhich would be merely an invitation to her relatives tointerfere; and so on.  He resumed his walk; but with less of gayassurance.  He could only endeavour to fortify himself with thereflection that in the one or two instances of which he had heard ofthis very thing being done the young people had been completelysuccessful and had kept their secret until they judged the time fittingfor the disclosing of it.When he reached his brother's house, the Reverend Andrew was in hisstudy, engaged in the composition of the following Sunday's sermon; hewas seated at a little table near the fire; a pot of tea on thechimney-piece; a large Bible and Cruden's Concordance lying open on thesofa beside him.  The heavy, bilious-hued man rose leisurely, and rubbedhis purplish hands, and put them underneath his coat-tails, as he turnedhis back to the fire, and stood on the hearth-rug, regarding hisbrother.'Well, Ronald, lad, ye're not frightened for a cold morning, to come outwith a jacket like that.''The morning's well enough,' said Ronald briefly; and forthwith he laidbefore his brother the errand on which he had come, and besought hisassistance, if that were practicable.  He told the story simply andconcisely; not pleading any justification; but rather leaving the factsto speak for themselves.  And would his brother help?in other words,supposing there were no other obstacle in the way, would Andrew performthis ceremony for them, and so render their future proof against allcontingencies?  He was not asked for any advice; he was not asked toassume any responsibility; would he merely exercise this clericalfunction of his on their behalfseeing how urgent matters were?The Reverend Andrew was very much puzzled, not to say perturbed.  Hebegan to walk up and down the room; his head bent forward, his handsstill underneath his coat-tails.'You put me in a box, Ronald, and that's a fact,' said he.  'I'mthinking my wishes as a brother will be for setting themselves upagainst my duty as a minister of the Gospel.  For I dare not counsel anyyoung girl to defy the authority of her own people''She has not asked you for any counsel,' Ronald said curtly.  'Andbesides we don't know what the authority might be.  I dare say, if herfather knew all the circumstances, he would be on our side; and Isuppose he has as much right to speak as her little spitfire of amother.'This was hard on Mrs. Douglas, who had always treated Ronald withcourtesyif of a lofty and distant kind; but impetuous young people,when their own interests are at stake, are seldom just to their elders.However, the Reverend Andrew now began to say that, if he werealtogether an outsider, nothing would give him greater pleasure than tosee this wish of his brother's accomplished.  He had observed much, hesaid; he had heard more; he knew the saving influence that this girl hadexercised on Ronald's life; he could pray for nothing better than thatthese two should be joined in lawful bonds, towards the strengthening ofeach other, and the establishment of a mutual hope and trust.'But it would never do for me to be mixed up in it, Ronald,' hecontinued.  'When it came to be known, think of what ill-minded folkmight say.  I must have regard to my congregation as well as to myself;and what if they were to accuse me of taking part in a conspiracy?''A conspiracy?' Ronald repeated sharply.  'What kind of a conspiracy?To steal away a rich heiressis that it?  God bless me, the lass hasnothing beyond what she stands up in!  There's the sealskin coatGlengask gave her; they can have that back, and welcome.  Whatconspiracy would ye make out?''No, no, lad; I'm thinking what ill tongues might say.''Let them lick their own venom till they rot!  What care I?''Yes, yes, yes, lad; but ye're not a placed minister; ye've but yourselfand her to think of.  Now, just wait a bit.'He had gone back to his chair by the fire, and was seated there, staringinto the red coals.'I suppose you've heard of Dugald Mannering, of Airdrie?' he said, atlength.'Yes, indeed,' was the answer.  'Meeniethat isMiss Douglas and I wentto hear him the Sunday before last, but there was not a seat to be gotanywhereno, nor standing-room either.'This Mr. Mannering was a young divine of the U.P. Church who had anextraordinary popularity at this time among the young people of thesouth of Scotland, and especially the young people of Glasgow, and thatfrom a variety of causes.  He was a singularly eloquentpreacherflowing, ornate, and poetical; he was entirely unconventional,not to say daring, in his choice of subjects; his quotations were ascommonly from Shakespeare and Coleridge and Byron and Browning as fromthe usual pulpit authorities; he was exceedingly handsome, and ratherdelicate-lookingpale and large-eyed and long-haired; and he had refusedthe most flattering offers'calls' is the proper wordfrom variouswest-end congregations of Glasgow, because he considered it his duty toremain among the mining-folk of Airdrie.  When he did accept aninvitation to preach in this or that city church, the young people fromfar and near came flocking to hear him; and a good many of their elderstoo, though these were not without certain prickings of conscience as tothe propriety of devoting the Lord's day to what was remarkably like arevel in pure literature.'Dugald's coming over here this afternoon,' the elder brother continued,as if he were communing with himself. 'He's an enthusiastic kind offellowhe'll stick at nothing, if he thinks it's right.  I wish, now, Ihad that portraitbut Maggie's away to school by this time''What portrait?' Ronald asked.The Reverend Andrew did not answer, but rose, and slowly andthoughtfully left the room.  When he came back he had in his hand aphotograph of Meenie framed in a little frame of crimson velvet, andthat he put on the table: Ronald recognised it swiftly enough.'He has got an eye for a handsome young lass, has Dugald,' the ministersaid shrewdly.  'I'll just have that lying about, as it were.  Ay, it'sa straightforward, frank face, that; and one that has nothing to hide.I'll just have it lying about when Dugald comes over this afternoon, andsee if he doesna pick it up and have a good look at it.''But what mean ye, Andrew?' his brother said.'Why, then, lad, I think I'll just tell Dugald the whole story; and ifhe's not as hot-headed as any of ye to carry the thing through, I'll besurprised.  And I suppose if he marries ye, that's just as good as anyone else?for to tell you the truth, Ronald, I would rather not be mixedup in it myself.''And the banns?' said Ronald quickly.  'And the length of time in theparish?  And the consent of her mother and father?'The minister waved his hand with a superior air; these were trivialthings, not to say popular errors; what had been of real consequence wasthe extent to which he dared implicate himself.'I will not say,' he observed slowly, 'that I might not, in othercircumstances, have preferred the publication of banns.  It would havebeen more in order, and more seemly; for I do not like the interferenceof the secular arm in what should be a solely sacred office.  Besidesthat, there is even a premium put on publicity, as is right; fiveshillings for the one proclamation, but only half-a-crown if you havethem proclaimed two following Sundays.  Well, well, we mustn't complain;I see sufficient reason; from all I can learnand you were ever atruth-teller, Ronald, in season and out of season, as well I minditseems to me you are fulfilling the laws of God, and breaking none ofman's making; so just you go to the Registrar of the parish, and givehim the particulars, and deposit a half-crown as the worthy man's fee,and then, eight days hence, you call on him again, and he'll give you acertificate entitling you to be married in any house or church in theKingdom of Scotland.  And if there's no other place handy, ye're welcometo the room you're standing in at this minute; though I would as liefhave the marriage take place anywhere else, and that's the truth,Ronald; for although I can defend what little I have done to my ownconscience, I'm no sure I should like to stand against theclishmaclavers of a lot of old wives.''Where am I to find the Registrar, Andrew?' he asked: he was a littlebewildered by the rapidity with which this crisis seemed approaching.'I suppose you've a good Scotch tongue in your head, and can ask for theloan of a Directory,' was the laconic answer.  The Reverend Andrew hadtaken up the photograph again, and was regarding it.  'An honest, sweetface; as pretty a lass as ever a man was asked to work and strive forand to win.  Well, I do not wonder, Ronald, ladwith such a prize beforeyou  But off you go now, for I must get to my work again; and if youcome over and have a cup of tea in the afternoon, between four and five,I suppose Dugald Mannering will be here, and maybe ye'll be the besthand to explain the whole situation of affairs.'And so Ronald left to seek out the Registrar; and as he went awaythrough the busy and sunlit streets, he was asking himself if there wasnot one of all those people who could guess the secret that he carriedwith him in his bosom, and that kept his heart warm there.The Rev. Dugald Mannering, as it turned out, was not nearly so eager andenthusiastic as Ronald's brother had prophesied; for it behoves ayouthful divine to maintain a serious and deliberative countenance, whenweighty matters are put before him for judgment.  But afterwards, whenthe two young men were together walking away home through the duskystreets of Glasgow, the U.P. minister became much more frank andfriendly and communicative.'I see your brother's position well enough, Mr. Strang,' said he.  'Ican understand his diffidence; and it is but right that he should beanxious not to give the envious and ill-natured a chance of talking.  Heis willing to let the ceremony take place in his house, because you arehis brother.  If I were you, I would rather have it take place anywhereelseboth as being fairer to him, and as being more likely to ensuresecrecy, which you seem to think necessary.'Ronald's face burned red: should he have to ask Meenie to come to hishumble lodgings, with the wondering, and perhaps discontented andsuspicious, landlady, as sole on-looker?'Well, now,' the young preacher continued, 'when I come to Glasgow,there are two old maiden aunts of mine who are good enough to put me up.They live in Rose Street, Garnethill; and they're very kind old people.Now I shouldn't wonder at all if they took it into their head tobefriend the young lady on this occasionI mean, if you will allow me tomention the circumstances to them; indeed, I am sure they would;probably they would be delighted; indeed I can imagine theirexperiencing a fearful joy on finding this piece of romance suddenlytumbling into the middle of their prim and methodical lives.  The dearold creatures!I will answer for them.  I will talk to them as soon as Iget home now.  And do you think you could persuade Miss Douglas to callon them?'Ronald hesitated.'If they were to send her a message, perhaps''When are you likely to see her?''To-morrow morning, at eleven,' he said promptly.'Very well.  I will get one of the old ladies to write a little note toMiss Douglas; and I will post it to you to-night; and to-morrow morning,if she is so inclined, bring her along and introduce yourself andherwill you?  I shall be there, so there won't be any awkwardness; andI would not hurry you, but I've to get back to Airdrie to-morrowafternoon.  Is it a bargain?''So far as I am concernedyes; and many thanks to ye,' Ronald said, ashe bade his companion good-bye and went away home to his solitarylodgings.But when, the next morning, in Randolph Terraceand after he had rapidlytold her all that had happenedhe suggested that she should there andthen go along and call on the Misses Mannering, Meenie started back in akind of fright, and a flush of embarrassment overspread her face. Andwhywhyhe asked, in wonder.'Oh, Ronald,' she said, glancing hurriedly at her costume, 'thesetheseare the first of your friends you have asked me to go to see, and do youthink I could go like this?''This' meant that she had on a plain and serviceable ulster, a smartlittle hat with a ptarmigan's wing on it, a pair of not over-new gloves,and so forth.  Ronald was amazed.  He considered that Meenie was alwaysa wonder of neatness and symmetry, no matter how she was attired.  Andto think that any one might find fault with her!'Besides, they're not my friends,' he exclaimed.  'I never saw them inmy life.''They know who your brother is,' she said.  'Do you think I would giveany one occasion to say you were marrying a slattern?  Just look.'She held out her hands; the gloves were certainly worn.'Take them off, and show them the prettiest-shaped hands in Glasgowtown,' said he.'And my hairI know it is all rough and untidyisn't it now?' she said,feeling about the rim of her hat.'Well, it is a little,' he confessed, 'only it's far prettier that waythan any other.''Ronald,'she pleaded, 'some other timeon Friday morningwill Fridaymorning do?''Oh, I know what you want,' said he.  'You want to go and get on yoursealskin coat and your velvet hat and a new pair of gloves and all therest; and do you know what the old ladies are like to say when they seeyou?they'll say, "Here's a swell young madam to be thinking of marryinga man that may have but a couple o' pounds a week or so at first to keephouse on."''Oh, will they think that?' she said quickly.  'Well, I'llI'll go now,Ronaldbut please make my hair smooth behindand is my collar allright?'And yet it was not such a very dreadful interview, after all; for thetwo old dames made a mighty fuss over this pretty young creature; andvied with each other in petting her, and cheering her, and counsellingher; and when the great event was spoken of in which they also were toplay a part they affected to talk in a lower tone of voice, as if itwere something mysterious and tragic and demanding the greatest cautionand circumspection.  As for the young minister, he sate rather apart,and allowed his large soft eyes to dwell upon Meenie, with something ofwistfulness in his look.  He could do so with impunity, in truth, forthe old ladies entirely monopolised her.  They patted her on theshoulder, to give her courage; they spoke as if they themselves had gonethrough the wedding ceremony a hundred times.  Was she sure she wouldrather have no other witnesses?  Would she stand up at the head of theroom now, and they would show her all she would have to do? And theystroked her hand; and purred about her; and were mysteriously elatedover their share in this romantic business; insomuch that theyaltogether forgot Ronaldwho was left to talk politics with theabsent-eyed young parson.Between this interview and the formal wedding a whole week had toelapse; and during that time Agatha Gemmill saw fit to deal in quite adifferent way with her sister.  She was trying reason now, andpersuasion, and entreaty; and that at least was more agreeable to Meeniethan being driven into a position of angry antagonism.  Moreover, Meeniedid not seek to vaunt her self-will and independence too openly.  Hermeetings with Ronald were few; and she made no ostentatious parade ofthem.  She was civil to Mr. Frank Lauder when he came to the house.Indeed, Mr. Gemmill, who arrogated to himself the success of this mildermethod of treating the girl, was bold enough to declare that everythingwas going on well; Meenie had as much common sense as most folk; she wasnot likely to throw herself away; and when once she had seen old Mr.Lauder's spacious mansion, and picture galleries, and what not, andobserved the style in which the family lived, he made do doubt but thatthey would soon have to welcome Frank Lauder as a brother-in-law.Trembling, flushed at times, and pale at others, and clinging nervouslyto Ronald's arm, Meenie made her way up this cold stone staircase inGarnethill, and breathless and agitated she stood on the landing, whilehe rang the bell.'Oh, Ronald, I hope I am doing right,' she murmured.'We will let the future be the judge of that, my good girl,' he said,with modest confidence.The old dames almost smothered her with their attentions and kindness;and they had a bouquet for herall in white, as became a bride; and theyhad prepared other little nick-nacks for her adornment, so that they hadto carry her off to their own room, for the donning of these. And whenthey brought her backrose-red she was, and timid, and tremblingeach ofthem had one of her hands, as if she was to be their gift to give away;and very important and mysterious were they about the shutting of thedoors, and the conducting the conversation in whispers. Then theminister came forward, and showed them with a little gesture of his handwhere they should stand before him.The ceremonial of a Scotch wedding is of the simplest; but the addressto the young people thus entering life together may be just anything youplease.  And in truth there was a good deal more of poetry than oftheology in these mellifluent sentences of the Rev. Mr. Mannering's, ashe spoke of the obligations incurred by two young folk separatingthemselves from all others and resolved upon going through the world'sjoys and sorrows always side by side; and the old dames were muchaffected; and when he went on to quote the verses'And on her lover's arm she leant,And round her waist she felt it fold,And far across the hills they wentIn that new world which is the old,'they never thought of asking whether the lines were quite apposite; theywere sobbing unaffectedly and profusely; and Meenie's eyes were ratherwet too.  And then, when it was all over, they caught her to their armsas if she had been their own; and would lead her to the sofa, andoverwhelm her with all kinds of little attentions and caresses. Cake andwine, tooof course she must have some cake and wine!'Should I, Ronald?' she said, looking up, with her eyes all wet andshining and laughing: it was her first appeal to the authority of herhusband.'As you likeas you like, surely.'But when they came to him he gently refused.'Not on your wedding day!' the old ladies exclaimedand then he raisedthe glass to his lips; and they did not notice that he had not touchedit when he put it down again.And so these two were married nowwhatever the future might have instore for them; and in a brief space of timeas soon, indeed, as shecould tear herself away from these kind friends, she had dispossessedherself of her little bits of bridal finery; and had bade a long andlingering good-bye to Ronald; and was stealing back to her sister'shouse.*CHAPTER XII.**IN DARKENED WAYS.*It was with feelings not to be envied that Jack Huysen stalked up anddown the verandah in front of this Fort George hotel, or haunted thelong, echoing corridors, eager to question any one who had access to thesick room.  All the mischief seemed to be of his doing; all the help andcounsel and direction in this time of distress seemed to be afforded byhis friend Tilley.  It was hethat is, Huysenwhose carelessness had ledto the boating catastrophe; it was the young Doctor who had plunged intothe lake and saved Carry's life.  Not only that, but it was on hisshoulders that there now seemed to rest the burden of saving her asecond time; for she had gone from bad to worse; the fever had increasedrapidly; and while Doctor Tilley was here, there, and everywhere in hisquiet but persistent activity, taking elaborate precautions about thetemperature of the room, instructing the two trained nurses whom he hadtelegraphed for from New York, and pacifying the mental vagaries of thepatient as best he might, what could Jack Huysen do but wander aboutlike an uneasy spirit, accusing himself of having wrought all this evil,and desperately conscious that he could be of no use whatever inmitigating its results.She was not always delirious.  For the most part she lay moaningslightly, breathing with the greatest difficulty, and complaining ofthat constant pain in her chest; while her high pulse and temperaturetold how the fever was rather gaining upon her than abating.  But thenagain, at times, her face would grow flushed; and the beautiful softblack eyes would grow strangely bright; and she would talk in pantingwhispers, in an eager kind of way, and as if she had some secret totell.  And always the same delusion occupied her mindthat this was LochNaver; that they had got into trouble somehow, because Ronald was not inthe boat; that they had sent for Ronald, but he had gone away; and soforth.  And sometimes she uttered bitter reproaches; Ronald had beenill-treated by some one; nay, she herself had been to blame; and who wasto make up to him for what he had suffered at her hands?'Not that he cared,' she said, rather proudly and contemptuously, onehushed evening that the Doctor was trying to soothe her into quietude.'No, no.  Ronald care what a conceited scribbling schoolboy said abouthim? No!  I should think not.  Perhaps he never knewindeed, I think henever knew.  He never knew that all our friends in Chicago were asked tolook on and see him lectured, and patronised, and examined.  Oh! soclever the newspaper-writer waswith his airs of criticism andpatronage! But the coward that he wasthe cowardto strike in thedarkto sit in his little den and strike in the dark!  Why didn't JackHuysen drag him out?  Why didn't he make him sign his name, that wecould tell who this was with his braggart airs?  The coward!  Why,Ronald would have felled him!  No! no!  He would not have looked the waythe poor pretentious fool was going.  He would have laughed.  Doctor, doyou know who he was?  Did you ever meet him?''But who, Miss Carry?' he said, as he patted her hot hand.She looked at him wonderingly.'Why, don't you know?  Did you never hear?  The miserable creature thatwas allowed to speak ill of our Ronald.  Ah! do you think I haveforgotten?  Does Jack Huysen think I have forgotten?  No, I will notforgetyou can tell him, I will not forgetI will not forgetI will notforget'She was growing more and more vehement; and to pacify her he had toassure her that he himself would see this matter put straight; and thatit was all right, and that ample amends would be made.Of course, he paid no great attention to these delirious wanderings; butthat same evening, when he had gone into the smoking-room to report toJack Huysen how things were going, this complaint of Miss Carry'shappened to recur to his mind.'Look here, Jack, what's this that she's always talking aboutseems toworry her a good dealsome newspaper articleand you're mixed up in it,toosomething you appear to have said or done about that fellow herfather took such a fancy forI mean, when they were in Scotland''Oh, I know,' said the editor, and he blushed to the very roots of hislong-flowing hair.  'I know.  But it's an old story.  It's all forgottennow.''Well, it is not,' the young Doctor said 'and that's the fact.  Sheworries about it continually.  Very strange, now, how her mind justhappened to take that bent.  I don't remember that we were talking muchabout the Scotch Highlands.  But they must have been in her head whenshe fell ill; and now it's nothing else.  Well, what is it about thenewspaper article, anyway?''Why, nothing to make a fuss about,' Jack Huysen said, but ratheruneasily.  'I thought it was all forgotten.  She said as much.  Wonderyou don't remember the articlesuppose you missed itbut it was aboutthis same Highland fellow, and some verses of hisit was young Reganwrote itconfound him, I'd have kicked him into Lake Michigan before Ilet him write a line in the paper, if I'd have known there was going tobe this trouble about it. And I don't think now there was much to findfault withI only glanced over it before sending it to her, and itseemed to me favourable enoughof course, there was a little of the dehaut en bas businessyou know how young fellows like to writebut itwas favourablevery favourable, I should sayhowever, she chose to workup a pretty high old row on the strength of it when she came home, and Ihad my work cut out for me before I could pacify her.  Why, you don'tsay she's at that again?  Women are such curious creatures; they hold onto things so; I wonder, now, why it is she takes such an interest inthat fellowafter all this time?''Just as likely as not the merest coincidencesome trifle that got holdof her brain when she first became delirious,' the young Doctor said.'I suppose the boating, and the lake, and all that, brought backrecollections of the Highlands; and she seems to have been fascinated bythe life over therethe wildness of it caught her imagination, Isuppose.  She must have been in considerable danger once or twice, Ishould guess; or perhaps she is mixing that up with the mishap of theother day.  Well, I know I wish her father were here.  We can't do morethan what is being done; still, I wish he were here.  If he can getthrough to Glen Falls to-night, you may depend on it he'll come alongsomehow.'By this time Jack Huysen was nervously pacing up and downthere was noone but themselves in the room.'Now, look here, Tom,' he said, presently, 'I wish you would tell me,honour bright: was it a squall that caught the boat, or was it downrightcarelessness on my part?  I may as well know.  I can't take more shameto myself anyhowand to let you jump in after her, too, when I'm abetter swimmer than you areI must have lost my head altogether''And much good you'd have done if you had jumped in,' the Doctor said,'and left the two women to manage the boat.  How should we have gotpicked up, then?''But about that gybing, nowwas it my fault?''No, it was mine,' the Doctor said curtly.  'I shouldn't have given upthe tiller.  Fact is, the girls were just mad about that "Dancing in theBarn"; and I was fool enough to yield to them.  I tell you, Jack, itisn't half as easy as it looks steering a boat that's running fairbefore the wind; I don't blame you at all; I dare say there was a nastypuff that caught you when you weren't looking; anyhow, it's a blessingno one was hit by the boomthat was what I feared at first for MissHodson when I found her insensibleI was afraid she had been hit aboutthe head''And you don't think it was absolute carelessness?' the other saidquickly.  'Mind, I was steering straight for the pier, as you said.''Oh, well,' said the young Doctor evasively, 'if you had noticed intime, you knowor when I called to youbut perhaps it was too late then.It's no use going back on that now; what we have to do now is to fightthis fever as well as we can.''I would take it over from her if I could,' Jack Huysen said, 'andwillingly enough.'It was not until early the next morning that Mr. Hodson arrived.  Helooked dreadfully pale and harassed and fatigued; for the fact was hewas not in Chicago when they telegraphed for him; some business affairshad called him away to the south; and the news of his daughter's illnessfollowed him from place to place until it found him in a remote cornerof Louisiana, whence he had travelled night and day without givinghimself an hour's rest.  And now he would not stay to dip his hands andface in cold water after his long and anxious journey; he merely asked afew hurried questions of the Doctor; and then, stealthily and ontip-toe, and determined to show no sign of alarm or perturbation, hewent into Carry's room.She had been very delirious during the nighttalking wildly andfrantically in spite of all their efforts to soothe her; but now she layexhausted, with the flushed face, and bluish lips, and eager, restlesseyes so strangely unlike the Carry of other days.  She recognised him atoncebut not as a new-comer: she appeared to think he had been there allthe time.'Have you seen him, pappa?' she said, in that eager way.  'Did you seehim when you were out?''Who, darling?' he said, as he sate down beside her and took her wastedhand in his.'Why, Ronald, to be sure!  Oh, something dreadful was about to happen tohimI don't know what it wassomething dreadful and dreadfuland Icalled outat the windowat the window thereand nurse says it is allright nowall right now''Oh yes, indeed,' her father said gently, 'you may depend it is allright with Ronald now.  Don't you fret about that.''Ah, but we neglected him, pappa, we neglected him; and I worst of any,'she went on, in that panting, breathless way.  'It was always thesamealways thinking of doing something for him, and never doing it.  Imeant to have written to the innkeeper for his address in Glasgow; butnothat was forgotten too.  And then the spliced rod, that George was tohave got for meI wanted Ronald to have the best salmon-rod that Americacould makebut it was all talkingall talking.  Ah, it was never talkingwith him when he could do us a serviceand the other boatmen gettingmoney, of courseand he scarcely a "thank you" when we came away.  Whydidn't George get the fishing-rod?''It's all right, Carry, darling,' her father said, whispering to her,'you lie quiet now, and get well, and you'll see what a splendidsalmon-rod we'll get for Ronald.  Not that it would be of much use tohim, you see, when he's in Glasgow with his books and studies; but itwill show him we have not forgotten him.  Don't you trouble about it,now; I will see it is all right; and you will give it to him yourself,if we go over there next spring, to try the salmon-fishing again.''Then you will take George with you, pappa,' she said, regarding himwith her burning eyes.'Oh yes; and you''Not me, not me,' she said, shaking her head.  'I am going away.  TheDoctor doesn't know; I know.  They have been very kind; butbutaskthem, pappa, not to bother me to take things nowI want to be let alone,now you are hereit will only be for a little while''Why, what nonsense you talk!' he saidbut his heart was struck with asudden fear, for these few straggling sentences she had uttered withoutany appearance of delirium. 'I tell you, you must hasten to get well andstrong; for when George and you and I go to Scotland, there will be agreat deal of travelling to do.  You know we've got to fix on that pieceof land, and see how it is all to be arranged and managed, so thatGeorge will have a comfortable little estate of his own when he comes ofage; or maybe, if it is a pretty place, we may be selfish and keep it inour own handseh, Carry?and then, you see, we shall have to have Ronaldtravel about with us, to give us his advice; and the weather may be bad,you know, you'll have to brace yourself up. There, now, I'm not going totalk to you any more just now.  Lie still and quiet; and mind you doeverything the Doctor bids youwhy, you to talk like that!you!  I neverthought you would give in, Carry: why, even as a schoolgirl you had thepluck of a dozen!  Don't you give in; and you'll see if we haven't thosetwo cobles out on Loch Naver before many months are over.'She shook her head languidly; her eyes were closed now.  And he was forslipping out of the room but that she clung to his hand for a moment.'Pappa,' she said, in a low voice, and she opened her eyes and regardedhimand surely at this moment, as he said to himself, she seemedperfectly sane and reasonable, 'I want you to promise me something.''Yes, yes,' he said quickly: what was it he would not have promised inorder to soothe and quiet her mind at such a time?'I don't know about going with you and George,' she said, slowly, andapparently with much difficulty.  'It seems a long way offa longtimeandand I hardly care now what happens.  But you will look afterRonald; you must promise me that, pappa; and tell him I was sorry; Isuppose he heard the shooting was taken, and would know why we did notgo over in the autumn; but you will find him out, pappa, and see what heis doing; and don't let him think we forgot him altogether.''Carry, darling, you leave that to me; it will be all right with Ronald,I promise you,' her father said eagerly.  'Why, to think you should havebeen worrying about that!  Oh! you will see it will be all right aboutRonald, never fear!what would you say, now, if I were to telegraph tohim to come over and see you, if only you make haste and get well?'These assurances, at all events, seemed to pacify her somewhat; and asshe now lay still and quiet, her father stole out of the room, hopingthat perhaps the long-prayed-for sleep might come to calm the feveredbrain.But the slow hours passed, and, so far from any improvement becomingvisible, her condition grew more and more serious.  The two doctorsforDoctor Tilley had summoned in additional aidwere assiduous enough; but,when questioned, they gave evasive answers; and when Mr. Hodson beggedto be allowed to telegraph to a celebrated Boston physician, who wasalso a particular friend of his own, asking him to come along at once,they acquiesced, it is true, but it was clearly with the view ofsatisfying Mr. Hodson's mind, rather than with any hope of advantage tothe patient.  From him, indeed, they scarcely tried to conceal theextreme gravity of the case.  Emma Kerfoot and Mrs. Lalor were quietedwith vague assurances; but Mr. Hodson knew of the peril in which hisdaughter lay; and, as it was impossible for him to go to sleep, and ashis terrible anxiety put talking to these friends out of the question,he kept mostly to his own room, walking up and down, and fearing everymoment lest direr news should arrive.  For they had been much ofcompanions, these two; and she was an only daughter; and her bright,frank, lovable characterthat he had watched from childhood growing moreand more beautiful and coming into closer communion with himself as yearafter year went byhad wound its tendrils round his heart.  That Carry,of all people in the world, should be taken away from them so, seemed sostrange and unaccountable: she that was ever so full of life and gaietyand confidence.  The mother had been an invalid during most of hermarried life; the boy George had not the strongest of constitutions; butCarry was always to the fore with her audacious spirits andlight-heartedness, ready for anything, and the best of travellingcompanions.  And if she were to go, what would his life be to him?thelight of it gone, the gladness of it vanished for ever.That afternoon the delirium returned; and she became more and morewildly excited; until the paroxysm passed beyond all bounds.  Sheimagined that Ronald was in some deadly peril; he was alone, with no oneto help; his enemies had hold of him; they were carrying him off, tothrust him into some black lake; she could hear the waters roaring inthe dark.  It was in vain that the nurse tried to calm her and to reasonwith her; the wild, frightened eyes were fixed on vacancy; and again andagain she made as if she would rush to his help, and would then sinkback exhausted and moaning, and heaping reproaches on those who wereallowing Ronald to be stricken down unaided. Then the climax came, quiteunexpectedly.  The nursewho happened at the moment to be alone with herin the roomwent to the side-table for some more ice; and she wastalking as she went; and trying to make her charge believe thateverything was going on well enough with this friend of hers inScotland.  But all of a sudden, when the nurse's back was thus turned,the girl sprang from the bed and rushed to the window.  She tore asidethe curtains that had been tied together to deaden the light; she tuggedand strained at the under sash; she was for throwing herself outto flyto Ronald's succour.'See, see, see!' she cried, and she wrenched herself away from thenurse's frightened grasp.  'Oh, don't you see that they are killinghimthey are killing himand none to help!  RonaldRonald!  Oh, whatshall I do? Nurse, nurse, help me with the windowquickquickoh, don'tyou hear him calling?and they are driving him down to the lakehe willbe in the water soonand lostlostlostRonald!Ronald!'Nay, by this time she had actually succeeded in raising the under sashof the window a few inchesnotwithstanding that the nurse clung roundher, and tried to hold her arms, while she uttered shriek after shriekto call attention; and there is no doubt that the girl, grown quitefrantic, would have succeeded in opening the window and throwing herselfout, had not Mrs. Lalor, alarmed by the shrieking of the nurse, rushedin.  Between them they got her back into bed; and eventually she calmeddown somewhat; for, indeed, this paroxysm had robbed her of all herremaining strength.  She lay in a kind of stupor now; she paid no heedto anything that was said to her; only her eyes were restlesswhen anyone entered the room.Dr. Tilley was with her father; the younger man was apparently calm,though rather pale; Mr. Hodson made no effort to conceal his agony ofanxiety.'I can only tell you what is our opinion,' the young Doctor said,speaking for himself and his brother practitioner.  'We should be aspleased as you could be to have Dr. Macartney here; but the delaywell,the delay might prove dangerous.  Her temperature is 107you know whatthat means?''But this rolling up in a wet sheetthere is a risk, isn't there?' theelder man said; and how keenly he was watching the expression of theyoung Doctor's face!'I have only seen it used in extreme cases,' was the answer.  'If shewere my own daughter, or sister, that is what I would do.''You have a right to speakyou have already saved her life once,' herfather said.'If we could only bring about a profuse perspiration,' the young Doctorsaid, a little more eagerlyfor he had been maintaining a professionallydispassionate manner; 'and then if that should end in a long deepsleepeverything would go well then.  But at present every hour thatpasses is against usand her temperature showing no sign of abating.''Very well,' her father said, after a moment's involuntary hesitation.'If you say the decision rests with me, I will decide.  We will not waitfor Macartney.  Do what you propose to doI know you think it is for thebest.'And so it proved.  Not once, but twice, within a space of seven days,had this young Doctor saved Carry Hodson's life.  That evening they wereall seated at dinner in the big dining-hallMrs. Lalor and her sister,Jack Huysen, and Carry's fatherthough the food before them did not seemto concern them much.  They were talking amongst themselves, but ratherabsently and disconnectedly; and, what was strange enough, they spoke inrather low tones, as if that were of any avail.  Dr. Tilley came in, andwalked quickly up to the table; and quite unwittingly he put his hand onEmma Kerfoot's shoulder.'I have good news,' said he, and there was a kind of subdued triumph inhis eyes.  'She is sleeping as soundlyas soundly as any human beingever slepteverything has come off wellwhy, I am as happy as if I hadbeen declared President!'  But instantly he perceived that thisexuberance of triumph was not in accordance with professional gravity.'I think there is every reason to be satisfied with the prospect,' hecontinued in more measured tones, 'and now that Dr. Sargent is with her,and the night nurse just come down, I think I will take the opportunityto get something to eatfor I have forgotten about that sincebreakfast.''Oh, Tom!' cried Miss Kerfoot reproachfully; and presently everybody atthe table was showering attentions on this young man.'And may I go in and see her now?' said Miss Kerfoot, preparing to stealaway.'No,' was the peremptory answer.  'No one.  Every half hour of a sleeplike that is worth its weight in goldwell, that's a muddle, but youknow what I mean.  It's worth a cart-load of gold, anyway.  I hopeshe'll go on for twenty-four hours, or thirty-six, for the matter ofthat.  Oh, I can tell you it is quite refreshing to look at hertalkabout the sleep of an infant!you never saw an infant sleeping as deepand sound as that; and I shouldn't wonder now if her temperature weredown another degree by midnight.'But he saw that Mr. Hodson was still terribly agitated.'Well, sir, would you like to go in and see her for a moment?  I havetold the nurse to leave the door half an inch open, and there's a screento keep off the draught; I dare say we can slip in without disturbingher.'And so it was that Mr. Hodson saw his daughter againnot with flushedcheeks and dilated eye, but lying still and calm, a very weight of sleepappearing to rest on her eyelids.  And when he came out of the roomagain, he pressed the young man's handit was a message of thanks toodeep for words.All that night she slept; and all next day she slept, without a moment'sintermission.  When, at length, she opened her eyes, and stirred alittle, Emma Kerfoot was by the bedside in an instant.'Dear Carry!' she said.  'Do you want anything?'She shook her head slightly; she was excessively weak; but the look inher eyes was one of calm intelligence; it was clear that the deliriumhad left her.'Do you know that your father is here?''Why?' she managed to say.'Because you have been so ill!  Don't you know? Don't you recollect?''YesI know, a little,' she said.  'Where is Jack Huysen?''He is here in the hotel too.  Oh, how glad they will all be to hearthat you are quite yourself again.  And I must go and tell them, as soonas nurse comes; for, you know, you'll have a long pull before you,Carry; and if you don't get quite well again not one of us will everforgive ourselves for bringing you to Lake George.  And there's JackHuysen, poor fellow, he has just been distracted; and all the time youwere ill you never had a word for himthough he used to haunt thepassage outside just like a ghostwell, well, you'll have to make it upto him.'At this moment the nurse appeared, and Miss Kerfoot was free to departon her joyful errand.  Of course, she was for summoning everybodyandJack Huysen among the rest; but the doctors interposed; their patientmust be kept perfectly quiet; in the meantime no one but her father wasto have access to her room.Now Mr. Hodson, when he was seated there by her side, and chattinglightly and carelessly about a variety of indifferent matters (sheherself being forbidden to speak), considered that he could not dobetter than relieve her mind of any anxiety she may have entertained onRonald's account.  All through her delirium that was the one thing thatseemed to trouble her; and, lest she should revert to it, he thought hemight as well give her ample assurance that Ronald should be lookedafter.  However, to his great surprise, he found that she was quiteignorant of her having made these appeals on behalf of Ronald.  She didnot seem to know that she had been in dire distress about him,reproaching herself for their treatment of him, and begging her fatherto make such atonement as was yet possible.  No; when she was allowed tospeak a little, she said quite calmly that it was a pity they had notbeen able to go to Scotland that autumn; that they should have writtento Ronald to see how he was getting on; and that her father, if hevisited the old country, in the coming spring, ought surely to seek himout, and remind him that he had some friends in America who would beglad to hear of his welfare.  But Mr. Hodson said to himself that hewould do a little more than that.  He was not going to recall thepromise that he had made to his daughter when, as he thought, she laynear to the very gates of death. What had put that pathetic solicitudeinto her mind he knew not; but she had made her appeal, with dumbfever-stricken eyes and trembling voice; and he had answered her andpledged his word.  Ronald should be none the loser that this sick girlhad thought of him when that she seemed to be vanishing away from themfor ever; surely in that direction, as well as any other, the fathermight fitly give his thank-offeringfor the restitution to life of thesole daughter of his house?*CHAPTER XIII.**IN ABSENCE.*Loch Naver lay calm and still under the slow awakening of the dawn.  Allalong the eastern horizon the low-lying hills were of a velvet-texturedolive-greena mysterious shadow-land where no detail was visible; butoverhead the skies were turning to a clear and luminous gray; theroseate tinge was leaving the upper slopes of Ben Loyal and Ben Clebrig;and the glassy surface of the lake was gradually whitening as thered-golden light changed to silver and broadened up and through the widesleeping world.  An intense silence lay over the little hamlet among thetrees; not even a dog was stirring; but a tiny column of pale blue smokeissuing from one of the chimneys told that some one was awakewithinprobably the yellow-haired Nelly, whose duties began at an earlyhour.And what was Meenieor Rose Meenie, or Love Meenie, as she might becalled now, after having all those things written about herwhat was shedoing awake and up at such a time?  At all events, her morning greetingwas there confronting her.  She had brought it and put it on the littledressing-table; and as she brushed out her beautiful abundant browntresses, her eyes went back again and again to the pencilled lines, andshe seemed not ill-pleased.  For this was what she read:The hinds are feeding upon the hill,And the hares on the fallow lea;Awake, awake, Love Meenie!Birds are singing in every tree;And roses you'll find on your window-sillTo scent the morning air;Awake, awake, Love Meenie,For the world is shining fair!O who is the mistress of bird and flower?Ben Clebrig knows, I ween!Awake, awake, Love Meenie,To show them their mistress and queen!And it could hardly be expected that she should bring any very keencritical scrutiny to bear on these careless verses of Ronald's (of whichshe had now obtained a goodly number, by dint of wheedling and entreaty,and even downright insistence), seeing that nearly all of them werewritten in her praise and honour; but even apart from that she hadconvinced herself that they were very fine indeed; and that one or twoof them were really pathetic; and she was not without the hope that,when the serious affairs of life had been attended to, and a littleleisure and contemplation become possible, Ronald might turn to hispoetical labours again and win some little bit of a name for himselfamongst a few sympathetic souls here and there.  That he could do so, ifhe chose, she was sure enough.  It was all very well for him to makelight of these scraps and fragments; and to threaten to destroy them ifshe revealed the fact of their existence to anybody; but she knew theirworth, if he did not; and when, in this or that magazine or review, shesaw a piece of poetry mentioned with praise, her first impulse was toquickly read it in order to ask herself whether Ronaldgiven time andopportunitycould not have done as well.  Moreover, the answer to thatquestion was invariably the same; and it did not leave her unhappy.  Itis true (for she would be entirely dispassionate) he had not writtenanything quite so fine as 'Christabel'as yet; but the years were beforehim; she had confidence; the world should seeand give him a fittingwelcome all in good time.When, on this clear morning, she was fully equipped for her walk, shestole silently down the stair, and made her way out into the nowawakening day.  The little hamlet was showing signs of life.  Astable-lad was trying to get hold of a horse that had strayed into themeadow; a collie was barking its excitement over this performance; thepretty Nelly appeared carrying an armful of clothes to be hung out todry.  And then, as Meenie passed the inn, she was joined by Harry theterrier, who, after the first grovelling demonstrations of joy, seemedto take it for granted that he was to be allowed to accompany her.  Andshe was nothing loth.  The fact was, she was setting out in quest ofthat distant eyrie of Ronald's of which he had often told her; and shedoubted very much whether she would be able to find it; and sheconsidered that perhaps the little terrier might help her.  Would he notnaturally make for his master's accustomed resting-place, when they weresufficiently high up on the far Clebrig slopes?So they went away along the road together; and she was talking to hercompanion; and telling him a good deal more about Glasgow, and about hismaster, than probably he could understand.  Considering, indeed, thatthis young lady had just been sent home in deep disgrace, she seemed inexcellent spirits.  She had borne the parting admonitions andupbraidings of her sister Agatha with a most astonishing indifference;she had received her mother's reproaches with a placid equanimity thatthe little woman could not understand at all (only that Meenie's faceonce or twice grew fixed and proud when there was some scornfulreference to Ronald); and she had forthwith set about nursing herfatherwho had caught a severe chill and was in bedwith an amiableassiduity, just as if nothing had happened. As regards her father, heeither did not know, or had refused to know, about Meenie's lamentableconduct.  On this one point he was hopelessly perverse; he never wouldlisten to anything said against this daughter of his; Meenie was alwaysin the rightno matter what it was.  And so, notwithstanding that shehad been sent home as one in disgrace, and had been received as one indisgrace, she installed herself as her father's nurse with an amazingself-content; and she brought him his beef-tea and port-wine at thestated intervals (for the good Doctor did not seem to have as much faithin drugs as might have been anticipated); and she kept the peat-firepiled up and blazing; and she methodically read to him the InvernessCourier, the Glasgow Weekly Citizen, and the Edinburgh Scotsman;and when these were done she would get out a volume of old ballads, orperhaps 'The Eve of St. Agnes,' or 'Esmond,' or 'As You Like It,' or the'Winter's Tale.'  It did not matter much to him what she read; he likedto hear the sound of Meenie's voicein this hushed, half-slumberous,warm little room, while the chill north winds howled without, chasingeach other across the driven loch, and sighing and sobbing away alongthe lonely Strath-Terry.But on this fair morning there was not a breath stirring; and thecurving bays and promontories and birch-woods, and the far hills beyond,were all reflected in the magic mirror of the lake, as she sped alongthe highway, making for the Clebrig slopes.  And soon she was mountingthesewith the light step of one trained to the heather; and ever as shegot higher and higher the vast panorama around her grew wider and morewide, until she could see hills and lochs and wooded islands that neverwere visible from Inver-Mudal.  In the perfect silence, the sudden whirrof a startled grouse made her heart jump.  A harethat looked remarkablylike a cat, for there was as much white as bluish-brown about itgot upalmost at her feet and sped swiftly away over heath and rock until itdisappeared in one of the numerous peat-hags.  There was a solitaryeagle slowly circling in the blue; but at so great a height that it wasbut a speck.  At one moment she thought she had caught sight of theantlers of a stag; and for a second she stopped short, ratherfrightened; but presently she had convinced herself that these were buttwo bits of withered birch, appearing over the edge of a rock far aboveher.  It was a little chillier here; but the brisk exercise kept herwarm.  And still she toiled on and on; until she knew, or guessed, thatshe was high enough; and now the question was to discover thewhereabouts of the clump of rocks under shelter of which Ronald wasaccustomed to sit, when he had been up here alone, dreaming day-dreams,and scribbling the foolish rhymes that had won to her favour, whateverhe might think of them.At first this seemed a hopeless task; for the whole place was awilderness of moss and heather and peat-hags, with scarcely adistinctive feature anywhere.  But she wandered about, watching thelittle terrier covertly; and at last she saw him put his nose in aninquiring way into a hole underneath some tumbled boulders.  He turnedand looked at her; she followed.  And now there could be no doubt thatthis was Ronald's halting-place and pulpit of meditation; for sheforthwith discovered the hidden case at the back of the littlecavethough the key of that now belonged to his successor.  And so, inmuch content, she sate herself down on the heather; with all the wide,sunlit, still world mapped out before herthe silver thread of MudalWater visible here and there among the moors, and Loch Meadie with itsislands, and Ben Hope and Ben Loyal, and Bonnie Strath-Naver, and thefar Kyle of Tongue close to the northern Sea.Now, what had Love Meenie climbed all this height for? what but to readherself back into the time when Ronald used to come here alone; and tothink of what he had been thinking; and to picture herself as still anunconscious maiden wandering about that distant little hamlet thatseemed but two or three dots down there among the trees.  This, orsomething like it, has always been a favourite pastime with lovers; butMeenie had an additional source of interest in the possession of apacket of those idle rhymes, and these were a kind of key to bygonemoods and days.  And so it was herein this strange stillnessthatRonald had written these verses about her; and perhaps caught a glimpseof her, with his telescope, as she came out from the cottage tointercept the mail; when little indeed was she dreaming that he had anysuch fancies in his head.  And now as she turned over page after page,sometimes she laughed a little, when she came to something that seemed atrifle audaciousand she scarcely wondered that he had been afraid ofher seeing such bold declarations: and then again a kind of compunctionfilled her heart; and she wished that Ronald had not praised her so; forwhat had she done to deserve it; and how would her coming life be madeto correspond with these all too generous and exalted estimates of hercharacter?  Of course she liked well enough to come upon praises of herabundant brown hair, and her Highland eyes, and the rose-leaf tint ofher cheeks, and the lightness of her step; for she was aware of thesethings as well as he; and glad enough that she possessed them, for hadthey not commended her to him?  But as for these other wonderful gracesof mind and disposition with which he had adorned her?  She was sadlyafraid that he would find her stupid, ill-instructed, unread, fractious,unreasonable, incapable of understanding him.  Look, for example, how hecould imbue these hills and moors and vales with a kind of magic, sothat they seemed to become his personal friends.  To her they were alldead things (except Mudal Water, at times, on the summer evenings), butto him they seemed instinct with life.  They spoke to him; and he tothem; he understood them; they were his companions and friends; who buthimself could tell of what this very hill of Clebrig was thinking?Ben Clebrig's a blaze of splendourIn the first red flush of the morn,And his gaze is fixed on the eastwardTo greet the day new-born;And he listens a-still for the bellowOf the antlered stag afar,And he laughs at the royal challenge,The hoarse, harsh challenge of war.But Ben Clebrig is gentle and placidWhen the sun sinks into the west,And a mild and a mellow radianceShines on his giant crest;For he's looking down upon MeenieAs she wanders along the road,And the mountain bestows his blessingOn the fairest child of God.There again: what could he see in her (she asked herself) that he shouldwrite of her so?  He had declared to her that the magic with which allthis neighbourhood was imbued was due to her presence there; but howcould she, knowing herself as she did, believe that?  And how to showher gratitude to him; and her faith in him; and her confidence as to thefuture?  Well, she could but give to him her life and the love that wasthe life of her lifeif these were worth the taking.But there was one among these many pieces that she had pondered overwhich she returned to again and again, and with a kind of pride; andthat not because it sounded her praises, but because it assured herhopes.  As for Ronald's material success in life, she was troubled withlittle doubt about that.  It might be a long time before he could cometo claim his wife; but she was content to wait; in that direction shehad no fears whatever.  But there was something beyond that.  She lookedforward to the day when even the Stuarts of Glengask and Orosay shouldknow what manner of man this was whom she had chosen for her husband.Her mother had called him an uneducated peasant; but she paid no heed tothe taunt; rather she was thinking of the time when Ronaldother thingsbeing settledmight perhaps go to Edinburgh, and get to know some oneholding the position there that Jeffrey used to hold (her reading was alittle old-fashioned) who would introduce him to the world of lettersand open the way to fame.  She knew nothing of Carry Hodson's lucklessattempt in this direction; she knew, on the contrary, that Ronald wasstrongly averse from having any of these scraps printed; but she said toherself that the fitting time would come.  And if these unpolishedverses are found to belie her confident and proud prognostications as tothe future, let it be remembered that she was hardly nineteen, that shewas exceedingly warm-hearted, that she was a young wife, and day andnight with little to think about but the perfections of her lover, andhis kindness to her, and his praise of her, and the honour in which heheld her.  However, this piece was not about Meenie at allhe had calleditBY ISLAY'S SHORES.By Islay's shores she sate and sang:'O winds, come blowing o'er the sea,And bring me back my love againThat went to fight in Germanie!'And all the livelong day she sang,And nursed the bairn upon her knee:'Balou, balou, my bonnie bairn,Thy father's far in Germanie,But ere the summer days are gane,And winter blackens bush and tree,Thy father will we welcome hameFrae the red wars in Germanie.'O dark the night fell, dark and mirk;A wraith stood by her icily:'Dear wife, I'll never more win hame,For I am slain in Germanie.On Minden's field I'm lying stark,And Heaven is now my far countrie,Farewell, dear wife, farewell, farewell,I'll ne'er win hame frae Germanie.'And all the year she came and went,And wandered wild frae sea to sea;'O neighbours, is he ne'er come back,My love that went to Germanie?'Port Ellen saw her many a time;Round by Port Askaig wandered she:'Where is the ship that's sailing inWith my dear love frae Germanie?'But when the darkened winter fell:'It's cold for baith my bairn and me;Let me lie down and rest awhile:My love's away frae Germanie.O far away and away he dwells;High Heaven is now his fair countrie;And there he standswith arms outstretchedTo welcome hame my bairn and me!'And if Meenie's eyes were filled with tears when she had re-read thefamiliar lines, her heart was proud enough; and all her kinsmen ofGlengask and Orosay had no terrors for her; and her mother's taunts nosting.  Of course, all this that she hoped for was far away in thefuture; but even as regarded the immediate years before her she refusedto be harassed by any doubt.  Perhaps she would not have asserted in setterms that a knack of stringing verses together proved that the writerhad also the capacity and knowledge and judgment necessary to drain andfence and plant and stock a Highland estate; abstract questions of thekind had little interest for her; what she did knowwhat formed thefirst article of her creed, and the last, and the interveningthirty-sevenwas that Ronald could do anything he put his mind to.  Andthis was a highly useful and comfortable belief, considering all hercircumstances.And so she sped away down the mountain-side againglad to havediscovered Ronald's retreat; and so light and swift was her step thatwhen she at length reached the inn she found herself just ahead of themail coming in from the south.  Of course she waited for letters; andwhen Mrs. Murray had opened the bags, it was found there were three forthe Doctor's cottage.  The first was from Ronald; that Meenie whippedinto her pocket.  The second was for Mrs. Douglas, and clearly inAgatha's handwriting.  The third, addressed to Meenie, had an Americanstamp on it; and this was the one that she opened and read as shequietly walked homeward.It was a long letter; and it was from Miss Carry Hodson; who first ofall described the accident that had befallen her, and her subsequentillness; and plainly intimated that no such thing would have happenedhad her Highland friends been in charge of the boat.  Then she went onto say that her father had just sailed for Europe; that he had businessto transact in Scotland; that he wished to see Ronald; and would MissDouglas be so very kind as to ask the innkeeper, or the post-master atLairg, or any one who knew Ronald's address in Glasgow, to drop apost-card to her father, addressed to the Langham Hotel, London, withthe information. Moreover, her father had intimated his intention oftaking the Loch Naver salmon-fishing for the next season, if it was notas yet let; and in that case the writer would be overjoyed to findherself once more among her Inver-Mudal friends.  Finally, and as a kindof reminder and keepsake, she had sent by her father a carriage-rug mademostly of chipmunk skins; and she would ask Miss Douglas's acceptance ofit; and hoped that it would keep her knees snug and warm and comfortablewhen the winds were blowing too sharply along Strath-Terry.Of course, all this was wonderful news to come to such a quiet andremote corner of the world; but there was other news as well; and thatby an odd coincidence. Some little time after Mrs. Douglas had receivedthe letter from Agatha, she came to Meenie.'Williamina,' said she, 'Agatha writes to me about Mr. Frank Lauder.''Yes?' said Meenie, rather coldly.'He intends renting the salmon-fishing on the loch for the next season;and he will be alone at the inn.  Agatha hopes that we shall beparticularly civil to him; and I hopeI say, I hopethat every one inthis house will be.  It is of the greatest importance, considering howhe stands with regard to Mr. Gemmill.  I hope he will be received inthis house with every attention and kindness.'And then the pompous little dame left.  It was almost a challenge shehad thrown down; and Meenie was at first a little bewildered.  Whatthen?would this young man, for the six weeks or two months of his stay,be their constant visitor?  He would sit in the little parlour, eveningafter evening; and how could she keep him from talking to her, and howcould she keep him from looking at her?  And Ronaldher husbandwould befar away; and alone, perhaps; and not allowed a word with her; whereasshe would have to be civil and polite to this young man; and even if sheheld her eyes downcast, how could she help his regarding her face?And then she suddenly bethought her of Miss Hodson's letter.  What?wasMr. Hodson after the fishing too? And ought not the last tenant to havethe refusal?  And should not the Duke's agent know?  And why should shenot write him a notejust in case no inquiry had been made?  She had notmuch time to think about the matter; but she guessed quickly enoughthat, if an American millionaire and the son of a Glasgow merchant areafter the same thing, and that thing purchasable, the American is likelyto get it.  And why should Ronald's wife be stared at and talked to bythis young manhowever harmless and amiable his intentions?So she went swiftly to her own room and wrote as follows:'DEAR MR. CRAWFORDI have just heard from Miss Hodson, whose father washere last spring, that he is on his way to Europe; and that he hopes tohave the fishing again this year.  I think I ought to let you know, justin case you should have any other application for the loch.  I am sureMiss Hodson will be much disappointed if he does not get it.  Yourssincerely,'MEENIE S. DOUGLAS.''There,' said she, and there was a little smile of triumph about hermouth, 'if that doesn't put a spoke in the wheel of Mr. Frank Lauder,poor fellow, I don't know what will.''Spiteful little cat,' her sister Agatha would have called her, had sheknown; but women's judgments of women are not as men's.*CHAPTER XIV.**WANDERINGS IN THE WEST.*On a singularly clear and brilliant morning in February a large andheavy screw-steamer slowly crept out of the land-locked little harbourof Portree, and steadily made away for the north.  For her the squallyBen Inivaig at the mouth of the channel had no terrors; indeed, whatcould any vessel fear on such a morning as this?  When they got well outinto Raasay Sound, it seemed as if the whole world had been changed intoa pantomime-scene.  The sky was calm and cloudless; the sea was as glassand of the most dazzling blue; and those masses of white that appearedon that perfect mirror were the reflections of the snow-powderedislandsRaasay, and Fladda, and South Ronathat gleamed and shone andsparkled there in the sun.  Not often are the wide waters of the Minchso fair and calm in mid-winter; the more usual thing is northerly gales,with black seas thundering by into Loch Staffin and Kilmaluag Bay, orbreaking into sheets and spouts of foam along the headlands of AirdPoint and Ru Hunish.  This was as a holiday trip, but for the sharpcold.  The islands were white as a solan's wingsave along the shores;the sea was of a sapphire blue; and when they got up by Rona lightbehold the distant snow-crowned hills of Ross and Cromarty rose faintand spectral and wonderful into the pale and summer-like sky.  The mensung 'Fhir a Bhata' as they scoured the brass and scrubbed the decks;the passengers marched up and down, clapping their hands to keep themwarm; and ever as the heavy steamer forged on its way, the world of bluesea and sky and snow-white hills opened out before them, until somedeclared at last that in the far north they could make out the ShiantIsles.Now under shelter of the companion-way leading down into the saloonthree men were standing, and two of them were engaged in an animatedconversation.  The third, who was Mr. Hodson, merely looked on andlistened, a little amused, apparently.  One of the othersa tall,heavy-bearded, north-Highland-looking manwas Mr. Carmichael, a famousestate-agent in London, who had run two or three commissions together asan excuse for this midwinter trip. The third member of the group wasRonald, who was hammering away in his usual dogmatic fashion.'Pedigree?  The pride of having ancestors?' he was saying.  'Why,there's not a man alive whose ancestry does not stretch as far back asany other man's ancestry.  Take it any way ye like: if Adam was ourgrandfather, then we're all his grandchildren; or if we are descendedfrom a jellyfish or a monkey, the line is of the same length for all ofusfor dukes, and kings, and herd-laddies.  The only difference is this,that some know the names of their forefathers, and some don't; and thepresumption is that the man whose people have left no story behind themis come of a more moral, useful, sober, hard-working race than the manwhose forbears were famous cut-throats in the middle ages, or dishonestlawyers, or king's favourites.  It's plain John Smith that has made upthe wealth of this country; and that has built her ships for her, anddefended her, and put her where she is; and John Smith had his ancestorsat Cressy and Agincourt as well as the restay, and they had the bulk ofthe fighting to do, I'll be bound; but I think none the worse of himbecause he cannot tell you their names or plaster his walls with coatsof arms.  However, it's idle talking about a matter of sentiment, andthat's the fact; and so, if you'll excuse me, I'll just go down into thecabin, and write a couple o' letters.'A minute or so after he had disappeared, Mr. Hodson (who lookedmiserably cold, to tell the truth, though he was wrapped from head toheel in voluminous furs) motioned his companion to come a few yardsaside, so that they could talk without fear of being overheard.'Now,' said he, in his slow and distinct way, 'now we are alone, I wantyou to tell me what you think of that young man.''I don't like his politics,' was the prompt and blunt answer.'No more do I,' said Mr. Hodson coolly.  'But for another reason.  Youcall him a Radical, I call him a Tory. But no matterI don't mean aboutpolitics.  Politics?who but a fool bothers his head aboutpoliticsunless he can make money out of them?  No, I mean somethingmore practical than that.  Here have you and he been together thesethree days, talking about the one subject nearly all the timeI mean themanagement of these Highland estates, and the nature of the ground, andwhat should be done, and all that.  Well, now, you are a man of greatexperience; and I want you to tell me what you think of this youngfellow.  I want you to tell me honestly; and it will be in strictconfidence, I assure you.  Now, has he got a good solid grip of thething?  Does he know?  Does he catch on?  Is he safe?  Is he to betrusted?''Oh, there, there, there!' said the big estate-agent, interruptingthrough mere good-nature.  'That's quite another thingquite anotherthing.  I've not a word to say against him thereno, quite the otherwaya shrewd-headed, capable fellow he is, with a groundwork ofpractical knowledge that no man ever yet got out of books.  Assharp-eyed a fellow as I have come across for many a daydidn't you seehow he guessed at the weak points of that Mull place before ever he setfoot ashore?  Quick at figures, toooh yes, yes, a capable fellow I callhim; he has been posting himself up, I can see; but it's where hispractical knowledge comes in that he's of value.  When it's a questionof vineries, or something like that, then he goes by the bookthat'suseless.'Mr. Hodson listened in silence; and his manner showed nothing.'I have been thinking he would be a valuable man for me,' the agent saidpresently.'In your office?' said Mr. Hodson, raising his eyes.'Yes.  And for this reason.  You see, if he would only keep away fromthose dd politics of his, he is a very good-natured fellow, and he hasgot an off-hand way with him that makes shepherds, and keepers, andpeople of that kind friendly; the result is that he gets all theinformation that he wantsand that isn't always an easy thing to get.Now if I had a man like that in my office, whom I could send with aclient thinking of purchasing an estateto advise himto get at thetruthand to be an intelligent and agreeable travelling-companion at thesame timethat would be a useful thing.''Say, now,' continued Mr. Hodson (who was attending mostly to his ownmeditations), 'do you think, from what you've seen of this young man,that he has the knowledge and business-capacity to be overseerfactor,you call it, don't you?of an estatenot a large estate, but perhapsabout the size of the one we saw yesterday or this one we are going tonow?  Would he go the right way about it? Would he understand what hadto be doneI mean, in improving the land, and getting the most out ofit'Mr. Carmichael laughed.'It's not a fair question,' said he.  'Your friend Strang and I are toomuch of one opinionay, on every point we're agreedfor many's the longtalk we've had over the matter.''I knowI know,' Mr. Hodson said.  'Though I was only half-listening;for when you got to feu-duties and public burdens and things of thatkind I lost my reckoning. But you say that you and Strang are agreed asto the proper way of managing a Highland estate: very well: assumingyour theories to be correct, is he capable of carrying them out?''I think soI should say undoubtedlyI don't think I would myselfhesitate about trusting him with such a placethat is, when I had madesufficient inquiries about his character, and got some money guaranteeabout his stewardship. But then, you see, Mr. Hodson, I'm afraid, if youwere to let Strang go his own way in working up an estate, so as to getthe most marketable value into it, you and he would have differentopinions at the outset.  I mean with such an estate as you would findover there,' he added, indicating with his finger the long stretch ofwild and mountainous country they were approaching.  'On rough and hillyland like that, in nine cases out of ten, you may depend on it, it'sforesting that pays.''But that's settled,' Mr. Hodson retorted rather sharply. 'I havealready told you, and Strang too, that if I buy a place up here I willnot have a stag or a hind from end to end of it.''Faith, they're things easy to get rid of,' the other saidgood-naturedly.  'They'll not elbow you into the ditch if you meet themon the road.''No; I have heard too much.  Why, you yourself said that the very nameof American stank in the nostrils of the Highlanders.''Can you wonder?' said Mr. Carmichael quietly: they had been talking thenight before of certain notorious doings, on the part of an Americanlessee, which were provoking much newspaper comment at the time.'Well, what I say is thisif I buy a place in the Highlandsand no onecan compel me to buy itit is merely a fancy I have had for two or threeyears back, and I can give it up if I choosebut what I say is, if I dobuy a place in the Highlands, I will hold it on such conditions that Ishall be able to bring my family to live on it, and that I shall be ableto leave it to my boy without shame.  I will not associate myself with asystem that has wrought such cruelty and tyranny.  No; I will not allowa single acre to be forested.''There's such a quantity of the land good for nothing but deer,' Mr.Carmichael said, almost plaintively.  'If you only saw it!you're goingnow by what the newspaper writers saypeople who never were near adeer-forest in their lives.''Good for nothing but deer?  But what about the black cattle thatRonaldthat Strangis always talking about?' was the retortand Mr.Hodson showed a very unusual vehemence, or, at least, impatience.'Well, I don't care. That has got nothing to do with me.  But it has gotto do with my factor, or overseer, or whatever he is.  And between himand me this is how it will lie: "If you can't work my estate, big orsmall as it may be, without putting the main part of it under deer, andbeginning to filch grazings here and there, and driving the croftersdown to the sea-shore, and preventing a harmless traveller from having aSunday walk over the hills, then out you go.  You may be fit for someother place: not for mine."  Then he went on in a milder strain.  'AndStrang knows that very well.  No doubt, if I were to put him in aposition of trust like that, he might be ambitious to give a goodaccount of his stewardship; I think, very likely he would be, for he's ayoung man; but if I buy a place in the Highlands, it will have to bemanaged as I wish it to be managed.  When I said that I wanted the mostmade out of the land, I did not mean the most money.  No.  I should beglad to have four per cent for my investment; if I can't have that, Ishould be content with three; but it is not as a commercial speculationthat I shall go into the affair, if I go into it at all.  My wants aresimple enough.  As I tell you, I admire the beautiful, wild country; Ilike the peoplewhat little I have seen of them; and if I can get apicturesque bit of territory somewhere along this western coast, Ishould like to give my family a kind of foothold in Europe, and I daresay my boy might be glad to spend his autumns here, and have a turn atthe grouse.  But for the most part of the time the place would be undercontrol of the factor; and I want a factor who will work the estateunder certain specified conditions.  First, no foresting.  Then I wouldhave the crofts revaluedas fairly as might be; no crofter to be liableto removal who paid his rent.  The sheep-farms would go by their marketvalue, though I would not willingly disturb any tenant; however, in thatcase, I should be inclined to try Strang's plan of having those blackcattle on my own account.  I would have the cottars taken away from thecrofts (allowing for the rent paid to the crofter, for that would be butfair, when the value of the crofts was settled), and I would build forthem a model village, which you might look upon as a philanthropic fadof my own, to be paid for separately.  No gratuitous grazing anywhere tocrofter or cottar; that is but the parent of subsequent squabbles.  ThenI would have all the draining and planting and improving of the estatedone by the local hands, so far as that was practicable.  And then Ishould want four per cent return on the purchase-money; and I should notbe much disappointed with three; and perhaps (though I would not admitthis to anybody) if I saw the little community thriving andsatisfiedand reckoning also the honour and glory of my being a king onmy own small domainI might even be content with two per cent.  Now, Mr.Carmichael, is this practicable?  And is this young fellow the man toundertake it?  I would make it worth his while.  I should not like tosay anything about payment by results or percentage on profits; thatmight tempt him to screw it out of the poorer people when he was leftmasterthough he does not talk like that kind of a fellow.  I wrote toLord Ailine about him; and got the best of characters.  I went and sawthe old man who is coaching him for that forestry examination; he isquite confident about the resultnot that I care much about that myself.What do you say now?  You ought to be able to judge.'Mr. Carmichael hesitated.'If you got the estate at a fair price,' he said at length, 'it might bepracticable, though these improvement schemes suck in money as a spongesucks in water.  And as for this young fellowwell, I should think hewould be just the man for the placeactive, energetic, shrewd-headed,and a pretty good hand at managing folk, as I should guess. But, youknow, before giving any one an important post like thatand especiallywith your going back to America for the best part of every yearI thinkyou ought to have some sort of money guarantee as a kind of safeguard.It's usual.  God forbid I should suggest anything against the ladhe'sas honest looking as my own two boys, and I can say no more thanthatstill, business is business. A couple of sureties, now, of 500apiece, might be sufficient.''It's usual?' repeated Mr. Hodson absently.  'Yes, I suppose it is.Pretty hard on a young fellow, though, if he can't find the sureties.  Athousand pounds is a big figure for one in his position.  He has told meabout his father and his brother: they're not in it, anyhowboth of themwith hardly a sixpence to spare.  However, it's no use talking about ituntil we see whether this place here is satisfactory; and even thendon't say a word about it to him; for if some such post were to beoffered to himand if the securities were all right and so forthit hasgot to be given to him as a little present from an American young lady,if you can call it a present when you merely propose to pay a man a fairday's wage for a fair day's work. And I am less hopeful now; the threeplaces we have looked at were clearly out of the question; and myHighland mansion may prove to be a castle in Spain after all.'Late that night they reached their destination; and early next morningat the door of the hotelwhich looked strangely deserted amid the wintrylandscapea waggonette was waiting for them, and also the agent for theestate they were going to inspect.  They started almost directly; and along and desperately cold drive it proved to be; Mr. Hodson, for one,was glad enough when they dismounted at the keeper's cottage where theirtramp over the ground was to beginhe did not care how rough the countrymight be, so long as he could keep moving briskly.Now it had been very clear during these past few days that Ronald hadnot the slightest suspicion that Mr. Hodson, in contemplating thepurchase of a Highland estate (which was an old project of his), hadalso in his eye some scheme for Ronald's own advancement.  All the waythrough he had been endeavouring to spy out the nakedness of the land,and to demonstrate its shortcomings.  He considered that was hisbusiness.  Mr. Hodson had engaged himat what he considered themunificent terms of a guinea a day and all expenses paidto come andgive his advice; and he deemed it his duty to find out everything,especially whatever was detrimental, about such places as they visited,so that there should be no swindling bargain.  And so on this Ross-shireestate of Balnavrain, he was proving himself a hard critic.  This washopelessly bleak; that was worthless bog-land;why was there no fencingalong those cliffs?where were the roads for the peats?who had hadcontrol over the burning of the heather?wasn't it strange that allalong these tops they had not put up more than a couple of coveys ofgrouse, a hare or two, and a single ptarmigan?  But all at once, whenthey had toiled across this unpromising and hilly wilderness, they cameupon a scene of the most startling beautyfor now they were looking downand out on the western sea, that was a motionless mirror of blue andwhite; and near them was a wall of picturesquely wooded cliffs; andbelow that again, and sloping to the shore, a series of natural plateausand carefully planted enclosures; while stretching away inland was afertile valley, with smart farmhouses, and snug clumps of trees, and ameandering river that had salmon obviously written on every square footof its partially frozen surface.'What a situation for a house!' was Ronald's involuntary exclamationashe looked down on the sheltered semicircle below him, guarded on theeast and north by the cliffs, and facing the shining west.'I thought ye would say that,' the agent said, with a quiet smile.'It's many's the time I've heard Sir James say he would give 20,000 ifhe could bring the Castle there; and he was aye minded to buildthereay, even to the day of his death, poor man; but then the Colonel,when the place came to him, said no; he would rather sell Balnavrain;and maist likely the purchaser would be for building a house to his ainmind.''And a most sensible notion too,' Mr. Hodson said. 'But look here, myfriend: you've brought us up to a kind of Pisgah; I would rather go downinto that land of Gilead, and see what the farmhouses are like.''Ay, but I brought ye here because it's about the best place for givingye an idea of the marches,' said the man imperturbably, for he knew hisown business better than the stranger.  'Do ye see the burn away overthere beyond the farmhouse?''Yes, yes.''Well, that's the Balnavrain march right up to the top; and then theDuchess runs all along the sky-line yonderto the black scaur.''You don't say!' observed Mr. Hodson.  'I never heard of a Duchess doinganything so extraordinary.''But we march with the Duchess,' said the other, a little bewildered.'That's a little more decorous, anyway.  Well now, I suppose we can makeall that out on the Ordnance Survey map when we get back to the hotel.I'm for getting down into the valleyto have a look around; I take itthat if I lived here I shouldn't spend all the time on a mountain-top.'Well, the long and the short of it was that, after having had two orthree hours of laborious and diligent tramping and inspection andquestioning and explanation, and after having been entertained with acomfortable meal of oat-cake and hot broth and boiled beef at ahospitable farmhouse, they set out again on their cold drive back to thehotel, where a long business conversation went on all the evening,during dinner and after dinner.  It was very curious how each of thesethree brought this or that objection to the placeas if bound to do so;and how the fascination of the mere site of it had so clearly captivatedthem none the less.  Of course, nothing conclusive was said or done thatnight; but, despite these deprecatory pleas, there was a kind of tacitand general admission that Balnavrain, with proper supervision andattention to the possibilities offered by its different altitudes, mightbe made into a very admirable little estate, with a dwelling-house on itsecond in point of situation to none on the whole western sea-board ofthe Highlands.'Ronald,' said Mr. Hodson that evening, when Mr. Carmichael had gone offto bed (he was making for the south early in the morning), 'we have hadsome hard days' work; why should we let Loch Naver lie idle?  I supposewe could drive from here somehow?  Let us start off to-morrow; and we'llhave a week's salmon-fishing.''To Inver-Mudal?' he saidand he turned quite pale.'Yes, yes, why not?' Mr. Hodson answered.  But he had noticed thatstrange look that had come across the younger man's face; and heattributed it to a wrong cause. 'Oh, it will not take up so much of yourtime,' he continued.  'Mr. Weems declares you must have your certificateas a matter of course.  And as for expensesthe present arrangement mustgo on, naturally, until you get back to Glasgow.  What is a week, man?Indeed, I will take no denial.'And Ronald could not answer.  To Inver-Mudal?to meet the girl whom hedared not acknowledge to be his wife?and with his future as hopelesslyuncertain as ever. Once or twice he was almost driven to make aconfession to this stranger, who seemed so frankly interested in him andhis affairs; but no; he could not do that; and he went to bed wonderingwith what strange look in her eyes Meenie would find him inInver-Mudalif he found it impossible to resist the temptation of beingonce more within sight of her, and within hearing of the sound of hervoice.*CHAPTER XV.**A PLEDGE REDEEMED.*Mr. Hodson could by no means get to understand the half-expressedreluctance, the trepidation almost, with which Ronald seemed to regardthis visit to Inver-Mudal.  It was not a matter of time; for his studiesfor the examination were practically over.  It was not a matter ofexpense; for he was being paid a guinea a day.  It was not debt; on thatpoint Mr. Hodson had satisfied himself by a few plain questions; and heknew to a sovereign what sum Ronald had still in the bank.  Nor could hebelieve, after the quite unusual terms in which Lord Ailine had writtenabout the young man's conduct and character, that Ronald was likely tohave done anything to cause him to fear a meeting with his formerfriends.  And so, having some little experience of the world, he guessedthat there was probably a girl in the case; and discreetly held hispeace.But little indeed was he prepared for the revelation that was soon to bemade.  On the afternoon of one of these cold February days they weredriving northward along Strath-Terry.  A sprinkling of snow had fallenin the morning; the horses' hoofs and the wheels of the waggonette madescarcely any sound in this prevailing silence. They had come in sight ofLoch Naver; and the long sheet of water looked quite black amid thewhite undulations of the woods and the moorland and the low-lying hills.Now at this point the road leading down to the village makes a suddenturn; and they were just cutting round the corner when Ronald, who hadbeen anxiously looking forward, caught sight of that that most he longedand that most he feared to see.  It was Meenie herselfshe was walkingby the side of the way, carrying some little parcel in her hand; andthey had come upon her quite unexpectedly, and noiselessly besides; andwhat might she not betray in this moment of sudden alarm?  He grippedthe driver's arm, thinking he might stop the horses; but it was now toolate for that.  They were close to her; she heard the patter of horses'hoofs; she looked up, startled; and the next momentwhen she saw Ronaldthereshe had uttered a quick, sharp cry, and had staggered back a stepor so, until in her fright she caught at the wire fence behind her.  Shedid not fall; but her face was as white as the snow around her; and whenhe leapt from the waggonette, and seized her by both wrists, so as tohold her there, she could only say, 'Ronald, Ronald,' and could seek forno explanation of this strange arrival.  But he held her tight and firm;and with a wave of his hand he bade the driver drive on and leave them.And Mr. Hodson lowered his eyes, thinking that he had seen enough; buthe formally raised his hat, all the same; and as he was being driven onto the inn, he returned to his surmise that there was a girl in thecaseonly who could have imagined that it was the Doctor's daughter?Nor was there a single word said about this tell-tale meeting whenRonald came along to the inn, some few minutes thereafter.  He seemed alittle preoccupied, that was all.  He rather avoided the stormy welcomethat greeted him everywhere; and appeared to be wholly bent on gettingthe preparations pushed forward for the fishing of the next day.  Ofcourse everything had to be arranged; for they had had no thought ofcoming to Inver-Mudal when they sailed from Glasgow; there was not evena boat on the loch, nor a single gillie engaged.But later on that evening, when the short winter day had departed, andthe blackness of night lay over the land, Ronald stole away from theinn, and went stealthily down through the fields till he found himselfby the side of the river.  Of course, there was nothing visible; had henot known every foot of the ground, he dared not have come this way; butonward he went like a ghost through the dark until he finally gained thebridge, and there he paused and listened.  'Meenie!' he said, in a kindof whisper; but there was no reply.  And so he groped his way to thestone dyke by the side of the road, and sate down there, and waited.This was not how he had looked forward to meeting Meenie again.  Many atime he had pictured that to himselfhis getting back to Inver-Mudalafter the long separationthe secret summonsand Meenie coming silentlyout from the little cottage to join him.  But always the night was amoonlight night; and the wide heavens calm and clear; and Loch Naverrippling in silver under the dusky shadows of Ben Clebrig.  Why, he hadalready written out that summons; and he had sent it to Meenie; and nodoubt she had read it over to herself more than once; and wondered whenthe happy time was to be.  The night that he had looked forward to wasmore like a night for a lovers' meeting: this was the message he hadsent herO white's the moon upon the loch,And black the bushes on the brae,And red the light in your window-pane:When will ye come away,Meenie,When will ye come away?I'll wrap ye round and keep ye warm,For mony a secret we've to tell,And ne'er a sound will hinder usDown in yon hidden dell,Meenie,Down in yon hidden dell.O see the moon is sailing onThrough fleecy clouds across the skies,But fairer far the light that I know,The love-light in your eyes,Meenie,The love-light in your eyes.O haste and haste; the night is sweet,But sweeter far what I would hear;And I have a secret to tell to you,A whisper in your ear,Meenie,A whisper in your ear.But here was a bitter cold winter night; and Meenie would have to comethrough the snow; and dark as pitch it washe would have to guess at thelove-light in her eyes, so cruelly dense was this blackness all around.Then his quick ear detected a faint sound in the distancea hushedfootfall on the snow; and that came nearer and nearer; he went out tothe middle of the road.'Is that you, Meenie?'The answer was a whisper'Ronald!'And like a ghost she came to him through the dark; but indeed this wasno ghost at all that he caught to him and that clung to him, for if hercheeks were cold her breath was warm about his face, and her lips werewarm, and her ungloved hands that were round his neck were warm, and allthe furry wrappings that she wore could not quite conceal the joyfulbeating of her heart.'Oh, RonaldRonaldyou nearly killed me with the frightI thoughtsomething dreadful had happenedthat you had come back without anywarningand now you say instead that it's good newsoh, let it be goodnews, Ronaldlet it be good newsif you only knew how I have beenthinking and thinkingand crying sometimesthrough the long days and thelong nightslet it be good news that you have brought with you, Ronald!''Well, lass' (but this was said after some little time; for he had otherthings to say to her with which we have no concern here), 'it may begood news; but it's pretty much guess-work; and maybe I'm building upsomething on my own conceit, that will have a sudden fall, and serve meright.  And then even at the best I hardly see''But, Ronald, you said it was good news!'  And then she altered hertone.  'Ah, but I don't care!  I don't care at all when you are here.It is only when you are away that my heart is like lead all the longday; and at night I lie and think that everything is against usand sucha long time to waitand perhaps my people finding outbut what is it,Ronald, you had to tell me?''Well, now, Meenie,' said he.'But that is not my nameto you,' said she; for indeed she scarce knewwhat she said, and was all trembling, and excited, and clinging tohimthere, in the dark, mid the wild waste of the snow.'Love-Meenie and Rose-Meenie, all in one,' said he, 'listen, and I'lltell you now what maybe lies before us. Maybe, it is, and that only; Ithink this unexpected coming to see you may have put me off my head abit; but if it's all a mistakewell, we are no worse off than we werebefore.  And this is what it is now: do you remember my telling you thatMr. Hodson had often been talking of buying an estate in theHighlands?well, he has just been looking at oneit's over there on theRoss-shire coastand it's that has brought us to the Highlands just now,for he would have me come and look at it along with him. And what wouldyou think if he made me the factor of it? Well, maybe I'm daft to thinkof such a thing; but he has been talking and talking in a way I cannotunderstand unless some plan of that kind is in his head; ay, and he hasbeen making inquiries about me, as I hear; and not making much of theforestry certificate, as to whether I get it or no; but rather, as Ishould guess, thinking about putting me on this Balnavrain place as soonas it becomes his own.  Ay, ay, sweetheart; that would be a fine thingfor me, to be in a position just like that of Mr. Crawfordthough on asmall scale; and who could prevent my coming to claim my good wife then,and declaring her as mine before all the world?''Yes, yes, Ronald,' she said eagerly, 'but why do you talk like that?Why do you speak as if there was trouble? Surely he will make youfactor!  It was he that asked you to go away to Glasgow; he always wasyour friend; if he buys the estate, who else could he get to manage itas well?''But there's another thing, sweetheart,' said he, rather hopelessly.'He spoke about it yesterday.  Indeed, he put it plain enough.  He askedme fairly whether, supposing somebody was to offer me the management ofan estate, I could get guaranteessecurities for my honesty, in fact;and he even mentioned the sum that would be needed. Well, well, it'sbeyond me, my girlwhere could I find two people to stand surety for meat 500 apiece?'She uttered a little cry, and clung closer to him.'RonaldRonaldsurely you will not miss such a chance for thatit is amatter of form, isn't it?and some one''But who do I know that has got 500, and that I could ask?' said he.'Ay, and two of them.  Maybe Lord Ailine might be onehe was always agood friend to mebut two of themtwo of themwell, well, good lass, ifit has all got to go, we must wait for some other chance.''Yes,' said Meenie bitterly, 'and this Americanhe calls himself afriend of yours tooand he wants guarantees for your honesty!''It's the usual thing, as he said himself,' Ronald said. 'But don't bedownhearted, my dear.  Hopes and disappointments come to every one, andwe must meet them like the rest.  The world has always something foruseven these few minuteswith your cheeks grown warm againand thescent of your hairay, and your heart as gentle as ever.'But she was crying a little.'Ronaldsurelyit is not possible this chance should be so near usandthen to be taken away.  And can't I do something?  I know the Glengaskpeople will be angrybutbut I would write to Lady Stuartor if I couldonly go to her, that would be betterit would be between woman andwoman, and surely she would not refuse when she knew how we wereplacedandand it would be something for me to dofor you know you'vemarried a pauper bride, Ronaldand I bring you nothingwhen even afarmer's daughter would have her store of napery and a chest of drawersand all thatbut couldn't I do this, Ronald?I would go and see LadyStuartshe could not refuse me!'He laughed lightly; and his hands were clasped round the soft brownhair.'No, no, no, sweetheart; things will have come to a pretty pass before Iwould have you exposed to any humiliation of that sort.  And why shouldyou be down-hearted?  The world is young for both of us.  Oh, don't yoube afraid; a man that can use his ten fingers and is willing to workwill tumble into something sooner or later; and what is the use of beinglovers if we are not to have our constancy tried?  No, no; you keep abrave heart: if this chance has to be given up, we'll fall in withanother; and maybe it will be all the more welcome that we have had towait a little while for it.''A little while, Ronald?' said she.He strove to cheer her and reassure her still further; although, indeed,there was not much time for that; for he had been commanded to dine withMr. Hodson at half-past seven; and he knew better than to keep the manwho might possibly be his master waiting for dinner.  And presentlyMeenie and he were going quietly along the snow-hushed road; and he badeher good-byemany and many times repeatednear the little garden-gate;and then made his way back to the inn.  He had just time to brush hishair and smarten himself up a bit when the pretty Nellywho seemed to bea little more friendly and indulgent towards him than in formerdayscame to say that she had taken the soup into the parlour, and thatthe gentleman was waiting.Now Mr. Hodson was an astute person; and he suspected something, and wasanxious to know more; but he was not so ill-advised as to begin withdirect questions. For one thing, there was still a great deal to betalked over about the Balnavrain estatewhich he had almost decided onpurchasing; and, amongst other matters, Ronald was asked whether theoverseer of such a place would consider 400 a year a sufficient salary,if a plainly and comfortably built house were thrown in; and alsowhether, in ordinary circumstances, there would be any difficulty abouta young fellow obtaining two sureties to be responsible for him. Fromthat it was a long way round to the Doctor's daughter; but Mr. Hodsonarrived there in time; for he had brought for her a present from his owndaughter; and he seemed inclined to talk in a friendly way about theyoung lady. And at last he got the whole story.  Once started, Ronaldspoke frankly enough.  He confessed to his day-dreams about one so farsuperior to him in station; he described his going away to Glasgow; hisloneliness and despair there; his falling among evil companions and hisdrinking; the message of the white heather; his pulling himself up; andMeenie's sudden resolve and heroic self-surrender. The private marriage,tooyes, he heard the whole story from beginning to end; and the more heheard the more his mind was busy; though he was a quiet kind of person,and the recital did not seem to move him in any way whatever.And yet it may be doubted whether, in all the county of Sutherland, orin all the realm of England, there was any happier man that night thanMr. Josiah Hodson.  For here was something entirely after his own heart.His pet hobby was playing the part of a small beneficent Providence; andhe had already befriended Ronald, and was greatly interested in him;moreover, had he not promised his daughter, when she lay apparently verynear to death, that Ronald should be looked after?  But surely he hadnever looked forward to any such opportunity as this!  And then the girlwas so prettythat, also, was something.  His heart warmed to theoccasion; dinner being over, they drew their chairs towards the bigfireplace where the peats were blazing cheerfully; Ronald was bidden tolight his pipe; and then; the Americanin a quiet, indifferent,sententious way, as if he were talking of some quite abstract andunimportant mattermade his proposal.'Well, now, Ronald,' said he, as he stirred up some of the peats withhis foot, 'you seemed to think that 400 a year and a house thrown inwas good enough for the overseer of that Balnavrain place.  I don't knowwhat your intentions are; but if you like to take that situation, it'syours.'Ronald looked startledbut only for a moment.'I thank ye, sir; I thank ye,' he said, with rather a downcast face.  'Iwill not say I had no suspicion ye were thinking of some such kindness;and I thank yemost heartily I thank ye.  But it's beyond me.  I couldnot get the securities.''Well, now, as to that,' the American said, after a moment'sconsideration, 'I am willing to take one securityI mean for the wholeamount; and I want to name the person myself.  If Miss Douglas will gobail for youor Mrs. Strang, I suppose I should call herthen there isno more to be said.  Ronald, my good fellow, if the place is worth yourwhile, take it; it's yours.'A kind of flash of joy and gratitude leapt to the younger man's eyes;but all he could manage to say was'If I could only tell her!''Well, now, as to that again,' said Mr. Hodson, rising slowly, andstanding with his back to the fire, 'I have got to take along thatpresent from my daughterto-morrow morning would be best; and I couldgive her the information, if you wished.  But I'll tell you what wouldbe still better, my friend: you just let me settle this little affairwith the old peoplewith the mamma, as I understand. I'm not much of atalkist; but if you give me permission I'll have a try; I think we mightcome to some kind of a reasonable understanding, if she doesn't flattenme with her swell relations.  Why, yes, I think I can talk sense to her.I don't want to see the girl kept in that position; your Scotchwayswell, we haven't got any old ballads in my country, and we like tohave our marriages fair and square and aboveboard: now let me tell theold lady the whole story, and try to make it up with her.  She can'tscold my head off.'And by this time he was walking up and down the room; and he continued'No; I shall go round to-morrow afternoon, when we come back from thefishing.  And look here, Ronald; this is what I want you to do; you mustget the other boat down to the lakeand you will go in that oneand getanother lad or twoI will pay them anything they want. I can't have myoverseer acting as gillie, don't you seeif I am going to talk with hismother-in-law; you must get out the other boat; and if you catch asalmon or two, just you send them along to the Doctor, with yourcomplimentsdo you hear, your compliments, not mine.  Now''And I have not a word of thanks!' Ronald exclaimed. 'My head is justbewildered''Say, now,' the American continued quietlyin fact, he seemed to beconsidering his finger-nails more than anything else, as he walked upand down the room'say, now, what do you think the Doctor's incomeamounts to in the year?  Not much?  Two hundred pounds with all expensespaid?''I really don't know,' Ronald saidnot understanding the drift of thisquestion.'Not three hundred, anyway?''I'm sure I don't know.''Ah.  Well, now, I've got to talk to that old lady to-morrow about theprospects of her son-in-lawthough she don't know she has got one,' Mr.Hodson was sayinghalf to himself, as it were.  'I suppose she'll jumpon me when I begin.  But there's one thing.  If I can't convince herwith four hundred a year, I'll try her with fiveand Carry shall kiss methe difference.'*CHAPTER XVI.**THE FACTOR OF BALNAVRAIN.*Well, now, some couple of months or so thereafter, this same Miss Carrywas one of a party of fourall Americanswho set out from Lairg stationto drive to Inver-Mudal; and very comfortable and content with eachother they seemed to be when they were ensconced in the big waggonette.For a convalescent, indeed, Miss Hodson appeared to be in excellentspirits; but there may have been reasons for that; for she had recentlybecome engaged; and her betrothed, to mark that joyful circumstance, hadleft for Europe with her; and it was his first trip to English shores;and more especially it was his first trip to the Highlands of Scotland;and very proud was she of her self-imposed office of chaperon andexpounder and guide.  Truth to tell, the long and lank editor found thatin many respects he had fallen upon troublous times; for not only was heexpected to be profoundly interested in historical matters about whichhe did not care a red cent, and to accept any and every inconvenienceand discomfort as if it were a special blessing from on high, and to beready at all moments to admire mountains and glens and lakes when hewould much rather have been talking of something more personal to MissCarry and himself, but alsoand this was the cruellest wrong of allhehad to listen to continued praises of Ronald Strang that now and againsounded suspiciously like taunts.  And on such occasions he was puzzledby the very audacity of her eyes.  She regarded him boldlyas if tochallenge him to say that she did not mean every word she uttered; andhe dared not quarrel with her, or dispute; though sometimes he had hisown opinion as to whether those pretty soft dark eyes were quite soinnocent and simple and straightforward as they pretended to be.'Ah,' said she, as they were now driving away from the village into thewide, wild moorland, 'ah, when you see Ronald, you will see a man.'She had her eyes fixed on him.'I suppose they don't grow that kind of a thing in our country,' heanswered meekly.'I mean,' she said, with a touch of pride, 'I mean a man who is notashamed to be courteous to womena man who knows how to show properrespect to women.''Why, yes, I'll allow you won't find that quality in an American,' hesaid, with a subtle sarcasm that escaped her, for she was too obviouslybent on mischief.'And about the apology, now?''What apology?''For your having published an insulting article about Ronald, to besure.  Of course you will have to apologise to him, before this very dayis over.''I will do anything else you like,' the long editor said, with muchcomplaisance.  'I will fall in love with the young bride, if you like.Or I'll tell lies about the weight of the salmon when I get back home.But an apology? Seems to me a man making an apology looks about asfoolish as a woman throwing a stone: I don't see my way to that.Besides, where does the need of it come in, anyhow?  You never read thearticle.  It was very complimentary, as I think; yes, it was so; a wholecolumn and more about a Scotch gamekeeper''A Scotch gamekeeper!' Miss Carry said proudly. 'Well, now, just youlisten to me.  Ronald knows nothing at all about this article; if hedid, he would only laugh at it; but he never heard of it; and it's notto be spoken of here.  But I mean to speak of it, by and by.  I mean tospeak of it, when I make the acquaintance ofwhat's his distinguishedname?'But here Miss Kerfootwho, with her married sister, occupied the otherside of the waggonettebroke in.'You two quarrelling again!'  And then she sighed. 'But what is the goodof a drive, anyway, when we haven't got Doctor Tom and his banjo?''A banjoin Strath-Terry?' Miss Carry cried.  'Do you mean to say youwould like to hear a banjo tinkle-tinkling in a country like this?''Yes, my dyaw,' said Miss Kerfoot coolly: she had been making somestudies in English pronunciation, and was getting on pretty well.'I suppose you can't imagine how Adam passed the time without one in theGarden of Edenwanted to play to Eve on the moonlight nightsacake-walk, I supposepumpkin-piewhy, I wonder what's the use ofbringing you to Europe.'For answer Miss Kerfoot began to hum to herselfbut with the wordssounding clearly enough'I'se gwine back to Dixie,I'se gwine back to Dixie,I'se gwine where the orange blossoms grow;O, I'd rather be in Dixie,I'd rather be in Dixie,For travelling in the Highlands is so'But here remorse of conscience smote her; and she seized Carry's hand.'No, I won't say ityou poor, weak, invalid thing. And were theyworrying you about the Highlands, and the slow trains, and the stuffyomnibus at Lairg?  Well, they shan't say anything more to youthat theyshan't; and you are to have everything your own way; and I'm going tofall in love with Ronald, just to keep you company.'But alas! when they did eventually get to Inver-Mudal, there was noRonald to be found there.  Mr. Murray was there, and Mrs. Murray, andthe yellow-haired Nelly; and the travellers were told that luncheon wasawaiting them; and also that Mr. Hodson had had the second boat put inreadiness, lest any of them should care to try the fishing in theafternoon.'But where is Ronald?' said Miss Carry, not in the least concealing hervexation.'Don't cry, poor thing,' Miss Kerfoot whispered to her. 'It shall haveits Ronald!''Oh, don't bother!' she said angrily.  'Mr. Murray, where is Ronald?  Ishe with my father on the loch?''No, no; it's the two gillies that's with Mr. Hodson on the loch,' theinnkeeper said.  'And do not you know, Miss, that Ronald is not here atahl now; he is away at the place in Ross-shire.''Oh yes, I know that well enough,' she said, 'but my father wrote thathe was coming over to see us for a day or two; and he was to be herethis morningand his wife as well.  But it is of no consequence.  Isuppose we had better go in and have lunch now.'Miss Kerfoot was covertly laughing.  But there was a young lad therecalled Johnniea shy lad he was, and he was standing apart from theothers, and thus it was that he could see along the road leading down tothe Mudal bridge.  Something in that direction attracted Johnnie'sattention; he came over and said a word or two to Mr. Murray; theinnkeeper went to the gable of the house, so that he could get a look upTongue way, and then he said'Oh yes, I think that will be Ronald.''Don't you hear?' said Miss Kerfoot, who was following the others intothe inn.  'They say that Ronald is coming right now.'Miss Carry turned at once, and went to where the inn-keeper wasstanding.  Away along there, and just coming over the bridge, was adog-cart, with two figures in it. She watched it.  By and by it waspulled up in front of the Doctor's cottage; she guessed that that wasMeenie who got down from the vehicle and went into the house; no doubtthis was Ronald who was now bringing the dog-cart along to the inn.  Andthen the others were summoned; and presently Ronald had arrived and wasbeing introduced to them; and Miss Carry had forgotten all herimpatience, for he looked just as handsome and good-natured andmodest-eyed as ever; and it was very clear that Miss Kerfoot was muchimpressed with the frankness and simplicity of his manner; and theeditor strove to be particularly civil; and Mrs. Lalor regarded thenew-comer with an obviously approving glance.  For they all had heardthe story; and they were interested in him, and in his young wife;besides, they did not wish to wound the feelings of this poor invalidcreatureand they knew what she thought of Ronald.And how was he to answer all at once these hundred questions about theRoss-shire place, and the house that was building for them, and the farmwhere he and his wife were temporarily staying?'Come in and have lunch with us, Ronald,' said Miss Carry, in her usualfrank way, 'and then you will tell us all about it.  We were just goingin; and it's on the table.''I cannot do that very well, I thank ye,' said he, 'for I have to goback to the Doctor's as soon as I have seen the mare looked after'Oh, but I thought you were coming down to the loch with us!' she said,with very evident disappointment.'Yes, yes, to be sure!' said he.  'I'll be back in a quarter of an hourat the furthest; and then I'll take one of the lads with me and we'llhave the other boat got out as well.''But you don't understand, Ronald,' she said quickly. 'The other boat istherereadyand two gillies, and rods, and everything.  I only want youto come with us for luck; there's always good luck when you are in theboat.  Ah, do you know what they did to me on Lake George?''Indeed, I was sorry to hear of it, Miss,' said he gravely.'Miss!' she repeated, with a kind of reproach; but she could not keepthe others waiting any longer; and so there was an appointment made thatthey were all to meet at the loch-side in half an hour; and she and herfriends went into the house.When it came to setting out, however, Mrs. Lalor begged to be excused;she was a little bit tired, she said, and would go and lie down.  So theother three went by themselves; and when they got down to the loch, theynot only found that Ronald was there awaiting them, but also that Mr.Hodson had reeled up his lines and come ashore to welcome them.  Ofcourse that was the sole reason. At the same time the gillies had gotout three remarkably handsome salmon and put them on the grass; and thatwas the display that met the eyes of the strangers when they drew near.Mr. Hodson was not proud; but he admitted that they were good-lookingfish.  Yes; it was a fair morning's work.  But there were plenty morewhere these came from, he said encouragingly; they'd better begin.Whereupon Miss Carry said promptly'Come along, Em.  Mr. Huysen, will you go with pappa, when he is ready?And Ronald will come with us, to give us good luck at the start.'Miss Kerfoot said nothing, but did as she was bid; she merely cast aglance at Mr. Huysen as they were leaving; and her eyes were demure.However, if she considered this manoeuvreas doubtless she dida pieceof mere wilful and perverse coquetry on the part of her friend, she wasentirely mistaken.  It simply never would have entered Miss Carry's headthat Ronald should have gone into any other person's boat, so long asshe was therenor would it have entered his head either.  But besidesthat, she had brought something for him; and she wished to have time toshow it to him; and so, when the boat was well away from the shore, andwhen he had put out both the lines, she asked him to be so kind as toundo the long case lying there, and to put the rod together, and saywhat he thought of it.  It was a salmon-rod, she explained; of Americanmake; she had heard they were considered rather superior articles; andif he approved of this one, she begged that he would keep it.He looked up with a little surprise.'Ye are just too kind,' said he.  'There's that beautiful rug that yousent to my wife, now''But isn't it useful?' she said, in her quick, frank way. 'Isn't itcomfortable?  When you were coming along this morning, didn't she findit comfortable?''Bless me!' he cried.  'Do you think she would put a beautiful thinglike that into a dog-cart to be splashed with mud, and soiled with one'sboots?  No, no; it's put over an easy-chair at the Doctor's, until weget a house of our own, and proud she is of it, as she ought to be.'And proud was he, too, of this beautiful rodif he declared that it wasfar too fine for this coarse trolling work; and Miss Kerfoot arrived atthe impression that if he could not make pretty speeches of thanks,there was that in his manner that showed he was not ungrateful.Nor was Miss Carry's faith in Ronald's good luck belied; for they hadnot been more than twenty minutes out on the loch when they had got holdof something; and at once she rose superior to the excitement of thegillies, and to the consternation of her American friend. Perhaps shewas showing off a little; at all events, she seemed quite cool andcollected, as if this strain on the rod and the occasional long screamof the reel were a usual kind of thing; and Ronald looked on in quietcomposure, believing that his pupil was best left alone.  But alas!alas! for that long illness.  The fish was a heavy one and a gamefighter; Miss Carry's arms were weaker than she had thought; at the endof about a quarter of an hourduring which time the salmon had beenplunging and boring and springing, and making long rushes in everyconceivable mannershe began to feel the strain. But she was a bravelass; as long as ever she could stand upright, she held on; then shesaid, rather faintly'Ronald!''Take the rod,' she said, 'the fish isn't played out; but I am.''What's the matter?' said he, in great alarm, as she sank on to theseat.'Oh, nothing, nothing,' she said, though she was a little pale.  'GiveEm the rodgive Miss Kerfoot the rodquick, Em, get up and land yourfirst salmon.''Oh my gracious, no!  I should die of fright!' was the immediate answer.But Ronald had no intention of allowing Miss Carry's salmon to be handedover to any one else.  He turned to the gillies.'Is there not a drop of whisky in the boat?  Quick, lads, if you havesuch a thingquick, quick!They handed him a small green bottle; but she shrank from it.'The taste is too horrid for anything,' she said.  'But I will haveanother try.  Stand by me, Ronald; and mind I don't fall overboard.'She got hold of the rod again; he held her right armbut only to steadyher.'CarryCarry!' her friend said anxiously.  'I wish you'd leave it alone.Remember, you've been illit's too much for youoh, I wish the thingwould go away!''I mean to wave the banner over this beast, if I die for it,' Miss Carrysaid, under her breath; and Ronald laughedfor that was more of his wayof thinking.'We'll have him, sure enough,' he said.  'Ay, and a fine fish, too, thatI know.''Oh, Ronald!' she cried.For there was a sudden and helpless slackening of the line.  But she hadexperience enough to reel up hard; and presently it appeared that thesalmon was therevery much there, in fact, for now it began to gothrough some performanceswithin five-and-twenty yards of the boatthatnearly frightened Miss Kerfoot out of her wits.  And then these cantripsmoderated slowly down; the line was got in shorter; Ronald, stillsteadying Miss Carry's right arm with his left hand, got hold of theclip in the other; and the young lady who was the spectator of all thismanoeuvring began rather to draw away in fear, as that large whitegleaming thing showed nearer and nearer the coble.  Nay, she uttered aquick cry of alarm when a sudden dive of the steel hook brought out ofthe water a huge silvery creature that the next moment was in the bottomof the boat; and then she found that Carry had sunk down beside her,pretty well exhausted, but immensely proud: and that the gillies werelaughing and vociferous and excited over the capture; and Ronald calmlygetting out his scale-weight from his pocket.  The other boat was justthen passing.'A good one?' Mr. Hodson called out.'Just over sixteen pounds, sir.''Well done.  But leave us one or two; don't take them all.'Miss Carry paid no heed.  She was far too much exhausted; but pleasedand satisfied, also, that she had been able to see this fight to theend.  And she remembered enough of the customs of the country to ask thetwo gillies to take a dramthough it had to come from their own bottle;she said she would see that that was replenished when they got back tothe inn.It was a beautiful clear evening as they all of themthe fishing havingbeen given up for the daywalked away through the meadows, and up intothe road, and so on to the little hamlet; the western sky was shining insilver-gray and lemon and saffron; and there was a soft sweet feelingalmost as of summer in the air, though the year was yet young.  They hadgot six fish all told; that is to say, Mr. Hodson's boat had got onemore in the afternoon; while Miss Carry had managed to pick up a smallthing of eight pounds or so just as they were leaving off.  The factwas, they did not care to prosecute the fishing till the last moment;for there was to be a little kind of a dinner-celebration that evening;and no doubt some of them wanted to make themselves as smart aspossiblethough the possibilities, as a rule, don't go very far in thecase of a fishing-party in a Highland innall to pay due honour to thebride.And surely if ever Meenie could lay claim to the title of Rose-Meenie itwas on this evening when she came among these stranger folkwho wereaware of her story, if not a word was said or hinted of itand found allthe women be-petting her.  And Mrs. Douglas was there, radiant in silkand ribbons, if somewhat austere in manner; and the big good-naturedDoctor was there, full to overflowing with jests and quips and occultScotch stories; and Mr. and Mrs. Murray had done their very best for thedecoration of the dining-roomthough Sutherlandshire in April is farfrom being Florida.  And perhaps, too, Miss Carry was a little paid outwhen she saw the perfectly servile adulation which Mr. J. C. Huysen (whohad a sensitive heart, according to the young men of the N. Y. Sun)laid at the feet of the pretty young bride; though Mr. Hodson ratherinterfered with that, claiming Mrs. Strang as his own.  Of course, MissKerfoot was rather down-hearted, because of the absence of her Tom andhis banjo; but Ronald had promised her she should kill a salmon on themorrow; and that comforted her a little.  Mrs. Lalor had recovered, andwas chiefly an amused spectator; there was a good deal of human natureabout; and she had eyes.Altogether it was a pleasant enough evening; for, although the Americansand the Scotch are the two nations out of all the world that are themost madly given to after-dinner speech-making, nothing of the kind wasattempted: Mr. Hodson merely raised his glass and gave 'The Bride!' andRonald said a few manly and sensible words in reply. Even Mrs. Douglasso far forgot the majesty of Glengask and Orosay as to become quitecomplaisant; perhaps she reflected that it was, after all, chieflythrough the kindness of these people that her daughter and herdaughter's husband had been placed in a comfortable and assuredposition.Ronald and Meenie had scarcely had time as yet to cease from beinglovers; and so it was that on this same night he presented her with twoor three more of those rhymes that sometimes he still wrote about herwhen the fancy seized him.  In fact, he had written these verses as hesate on the deck of the big screw-steamer, when she was slowly steamingup the Raasay Sound.O what's the sweetest thing there isIn all the wide, wide world?A rose that hides its deepest scentIn the petals closely curled?Of the honey that's in the clover;Or the lark's song in the morn;Or the wind that blows in summerAcross the fields of corn;Or the dew that the queen of the fairiesFrom her acorn-chalice sips?Ah no; for sweeter and sweeter farIs a kiss from Meenie's lips!And Meenie was pleasedperhaps, indeed, she said as much and showed asmuch, when nobody was by; but all the same she hid away the littlefragment among a mass of similar secret treasures she possessed; for shewas a young wife now; and fully conscious of the responsibilities of herposition; and well was she aware that it would never do for any one toimagine that nonsense of that kind was allowed to interfere with theimportant public duties of the factor of Balnavrain.THE END.