STAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON! (VOLUME I)This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almostno restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.Title: Stand Fast, Craig-Royston! (Volume I)Author: William BlackRelease Date: May 17, 2013 [EBook #42729]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON!(VOLUME I) ***Produced by Al Haines.STAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON!A NovelBYWILLIAM BLACK,AUTHOR OF"A DAUGHTER OF HETH," "MACLEOD OF DARE," ETC.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON, LIMITEDSt. Dunstan's HouseFETTER LANE, FLEET STREET, E.C.1890.[All rights reserved.]LONDON:PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.CONTENTS OF VOL. I.CHAPTERI. The WanderersII. NeighboursIII. An ApproachIV. Stalled Ox and a Dinner of HerbsV. Qu' mon Coeur en MariageVI. Fairy LandVII. Claire FontaineVIII. An AlarmSTAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON!CHAPTER I.THE WANDERERS.On a certain sunny afternoon in May, when all the world and his wifewere walking or driving in Piccadilly, two figures appeared there whoclearly did not belong to the fashionable crowd.  Indeed, so unusual wastheir aspect that many a swift glance, shot from carefully impassivefaces, made furtive scrutiny of them as they passed.  One of thestrangers was an old man who might have been a venerable Scandinavianscald come to life againa man thick-set and broad-shouldered, withfeatures at once aquiline and massive, and with flowing hair and beardalmost silver-white.  From under his deeply lined forehead and shaggyeyebrows gleamed a pair of eyes that were alert and confident as withthe audacity of youth; and the heavy white moustache and beard did notquite conceal the cheerful firmness of the mouth.  For the rest, he woreabove his ordinary attire a plaid of shepherd's tartan, the ends looselythrown over his shoulders.By his side there walked a young girl of about seventeen, whosesingular, if somewhat pensive and delicate beauty, could not but havestruck any passer-by who happened to catch sight of her.  But she rarelyraised her eyes from the pavement. What was obvious to every one was,first of all, the elegance of her walkwhich was merely the naturalexpression of a perfectly moulded form; and then the glory of her hair,which hung free and unrestrained down her back, and no doubt added tothe youthfulness of her look.  As to the colour of those splendidmasseswell, it was neither flaxen, nor golden, nor brown, norgolden-brown, but apparently a mixture of all these shades, altering intone here and there according to sunshine or shadow, but always showinga soft and graduated sheen rather than any definite lustre.  Her face,as has been said, was mostly downcast; and one could only see that therefined and sensitive features were pale; also that there was a touch ofsun-tan over her complexion, that spoke of travel.  But when, byinadvertence, or by some forced overcoming of her native diffidence, shedid raise her eyes, there flashed a revelation upon the world; for theseblue-grey deeps seemed to hold light; a mild-shining light, timid,mysterious, appealing almost; the unconsciousness of childhood no longerthere, the self-possession of womanhood not yet come: then thosebeautiful, limpid, pathetic eyes, thus tremblingly glancing out for asecond, would be withdrawn, and again the dark lashes would veil themystic, deep-shining wells.  This was Maisrie Bethune; the old manbeside her was her grandfather.The young girl seemed rather to linger behind as her companion went upthe steps towards a certain door and rang the bell; and her eyes werestill downcast as she followed him across the hall and into anante-room.  When the footman came back with the message that hislordship was disengaged and would see Mr. Bethune, and when he was aboutto show the way upstairs, the girl hung back, and said, with almost apiteous look"I will stay here, grandfather.""Not at all," the old man answered, impatiently. "Not at all.  Comealong!"There were two persons in this large and lofty room on the first floor;but just as the visitors arrived at the landing, one of these withdrewand went and stood at a front window, where he could look down into thestreet.  The othera youngish-looking man, with clear eyes and apleasant smileremained to receive his guests; and if he could not helpa little glance of surpriseperhaps at the unusual costume of his chiefvisitor, or perhaps because he had not expected the young ladythere wasat all events nothing but good-nature in his face."My granddaughter, Maisrie, Lord Musselburgh," the old man said, by wayof introduction, or explanation.The young nobleman begged her to be seated; she merely thanked him, andmoved away a little distance, to a table on which were some illustratedbooks; so that the two men were left free to talk as they chose."Well now, that seems a very admirable project of yours, Mr. Bethune,"Lord Musselburgh said, in his frank and off-hand way.  "There's plentyof Scotch blood in my own veins, as you know; and I am glad of any goodturn that can be done to poor old Scotland.  I see you are not ashamedof the national garb.""You remember what was said on a famous occasion," the old man madeanswer, speaking methodically and emphatically, and with a strongnorthern accent, "and I will own that I hoped your lordship's heartwould 'warm to the tartan.'  For it is a considerable undertaking, afterall.  The men are scattered; and their verses are scattered; but,scattered or no scattered, there is everywhere and always in them thesame sentimentthe sentiment of loyalty and gratitude and admiration forthe land of the hills and the glens.  And surely, as your lordship says,it is doing a good turn to poor old Scotland to show the world thatwherever her sons may bein Canada, in Florida, out on the plains, oralong the Californian coastthey do not forget the mother that borethemno, but that they are proud of her, and think always of her, andregard her with an undying affection and devotion."He was warming to his work.  There was a vibration in his voice, as heproceeded to repeat the lines"From the lone shieling on the misty island,Mountains divide them and a world of seas;But still their hearts are true, their hearts are Highland,And they in dreams behold the Hebrides.""Is that by one of your Scotch-American friends?" Lord Musselburghasked, with a smile; for he was looking curiously, and not without acertain sympathetic interest, at this old man."I do not know, your lordship; at the moment I could not tell you," wasthe answer.  "But this I do know, that a man may be none the less a goodCanadian or American citizen because of his love for the heather hillsthat nourished his infancy, and inspired his earliest imagination.  Hedoes not complain of the country that has given him shelter, nor of thepeople who have welcomed him and made him one of themselves.  He onlysays with Crichton's emigrant shepherd"'Wae's me that fate us twa has twined''twined' is severed: perhaps your lordship is not so familiar with thedialect"'Wae's me that fate us twa has twined;And I serve strangers ower the sea;Their hearts are leal, their words are kind,But, lass, it isna hame to me!'Good men they are and true," he went on, in the same exalted strain;"valued and respected citizensnone more so; but cut their hearts open,and you will find Scotland written in every fibre.  It is through noingratitude to their adopted country that a spray of white heather, afew bluebells, a gowan or two, anything sent across the seas to them toremind them of the land of their birth, will bring hot tears to theireyes.  As one of them has written'What memories dear of that cot ye recall,Though now there remains neither rooftree nor wall!Alack-a-day! lintel and threshold are gone,While cold 'neath the weeds lies the hallowed hearthstone!'Twas a straw-roofed cottage, but love abode there,And peace and contentment aye breathed in its air;With songs from the mother, and legends from sire,How blithe were we all round the cheery peat-fire!Caledonia's blue-bells, O bonnie blue-bells!'""You have an excellent memory," Lord Musselburgh said, good-naturedly."Those patriotic effusions seem to have impressed you.""That was written by the Bard of Amulree, your lordship," continued thegarrulous old man; "and a truer Scotchman does not breathe, thoughAmerica has been his home nearly all his life.  And there is manyanother, both in Canada and the United States.  They may be in happiercircumstances than they would have been in the old country; they mayhave plenty of friends around them: but still their hearts turn back to'Where I've watched the gloamin' closeThe long bright summer days;And doubted not that fairies dweltOn Cathkin's bonnie braes;Auld Ruglin Brig and Cathkin braesAnd Clyde's meandering streams,Ye shall be subject of my laysAs ye are of my dreams.'Nor are they ashamed of their Scottish way of speechye may observe, mylord, that I've kept a twang of it myself, even among all my wanderings;and loth would I be to lose it.  But I'm wearying your lordship," theold man said, in a suddenly altered tone.  "I would just say that acollection of what the Scotch poets in America have written ought to beinteresting to Scotchmen everywhere, and perhaps to others as well; forpatriotism is a virtue that commands respect.  I beg your pardon forencroaching on your lordship's time""Oh, that's nothing," Lord Musselburgh said, easily; "but we must notkeep the young lady waiting."  He glanced in the direction of the girlwho was standing by the table.  She was turning over the leaves of abook.  Then he resumed the conversationbut in a much lower key."I quite understand, Mr. Bethune," he said, so that she should notoverhear, "what you wrote to methat the bringing out of such a volumewill require time, and expense.  Andand you must allow me to join in,in the only way I can.  Now what sum?"He hesitated.  Mr. Bethune said"Whatever your lordship pleases."The young man went into the front portion of the long apartment (wherehis friend was still discreetly standing behind the window curtains) andopened a despatch-box and sat down.  He drew out a cheque for 50,enclosed it in an envelope, and, coming back, slipped it into the oldman's hands."I hope that will help; and I shall be glad to hear of the progress ofthe work.""I thank your lordship," Mr. Bethune said, without any obsequiousness,or profusion of gratitude.And then he turned to his granddaughter."Maisrie!"The girl came away at once.  She bowed to Lord Musselburgh in passing,without lifting her eyes.  He, however, put out his hand, and said"Good-bye!"  Nay, more than that, although he had previously rang thebell, he accompanied them both downstairs, and stood at the door while afour-wheeled cab was being called for them. Then, when they had left, hereturned to the room above, and called lightly to his friend who wasstill standing at the window:"Ready, Vin?  Come along, then!  Did you hear the old man and hispoetry?a harmless old maniac, I think.  Well, let's be off to Victoria;we'll get down to the Bungalow in time for a good hour's lawn-tennisbefore dinner."Meanwhile old George Bethune and his granddaughter were being drivenaway eastward in the cab; and he was chatting gaily to her, with the airof one who had been successful in some enterprise. He had doffed hisScotch plaid; and, what is more, he had also abandoned the Scotch accentin which he had addressed 'his loardship.'  It was to be a great book,this collection of Scotch-American poetry.  It would enable him to pay awell-deserved compliment to many an old friend of his in Toronto, inMontreal, in New York.  He was warm in his praises of this young LordMusselburgh; and predicted a great future for him. Then he put his headout of the window and bade the driver stopopposite the door of awine-merchant's office."Grandfather," said the girl, "may I wait for you in the cab?""Certainly not," he answered with decision.  "I wish you to see men andthings as part of your education.  Live and learn, Maisrieevery momentof your life."Leaving the Scotch plaid in the cab, he crossed the pavement and wentinto the office, she meekly following.  The wine-merchant was sent for,and presently he made his appearance."Good afternoon, Mr. Glover," old George Bethune said, with something ofan air of quiet patronage, "I wish to order some claret from you."The tall, bald, bland-looking person whom he addressed did not seem toreceive this news with any joy; but the young lady was there, and he wasbound to be courteous; so he asked Mr. Bethune to be kind enough to stepinto the back-premises where he could put some samples before him.Maisrie was for remaining where she stood; but her grandfather bade hercome along; so she also went with them into the back portion of theestablishment, where she was accommodated with a chair.  At this tablethere were no illustrated books to which she could turn; there were onlybottles, glasses, corkscrews, and a plateful of wine-biscuits; so thatshe kept her eyes fixed on the floorand was forced to listen."Claret, Mr. Glover," said the old man, with a certain sententiousnessand assumption of importance that he had not displayed in speaking toLord Musselburgh, "claret was in former days the national drink ofScotlandowing to the close alliance with France, as you knowand theold Scotch families naturally preserve the tradition. So that you canhardly wonder if to one of the name of Bethune a sound claret isscarcely so much a luxury as a necessity.  Why, sir, my ancestor,Maximilien de Bethune, duc de Sully, had the finest vineyards in thewhole of France; and it was his privilege to furnish the royal table""I hope he got paid," the bland wine-merchant said, with a bit of alaugh; but happening to glance towards the young girl sitting there, andperceiving that the pale and beautiful face had suddenly grownsurcharged with colour, he, instantly, and with the greatestembarrassment, proceeded to stumble on"Oh, yes, of course," he said, hastily: "a great honournaturallytheroyal tablea great honour indeedI quite understandthe duc de Sully,did you say?oh, yesa great statesman""The greatest financier France has ever possessed," the old man said,grandly.  "Though he was by profession a soldier, when he came to tacklethe finances of the country, he paid off two hundred millions oflivresthe whole of the king's debts, in factand filled the royaltreasury.  It is something to bear his name, surely; I confess I amproud of it; but our family goes far further back than the duc de Sullyand the sixteenth century.  Why, sir," he continued, in his statelymanner, "when the royal Stewarts were known only by theirofficeDapifer or Seneschallus they were calledthe Beatons andBethunes could boast of their territorial designation.  In 1434, whenMagister John Seneschallus, Provost of Methven, was appointed one of theLords Auditors, it was Alexander de Beaton who administered the oath tohimthe same Alexander de Beaton who, some two years thereafter,accompanied Margaret of Scotland to France, on her marriage with theDauphin.  Yes, sir, I confess I am proud to bear the name; and perhapsit is the more excusable that it is about the last of our possessionsthey have left us. Balloray"  He paused for a second.  "Do you seethat child?" he said, pointing with a trembling forefinger to hisgranddaughter.  "If there were any right or justice, there sits theheiress of Balloray.""It was a famous lawsuit in its time," the wine-merchant observedbutnot looking in Maisrie's direction."It killed my father, and made me a wanderer on the face of the earth,"the old man said; and then he raised his head bravely.  "Well, nomatter; they cannot rob me of my name; and I am Bethune ofBalloraywhoever has the wide lands."Now perhaps there still dwelt in the breast of the suave-lookingwine-merchant some remorse of conscience over the remark that had causedthis pale and sensitive-looking young creature to flush with consciousshame; at all events he had quite abandoned the somewhat grudgingcoldness with which he had first received his customer; and when varioussamples of claret had been brought from the cellar and placed on thetable, it was the more expensive that he frankly and fully recommended.Nay, he was almost pressing.  And again he called to his assistant, andbade him fetch a particular bottle of champagne; and when that wasopened, he himself poured out a glass and offered it to the young lady,with a biscuit or two, and seemed concerned and distressed when shethanked him and declined.  The end of this interview was that old GeorgeBethune ordered a considerable quantity of claret; and carried away withhim, for immediate use, a case of twelve bottles, which was put into thefour-wheeled cab.Park Street, Mayfair, occupies a prominent position in the fashionablequarter of London; but from it, at intervals, run one or two smallerthoroughfaressometimes ending in stablesthe dwellings in which are ofa quite modest and unpretentious appearance.  It was to one of thesesmaller thoroughfares that George Bethune and his granddaughter nowdrove; and when they had entered the quiet little house, and ascended tothe first floor, they found that dinner was laid on the table, for theevening was now well advanced.  When they were ready, the frugal banquetwas also ready; and the old man, seated at the head of the table, withMaisrie on his right, soon grew eloquent about the virtues of the bottleof claret which he had just opened.  The girlwho did not take anywineseemed hardly to hear.  She was more thoughtful even thanusualperhaps, indeed, there was a trace of sadness in the delicate,pensive features.  When the fresh-coloured servant-lass brought in thethings, and happened to remain in the room for a second or two, Maisriemade some pretence of answering her grandfather; then, when they wereleft alone again, she relapsed into silence, and let him ramble on as hepleased.  And he was in a satisfied and garrulous mood.  The evening wasfine and warmthe window behind them they had left open.  He approved ofthe lodging-house cookery; he emphatically praised the claret, with theconviction of one who knew.  Dinner, in fact, was half way over beforethe girl, looking up with her beautiful, clear, limpid eyesbeautifulalthough they were so strangely wistfulventured to say anything."Grandfather," she asked, with obvious hesitation, "diddid LordMusselburghgive yousomething towards the publication of that book?""Why, yes, yes, yes, certainly," the old man said, with muchcheerfulness.  "Certainly.  Something substantial too.  Why not?"The hot blood was in her face againand her eyes downcast."Grandfather," she said, in the same low voice, "when will you set aboutwriting the book?""Ah, well," he made answer, evasively, but with perfect good humour, "itis a matter to be thought over.  Indeed, I heard in New York of asimilar volume being got together; but I may be first in the field afterall.  There is no immediate hurry. A thing of that kind must be thoughtover and considered.  And indeed, my dear, I cannot go back to Americaat present; for my first and foremost intention is that you should beginto learn something of your native country.  You must become familiarwith the hills and the moorlands, with the roaring mountain-torrents,and the lonely islands amid the grey seas.  For of what account is theaccident of your birth?  Omaha cannot claim you. There is Scotch bloodin your veins, Maisriethe oldest in the land; and you must seeDunfermline town, where the King sate 'drinking the blood-red wine'; andyou must see Stirling Castle, and Edinburgh, and Holyrood, and MelroseAbbey. Nebraska has no claim over youyou, a Bethune of Balloray.  Andyou have some Highland blood in your veins too, my dear; for if theGrants who intermarried with the Bethunes were not of the northernGrants whose proud motto is 'Stand fast, Craigellachie!' none the lessis Craig-Royston wild and Highland enough, as I hope to show you someday.  And Lowland or Highland, Maisrie, you must wear the snood when yougo north; a young Scotch lass should wear the snood; yes, yes, the bitof blue ribbon will look well in your hair.  Melrose," he rambled on, ashe filled his glass again, "and Maxwellton Braes; Yarrow's Banks; andfair Kirkconnel Lea: a storied country: romance, pathos, tragic anddeathless music conjured up at every footstep. Instead of the St.Lawrence, you shall have the murmur of the Tweed: instead ofBrooklynthe song-haunted shores of Colonsay!  But there is one placethat with my will you shall never visitno, not while there arestrangers and aliens there.  You may wander all over Scotlandnorth,south, east, and westbut never, never while I am alive, must you ask tosee 'the bonny mill-dams o' Balloray.'"She knew what he meant; she did not speak. But presentlyperhaps to drawaway his thoughts from that terrible law-suit which had had suchdisastrous consequences for him and hisshe said"I hope, grandfather, you won't think of remaining in this country on myaccount.  Perhaps it is better to read about those beautiful places, andto dream about them, than to see themyou remember 'Yarrow Unvisited.'And indeed, grandfather, if you are collecting materials for that book,why should we not go back at once?  It would be dreadful ififthe othervolume were to come out firstand you indebted to Lord Musselburgh, orany one else; but if yours were written and publishedif you could showthem you had done what you undertook to do, then it would be allperfectly right.  For you know, grandfather," she continued, in a gentlypersuasive and winning voice, "no one could do it as well as you!  Whoelse has such a knowledge of Scotland and Scottish literature, or such asympathy with Scottish music and poetry? And then your personalacquaintance with many of those writerswho used to welcome you as oneof themselveswho else could have that?  You could do it better than anyone, grandfather; and you have always said you would like to dosomething for the sake of Scotland; and here is the very thing ready toyour hand.  Some other time, grandfather," she pleaded, with thosebeautiful clear eyes turned beseechingly upon him, "some other time youwill take me to all those beautiful places.  It is not as if I had comeback home; I have hardly ever had a home anywhere; I am as well contentin Montreal or Toronto as anywhere else.  And then you could get all theassistance you might need over thereyou could go to your variousfriends in the newspaper offices, and they would give you information.""Yes, yes; well, well," he said, peevishly; "I am not a literary hack,to be driven, Maisrie.  I must have my own time.  I made no promise.There, now, get me my pipe; and bring your violin; and play some ofthose Scotch airs.  Yes, yes; you can get at the feeling of them; andthat comes to you through your blood, Maisrieno matter where you happento be born."Twilight had fallen.  At the open window, with a long clay pipe, as yetunlit, in his fingers, old George Bethune sate and stared out into thesemi-darkness, where all was quiet now, for the carriages from theneighbouring mews had long ago been driven away to dinner-parties andoperas and theatres.  And in the silence, in the dusky part of the room,there arose a low sound, a tender-breathing sound of most exquisitepathos, that seemed to say, as well as any instrument might say"I'm wearin' awa', Jean,Like snaw-wreaths in thaw, Jean,I'm wearin' awa',To the land o' the leal;There's nae sorrow there, Jean,There's neither cauld nor care, Jean,The day's aye fairIn the land o' the leal."Most tenderly she played, and slowly; and with an absolute simplicity oftone."There's Scotch blood in your veins, MaisrieScotch blood," he said,approvingly, as the low-vibrating notes ceased.And then again in the darkness another plaintive wail aroseit was theFlowers o' the Forest this timeand here the old man joined in, singingin a sort of undertone, and with a sufficiently sympathetic voice:"I've heard the liltin' at our yowe-milkin',Lasses a-liltin, before the dawn o' day;But now there's a moanin' on ilka green loanin';The Flowers o' the Forest are a' wede away.*      *      *      *      *"We hear nae mair liltin' at our yowe-milkin',Women and bairns are dowie and wae;Sighin' and moanin', on ilka green loanin'The Flowers o' the Forest are a' wede away.""Yes, yes," he said, as he rose and came away from the window, "it isthe Scotch blood that tingles, it is the Scotch heart that throbs.'Yestreen, when to the trembling strings, the dance gaed through thelichted ha''  Who but a Scotchman could have written that?  Well, now,Maisrie, we'll have the gas; and you can get out the spirits; and we'lltry some of the livelier airs.  There's plenty of them, too, as befits adaring and energetic peoplea nation of fighters.  They were not alwaysbewailing their losses in the field."  And therewith the old man, pacingup and down before the empty fire-place, began to sing, with uprighthead and gallant voice"London's bonnie woods and braes,I maun leave them a', lassie;Wha can thole when Britain's faesWould gie Briton law, lassie?Wha would shun the field o' danger?Wha to fame would live a stranger?Now when freedom bids avenge her,Wha would shun her ca', lassie?"Maisrie Bethune had laid aside her violin; but she did not light thegas.  She stood there, in the semi-darkness, in the middle of the room,timidly regarding her grandfather, and yet apparently afraid to speak.At last she managed to say"Grandfatheryou will not be angry?""What's this, now?" he said, wheeling round and staring at her, for thepeculiarity of her tone had caught his ear."Grandfather," she continued, in almost piteous embarrassment.  "IIwish to say something to youI have been thinking about it for a longwhile backand yet afraid you mightn't understandyou might be angry""Well, well, what is it?" he said, impatiently. "What are youdissatisfied with?  I don't see that you've much to complain of, or Ieither.  We don't live a life of grandeur; nor is there much excitementabout it; but it is fairly comfortable.  I consider we are very welloff.""We are too well off, grandfather," she said, sadly.He started at this, and stared at her again."What do you mean?""Grandfather," she said, in the same pathetic voice, "don't you see thatI am no longer a child? I am a woman.  And I am doing nothing.  Why didyou give me so careful an education if I am not to use it?  I wish toearn somethingII wish to keep you and me, grandfather"The stammering sentences ceased: he replied slowly, and perhaps a triflecoldly."Why did I have you carefully educated?  Well, I should have thought youmight have guessedmight have understood.  But I will tell you.  I havegiven you what education was possible in our circumstances in order tofit you for the station which some day you may be called upon to fill.And if not, if it is fated that injustice and iniquity are to be in ourcase perpetual, at all events you must be worthy of the name you bear.But it was not as an implement of trade," he continued, more warmly,"that I gave you such education as was possible in our wandering lives.What do you want to do?  Teach music?  And you would use your trainedhand and earand your trained soul, which is of more importance stilltodrum mechanical rudiments into the brats of some bourgeois household?  Afit employment for a Bethune of Balloray!"She seemed bewilderedand agonised."Grandfather, I must speak!  I must speak! You may be angry ornotbutbut I am no longer a childI can see how we are situatedandandif it is pride that causes me to speak, remember who it is that hastaught me to think of our name. Grandfather, let us begin a new life!  Ican workI am old enough to workI would slave my fingers to the bonefor you!  Grandfather, why should you accept assistance from anyone?from Lord Musselburgh or any one?  No, I do not blame youI havealways thought that everything you did was rightand kind and good; butI cannot be a child any longerI must say what I think and feel.Grandfather"But here the incoherent appeal broke down; she fell on her knees beforehim, and clasped her hands over her face; and in the dark the oldmanstern and immovablecould hear the sound of her violent sobbing."I will workoh, I will work night and day, grandfather," she continued,wildly, "if only you will take my money and not from any one else!  Iwill go on the stageI will turn dressmakerI will go anywhere or doanythingand work hard and hardif only you will consent!  There wouldnot be so much sacrifice, grandfathera little, not muchand don't youthink we should be all the happier?  I have spoken at last,grandfatheryou will forgive me!  I could not keep silent any longer.It has been weighing on my heartand nownow you are going to say yes,grandfatherand to-morrowto-morrow we begin differently. We are so muchalonelet us live for each otherlet us be independent of every one!Now you are going to say yes, grandfatherand indeed, indeed I will workfor both of us, oh, so gladly!""Have you finished?" he asked.She rose, and would have seized his hand to enforce her appeal, but hewithdrew a step, and motioned her to be seated."I am glad of this opportunity," he said, in a formal and measuredfashion.  "You say you have become a woman; and it is natural you shouldbegin and think for yourself; hitherto I have treated you as a child,and you have obeyed and believed implicitly.  As for your immediatewish, I may say at once that is impossible.  There is no kind of workfor which you are fittedeven if I were prepared to live on yourearnings, which I am not.  The stage? What could you do on the stage!Do you think an actress is made at a moment's notice?  Or a dress-makereither?  How could you turn dressmaker to-morrow?because you can hemhandkerchiefs? And as for making use of your education, do you know ofthe thousands of girls whose French and Italian and music are as good asyours, and who can barely gain their food by teaching?"He altered his tone; and spoke more proudly."But what I say is this, that you do not understand, you have not yetunderstood, my position. When George Bethune condescends to acceptassistance, as you call it, he receives no favour, he confers an honour.I know my rights, and stand on them; yes, and I know my wrongsand howtrifling the compensations ever likely to be set against them. You spokeof Lord Musselburgh; but Lord Musselburgha mushroom peertherepresentative of a family dragged from nothingness by James VI.LordMusselburgh knew better than youwell he knewthat he was honouringhimself in receiving into his house a Bethune of Balloray.  And as forhis granting me assistance, that was his privilege, his opportunity, hisduty.  Should not I have done the like, and gladly, if our positions hadbeen reversed?  Noblesse oblige.  I belong to his orderand to afamily older by centuries than his.  If there was a favour conferredto-day at Musselburgh House, it was not on my shoulders that it fell."He spoke haughtily, and yet without anger; and there was a ring ofsincerity in his tones that could not be mistaken.  The girl sate silentand abashed."No," said he, in the same proud fashion; "during all my troubles, andthey have been more numerous than you know or need ever know, I havenever cowered, or whimpered, or abased myself before any living being.I have held my head up. My conscience is clear towards all men.  'Standfast, Craig-Royston!' it has been with meand shall be!"He went to the window and shut it."Come, light the gas, Maisrie; and let us talk about something else.What I say is this, that if anyone, recognising the injustice that I andmine have suffered, should feel it due to himself, due to humanity, tomake some little reparation, why, that is as between man and manthatought to be considered his privilege; and I take no shame.  I ask for nocompassion.  The years that I can hope for now must be few; but theyshall be as those that have gone before.  I abase myself before no one.I hold my head erect.  I look the world in the face; and ask which of ushas the greater cause to complain of the other.  'Stand fast,Craig-Royston!'that has been my motto; and so, thank God, it shall beto the end!"Maisrie lit the gas, and attended to her grandfather's other wantsin amechanical sort of way. But she did not take up the violin again.  Therewas a strangely absent look on the pale and beautiful and pensive face.CHAPTER II.NEIGHBOURS.The young man whom Lord Musselburgh had hailed came into the middle ofthe room.  He was a handsome and well-made young fellow of about threeor four-and-twenty, with finely-cut and intelligent features, and cleargrey eyes that had a curiously straightforward and uncompromising lookin them, albeit his manner was modest enough.  At the present moment,however, he seemed somewhat perturbed."Who were those two?" he said, quickly."Didn't you listen while the old gentleman was declaiming away?" LordMusselburgh made answer.  "An enthusiastic Scot, if ever there was one!I suppose you never heard of the great Bethune lawsuit?""But the otherthe girl?""His granddaughter, I think he said.""She is the most beautiful human creature I ever beheld!" the young manexclaimed, rather breathlessly.His friend looked at himand laughed."That's not like you, Vin.  Take care.  The Hope of the Liberal Partyenmeshed at four-and-twentythat wouldn't do!  Prettyoh, yes, she waspretty enough, but shy: I hardly saw anything of her.  I dare say herpretty face will have to be her fortune; I suspect the poor oldgentleman is not overburdened with worldly possessions.  He has hisname, however; he seems proud enough of that; and I shouldn't wonder ifit had made friends for him abroad.  They seem to have travelled a gooddeal."While he was speaking his companion had mechanically lifted from thetable the card which old George Bethune had sent up.  The address inMayfair was pencilled on it.  And mechanically the young man laid downthe card again."Well, come along, Vinlet's get to Victoria.""No, if you don't mind, Musselburgh," said the other, with downcasteyes, and something of embarrassment, "I would rathernot go down to theBungalow to-night.  Some other timeit is so good of you to be alwaysasking me down""My dear fellow," the young nobleman said, looking at his friendcuriously, "what is the matter with you?  Are you in a dream?  Are youasleep? Haven't I told you that  is coming down by a late trainto-night; and isn't all the world envying you that the great man shouldmake such a protg and favourite of you?  Indeed you must come down;you can't afford to lose such a chance. We will sit up for him; andyou'll talk to him during supper; and you'll listen to him for hoursafter if he is in the humour for monologues.  Then to-morrow morningyou'll take him away bird's-nestinghe is as eager for any new diversionas a school-boy; and you'll have him all to yourself; and one of thesedays, before you know where you are, he'll hand you a Junior Lordship.Or is it the Under-Secretaryship at the Home Office you're waiting for?You know, we're all anxious to see how the new experiment will come off.The young man unspoiled by Oxford or Cambridgeuntainted by landlordsentimenttrained for public life on first principles: one wants to seehow all this will work in practice.  And we never dictateoh, no, wenever dictate to the constituencies; but when the public notice fromtime to time in the newspapers that Mr. Vincent Harris was included in's dinner-party on the previous evening, then they think; and perhapsthey wonder when that lucky young gentleman is going to take his seat inthe House of Commons.  So really, my dear Vin, you can't afford to throwaway this chance of having  all to yourself.  I suppose he quiteunderstands that you are not infected with any of your father'sSocialistic theories?  Of course it's all very well for an enormouslyrich man like your father to play with Communismit must be an excitingsort of amusementlike stroking a tiger's tail, and wondering what willhappen in consequence; but you must keep clear of that kind of thing, myboy.  Now, come along""Oh, thank you, Musselburgh," the young man said, in the sameembarrassed fashion, "but if you'll excuse meI'd rather stay in townto-night.""Oh, very well," the other said, good-naturedly, "I shall be up in a dayor two again.  By the way, the Four-in-Hand Club turns out on Saturday.Shall I give you a liftand we'll go down to Hurlingham for the polo?Mrs. Ellison is coming.""Oh, thanksawfully good of youI shall be delighted," the young manmurmured; and a few seconds thereafter the two friends had separated,Lord Musselburgh driving off in a hansom to Victoria-station.This young Vincent Harris who now walked away along Piccadilly towardsHyde Park was in a sort of waking trance.  He saw nothing of the peoplepassing by him, nor of the carriages, nor of the crowd assembled at thecorner of the Row, expecting the Princess.  He saw a pale and patheticface, a dimly-outlined figure standing by a table, a chastened splendourof girlish hair, an attitude of meekness and diffidence.  Once only hadhe caught a glimpse of the beautiful, clear, blue-grey eyeswhen shecame in at the door, looking startled almost; but surely a man is notstricken blind and dumb by a single glance from a girl's wondering orenquiring eyes?  Love at first sight?he would have dismissed thesuggestion with anger, as an impertinence, a profanation.  It was notlove at all: it was a strange kind of interest and sympathy she hadinspiredcompassionate almost, and yet more reverent than pitiful.There appeared to be some mysterious and subtle appeal in her veryyouth: why should one so young be so solitary, so timid, shelteringherself, as it were, from the common gaze?  Why that touch of pathosabout a mouth that was surely meant to smile?why the loweredeyelashes?was it because she knew she was alone in this greatwilderness of strangers, in this teeming town?  And he felt in his heartthat this was not the place for her at all.  She ought to have been awayin sunny meadows golden with buttercups, with the laughter of youngchildren echoing around her, with the wide air fragrant with thenew-mown hay, with thrushes and blackbirds piping clear from amidst thehawthorn boughs.  Who had imprisoned this beautiful child, and made awhite slave of her, and brought her into this great roaring market ofthe world?  And was there no one to help?But it was all a perplexity to him; even as was this indefinable concernand anxiety about one to whom he had never even spoken a word.  What wasthere in that pensive beauty that should so strangely trouble him?  Shehad made no appeal to him; their eyes could scarcely be said to havemet, even in that brief moment; her cruel fate, the tyranny of hersurroundings, her pathetic resignation, were all part and parcel of adistracted reverie, that seemed to tear his heart asunder with fears,and indignation, and vows of succour.  And thensomehowamidst thischaos and bewildermenthis one desire was that she should know he wishedto be her friendthat some dayoh, some wild white day of joy!he shouldbe permitted to take her hand and say "Do not be so sad!  You are not somuch alone.  Let me be by your side for a little whileuntil youspeakuntil you tell me what I can dountil you say 'Yes, I take you formy friend!'"He had wandered away from the fashionable crowdpacing aimlessly alongthe unfrequented roadways of the Park, and little recking of the truecause of the unrest that reigned in his bosom. For one thing,speculations about love or marriage had so far concerned him butslightly; these things were too remote; his aspirations and ambitionswere of another sort.  Then again he was familiar with feminine society.While other lads were at college, their thoughts intent on cricket, orboating, or golf, he had been kept at home with masters and teachers tofit him for the practical career which had been designed for him; andpart of the curriculum was that he should mix freely with his kind, andget to know what people of our own day were thinking, not what people oftwo thousand years ago had been thinking.  One consequence of this wasthat 'Vin' Harris, as he was universally called, if he did not knoweverything, appeared to know everybody; and of course he was acquaintedwith scores on scores of pretty girlswhom he liked to look at when, forexample, they wore a smart lawn tennis costume, and who interested himmost perhaps when they were saucy; and also he was acquainted with aconsiderable number of young married ladies, who were inclined to pethim, for he was good-natured, and easy-mannered, and it may be just alittle careless of their favour.  But as for falling seriously in love(if there were such a thing) or perplexing himself with dreams ofmarriagethat was far from his scheme of life.  His morning companionswere Spencer, Bain, John Mill, Delolme, Hallam, Freeman, and the like;during the day he was busy with questions relating to food supply, tothe influence of climate on character, the effect of religious creeds onmental development, the protection and cultivation of new industries,and so forth; then in the evening he was down at the House of Commons agood deal, especially when any well-known orator was expected to speak;and again he went to all kinds of social festivities, particularly whenthese were of a political cast, or likely to be attended by politicalpeople.  For Vin Harris was known to be a young man of great promise andprospects; he was received everywhere; and granted a consideration byhis elders which was hardly justified by his years.  That he remainedunspoiledand even modest in a degree unusual at his agemay be put downto his credit, or more strictly to the fortunate accident of histemperament and disposition.How long he walked, and whither he walked, on this particular evening,he hardly knew; but as daylight waned he found himself in Oxford-street,and over there was Park-street.  Well enough he remembered the addresspencilled on the visiting-card; and yet he was timorous about seeking itout; he passed and went oncame back againglanced nervously down thelong thoroughfareand then resumed his aimless stroll, slowly andreluctantly. To these indecisions and hesitations there came theinevitable climax: with eyes lowered, but yet seeming to see everythingaround him and far ahead of him, he went down Park-street until he cameto the smaller thoroughfare named on the card; and there, with stillgreater shamefacedness, he paused and ventured to look at the house thathe guessed to be the abode of the old man and his granddaughter.  Well,it was a sufficiently humble dwelling; but it was neat and clean; and inthe little balcony outside the first floor were a number of pots offlowerslobelias, ox-eye daisies, and musk.  The window was open, but hecould hear nothing.  He glanced up and down the small street. By thistime the carriages had all been driven away to dinner-party and theatre;a perfect silence prevailed everywhere; there was not a singlepasser-by.  It was a quiet corner, a restful haven, these two lonelycreatures had found, after their varied buffetings about the world.  Andto this young man, who had just come away from the roar of Oxford-streetand its surging stream of human life, there seemed something singularlyfascinating and soothing in the stillness.  He began to think that he,too, would like to escape into this retreat.  They would not object to asolitary companion?to a neighbour who would be content to see them,from the other side of the way, at the window now and again, or perhapsto say "Good morning!" or "Good evening!" as they passed him on thepavement?  He could bring his books; here would be ample opportunity forstudy; there were far too many distractions and interruptions at hisfather's house.  And thenafter weeks and weeks of patient waitingthenperhapssome still eveninghe might be invited to cross over?  In thehushed little parlour he would take his seatandoh! the wonder andenhancement of itbe privileged to sit and listen, and hear what thewanderers, at rest at last, had to say of the far and outer world theyhad left behind them.  He did not know what she was called; but hethought of several names; and each one grew beautifulbecame possessedof a curious interestwhen he guessed that it might be hers.Suddenly the silence sprung into life; some one seemed to speak to him;and then he knew that it was a violinbeing played in that very room. Heglanced up towards the open window; he could just make out that the oldman was sitting there, within the shadow; therefore it must be the girlherself who was playing, in the recess of the chamber.  And in a sort ofdream he stood and listened to the plaintive melodyhardlybreathinghaunted by the feeling that he was intruding on some sacredprivacy.  Then, when the beautiful, pathetic notes ceased, henoiselessly withdrew with bowed head.  She had been speaking to him, buthe was bewildered; he hardly could tell what that trembling, infinitelysad voice had said.He walked quickly now; for in place of those vague anticipations andreveries, a more definite purpose was forming in his brain; and therewas a certain joyousness in the prospect.  The very next morning hewould come up to this little thoroughfare, and see if he could securelodgings for himself, perhaps opposite the house where the old man andhis granddaughter lived.  It was time he was devoting himself morevigorously to study; there were too many people calling at the bigmansion in Grosvenor Place; the frivolities of the fashionable worldwere too seductive.  But in the seclusion of that quiet little quarterhe could give himself up to his books; and he would know that he hadneighbours; he might get a glimpse of them from time to time; that wouldlighten his toil.  Then when Mary Bethunehe had come to the conclusionthat Mary was her name, and had made not such a bad guess, afterallwhen Mary Bethune played one of those pathetic Scotch airs, he wouldhave a better right to listen; he would contentedly put down Seaman's"Progress of Nations," and go to the open window, and sit there, tillthe violin had ceased to speak.  It was a most excellent scheme; heconvinced himself that it would work right wellbecause it was based oncommon sense.When he arrived at the great house in Grosvenor Place, he went at onceinto the dining-room, and found, though not to his surprise, that dinnerwas just about over.  There were only three persons seated at the longtable, which was sumptuously furnished with fruit, flowers, and silver.At the bead was Vin Harris's father, Mr. Harland Harris, a stout,square-set, somewhat bourgeois-looking man, with a stiff, pedantic, andpompous manner, who nevertheless showed his scorn of conventionalitiesby wearing a suit of grey tweed; on his right sate his sister-in-law,Mrs. Ellison, a remarkably pretty young widow, tall and elegant offigure, with wavy brown hair, shrewd blue eyes, and a most charmingsmile that she could use with effect; the third member of the groupbeing Mr. Ogden, the great electioneerer of the north, a big and heavyman, with Yorkshire-looking shoulders, a bald head, and small, piggisheyes set in a wide extent of face. Mr. Ogden was resplendent in eveningdress, if his shining shirt-front was somewhat billowy."What's this now?" said the pretty Mrs. Ellison to the young man, as hecame and pulled in a chair and sate down by her.  "Haven't you had anydinner?""Good little children come in with dessert," said he, as he carelesslyhelped himself to some olives and a glass of claret.  "It's too hot toeat foodunusual for May, isn't it?  Besides I had a late luncheon withLord Musselburgh.""Lord Musselburgh?" put in Mr. Ogden.  "I wonder when his lordship isgoing to tell us what he means to bean owner of racehorses, or ayachtsman, or a statesman?  It seems to me he can't make up his ownmind; and the public don't know whether to take him seriously or not.""Lord Musselburgh," said Vincent, firing up in defence of his friend,"is an English gentleman, who thinks he ought to support Englishinstitutions:and I dare say that is why he does not find saving gracein the caucus."Perhaps there was more rudeness than point in this remark; but Mrs.Ellison's eyes laugheddecorously and unobserved.  She said aloud"For my part, I consider Lord Musselburgh a very admirable young man: hehas offered me the box-seat on his coach at the next Meet of theFour-in-Hand Club.""And are you going, aunt?" her nephew asked."Yes, certainly.""Rather rash of Musselburgh, isn't it?" he observed, in a casual sort ofway."Why?""What attention is he likely to pay to his team, if you are sittingbeside him?""None of your impertinence, sir," said she (but she was pleased all thesame).  "Boys must not say such things to their grandmothers."Now the advent of Master Vin was opportune; for Mr. Harris, finding thathis sister-in-law had now some one of like mind to talk to, left thosetwo frivolous persons alone, and addressed himself exclusively to hisbulky friend from the north. And his discourse took the form of pointingout what were the practical and definite aims that Socialism had toplace before itself.  As to general principles, all thinking men wereagreed.  Every one who had remarked the signs of the times knew that thenext great movement in modern life must be the emancipation of thewage-slave.  The tyranny of the capitalistworse than any tyranny thatexisted under the feudal systemmust be cribbed and confined: too longhad he gorged himself with the fruits of the labours of hisfellow-creatures.  The most despicable of tyrants, he; not only robbingand plundering the hapless beings at his mercy, but debasing theirlives, depriving them of their individualism, of the self-respect whichwas the birthright of the humblest handicraftsman of the middle ages,and making of them mere machines for the purpose of filling his pocketswith useless and inordinate wealth.  What was to be done, then?whatwere the immediate steps to be taken in order to alter this system ofmonstrous and abominable plunder.  It was all very well to makeprocessions to Pre Lachaise, and wave red flags, and wax eloquent overthe graves of the Communists; but there was wanted something more thantalk, something more than a tribute to the memory of the martyrs,something actual to engage our own efforts, if the poor man was not tobe for ever ground to the dust, himself and his starving family, by therelentless plutocrat and his convenient freedom of contract.  Let theState, thenthat engine of oppression which had been invented by therichnow see whether it could not do something for all classes under itscare: let it consider the proletariat as well as the unscrupulouslandlords and the sordid and selfish bourgeoisie.  Already it wasworking the Telegraphs, the Post Office, the Parcels Post, theDockyards, and Savings Banks; and if it regulated the wages it paid bythe wage-rate of the outside market, that was because it followed thewicked old system of unequal distribution of profit that was soon to bedestroyed.  That would speedily be amended.  What further, then? Theland for the people, first of all.  As clear as daylight was the rightof the people to the land: let the State assume possession, and manageitits mines and minerals, its agriculture, its public grounds andparksfor the benefit of all, not for the profit of a pampered few.  TheState must buy and own the railways, must establish Communal centres ofdistribution for the purchase and exchange of goods, must establishsystems of credit, must break down monopoly everywhere, and the ironpower of commercialism that was crushing the life out of the masses ofthe population.  The State must organise production, so that each manshall do his share of work demanded by the community, and no moreBut here Mrs. Ellison, who had doubtless heard or read all this before,turned away altogether.  She asked her nephew to give her some morestrawberries."I say, Vin," she remarked, incidentally, "what very beautifuldessert-plates these are.  I don't remember them.  Where did you getthem?""I thought you would admire them," said he. "They are my father's owndesign.""Really!  I call them very handsomeand so quaint and unusual.  He musttell me where I can get some of them: when I go back to Brighton Ishould like to take a few with me for my small establishment.""But you can't, aunt," he said."Why?""Because my father had the moulds broken."She looked at him for a moment and then sniggeredyes, sniggered, butdiscreetly, so that the two perfervid politicians should not see."That is pretty well," she observed in an undertone, "for a Socialistand Communistto have the moulds broken so that nobody else should haveany!"Presently she said, in the same undertone"I'm going to catch your eye in a minute, Vin. Are you coming upstairsto the drawing-room with me?""Yes, of course, aunt," said he, instantly.  "Get up now, and let's beoff."She rose: so did her brother-in-law.  Mr. Ogden remained in hischairperhaps through inattention, or perhaps he was bewildered by theconsciousness that he ought to make, as a relic of his ancient worshipof laissez faire, some protest against this wholesale intervention ofthe State.  Then Vincent opened the door for the tall and bright-eyedyoung widow; and he and she passed out and went upstairs together.When they entered the spacious and richly-furnished room, the atmosphereof which was heavy with the scent of flowers, Mrs. Ellison seatedherself in a low lounging-chair, while her nephew stood some little wayoff, his hands behind his back, his eyes absently staring into arose-shaded lamp as if he could see pictures there.  When she spoke, nodoubt he heard; but he did not answer or interrupt: he allowed her toramble on.  And she was in a talkative and vivacious mood."I'm going to the Drawing Room to-morrow, Vin," said she, "to presentLouie Drexel; and if you were kind and civil you would come down to St.James's Park and find out our brougham and talk to us while we arewaiting.  I do so want you to get to know Miss Drexel well; it would beworth your while, I can tell you.  You see, those American girls havesuch excellent good sense.  This evening, before you came in, yourfather was treating us to a dissertation on the iniquity of richesorrather the absurdity of people revelling in wealth, and at the same timeprofessing to be Christians.  He askedand I'm sure I couldn't answerhimhow a Bishop can reconcile his enjoyment of 10,000 a year withChrist's plain injunction, 'Sell all that thou hast and distribute untothe poor.'  And while I was listening to the sermon, I was thinking ofyou, Vin.  I don't know how far you have accepted your father'stheorieswhich he himself takes precious good care not to put intopractice.  But some dayfor young men are so impulsive and wilful anduncertainyou might suddenly take it into your head to do some wildthing of that kind; and then don't you see how well it would be for youto be married to a sensible American girl; for if you were to sell allthat you have and give to the poor, she would make pretty certain youdidn't sell all that she hadso long as the Married Women's Property Actwas in force.  There's no mad Quixotism about a girl likethatlevel-headed, isn't that what they call it over there?  Then thinkwhat a help such a wife as that would be to you in public life.  Thinkof an election, for examplewhy, Louie Drexel could talk the voters outof their five sensesbamboozle the women, and laugh the men into goodhumour.  I wonder you didn't pick up one of those bright American girlswhen you were over in the States: I suppose you were too busy examiningthe political machine, and the machinists.  But I'm glad you didn't; Icouldn't trust you; and I'm going to do it for you myself.  You are myboy: I'm going to provide for you.  And I haven't fixed on Louie Drexelyet; but at the same time you might come down to-morrow to St. James'sPark and talk to her."He withdrew his eyes from the crimson lamp, and came and took a chairnear her."I am thinking of making a little change in my arrangements," said he."There is too much distraction here; especially at this time of theyear, when everybody's in town.  I am going to take rooms elsewhere.""Oh, ho!" exclaimed the pretty young widow, with a smile.  "Is that it?The restraint of home has been found too much at lastwe must havefreedom, and wine-parties, and cards?  Well, who can wonder at it?  Iwarned your father years ago of the folly of not sending you to college;you would have had all that over by this time, like other young men; butno, the future Champion of the Proletariat was not to have his mindcontaminated by the sons of squires.  Well, and where have the princelyapartments been chosen?  In Piccadilly, of courseyellow satin andgolden goblets.""You are quite mistaken, aunt," he said, simply. "The rooms I hope toget to-morrow are in a quiet little street that I dare say you neverheard of: if you saw it, you might probably call it shimmy.""Oh, is that it?" she said again, for her brain was nimble and swift inthe construction of theories. "Then you are really going to put some ofyour father's principles into practice, and to consort with the masses?I've often wondered when he was going to begin himself.  You know how hedeclares it to be monstrous that there should be people of your ownrace, and colour, and religion, whom you would hesitate to ask to sitdown at the same table as yourself; but I have not heard him as yetinvite Jack the crossing-sweeper or Tom from the stable-yard to come inand dine with him.  And if they came in without an invitation, takinghim at his word, as it were, I'm afraid their reception wouldn't bewarmyes, it would be remarkably warmthey'd be thrown out of thefront-door in a couple of seconds. So you are going slumming, is thatit?  You want to understand the great heart of the peoplebefore youlead them on to anarchy and universal plunder?""Aunt," said he, with a smile, "you mustn't say such things to me; youmustn't pour reactionary poison into my young mind.  No; I am going toretire into that quiet little corner of London simply to get on with mybooks; and as I shan't let anybody know where it is, I can't bedisturbed.""Do you mean to live there altogether?" she asked, glancing quickly athim.  "Shall you sleep there?""Oh, no.  I shall come home here each evening.""To dinner?  But it is no use asking you that; for you never seem tocare where you dine, or whether you dine at all.  Have you told yourfather of this scheme?""No, not yet," he made answer; and he could say nothing further justthen, for at this moment Harland Harris and his guest came upstairs fromthe dining-room, and Mr. Ogden proceeded to engage the young widow inponderous conversation.As good luck would have it, when Vincent went up next morning to thelittle thoroughfare leading from Park-street, he found exactly the roomshe wanted, and engaged them there and then, paying a fortnight's rent inadvance in order to calm the good landlady's mind, for he had not ascrap of luggage with him.  The sitting-room was all he really required,to be sure; but he did not wish to be disturbed by having the adjoiningbedroom occupied; so he took that too, money not being of muchconsequence to this young man. And then, when the landlady left, he satedown to look at his new possessions.  The apartments must have lookedpoorly furnished to eyes familiar with the splendour of Grosvenor Place;but at all events they seemed clean.  Cheap German lithographs adornedthe walls; the fireplace was gay with strips of pink paper.  But when heapproached the windowwhich he did stealthilythere was more to interesthim: the opposite two windows, behind the balcony filled with flowers,were both open: at any moment a figure might appear thereperhapslooking out absently and vaguely with those beautiful and wistful eyes.Or perchance he might hear the tender strains of the unseen violin?  Heremained there for some time, rather breathless and nervous, until herecollected that he had come hither for the purposes of study; and thenhe thought he would go away down to Grosvenor Place and seek out suchbooks and writing-materials as he might want, and bring them alongforthwith.He went downstairs and was just about to step outside when he caughtsight of something across the way which caused him instantly to shrinkback and shelter himself within the shadow of the doorhis heart beatingquickly.  He had nearly been face-to-face with the pensive-eyed younggirl, for she had come forth from the opposite house, and was waitingfor her grandfather to follow.  He remained concealedfearful of beingseen, and yet scarcely knowing why.  Then, when he heard the door on theother side shut, and when he had allowed them a few seconds' grace, hestepped forth from his hiding, and saw that they were just turning thecorner into Park-street.Why this perturbation that caused his hands to tremble, that caused hiseyeballs to throb, as he looked and looked, and yet hardly dared tolook? He was doing no harmhe was thinking no harm. These thoroughfareswere open to all; the May morning was warm and fine and clear; whyshould not he take his way to Hyde Park as well as another? Even infurtively watching whither they wentin keeping a certain distancebetween them and himthere was no sort of sacrilege or outrage.  If theyhad turned and confronted him, they could not have recognised him: itwas almost impossible they could have observed the young man who washalf concealed by the curtains of the room in Musselburgh House.  Andyetyetthere was some kind of tremulous wonder in his being so nearherin his being allowed, without let or hindrance, to gaze upon thelong-flowing masses of hair, that caught a sheen of light here andthere, and stirred with the stirring of the wind.  And then the simplegrace and ease of her carriage: she held her head more erect in thesequiet thoroughfares; sometimes she turned a little to address the oldman, and then her refined and sensitive profile became visible, and alsothe mysterious charm of the long and drooping lashes.  He noticed thatshe never looked at any passer-by; but she did not seem so sad on thisfresh morning; she was talking a good dealand cheerfully, as he hoped.He wished for more sunlightthat the day might brighten all aroundherthat the warm airs might be sweet with the blossoms of the openingsummer.For now they were nearing Hyde Park; and away before them stretched thepale blue vistas of atmosphere under the wide-swaying branches of themaples.  They crossed to Grosvenor Gate; they left the dull roar of ParkLane behind them; they passed beneath the trees; and emerged upon theopen breadths of verdure, intersected by pale pink roads.  Though summerhad come prematurely, this was almost an April-like day: there was asouth-west wind blowing, and flattening the feathery grasses; there wereshafts of misty sunlight striking here and there; while a confusion ofclouds, purple and grey and silver, floated heavily through thesurcharged sky.  The newly-shorn sheep were quite whitefor London.  Asmart young maidservant idly shoving a perambulator had a glory ofSpring flowers in her bonnet.  The mild air blowing about broughtgrateful odourswas it from the green-sward all around, or from the moredistant masses of hawthorn white and red?The old man, marching with uplifted head, and sometimes swinging thestick that he carried, was singing aloud in the gaiety of his heart,though Vincent, carefully keeping at a certain distance, could not makeout either the words or the air. The young girl, on the other hand, wassimply looking at the various objects, animate and inanimate, aroundherat the birds picking up straws or shreds of wool for the building oftheir nests, at the wind shivering through the grey spikelets of thegrass, at the ever-changing conformation of the clouds, at the swayingof the branches of the trees; while from time to time there camefloating over from Knightsbridge the sound of a military band. No, shedid not appear so sad as she had done the day before; and there wassomething cheerful, too, about her costumeabout the simple dress ofdark blue-and-white-striped linen and the sailor's hat of cream-whitewith a dark blue band.  Mary, he made sure her name wasMary Bethune.Only a name to him; nothing more: a strange, indefinable, immeasurabledistance lay between them; not for him was it to draw near to her, tobreathe the same air with her, to listen to the low tones of her voice,to wait for the uplifting of the mysteriously shaded eyes.  And as forfancies become more wildly audacious?what would be the joy of any humanbeing who should be allowed to touchwith trembling fingertipswithreverent and almost reluctant fingertipsthe soft splendour of thatshining and beautiful hair?George Bethune and his granddaughter made their way down to theSerpentine, and took their places on a bench there, while the old manproceeded to draw from his pocket a newspaper, which he leisurely beganto read.  The girl had nothing to do but sit placidly there and lookaround herat the shimmering stretch of water, at the small boys sailingtheir mimic yachts, at the quacking ducks and yelping dogs, at theever-rustling and murmuring trees.  Vincent Harris had now dared to drawa little nearer; but still he felt that she was worlds and worlds away.How many yards were there between him and her?not yards at all, butinfinities of space!  They were strangers to each other; no spoken wordwas possible between them; they might go through to the end of life withthis impalpable barrier for ever dividing them.  And yet it seemed asort of miraculous thing that he was allowed to come so closethat hecould almost tell the individual threads of that soft-shining hair.Then, more than once, too, he had caught a glimpse of her raised eyes,as she turned to address her grandfather; and that was a startling andbewildering experience.  It was not their mere beauty; though, to besure, their clear and limpid deeps seemed all the more clear and limpidbecause of the touch of sun-tan on her complexion; it was rather thatthey were full of all ineffable thingssimplicity, submission,gratitude, affection, and even, as he rejoiced to think, some measure ofmild enjoyment. For the moment there was little of that pensive andresigned look that had struck him in the figure standing with bowed headat Lord Musselburgh's table.  She appeared to be pleased with thevarious life around her and its little incidents; she regarded thesailing of the miniature yachts with interest. When a brace of duck wentwhirring by overhead, she followed their flight until they were lost toview; she watched two small urchins furtively fishing for minnows, withan eye on the distant park-keeper. There was a universal rustling ofleaves in the silence; and sometimes, when the wind blew straightacross, the music of the military band became more distinct.How long they remained there, the young man did not know; it was agolden morning, and all too brief.  But when at last they did rise to gohe was very nearly caught; for instead of returning by the way they hadcome, they struck westward; and he suddenly saw with alarm that therewas no time for him to get behind one of the elms.  All he could do wasto turn aside, and lower his eyes.  They passed within a few yards ofhim; he could distinctly hear the old man singing, with a fine note ofbravado in his voice, "The standard on the braes o' Mar, is up andstreaming rarely"; then, when he was sure they were some way off, hemade bold to raise his eyes again.  Had she taken any notice of him?  Hehoped not.  He did not wish her to think him a spy; he did not wish tobe known to her at all.  He should be her constant neighbour, hercompanion almost, without any consciousness on her part.  And again andagain he marvelled that the landlady in the little thoroughfare shouldhave given him those treasures of roomsshould have put such happinesswithin his reachfor so trivial a sum.  Seventeen shillings a week!wheneach moment would be a diamond, and each evening hour a string ofdiamonds!But nevertheless there were his studies to be thought of; so now hewalked away down to Grosvenor Place, gathered his books together, andtook them up in a hansom to his newly-acquired lodgings.  That afternoonhe did loyally stick to his workor tried to do so, though, in fact, hisears were alert for any sound coming from the other side of the way.  Hehad left his window open; one of the windows of the opposite house wasalso left open. Occasionally he would lay down Draper's Civil War inAmerica, and get up and stretch his legs, and from a convenient sheltersend a swift glance of scrutiny across the street.  There was no sign.Perhaps they had gone out again, shopping, or visiting, or, as likely asnot, to look at the people riding and driving in the Park.  He returnedto Draper, and to President Jackson's Proclamationbut with less ofinterest: his annotations became fewer.  He was listening as well asreading.Then all of a sudden there flashed into his brain a suggestionasuggestion that had little to do with Clay's Compromise, or the projectto arrest Mr. Calhoun.  On the previous evening it had seemed to him asthough the unseen violinist were speaking to him: why, then, should henot answer, in the same language?  There could be no offence in thatnoimpertinence: it would be merely one vague voice responding to theother, the unknown communicating in this fleshless and bloodless waywith the unknown.  And now he was abundantly grateful to his aunt forhaving insisted on his including music among his various studies andaccomplishments: a use had come for his slight proficiency at last: mostmodern languages he knew, but he had never expected to be called upon tospeak in this one.  And yet what more simple, as between neighbours?  Hewas not thrusting his society on any one; he was invading no privacy; hewas demanding no concession of friendship or even acquaintance. But atleast the dreadful gulf of silence would be bridged over by this mysticmeans.It was nearly six o'clock; London was busy when he went out on this hotevening.  He walked along to a music-publisher's place in Regent-street;and hired a piano on the express stipulation that it was to be in hisrooms within one hour.  Then, as he had only had a biscuit for lunch,and wished to leave himself untrammelled later on, he turned into arestaurant, and dined there, simply enough, and had a cigarette and alook at the evening papers. Thereafter he strolled back to his lodgings,and took to his book, though his thoughts were inclined to wander nowand again.Twilight had fallen; but he did not light the gas. Once, for a briefsecond or two, he had quietly run his fingers over the keys of thepiano, to learn if it was tolerably in tune; then the room relapsed intosilence again.  And was there to be silence on the other side as well?He waited and listened, and waited and listened, in vain.  Perhaps,while he was idling away his time in the Regent-street restaurant, theyhad come out from the house and gone off to some theatre.  The streetwas so still now that he could almost have heard any one speaking inthat room on the other side; but there was no sound.Then his heart leapt and his brain grew giddy. Here was thatlow-breathing and vibrating wail again:and was she alone now?in thegathering darkness?  He recognised the air; it was "Auld Robin Gray;"but never before had he known that it was so beautiful and so ineffablysad as well. Slowly she played and simply; it was almost like a humanvoice; only that the trembling strings had a penetrating note of theirown.  And when she ceased, it seemed to him that it would be profanationto break in upon the hushed and sacred stillness.And yet was he not to answer her, in the only speech that could notoffend?  Was he to act the coward, when there offered a chance of hisestablishing some subtle link with, her, of sending a message, ofdeclaring his presence in this surely unobtrusive fashion?  Quickly hesat down to the piano; and, in rather a nervous and anxious fashion,began.  He was not a brilliant performeranything but that; but he had alight touch and a sensitive ear; and he played with feeling and grace.It was "Kathleen Mavourneen"and a sort of appeal in its way, did shebut remember the words.  He played the melody over only once, slowly andas sympathetically as he could; then he rose and retired from the piano;and stood in the darkness, listening.Alas! there was no response.  What had he done?  He waited, wondering;but all was still in the little street.  It was as if some bird, somemellow-throated thrush or nightingale, had been warbling to itself inthe dim security of the leaves, and been suddenly startled and silencedby an alien sound, not knowing what that might portend.CHAPTER III.AN APPROACH.There was a knock at the door."Come in!" called out old George Bethune.There appeared a middle-aged man, of medium height, who looked like abutler out of employment; he was pale and flabby of face, with nervouseyes expressive of a sort of imbecile amiability."Ah, Hobson!" said Mr. Bethune, in his lofty manner.  "Well?"The landlady's husband came forward in the humblest possible fashion;and his big, prominent, vacuous eyes seemed to be asking for a littleconsideration and goodwill."I beg your pardon, sir," said he, in the most deplorable of Cockneyaccents, "I 'umbly beg your pardon for making so bold; but knowing asyou was so fond of everything Scotch, I took the liberty of bringing youa sample of something very speciala friend of mine, sir, recommendeditand then says I to him, 'Lor bless ye, I don't know nothing aboutHighland whiskey; but there's a gentleman in our 'ouse who is sure to bea judge, and if I can persuade him to try it, he'll be able to say ifit's the real sort.'""All right, Hobson," said George Bethune, in his grand way.  "Some othertime I will see what it is like.""Thank you, sir, thank you!" said the ex-butler, with earnest gratitude;and he went and placed the bottle on the sideboard.  Then he came back,and hesitatingly took out an envelope from his pocket.  "And if I mightask another favour, sir.  You see, sir, in this 'ot weather people won'tgo to the theatres; and they're not doing much; and my brother-in-law,the theatrical agent, he's glad to get the places filled up, to make ashow, sir, as you might say.  And I've got two dress-circle seats, ifyou and the young lady was thinking of going to the theatre to-morrownight.  It's a great favour, sir, as my brother-in-law said to me as hewas a-giving me the tickets and arsking me to get 'em used."He lied; for there was no brother-in-law and no theatrical agent in thecase.  He himself had that very afternoon honestly and straightforwardlypurchased the tickets at the box-office, as he had done on more than oneoccasion before, out of the money allowed him for personal expenses byhis wife; so that he had to look forward to a severe curtailment of hisgin and tobacco for weeks to come."Thanksthanks!" said George Bethune, as he lit his long clay pipe.  "Iwill see what my granddaughter says when she comes inunless you wouldlike to use the tickets yourself.""Oh, no, sir, begging your pardon, sir," was the instant rejoinder."When I 'ave a evening out I go to the Oxbridge music-'allperhaps it'svanity, sirbut when Charley Coldstream gets a hangcore, I do like tohear some on 'em call out, 'Says Wolseley, says he!'  Ah, sir, that wasthe proudest moment of my life when I see Charley Coldstream come on thestage and begin to sing verse after verse, and the people cheering; andI owed it all to you, sir; it was you, sir, as advised me to send it tohim""A catching refraina catching refrain," said the old gentleman,encouragingly.  "Just fitted to get hold of the public ear.""Why, sir," said Hobson, with a fatuous little chuckle of delight, "thiswerry afternoon, as I was coming down Park-street, I 'eard a butcher'sboy a-singing itI did indeed, siras clear as could be I 'eard thewords,'Says Wolseley, says he,To Arabi,You can fight other chaps, but you can't fight me.'every word I 'eard.  But would you believe it, sir, when I was in theOxbridge music-'all I could 'ardly listen, I was so frightened, and myears a-buzzin, and me 'ardly able to breathe.  Lor, sir, that was aexperience!  Nobody looked at me, and that was a mercyI couldn't ha'stood it. Even the chairman, as was not more than six yards from me, 'edidn't know who I was, and not being acquainted with him, I couldn'toffer him somethink, which I should have considered it a proud honour soto do on sich an occasion.  And if I might make so bold, sir"He was fumbling in his breast-pocket."Whatmore verses?" said Mr. Bethune, good-naturedly. "Well, let's seethem.  But take a seat, man, take a seat."Rather timidly he drew a chair in to the table; and then he said withappealing eyes:"But wouldn't you allow me, sir, to fetch you a little drop of thewhiskeyI assure you it's the best!""Oh, very wellvery well; but bring two tumblers; single drinking isslow work."In a few seconds those two curiously-assorted companionsthe one massiveand strong-built, impressive in manner, measured and emphatic of speech,the other feeble and fawning, at once eager and vacuous, his face everready to break into a maudlin smilewere seated in confabulationtogether, with some sheets of scribbled paper between."And if you will excuse my being so bold, sir," continued Hobson, withgreat humility, "but I 'ave been reading the little volume of Scotchsongs you lent me, andand""Trying your hand at that, too?""Only a verse, sir."Mr. Bethune took up the scrap of paper; and read aloud:"O leese me on the toddy,the toddy,the toddy,O leese me on the toddy,We'll hae a willie-waught!""Well, yes," he said, with rather a doubtful air, "you've got thephrases all rightexcept the willie-waught, and that is a common error.To tell you the truth, my friend, there is no such thing as awillie-waught.  Waught is a hearty drink; a richt gude-willie waughtis a drink with right good will.  Willie-waught is nothingamisconceptiona printer's blunder.  However, phrases do not count formuch.  Scotch phrases do not make Scotch song.  It is not the provincialdialectit is the breathing spirit that is the life"and therewith herepeated, in a proud manner, as if to crush this poor anxious poet bythe comparison,"I see her in the dewy flower,Sae lovely, sweet, and fair;I hear her voice in ilka birdWi' music charm the air;There's not a bonnie flower that springsBy fountain, shaw, or green,Nor yet a bonnie bird that singsBut minds me o' my Jean.""Beg pardon, sirMiss Bethune?" said Hobson, enquiringly; for heevidently thought these lines were of the old gentleman's owncomposition.  And then, as he received no answer, for Mr. Bethune hadturned to his pipe, he resumed, "Ah, I see, sir, I 'ave not beensuccessful.  Too ambitioustoo ambitious.  It was you yourself, sir, asadvised me to write about what I knew; andand in fact, sir, what I seeis that there is nothing like patriotism. Lor, sir, you should see themyoung fellers at the Oxbridgethey're as brave as lionsespecially whenthey've 'ad a glass.  Talk about the French! The French ain't in it,when we've got our spirit up.  We can stand a lot, sir, yes, we can; butdon't let them push us too far.  Not too far.  It will be a bad dayfor them when they do.  An Englishman ain't given to boasting; but he'sa terror when his back's upand a Scotchman too, sir, I beg yourpardonI did not mean anythingI intended to include the Scotchman too,I assure you, sir. There's a little thing here, sir," he continuedmodestly, "that I should like to read to you, if I may make so bold.  Ithought of sending it to Mr. ColdstreamI'm sure it would takeforthere's some fight in the Englishman yetand in the Scotchman too, sir,"he instantly added."A patriotic poem?Well?"Thus encouraged the pleased poet moistened his lips with the whiskey andwater he had brought for himself and began"Where's the man would turn and fly?Where's the man afraid to die?It isn't you, it isn't I.No, my lads, no, no!"Then his voice had a more valiant ring in it still:"Who will lead us to the fray?Who will sweep the foe away?Who will win the glorious day?Of England's chivalry?"It is true he said, "Oo will sweep the foe awye?" but these littlepeculiarities were lost in the fervour of his enthusiasm."RobertsGrahamBullerWood"He paused after each name as if listening for the thunderous cheering ofthe imaginary audience."And many another 'most as good:They're the men to shed their bloodFor their country!"Then there was a touch of pathos:"Fare thee well, love, and adieu!"But that was immediately dismissed:"Fiercer thoughts I have than you;We will drive the dastard crewInto slavery!"And then he stretched forth his right arm, and declaimed in loud andportentous tones"See the bloody tented-field;Look the foethey yield!they yield!Hurrah! hurrah! our glory's sealed!Three cheers for victory!"Suddenly his face blanched.  For at this moment the door opened: a tallwoman appearedwith astonishment and indignation only too legible in herangular features."Hobson!" she exclaimed; and at this awful sound the bold warrior seemedto collapse into a limp rag.  "I am surprisedI am indeed surprised!Really, sir, how can you encourage him in such impudence?  Seated atyour own table and drinking too, I declare," she went on, as she liftedup the deserted tumblerfor her bellicose husband had hastily picked uphis MSS. and vanished from the room.  "Really, sir, such familiarity!""In the republic of letters, my good Mrs. Hobson," said Mr. Bethune witha smile, "all men are equal.  I have been much interested in some ofyour husband's writings.""Oh, sir, don't put sich things in his 'ead!" she said, as she proceededto lay the cloth for dinner. "He's a fool, and that's bad enough; but ifso be as you put things in his 'ead, and he giving of hisself airs,it'll be hawful!  What good he is to anybody, I don't know.  He won'tclean a winder or black a boot even.""How can you expect it?" George Bethune said, in perfect good humour."Manual labour would be a degradation.  Men of genius ought to besupported by the State.""In the workus, I suppose," she said, sharplybut here Maisrie Bethunecame upstairs and into the room, carrying some parcels in her hand, andinstantly the landlady's face changed its expression, and became asamiable and smiling as the gaunt features would allow.At dinner the old man told his granddaughter that he had procured (hedid not say how) places at the  Theatre for the following evening, andseemed to be pleased about this little break in their quiet lives."But why did you go to such expense, grandfather?" Maisrie said.  "Youknow I am quite happy enough in spending the evening at home with you.And every day now I ask myself when I am to begin copying the poemsforthe volume, you know.  You have sent for them to America, haven't you?But really you have such a wonderful memory, grandfather, I believe youcould repeat them alland I could write them downand let the printershave them.  I was so glad when you let me help you with the book youpublished in Montreal; and you know my writing is clear enough; youremember what the foreman printer said?  Don't you think we could beginto-night, grandfather?  It pleases you to repeat those beautifulversesyou are so fond of themand proud of them because they arewritten by Scotchmenand I am sure it would be a delight to me to writethem out for you.""Oh, yes, yes," he said, fretfully, "but not to-night.  You're always insuch a hurry, Maisrie."  And then he added, in a gentler way, "Well, itis a wonderful blessing, a good memory.  I never want for a companion,when I've a Scotch air or a Scotch song humming through my brain.  Onthe darkest and wettest day, here in this big city, what have you to dobut think of'The broom, the yellow, yellow broom,The broom o' the Cowdenknowes,'and at once you have before you golden banks, and meadows, and Juneskies, and all else is forgotten. Indeed, lass, Scotland has become forme such a storehouse of beautiful thingsin imaginationthat I am almostafraid to return to it, in case the reality might disappoint me.  No,no, it could not disappoint me: I treasure every inch of the sacredsoil: but sometimes I wonder if you will recognise the magic andwitchery of hill and glen.  As for me, there is naught else I fear now;there are no human ties I shall have to take up again; I shall not haveto mourn the 'Bourocks o' Bargeny.'""What is that, grandfather?""If you had been brought up in Scotland, Maisrie, you would know whatthe bigging o' bourocks is among childrenplay-houses in the sand. Butsometimes the word is applied to huts or cottages, as it is in the titleof Hugh Ainslie's poem.  That poem is one that I shall be proud to givea place to in my collection," he continued, with an air of importance."Hugh Ainslie is no more with us; but his countrymen, whether in Americaor at home, are not likely to forget the 'Bourocks o' Bargeny.'""Can you remember it, grandfather?""Can I not?" said he; and therewith he repeated the lines, neverfaltering once for a phrase"I left ye, Jeanie, blooming fair'Mang the bourocks o' Bargeny;I've found ye on the banks o' Ayr,But sair ye're altered, Jeanie.I left ye like the wanton lambThat plays 'mang Hadyed's heather;I've found ye noo a sober dameA wife and eke a mither.I left ye 'mang the leaves sae greenIn rustic weed befittin';I've found ye buskit like a queen,In painted chaumer sittin'.Ye're fairer, statelier, I can see,Ye're wiser, nae doubt, Jeanie;But oh!  I'd rather met wi' thee'Mang the bourocks of Bargeny!""It's very sad, grandfather," she said, wistfully."The way of the worldthe way of the world," said he; and observing thatshe had finished and was waiting for him, he forthwith rose and went tothe mantelpiece for his pipe.  "There's many a true story of that kind.Well, Maisrie, you'll just get your violin, and we'll have the 'Broom o'the Cowdenknowes?'"  And while she went to fetch the violin, and as hecut his tobacco, he sang in a quavering voice"O the broom, the bonnie, bonnie broom,The broom o' the Cowdenknowes,I wish I were at hame againWhere the broom sae sweetly grows!"And then he went to the window, to smoke his pipe in peace and quiet,while Maisrie, seated further back in the shadow of the room, played forhim the well-known air.  Did she guessand fearthat she might have anaudience of more than one?  At all events her doubts were soon resolved:when she had ceased, and after a second or so of silence, there cameanother sound into the prevailing hushit was one of the Songs withoutWords, and it was being played with considerable delicacy and charm."Hallo," said Mr. Bethune, when he heard the first low-rippling notes,"have we a musical neighbour now?""Yes, grandfather," Maisrie replied, rather timidly.  "Last night, whenyou were out, some one played.""Ah, a music-mistress, I dare say.  Poor thingperhaps all aloneandwishing to be friendly in this sort of fashion."They listened without further speech until the last notes had graduallydied away."Now, Maisrie, it is your turn!""Oh, no, grandfather!" she said, hastily."Why not?""It would be like answeringto a stranger.""And are we not all strangers?" he said, gently. "I think it is a verypretty idea, if that is what is meant.  We'll soon see.  Come, Maisrie;something more than the plashing of a southern fountainsomething withnorthern fire in it.  Why not 'Helen of Kirkconnell'?"The girl was very obedient; she took up her violin; and presently shewas playing that strangely simple air that nevertheless is about asproud and passionate and piteous as the tragic story to which it iswedded.  Perhaps the stranger over there did not know the ballad; butGeorge Bethune knew it only too well; and his voice almost broke into asob as he said, when she had finished"Ah, Maisrie, it was no music-master taught you that; it was born inyour nature.  Sometimes I wonder if a capacity for intense sympathymeans an equal capacity for suffering; it is sad if it should be so; athick skin would be wholesomeras far as I have seen the world; and fewhave seen more of it. Well, what has our neighbour to say?"Their unseen companion on the other side of the little thoroughfareresponded with a waltz of Chopin'sa mysterious, elusive sort of athing, that seemed to fade away into the dark rather than to cease.Maisrie appeared disinclined to continue this do ut des programme; buther grandfather overruled her; and named the airs for her to play, oneby one, in alternation with those coming from the open window opposite.At last she said she was tired.  It was time for the gas to be lit, andthe hot water brought up for her grandfather's toddy.  So she closed thewindow and pulled down the blind; lit up the room; rang the bell for thehot water; and then placidly sate down to her knitting, whilst hergrandfather, brewing himself an unmistakable gude-willie waught, andlighting another pipe, proceeded to entertain her with a ramblingdisquisition upon the world at large, but especially upon his owntravels and experiences therein, his philosophical theories, and hisreminiscences of the Scotch countryside ballads of his youth.That mystic and enigmatic conversation with their neighbour over the waywas not continued on the following evening, for the old man and hisgranddaughter went to the theatre; but on the next night again it wasresumed; and thereafter, on almost every evening, the two windowsreplied to each other, as the twilight deepened into dusk.  And Maisriewas less reluctant nowshe almost took this little concert  deux as amatter of course.  For one thing, the stranger, whoever he or she mightbe, did not seem in any way anxious to push the acquaintance anyfurther; no one ever appeared at that open window; nor had she everencountered any one coming out as she stood on the doorstep waiting forher grandfather.  As for him, he still maintained that the new occupantof those rooms must be a womanperhaps some shy creature, willing tothink that she had friendly neighbours, and yet afraid to show herself.Besides, the music that came in response to Maisrie's Scotch airs washardly what a man would have chosen.  The stranger over there seemedchiefly fond of Mendelssohn, Chopin, and Mozart; though occasionallythere was an excursion into the Volkslieder domain"Zu Strassburg aufder Schanz," "Es ritten drei Reiter zum Thore hinaus," "Von meinetnBergli muss i scheiden," or something of that kind; whereas, if it hadbeen a man who occupied those rooms, surely they would have heardduringthe day, for examplea fine bold ditty like "Simon the Cellarer," "TheBay of Biscay," or "The Friar of Orders Gray," with a strident voiceoutroaring the accompaniment?  Maisrie answered nothing to thesearguments; but in spite of herself, when she had to cross the room forsomething or other, her eyes would seek that mysteriously vacant window,with however rapid and circumspect a glance.  And always in vain.Moreover, the piano was never touched during the day: the strangerinvariably waited for the twilight before seeking to resume that subtlelink of communication.Of course this state of things could not go on for everunless theperson over there possessed the gift of invisibility.  One morning asMaisrie and her grandfather were going out as usual for a stroll in thePark, she went downstairs first, and along the lobby, and opened thedoor, to wait for him.  At the very same instant the door opposite wasopened, and there, suddenly presented to her view, was a young man.  Hewas looking straight across; she was looking straight across; their eyesmet without the slightest chance of equivocation or denial; and eachknew that this was recognition.  They regarded each other but for aswift second; but as plainly as possible he had said to her "Do youguess?  Are you angry?  No, do not be angry!"and then his glance wasaverted; he shut the door behind him; and slowly proceeded on his way.Was she surprised?  No.  Perhaps she was startled by the unexpectednessof the meeting; perhaps her heart was beating a little more quickly thanusual; but a profound instinct had already told her that it was no womanwho had spoken to her in those dusky twilights, evening after evening.A woman would not have wrapped herself up in that mysterious secrecy.  Awoman who wished to make friends with her neighbours over the way wouldhave come to the window, would have smiled, would have made some excusefor calling.  Maisrie did not ostensibly look after the young manbutshe could see him all the same, until he turned the corner.  She wasvaguely troubled.  The brief glance she had met had in it a kind ofappeal.  And she wished to say in return that she was not offended;that, being strangers, they must remain strangers; but that she had nottaken his boldness ill.  She wished to sayshe did not know what.  Thenher grandfather came down; and they went away together; but she utterednot a syllable as to what had just occurred. It was all a bewildermentto herthat left her a little breathless when she tried to think of it.That night, when the customary time arrived, she refused to take up herviolin; and when her grandfather remonstrated, she had no definiteexcuse. She hesitated and stammeredsaid they had not played chess forever so longor would he rather have a game of draughts?anything butthe violin."Are you forgetting your good-natured neighbour over there?" hergrandfather asked.  "It will be quite a disappointment for her.  Poorthing, it appears to be the only society she has; we never hear a soundotherwise; there seems to be no one ever come to talk to her during theday, or we should hear a voice now and again.""Yes, but, grandfather," said Maisrie, who seemed much embarrassed,"don't you think it a little imprudent toto encourage this kind ofofanswering each otherwithout knowing who the other person is?""Why, what can be more harmless!" he protested, cheerfully, and then hewent on: "More harmless than music?nothing, nothing!  Song is thesolace of human life; in joy it is the natural expression of ourhappinessin times of trouble it refreshes the heart with thoughts ofother and brighter days.  A light hearta heart that can sing toitselfthat is the thing to carry you through life, Maisrie!"  And hehimself, as he crossed the room to fetch a box of matches, was trollinggaily, with a fine bravura execution"The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith,Fu' loud the wind blows frae the ferry;The ship rides by the Berwick Law,And I maun leave my bonnie Mary."Maisrie was not to be moved; but she appeared down-hearted a little.  Astime went on the silence in the little street seemed somehow to accuseher; she knew she was responsible.  She was playing draughts with hergrandfather, in a perfunctory sort of way.  She remembered that glanceof appealshe could not forget itand this had been her answer.  Thenall of a sudden her hand that hovered over the board trembled, and shehad almost dropped the piece that was in her fingers: for there hadsprang into the stillness a half-hushed soundit was an air she knewwell enoughshe could almost recognise the words"Nachtigall, ich hr' dich singen;S'Herz thut mir im Leibe springen,Komm nur bald und sag mir's wohl,Wie ich mich verhalten soll."Her grandfather stopped the game to listen; and when the soft-tonedmelody had ceased, he said"There, now, Maisrie, that is an invitation: you must answer.""No, no, grandfather," she said, almost in distress.  "I would rathernotyou don't knowyou must find out something aboutabout whoever it isthat plays.  I am sure it will be better.  Of course it is quiteharmless, as you sayoh, yes, quite harmlessbut I should like you toget to know firstquite harmless, of coursebut I am frightenedabout astrangernot frightened, of coursebutdon't ask me, grandfather!"Well, it was not of much concern to him; and as he was winning all alongthe line, he willingly returned to the game.  It had grown so dark,however, that Maisrie had to go and light the gashaving drawn down theblinds first, as was her invariable habit.  When she came back to thetable she seemed to breathe more freely; though she was thoughtful andpre-occupiednot with the game.  The music on the other side of the waywas not resumed that evening, as far as they could hear.Several days passed; and each evening now was silent.  Maisrie sawnothing more of the young man; indeed, she studiously refrained fromglancing across to the other side of the streetexcept when she wasgoing out, and wanted to make sure there was no one there.  Butsomething was now about to happen that entirely altered this dispositionof affairs.One morning George Bethune and his granddaughter had gone for theiraccustomed stroll in Hyde Park, and in course of time had taken theirplaces on a bench near the Serpentine, while the old man had pulled outa newspaper and began to read it.  The day was sultry, despite anoccasional stirring of wind; and Maisrie sitting there, and havingnothing to do but look at the water, and the trees, and the sky,observed that all the world around them was gradually growing darker.In the south, especially, the heavens were of a curious metallic huealivid grey, as it were; while across that hung two horizontal belts ofdeepest purple that remained motionless, while other and lighter tags ofvapour were inter-twisting with each other or melting away intonothingness.  Those two clouds were not of the usual cloud-form atallthey were rather like two enormous torpedoes lying one above theother; and there was a sombre deadness of hue about them that lookedominous.  Suddenly, as she was thus vaguely regarding those long purpleswathes, there ran across themspringing vertically upwardsa quiveringline of yellow flameso thin it was, it appeared like a thread of goldenwireand when that had vanished, there was a second or two of silence,followed by a dull, low, rumbling noise that seemed to come from aconsiderable distance.  She was not much alarmed.  There were no signsof a terrific thunderstorm; probably a few more flashes would serve toloosen and disperse those lowering clouds, and allow the day to clear.It was at this moment that a young man came up and addressed Mr.Bethunewith a certain courteous hesitation, and yet in frank andingenuous tones."I beg your pardon, sir," said he, "but may I claim the privilege of aneighbour to offer you this umbrellaI'm afraid there's a showercomingand the young lady may get wet."It was a pleasant voice; George Bethune looked up well-disposed towardsthe stranger, whoever he might be.  And the face of the young man wasalso prepossessing; it was something more than handsome; it wasintelligent and refined; and the honest and straightforward eyes had acertain confidence in them, as if they were not used to having theirfriendly advances repulsed."I thank youI thank you," said George Bethune, with much dignity.  "Ihad not observed. But you will want the umbrella for yourselfwe can getshelter under one of the trees.""Would that be wise, sir, in a thunderstorm?" said the young man.  "Oh,no, let me give you the umbrellaI don't mind a showerand it won't bemore than that, I fancy."George Bethune accepted the proffered courtesy."Here, Maisrie, since this young gentleman is so kind; you'd better beprepared.  A neighbour did you say, sir?" he continued."A very near neighbour," answered the young man, with a smile, and heseated himself by the side of Mr. Bethune without more ado.  "I haveoften thought of speaking to you, and asking to be allowed to make youracquaintance; for you seem to have very few visitorsyou will pardon mycuriositywhile I have none at all.""Oh, really, really," the old man said, somewhat vaguely; perhaps he waswondering how so faultlessly attired a young gentleman (hispatent-leather boots, for example, were of the most approved pattern)should have chosen lodgings in so humble a thoroughfare."It is a very quiet little corner, is it not?" the young man saidalmostas if answering that unspoken question.  "That is why it suits me sowell; I can get on with my books without interruption. The street is sosmall that it isn't worth an organ-grinder's while to waste time in it.""Music is a sad thing for interrupting study; I know that," the oldgentleman observed.  "By the way, I hope we do not disturb youmygranddaughter plays the violin sometimes""I could listen to that kind of music all day long," was the response."I never heard such violin-playingmost beautiful!most beautiful!""Then you are not far away from us?""Right opposite," was the straightforward answer.George Bethune glanced at the young man with a look of quiet amusement;he was thinking of the pale music-mistressthe solitary widow of hisimagination."And youyou also play a little in the evenings sometimes?""I hope you didn't think it rude, sir," the young man said, humbly.  "Ithought it permissible, as between neighbours.""Oh, they were pretty little concerts," said George Bethune,good-naturedly.  "Very pretty little concerts.  I don't know why theywere stopped.  I suppose Maisrie had some fancy about themmygranddaughter Maisrie"It was a kind of introduction.  The young man, modestly veiling thequick flash of delight in his eyes at this unexpected happiness,respectfully bowed.  Maisrie, with her beautiful pale face suffused withunusual colour, made some brief inclination also; then she seemed toretire again from this conversationthough she could not but overhear."My name is Harris," the young man said, as though these confidenceswere all as a matter of course between neighbours.  "It isn't a verydistinguished name; but one has to take what is given one.  It is not ofmuch consequence.""I am not so sure about that," the older man rejoined, somewhatsententiously.  "A good name is a good thing; it is an honour not to bepurchased. It may be the only one of your possessions remaining to you;but of that they cannot rob you.""Oh, of course, of course," Vincent said, quickly, for he perceived themistake he had made.  "An old historic name is certainly something to beproud of.  By the way, sir, did your family originally take their namefrom Bethon on the Sarthe or from Bethune in the Department of Calais?""BethuneBethune," said the old man, who appeared to be pleased by thisquestion, which spoke of previous enquiries; and then he added, with alofty air: "The Duc de Sully, Marquis de Rosny, Sovereign Prince ofEnrichemont and Boisbel, Grand Master of the Artillery and Marshal ofFrance, was Maximilien de BethuneMaximilien de Bethune.""Oh, really," said the young man, who seemed much impressed."The name," continued old George Bethune, in the same oracular vein,"was often spelt Beaton and Betonespecially in Scotlandas everybodyknows. Whether James, Archbishop of Glasgow, and his nephew David,Archbishop of St. Andrews, had any immediate relationship withFrancebeyond that David was consecrated Bishop of Mirepoix when he wasnegotiating the marriage of James V. at the French CourtI cannot at themoment precisely say; but of this there can be no doubt, that fromBethune in the north came the original territorial designation of thefamily, not from Bethon in the west.  Maximilien de BethuneBethune inthe Department of the Straits of Calais.""Oh really," the young man said again, quite humbly.Now by this time it had become manifest that there was to be nothunderstorm at all.  There had been a few more of those quiveringstrokes of yellow fire (that dwelt longer on the retina than in theclouds) accompanied by some distant mutterings and rumblings; and at onepoint it seemed as if the dreaded shower were coming on; but all passedoff gradually and quietly; the sky slowly brightened; a pale sunshinebegan here and there to touch the greensward and the shivering elms.This young man had no excuse for remaining here; but he seemed toforget; he was so busy talkingand talking in a very pleased andhalf-excited fashion, with an occasional glance across at the younglady."Grandfather," said Maisrie Bethune, presently, handing him the umbrellaas a sort of hint.But even when Vincent received his property back, he appeared to take noheed.  He had observed that the newspaper lying on the old man's kneewas the Toronto Globe; he drew attention to the circumstance; and nowall his conversation was of Queen's Park, Lake Ontario, of King Street,Queen Street, Church Street, of the Exhibition Grounds, of Park Island,and Block House Bay, and the Royal Canadian Yacht Club.  So he had beenthere too? Oh, yes, he had been all over Canada and America. He was asfamiliar with Idaho as with Brooklyn. He had fished in the Adirondacksand shot mountain sheep in the Rockies."You have been to Omaha, then?" the old man asked."Oh, yes, of course.""For my granddaughter here," he continued, with a smile, "is an Omahagirl.""Oh, indeed," said Vincent, rather breathlessly, and again he venturedto look across to Maisrie Bethune and her downcast eyes."Yes, but only by the accident of birth," said George Bethune,instantly, as if he must needs guard against any misapprehension."Every drop of blood in her veins is Scotchand of a right good qualitytoo.  Well, you have heardyou have heard.  Do you think any one couldunderstand those old Scotch airs who was not herself Scotch in heart andsoul?""I never heard anything so beautiful," the young man answered, in anundertone; indeed, he seemed hardly capable of talking about her, anymore than he could fix his eyes steadily on her face.  His forcedglances were timorous and fugitive.  There was something sacredthatkept him at a distance. It was enough to be conscious that she wasthere; his only prayer was that she should remain; that he and sheshould be together, if a little way apart, looking at the same skies andwater and trees, breathing the same air, hearkening to the same sounds.So he kept on talking to the old man, in rather a nervous and eagerfashion, fearful all the time that either of them should propose to go.And thus it came about that Vincent Harris seemed to have a good deal tosay for himself; he appeared to forget that he was speaking to twostrangers; rather he was chatting with two neighbours, whom he wished tobe his friends.  And the old man, in his self-sufficient and dignifiedway, was quite content to encourage this new acquaintance. Hisconversation was something to pass the time withal; he was modest,well-mannered, intelligent; there was an air of distinction about himthat showed good up-bringing as well as some decision of character.  Nodoubt he was of a wealthy family, or he could not have spent so much ofhis time in travel; by accident he had mentioned one or two well-knownpeople as though he were in the habit of familiarly meeting with them;from some passing hint as to the nature of his studies, Mr. Bethunegathered that this pleasant-spoken, pleasant-smiling neighbour wasdestined for a public career.  There was even something interesting, toone who had grown old and callous of the world's shows, in noting thebright enthusiasm of the young man, the clear light in his eyes, thegeneral air of strength and ease and courage that sate lightly on him,as befitting one who was in the very May-morn of his youth.But at last, for shame's sake, Vincent had himself to rise and break upthis all too-attractive companionship.  He said, with great humility:"I am sure I ought to apologise to Miss Bethune for having taken up somuch of your time.  Rather an unwarrantable intrusion; but I don't thinkthere is any chance of the rain coming nowandandso I will saygood-bye.""Good-byeglad to have made your acquaintance," said old George Bethune,with a grave courtesy.And Maisrie made him a little bowfor he was looking at her rathersupplicatinglyas he raised his hat and withdrew.  Their eyes had metonce more: she could not well have avoided that.  And of course she sawhim as he walked away southward, across the bridge, until hedisappeared."A very agreeable young man, that," said Mr. Bethune, with decision, ashe rose to his feet and intimated to his granddaughter that they hadbetter set forth again.  "Frank in manner, gentle, courteous,intelligent, toovery different from most of the young men of the day."His granddaughter was silent as she walked by his side."Whatdon't you think so, Maisrie?" he said, with a touch of impatience,for he was used to her assent."I think," she answered, a little proudly, "that he showed a good dealof confidence in coming to speak to you without knowing you; and as forhis playing those airs in the evening, and in such a waywell, I don'tlike to use the word impertinencebut still"He was surprised; perhaps a trifle vexed."Impertinence?  Nonsense!  Nonsense!  Frankness and neighbourlinessthatwas all; no intrusion, none: a more modest young man I have never met.And as for his coming up to speak to me, why, bless my life, that merelyshows the humanizing effects of travel.  It is like people meeting at atable d'hte; and what is the world but a big table d'hte, where youspeak with your neighbour for a little while, and go your way, andforget him? Confidence?impertinence?nonsense!  He was natural,unaffected, outspoken, as a young man should be: in fact, I found myselfon such friendly terms with him that I forgot to thank him for thelittle service he did usdid you, I should say. Bashfulness, Maisrie,"he continued, in his more sententious manner, "bashfulness and stiffnessare among the worst characteristics of the untravelled and untaught.Who are wewhatever may be our lineage and pride of birththat we shouldfence ourselves round with a palisade of suspicion or disdain?"And thus he went on; but he met with no response.  And he did not likeit; he grew all the more emphatic about this young man; and even hintedthat women were curiously perverse creatures, who evinced no toleration,or sympathy, or good nature in their judgment of their fellow beings.What was her objection?  To his appearance?he was remarkablygood-looking, and refined in aspect, without a trace of effeminacy.  Tohis manner?he was almost humble in his anxiety to please.  To histalk?but he had shown himself most bright, good-humoured, alert, andwell-informed."He had no right to come up and speak to you, grandfather," was all shewould say, and that with a quite unusual firmness.In the evening, after dinner, when the time came at which Maisrie wasaccustomed to take up her violin, there was obviously a littleembarrassment. But George Bethune tried to break through that by aforced display of geniality."Come, now, Maisrie," said he, in a gay fashion, "our neighbour over theway was straightforward enough to come up and offer us his hand; and wemust return the compliment.  One good turn deserves another.  Get yourviolin, and play something: he will understand.""Grandfather, how can you ask me?" she said, almost indignantly; andthere was that in the tone of her voice that forbade him to press herfurther.But perhaps the universal stillness that prevailed thereafter conveyedsome kind of reproach to her; or perhaps her heart softened a little; atall events she presently said, in rather a low voice, and with adiffident manner"Grandfather, if youif you really think the young gentleman wished tobe kind and obligingandand if you would like to show him some littlepoliteness in returncouldn't you step across the wayandand see him,and talk to him for a few minutes?  Perhaps he would be glad of that, ifhe is quite alone.""A capital idea, Maisrie," the old man said, rising at once.  "A capitalidea."  And then he added, with an air of lofty complacency andcondescension, as he selected a couple of volumes from a heap of bookson the sideboard: "Perhaps I might as well take over the Mmoires withme; it is not at all unlikely he may wish to know something furtherabout Maximilien de Bethune.  I am not surprisednot at allsurprisedthat a young man called Harris should perceive that there issomething in the grandeur of an old historical name."CHAPTER IV.STALLED OX AND A DINNER OF HERBS.But on this particular evening, as it happened, Vincent had promised todine at home; for his aunt was returning to Brighton on the followingday; and there was to be a little farewell banquet given in her honour.Of course aunt and nephew sate together; Mrs. Ellison had arranged that;knowing that at these semi-political dinner-parties the company wasfrequently a trifle mixed, she took care that on one side at least sheshould have a pleasant neighbour.  And indeed when the guests had takentheir placesthere were about thirty in allthe table presented a prettysight.  From end to end it was a mass of flowers; at intervals therewere pyramids of ice, draped with roses, blush-red and yellow; but thecandles in the tall candelabra were not litthe softly-tinted globes ofthe electric light shed a sufficient and diffused lustre.  It was asumptuous entertainment; and yet there prevailed an air of elegance andrefinement.  When soup was served, it was not the aldermanic turtle, buta clear golden fluid with gems of crimson and green; and it was handedround in silver dishes.  No one thought of a thick soup on this hot Junenight.As soon as the hum of conversation became general, the tall and handsomeyoung widow turned to her companionwho was only a year or two herjunior, by the wayand with her demure and mischievous eyes grown fullof meaning she said"Vin, what has happened to you to-day?""What do you mean, aunt?" he answered, with some surprise."Something has happened to you to-day," she went on, confidently.  "Youcan't hoodwink me. Why have you been so radiant, so complaisant, thisafternoonwhy are you here, for examplewhen you haven't shown up atthis dinner-table for weeks past?""And you going away to-morrow, aunt!" he exclaimed."No use, Vin.  All of a sudden you want to be magnanimous to the wholehuman race; your amiability becomes almost burdensome; your eyes arefull of pride and joy; and you think you can hide the transformationfrom me!  Well, then, I will tell you, since you won't tell me: to-dayyou were introduced to her."He was startledand no wonder: had his aunt, by some extraordinarychance, witnessed that interview in Hyde Park?  Mrs. Ellison's shrewd,quick eyes noticed his alarm, and laughed."The story is as clear as noonday," she continued, in the sameundertone.  "You come home every night between nine and ten.  Why?Because she is an actress, playing in the first piece only; and ofcourse the theatre loses its attraction for you the moment she has left.Now, my dear Vin, that is not the kind of thing for you at all!  You'dbetter stop iteven although you have experienced the wild joy of beingintroduced to her.  What do you know about her?  You have been investingher with all the charming qualities of her stage heroines; you haven'tlearnt yet that she is a little slatternly in her dress, that her tastesin eating and drinking are rather coarse, that her tastes in literatureand art aren't anyworse still, that she is already provided with ahusband, a lounger about Strand public-houses, only too ready to acceptyour patronage and the price of a glass of gin"He was immensely relieved."Oh, you're all wrong, aunt!" he said, cheerfully. "I haven't beeninside a theatre for six months!""You haven't?" she said, glancing at him with a kind of amusedsuspicion.  "You are really playing the good boy with Parliamentaryreports and blue books?  A very admirable diligence.  Other young menwould be strolling in the Park, in this hot weather."  And then all of asudden she asked: "What subject were you studying to-day, Vin?""Thompson's Distribution of Wealth," he made answer, with equalpromptitude."Oh.  What does he say?""You don't want to know, aunt!""Yes, I do: I'm used to hearing all sorts of theories at thistablethough I seldom see them put in practice."Well, he on his side was glad enough to get away from that other anddangerous topic; and whether or not he believed in her innocent desirefor knowledge, he began to discourse on the possibility of universalhuman happiness being reached by a voluntary equality in thedistribution of the products of labour."Voluntary, do you see, aunt?that is the very essence of the scheme,"he rambled on, while she appeared to be listening gravely.  "Thompsonwill have nothing to do with force; he himself points out that if youonce bring in force to redress the inequalities of wealth, you leave itopen for every succeeding majority to employ the same means, so thatindustry would be annihilated: the capitalists would not lend, theworkers would not work.  No, it is all to be done by mutual consent.Those who have wealth at present are not to be disturbed; what they haveamassed is but a trifle compared with what the millions can produce; andit is this product of universal co-operation that is to constitute thereal wealth of the world.  Well, I suppose it is only a dream," heproceeded.  "On the other hand, take my father's way of looking at it.He is all for State interference; the State is to appropriate everythingand manage everything; and to keep on managing it, I suppose, or elsethings would revert to their former condition.  That's where the troublecomes in, of course.  The moment you allow anything like freedom ofcontract, how can you prevent the former condition of affairs cominginto existence again?  You know, after all, aunt, there is generally areason for the institutions and social arrangements of any country; theydon't spring out of nothing; they grow, and their growth is anecessity""Vincent Harris," said the young widow, solemnly, "I perceive the seedsof a rabid Toryism beginning to sprout in your young mind.  Wouldn'tyour father say that the reason for the monstrous condition of affairsnow existingI don't consider them monstrous; not I; I'm pretty wellcontent, thank youbut wouldn't he say the reason was simply theignorance of the people who produce and the unscrupulous greed of theother people who take the lion's share of the profits?  Of course hewould; and so he wants to educate the producer; and protect him by theState; and see that he isn't swindled.  Go to; thou art Didymus, and anunbeliever; I suspect Lord Musselburgh has been corrupting you.  Tellme," she said, irrelevantly, "who is the woman with the black curlsIdid not catch her name when she was introduced to me"He was delighted that she showed no sign of returning to that awkwardtopic."Goodness gracious me, aunt," said he, glancing in the directionindicated, where sat an elderly lady, thin and gaunt and pale, withlarge lustrous black eyes, and black hair clone up in the fashion of ageneration ago, "do you mean to say you don't know Madame Mikucsek?""Who is MadameWhat-is-it?""You never even heard of her!" he exclaimed, in affected astonishment."Madame Mikucsekthe discoverer of the Mystery of the EasttheProphetess of the New Religionwho has her followers and disciples allover the worldfrom Syria to the Himalayasfrom New York to Sacramento.Really, aunt, you surprise me: you will be saying next you never heardof B.""What is Bor who is he?" she demanded, impatiently."B," he repeated, as if he were too puzzled by her appallingignorance to be able to explain, "why, BB is the equivalent ofthe Chinese T.  It is the principle of life; it is the beginning andthe end of all things; it is the condition of the souland yet not quitethe condition of the soul, for the soul can live outside B until themiracle of initiation happens.  Then the soul is received into B, andfinds that the present is non-existent, and that only the past and thefuture exist, the future being really the past, when once the soul hasentered B""Vin, I believe you are making a fool of me," the pretty Mrs. Ellisonsaid, severely."Oh, I assure you, aunt," he said, with eyes innocent of guile, "it isthe great discovery of the agethe great discovery of all timetheSacredthe Ineffable.  When you enter into B you lose yourindividualityor rather, you never had any individualityforindividuality was a confusion of thought, a product of the present, andthe present, as I have explained to you, my dear aunt, ceases to existwhen you have entered B.  Did I tell you that B is sentient?  Yes,but yet not a being; though there are manifestations, mysterious andecstatic; and the disciples write to each other on the first day of eachmonth, and tell each other what trances they have been in, and whatspiritual joy they have received.  These reports are sent to MadameMikucsek; and they are published in a journal that circulates among theinitiated; but the phraseology is hieratic, the outside world could makenothing of it.  As for her, she is not expected to reveal anythingwhatshe experiences transcends human speech, and even human thought""I saw the woman mopping up gravy with a piece of bread," said Mrs.Ellison, with frowning eyebrows."B," continued the young man, very seriously, "as far as I have beenable to make it out, consists of a vast sphere; elliptical, however: thezenith containing all human aspiration, the base consisting of forgottenevil.  When you once enter this magic circle, you are lost, you aretransformed, you are here and yet not here; to be does not signify to bebut not to be; and not to be is the highest good except not to havebeen.  B, when once you have received the consecration, and bathed inthe light, and perceived the altitudes and the essential deeps andcognisances""Ought to be written Bosh," said she, briefly. "I will not hear any moreof that nonsense.  And I believe you are only humbugging me: MadameWhat's-her-name looks more like the widow of a French Communist.  Nowlisten to me, Vin, for I am going away to-morrow.  I am glad I wasmistaken about the actress; but take care; don't get into scrapes.  Ishan't be happy till I see you married.  Ordinarily a man should notmarry until he is thirty or five-and-thirtyif he is five-and-forty somuch the betterbut even at five-and-thirty, he may have acquired alittle judgment; he may be able to tell how much honesty there is in theextreme amiability and unselfishness and simplicity that a young womancan assume, or whether she is likely to turn out an ill-conditioned,cross-grained, and sulking brute.  Oh, you needn't laugh: it's nolaughing matter, as you'll find out, my young friend.  But youyou aredifferent; you are no schoolboy; you've seen the worldtoo much of it,for you've learnt disrespect for your elders, and try to bamboozle themwith accounts of sham systems of philosophy or religion or whatever itis.  I say you ought to marry young; but not an elderly woman, as many ayoung man does, for money or position.  Good gracious, no!  You'll haveplenty of money; your father isn't just yet going to sell this silverdinner-servicewhich I detest, for it always looks more greasy thanchina, and besides you feel as if you were scoring it with the edge ofyour knife all the timeI say he isn't going to sell his silver anddistribute unto the poor just yet. As for position, you've got to makethat for yourself: would you owe it to your wife?  Very well," proceededhis pretty monitress, in her easy and prattling fashion; "come down toBrighton for a week or two.  I will ask the Drexel girls; you will havethem all to yourself, to pick and choose from, but Louie is myfavourite.  You have no idea how delightful Brighton is in Junetheinland drives are perfect, so cool and shaded with trees, when you knowwhere to go, that is.  If you come down I'll make up a party and takeyou all to Ascot: Mrs. Bourke has offered me her house for theweekisn't that good-natured, when she could easily have let it?and Ihave to telegraph yes or no to-morrow.  I hadn't intended going myself;but if you say you will come down, I will accept; and I know I can getthe Drexel girls.""It is so kind of you, aunt; so very kind," he said; "but I really can'tget away.  You know I don't care much about racing"But Louie Drexel isn't racing.""I'm very sorry, but you must excuse me, aunt," he said contritely."Ohdistribution of wealthsupply and demandsugar-bounties andblue-booksis that it? Well, well, what the young men of the present dayare coming to"She could say no more; for at this moment her neighbour, an elderly andlearned gentleman from Oxford, addressed her.  He had not hithertouttered a word, having paid strict attention to every dish and everywine (albeit he was a lean and famished-looking person); but now heremarked that the evenings were hot for the middle of June.  He spoke ofthe danger of having recourse to iced fluids.  Then he went on tocompare the bathing of the Greeks and Romans with the ablutions of theEnglishuntil he was offered strawberries, whereupon, having helpedhimself largely, he fell into a business-like silence again.When at length the ladies had gone upstairs, Lord Musselburgh came andtook the seat just vacated by Mrs. Ellison."I have a commission from your father, Vin," said he.  "I am to persuadeyou of the sweet reasonableness of his projectthat you should for atime become the private secretary of Mr. Ogden.""The private secretary of a man who hasn't an h!" retorted Master Vin,with scorn."What has that to do with it?" the young nobleman said, coolly.  "No.After all, there is something in what your father says.  He believesthat the next great political and social movement will be theemancipation of the wage-earnerthe securing to the producer his fairshare of the products of his labour.  If that is so, it will be a bigthing. It will be years before it comes off, no doubt; but then therewill be a great wave of public opinion; and if you are preparedif youare thereif you are identified with this tremendous social revolution,why, that magnificent wave will peacefully and calmly lift you into theCabinet.  I think that's about his notion.  Very well.  If you arewilling to take up this work, how could you begin better than bybecoming private secretary to Josiah Ogden? There you would come intodirect touch with the masses; you would get to know at first hand whatthey are thinking of, what they are hoping for; subsequently, you couldspeak with authority. Then there's another thing, Vin.  If you want tobecome a figure in public life in England, if you want to build asplendid monument for yourself, you should begin at the base.  Capturethe multitude; be as red-hot a Radical as they can desire; and theywon't mind what you do afterwards.  You may accept office; you may bepetted by Royalty; but they will rather like itthey will look on it asa compliment paid to one of themselves.  And that is where Ogden wouldcome in.  He, too, is one of themselvesthough he has his hired broughamwhen he comes to town, and his big dinners at the Menagerie Club.  Whathave you got to do with his h's?  If I want to back a horse, or ordera pair of boots, or have my hair cut, what does it matter to me whetherthe man has an h, or a superfluity of h's?  You make him useful toyou; you get what you want; isn't that enough?""Oh, no, it is not," Vincent rejoinedbut respectfully, for he neverforgot that Lord Musselburgh was his senior by very nearly five years."You see, you don't go into partnership with your hairdresser, and youdon't put your name over the bootmaker's shop.  And I shouldn't learnmuch from Mr. Ogden, for I don't believe in his machine-madepoliticseverything to be done by committees, and resolutions, andmajorities.  I expect to find him starting a Society for the Suppressionof Punch and Judy Shows, so that the infantile mind of England may notbe corrupted by exhibitions of brutality.""He is a very able man, let me tell you that," said Musselburgh, withdecision.  "And a capital speakera slogger, of course, but that iswanted for big crowds.  And sometimes he turns out a neat thing.  Didyou notice what he said at Sheffield the other daytelling the workingmen not to be too grateful for rich men's charitiesfor recreationgrounds, drinking fountains, and the like?  What he said was this'Whenthe capitalist has robbed Peter, it is easy for him to salve hisconscience by throwing a crust to Paul'not bad.  I think you might doworse, Vin, than become Ogden's private secretary.  Pretty hard work, ofcourse; but the modern young man, in politics, is supposed to bethoroughly in earnest: if he isn't he will have to reckon with theevening papers, for they don't like to be trifled with."The subject was not a grateful one, apparently; Vincent changed it."Do you remember," he said, with some little diffidence, "thatthat Iwas in your house one afternoon a few weeks ago when an old gentlemancalledandand his granddaughter""The perfervid old Scotchmanyes!""How did you come to know him?" the young man asked, with downcast eyes."I hardly recollect.  Let me see.  I think he first of all wrote to me,enclosing a note of introduction he had brought from a friend of mine inNew Yorka brother Scot.  Then, as you saw, he called, and told mesomething further about a book he is going to bring out; and I gave himsome little assistanceI don't think he is above accepting a fewsovereigns from any one to help him on his way through the world."Vin Harris flushed hotlyand he raised his head and looked his friendstraight in the face as he put the next question."Butbut he is a gentleman!his namehis familyeven his bearing""Oh, yes, yes, I suppose so," Lord Musselburgh said, lightly.  "Poor oldfellow, I was glad to lend him a helping hand.  I think his enthusiasm,his patriotism, was genuine; and it is a thing you don't often meet withnowadays.""Yesbutbut-" Vincent said, with a good deal of embarrassment, and yetwith some touch of half-indignant remonstrance, "the money you gavehimthat was to aid him in bringing out the book, wasn't it?""Certainly, certainly!" the other made answerhe did not happen tonotice the expression on his friend's face.  "Something aboutScotlandScotch poetryI think when he wrote he said something about adedication, but that is an honour I hardly covet.""In any case," observed the young man, "you have no right to say hewould accept money fromfrom anyonefrom a stranger."Then Lord Musselburgh did look upstruck by something in his companion'stone."Did I say that?  I'm sure I don't know.  Of course it was on account ofthe book that I ventured to give him some little helpoh, yes,certainlyI should not have ventured otherwise.  If he had beenoffended, I dare say he would have said so; but I fancy the oldgentleman has had to overcome his pride before now.  He seems to haveled a curious, wandering life.  By the way, Vin, weren't you very muchimpressed by the young ladyI remember your saying something"Fortunately there was no need for Vincent to answer this question; fornow there began a general movement on the part of the remaining gueststo go upstairs to the drawing-room; and in this little bit of a bustlehe escaped from further cross-examination.When at the end of the evening all the people had gone away, and whenHarland Harris had shut himself up in his study to finish hiscorrespondencefor he was going down the next morning to a Congress ofCo-operative Societies at IpswichMrs. Ellison and her nephew foundthemselves alone in the drawing-room; and the fair young widow mustneeds return to the subject she had been discoursing upon atdinnernamely, that this young man, in order to guard against pitfallsand embroilments, should get married forthwith."You seem anxious that I should marry," said he, bluntly; "why don't youget married yourself?""Oh, no, thank you!" she replied, with promptitude.  "I know when I havehad"  Apparently she was on the point of saying that she knew when shehad had enough; but that would not have been complimentary to the memoryof the deceased; so she abruptly broke offand then resumed.  "It isn'tnecessary for me to make any further experiments in life; but for you,with such a splendid future before you, it is a necessity.  As for me, Imean to let well alone.  And it is wellvery well. I do believe, Vin,that I am the only woman on this earth""What?" he said."who is really contented.  I am too happy. Sometimes I'm afraid; itseems as if I had no right to it.  Why, when I come downstairs in themorning, and draw an easy-chair to the open windowsespecially whenthere is a breeze coming off the sea, and the sun-blinds are out, andthe balcony nicely shaded, you knowI mean at home, in BrunswickTerracewell, when I take up the newspaper and begin to read aboutwhat's going onas if it was all some kind of a distant thingI feel sosatisfied with the quiet and the coolness and the sea-air that I ambound to do a little kindness to somebody, and so I turn to the columnswhere appeals are made for charity.  I don't care what it is; I'm sowell content that I must give something to somebodydistressed Irishwidows, sailors' libraries, days in the country, anything.  I dare say Isometimes give money where I shouldn't; but how am I to know?and at anyrate it pleases me.""But why shouldn't you be happy, aunt?" said the young man.  "You are sogood-humoured, and so kind, and so nice to look at, that it is no wonderyou are such a favourite, with men especially.""Oh, yes," she said, frankly.  "Men are always nice to youexcept theone you happen to marry; and I'm not going to spoil the situation.  Atpresent they're all sweetness, and that suits me: I'm not going to giveany one of them the chance of showing himself an ungrateful brute.  WhenI come downstairs at Brighton, I like to see only one cup on thebreakfast-table, and to feel that I have the whole room to myself.Selfish?then you can make amends by sending something to the Children'sHospital or the People's Palace or something of that kind.""Do you know, aunt," he observed, gravely, "what Mr. Ogden says of you?He says that, having robbed Peter, you try to salve your conscience bythrowing a crust to Paul.""When did I rob Peter?what Peter?" she said, indignantly."You are a capitalistyou have more than your own shareyou possess whatyou do not work fortherefore you are a robber and a plunderer.  I amsorry for you, aunt; but Mr. Ogden has pronounced your doom"Mr. Ogden!" she said, with angry browsand then she stopped."Yes, aunt?" he said, encouragingly."Oh, nothing.  But I tell you this, Vin.  You were talking of the properdistribution of wealth. Well, when you come to marry, and if I approveof the girl, I mean to distribute a little of my plunderof myill-gotten gainsin that direction: she shan't come empty-handed.  Thatis, if I approve of her, you understand.  And the best thing you can dois to alter your mind and come down to Brighton for a week or two; andI'll send for the Drexel girls and perhaps one or two more.  If youcan't just at present, you may later on.  Now I'm going off to my room;and I'll say good-bye as well as good-night; for I don't suppose I shallsee you in the morning."Good-night, then, and good-bye, aunt!" said he, as he held her hand fora second; and that was the last that he saw of her for some considerabletime.For a great change was about to take place in this young man's positionand circumstances, in his interests, and ambitions, and trembling hopes.He was about to enter wonderlandthat so many have entered, stealthilyand almost fearingthat so many remember, and perhaps would fain forget.Do any remain in that mystic and rose-hued region?  Some, at least, havenever even approached it; for its portals are not easily discoverable,are not discoverable at all, indeed, except by the twin torches ofimagination and abolition of self.When he went up to his chambers the next morning he was surprised tofind a card lying on the table; he had not expected a visitor in thissecluded retreat.  And when he glanced at the name, he was still moreperturbed.  What an opportunity he had missed!  Perhaps Mr. Bethune hadbrought an informal little invitation for himthe first overture offriendliness?  He might have spent the evening in the hushed, smallparlour over the way, with those violin strains vibrating through thedusk; or, with the lights ablaze, he might have sate and listened to theold man's tales of travel, while Maisrie Bethune would be sitting at herneedle-work, but looking up from time to timeeach glance a world'swonder!  And what had he had in exchange?a vapid dinner-party; sometalk about socialism; an invitation that he should descend into thecatacombs of North of England politics and labour mole-like there to noapparent end; finally, a promise that if he would only marry the younglady of Mrs. Ellison's choicepresumably one of her American friendshisbride should have some additional dowry to recommend her.  What were allthose distant schemes, and even the brilliant future that everybodyseemed to prophesy for him, to the bewildering possibilities that werealmost within his reach?  He went to the window.  The pots of musk, andlobelia, and ox-eye daisies, in the little balcony over there, and alsothe Virginia creeper intertwisting its sprays through the iron bars,seemed fresh: no doubt she had sprinkled them with water before leavingwith her grandfather. And had they gone to Hyde Park as usual?  He wassorely tempted to go in search; but something told him this mightprovoke suspicions; so he resolutely hauled in a chair to the table andset to work with his books and annotationsthough sometimes there camebefore his eyes a nebulous vision, as of a sheet of silver-grey waterand a shimmering of elms.In the afternoon he went out and bought a clothes-brush, a couple ofhair-brushes, some scented soap, and other toilet requisitesof which hehad not hitherto known the need in these chambers; and about fiveo'clock or a little thereafter, having carefully removed the last speckfrom his coat-sleeve, he crossed the way, and rather timidly knocked atthe door.  It was opened by the landlady's daughter, who appeared atonce surprised and pleased on finding who this visitor was."Is Mr. Bethune at home?" he demandedwith some vaguely uncomfortablefeeling that this damsel's eyes looked too friendly.  She seemed tounderstand everythingto have been expecting him."Oh, yes, sir.""May I go upstairs?"He gave no name; but she did not hesitate for a moment.  She led the wayupstairs; she tapped lightly; and in answer to Mr. Bethune's loud "Comein!" she opened the door, and said"The young gentleman, sir,"a form of announcement that might havestruck Vincent as peculiar if he had not been much too occupied tonotice."Ah, how do you dohow do you do?" old George Bethune (who was alone)called out, and he pushed aside his book and came forward with extendedhand.  "Nothing like being neighbourly; solitary units in the great seaof London life have naturally some interest in each other: you wouldgather that I looked in on you last night""Yes," said the young man, as he took the proffered chair.  "I am verysorry I happened to be outI had to dine at home last evening""At home?" repeated Mr. Bethune, looking for the moment just a triflepuzzled."Oh, yes," said his visitor, rather nervously. "Perhaps I didn'texplain.  I don't live over there, you know.  I only have the roomsfor purposes of study; the place is so quiet I can get on better than athome; there are no interruptions""Except a little violin-playing?" the old man suggested, good-naturedly."I wish there were more of that, sir," Vincent observed, respectfully."That was only in the evenings; and I used to wait for it, to tell youthe truth, as a kind of unintentional reward after my day's work.  Butof late I have heard nothing; I hope that Miss Bethune was not offendedthat I ventured toto open my piano at the same time""Oh, not at allI can hardly think so," her grandfather said, airily."She also has been busy with her books of lateit is Dante, I believe,at presentand as I insist on her always reading aloud, whatever thelanguage is, she goes upstairs to her own room; so that I haven't seenmuch of her in the evenings.  Now may I offer you a cigar?""No, thank you.""Or a glass of claret?""No, thanks.""Then tell me what your studies are, that we may become betteracquainted."And Vincent was about to do that when the door behind him opened.Instinctively he rose and turned.  The next instant Maisrie Bethune wasbefore himlooking taller, he thought, than he had, in Hyde Park,imagined her to be.  She saluted him gravely and without embarrassment;perhaps she had been told of his arrival; it was he who was, for themoment, somewhat confused, and anxious to apologise and explain.  But,curiously enough, that was only a passing phase.  When once he hadrealised that she also was in the roomnot paying much attention,perhaps, but listening when she chose, as she attended to some flowersshe had brought for the central tableall his embarrassment fled, andhis natural buoyancy and confidence came to his aid.  She, on her side,seemed to consider that she was of no account; that she was not calledupon to interfere in this conversation between her grandfather and hisguest.  When she had finished with the flowers, she went to the openwindow, and took her seat, opening out some needlework she had carriedthither.  The young man could see she had beautiful handsrather long,perhaps, but exquisitely formed: another wonder!  But the trulyextraordinary thingthe enchantmentwas that here he was in the sameroom with her, likely to become her friend, and already privileged tospeak so that she could hear!For of course he was aware that he had an audience of two; and very wellhe talked, in his half-excited mood.  There was no more timidity; therewas a gay self-assertiona desire to excel and shine; sometimes helaughed, and his laugh was musical.  He had skillfully drawn from theold man a confession of political faith (of course he was aConservative, as became one of the Bethunes of Balloray), so all chanceof collision was avoided on that point; and indeed Vin Harris was readyto have sworn that black was white, so eager was he to make animpression, on this his first, and wondrous visit.The time went by all too quickly; but the young man had becomeintoxicated by this unexpected joy; instead of getting up andapologising, and taking his hat, and going away, he boldly threw out thesuggestion that these threethese solitary units in the great sea ofLondon life, as George Bethune had called themshould determine to spendthe evening together.  He did not seem to be aware of the audacity ofhis proposal; he was carrying everything before him in a high-handedfashion; the touch of colour that rose to Maisrie Bethune's cheekwhatof that?  Oh, yes, maiden shyness, no doubt; but of little consequence;here were the golden momentshere the golden opportunity: why shouldthey separate?"You see," said he, "I don't care to inconvenience our people at home bymy uncertain hours; and so of late I have taken to dining at arestaurant, just when I felt inclined; and I have got to know somethingof the different places.  I think we might go out for a little stroll,as the evening will be cooler now, and wander on until we see a quietand snug-looking corner.  There is something in freedom of choice; andyou may catch sight of a bay window, or of a recess with flowers in it,and a bit of a fountain that tempts the eye""What do you say, Maisrie?" the old gentleman inquired."You go, grandfather," the girl replied at once, but without raising herhead.  "It will be a pleasant change for you.  I would rather remain athome.""Oh, but I should never have proposed such a thing," Vincent interposed,hastily, "if it meant that Miss Bethune was to be left here alone,certainly not!  II decline to be a party to any such arrangementoh, Icould not think of such a thing!""You'd better come, Maisrie," said the old man, with some air ofauthority."Very well, grandfather," she said, obediently; and straightway she roseand left the room.Master Vin's heart beat high; here were wonders upon wonders; in a shortspace he would be walking along the pavements of London town withMaisrie Bethune by his side (or practically so) and thereafter he andshe would be seated at the same table, almost within touch of eachother.  Would the wide world get to hear of this marvellous thing?Would the men and women whom they encountered in Oxford-street observeand conjecture, and perhaps pass on with some faint vision of thatbeautiful and pensive face imprinted on their memory?  By what magicfreak of fortune had he came to be so favoured? Those people inOxford-street were all strangers to her, and would remain strangers; healone would be admitted to the sacred privacies of her companionship andsociety; but a few minutes more, and he would be instructing himself inher little ways and preferences, each one a happy secret to be keptwholly to himself.  But the entranced young man was hardly prepared forwhat now followed.  When the door opened again, and Maisrie Bethunereappeared (her eyes were averted from him, and there was aself-conscious tinge of colour in her pale and thoughtful face) sheseemed to have undergone some sudden transformation.  The youthful looklent to her appearance by the long and loose-flowing locks and by herplain dress of blue and white linen had gone; and here was a young ladyapparently about twenty, tall, self-possessed (notwithstanding thattinge of colour) and grave in manner.  A miracle had been wrought!andyet she had only plaited up her hair, tying it with a bit of blueribbon, and donned a simple costume of cream-coloured cashmere. She wasputting on her gloves now; and he thought that long hands were by farthe most beautiful of any.Well, it was all a bewildermentthis walking along the London streetsunder the pale saffron of the evening sky, listening to the old man'semphatic monologue, but far more intent on warning Miss Bethune of theapproach of a cab, when she was about to cross this or the otherthoroughfare. Once he touched her arm in his anxiety to check her; hehad not intended to do so; and it was he who was thunderstruck andashamed; she did not appear to have noticed.  And then again he wasafraid lest she should be tired before they reached the particularrestaurant he had in mind; to which old George Bethune replied that hisgranddaughter did not know what fatigue was; he and she could walk for awhole day, strolling through the parks or along the streets, withabsolute ease and comfort, as became vagrants and world-wanderers."Though I am not so sure it is altogether good for Maisrie here," hecontinued.  "It may be that that has kept her thinshe is too thin for ayoung lass.  She is all spirit; she has no more body than a daddylong-legs."Vincent instantly offered to call a cabwhich they refused; but he wasnot beset by wild alarms; he knew that, however slight she might be, thenatural grace and elegance of her carriage could only be the outcome ofa symmetrical form in conjunction with elastic health.  That conclusionhe had arrived at in the Park; but now he noticed another thingthat, asshe walked, the slightly-swaying arms had the elbow well in to thewaist, and the wrist turned out, and that quite obviously without setpurpose.  It was a pretty movement; but it was more than merelygraceful; it was one mark of a well-balanced figure, even as was herconfident step.  For her step could be confident enough, and the set ofher head proud enoughif she mostly kept her eyes to the ground.It was an Italian restaurant they entered at last; and Vincent was sofortunate as to find a recess-compartment, which he knew of, vacant.They were practically dining in a private room; but all the same theycould when they chose glance out upon the large saloon, with its littlewhite tables, and its various groups of olive-complexioned orEnglish-complexioned guests.  The young man assumed the management ofthis small festivity from the outset.  He ordered a flask of Chianti forMr. Bethune and himself; and then he would have got somethinglightersome sparkling beveragefor the young lady, but that she toldhim that she drank no wine.  Why, he said to himself, he might haveknown!'for in her veinsRan blood as pure and cool as summer rains.'And as this modest little repast went on, perhaps Vincent was comparingit with the banquet of the night before.  Ah, there had been noenhancement, no enthralling ecstacy and delight, about thatentertainment, sumptuous as it was.  Here was some foodhe hardly lookedat ithe did not know what it was, and did not carewhich would have tobe paid for at the rate of 3/6 per head; but as compared with thisfrugal festivity, the splendours of the preceding eveningthe masses ofroses, the pyramids of ice, the silver candelabra, and all therestshrank into insignificance.  'Here there was a nameless glamourfilling all the air; a palpitation of hope, and a curious dumb sense ofgratitude as if for favours unexpected and undeserved; all the comingyears of his life seemed to be shining there in her eyesso that hehardly dared to look, so full of fear, and yet of a breathless joy andwonder, was the revelation, when she happened to glance towards him.And on her side, she appeared to be a little less reserved and distantthan she had hitherto been.  She seemed grateful for the trouble theyoung man had taken on behalf of her grandfather and herself; sometimes,when in his eager talk he said something that interested her, she raisedher head, with a smile in her eyes. A wonderful banquet, truly, thoughnot so imposing as that of the previous night.  He learned that she wasimmensely fond of propelling a gondola (the forward oar only; she wantedanother oar astern to steer) and here was another amazingly interestingfact, to be for ever and ever remembered.As for the old man (for the world was not created solely for young folk)he was at once gay and oracular."These little breaks and diversions," he was saying, as he stirred hiscoffeethe time of cigarettes having now arrived, "are usefulthingsuseful things; an affair of the moment, truly; but the wise manmakes of the passing moment as much as he possibly can.  Why, the realcurse of modern lifethe ineradicable diseaseis the habit ofcontinually looking before and after.  We none of us think enough of thepresent moment; we are anxiously speculating as to the future; or, whatis worse still, fretting over the memory of past injuries and pastmistakes.  That is where the uneducated, the unimaginative, have theirconsolation; we are not half so happy and content as the stolidploughman or the phlegmatic bricklayer who thinks only of the presentheat, or the present cold, or, at furthest, of the next pint of beer,and of the prospect of getting to bed, with the knowledge that he willsleep sound.  The actual and immediate things before them are the thingsthat interest them; not the unknown future, or the useless past. But Ihave schooled myself, thanks in a great measure to Horaceand mygranddaughter knows her Horace tooand I think I keep as stout a heartas most.  Dum loquimur, of course, fugerit invida tas; but evenwhile I know that the night presses down upon me, and the shadowyfathers, and the empty halls of Pluto, I put the knowledge away from me;I am content with the present moment; I am more than content, forexample, with this very excellent cigarette""Would you allow me to send you a few boxes?" interposed Vincent, atonce and eagerly.  "I think the cork mouthpiece is a great improvement.I know where they are to be got.  May I send you some?""I thank you; but they are not much in my way," the old man said, with acertain loftiness of demeanour.  "As I was remarking, the time has goneby for unavailing regrets over what has been done to me and mine.  Ithink I may say that throughout we have shown a bold front.  'Standfast, Craig-Royston!' has not been our watchword for nothing.  And asfor the futurewhy, 'to the gods belongs to-morrow!'  The anticipationof evil will not remove it: the recalling of bygone injuries provides nocompensation.  'The present moment is our ain; the neist we never saw;'and so, as we have had a pleasant evening so far, I think we may as wellget away home again; and, Maisrie, you will get out your violin, andwe'll have some Scotch songs, and my young friend and I will taste justa drop of Scotch whisky; and if there's any better combination than thatin the world, I do not know of it."But here a very awkward incident occurred.  Old George Bethune, in hisgrand manner, called to the waiter to bring the bill.  Now Vincent hadintended to steal out and arrange this little matter without allowingthe young lady to have any cognisance of it; but of course the waiter,when summoned, came up to the table, and proceeded to pencil out theaccount."I think, sir," put in the young man, modestly, "you'd better let mehave that.  It was my proposal, you know.""Oh, very well," said Mr. Bethune, carelessly; and as carelessly hehanded over the slip of paper he had just taken from the waiter.But the quick look of pain and humiliation that swept over the girl'sface stabbed the young man to the heart."Grandfather!" she said, with a burning flush."Oh, well," her grandfather said, petulantly; "I have just discoveredthat I have left my purse behind.  Some other timeit is all the sameitis immaterialthe next time will be my turn""Here is my purse, grandfather," she said; and she turned with an air ofquiet firmness to her younger neighbour, and merely said "If youplease!"  He was too bewildered to refuse: there was something in hermanner that compelled him to accede without a word of protest.  Shepushed her purse and the slip of paper across the table to hergrandfather; and then she rose, and turned to seek her sun-shade, whichVincent forthwith brought to her.  The curious mingling of simplicityand dignity with which she had interposed impressed him strangely:perhaps she was not so much of a school-girl as she had seemed when hefirst saw her walking through Hyde Park?  Then the three of them leftthe restaurant together; and quietly made their way home through thegathering twilight.But he would not go in when they arrived at their door, though the oldman again put Scotch music and Scotch whisky before him as aninducement. Perhaps he dreaded to outstay his welcome. He bade them bothgood-night; and Maisrie Bethune, as she parted from him, was so kind asto say "Thank you so much!" with the briefest, timid glance of herall-too-eloquent eyes.He went across to his own roomsmerely for form's sake.  He did notlight the gas when he got upstairs.  He carefully shut the window; thenhe sate down to the piano; and very gently and quietly he played agraceful little air.  It was "Dormez, dormez, ma belle!"; and it was akind of farewell message for the night; but he had made sure that sheshould not hear.CHAPTER V.QU' MON COEUR EN MARIAGE.When Maisrie Bethune and her grandfather returned home after the littledinner at the restaurant she went upstairs to her own room, while heproceeded to summon the landlady's husband from the lower deeps.Forthwith the pallid-faced and nervous-eyed Hobson appeared; and heseemed to be more obsequious than ever towards the great man who haddeigned to patronise his humble literary efforts, and had even got someof his verses printed in the Edinburgh Weekly Chronicle."Very hot evening, siryes, sirwould you like me to go and fetch you alittle hice, sir?" said he, in his eager desire to please.  "No trouble,sir, if agreeable to youremarkably 'ot for June, sirtheatres doingnothing, sironly the ballet: you see, sir, the young ladies have solittle on that they look cool and airy-like, and I suppose, sir, that'swhy the ballet is so popularyes, sir, my brother-in-law, the theatricalagent""Look here, Hobson," Mr. Bethune observed, as if he had not heard aword, "you have no doubt noticed a young gentleman who occupies roomsover the way?""Oh, yes, sira very handsome young man," he answeredor rather, what heactually did say was "a werry ensome young men.""I have just made his acquaintance."  Mr. Bethune continued, in hislofty fashion, "and naturally I should like to know something more ofhim, though I could not be guilty of the rudeness of asking himquestions about himself.  For example, I should be glad to know where heliveshe only uses those rooms during the day, you understand; and Ipresume that would be a simple thing for you to ascertaindiscreetly, Imean, discreetlywithout any impertinent intrusion.""Oh, yes, sir," said Hobson, his dull face lighting up with pleasure atthe notion of being able to do his patron a service.  "Yes, yes, sir; Ican find out; what more simple?"At this very moment there was the sound of a door being shut on theopposite side of the street. Hobson stepped to the open window; andinstantly withdrew his head again."He has just gone out, sirI will follow him.""But discreetly, Hobson, discreetly," was the old gentleman's finalinjunction, as his humble and zealous emissary departed.When Maisrie Bethune came downstairs again, she was in her ordinarydress of striped linen; and she seemed pleased with the evening'sadventure; and was more talkative than usual."It will be very pleasant for you, grandfather," said she, "to have sointelligent and interesting a neighbourdon't you think so?  For thoughhe is young, he seems to know everything, and to have been everywhere;and I am sure, you and he, grandfather, found plenty of things to talkabout. I have just been wondering whether it is possible he could havecome to Toronto while we were living there.  Wouldn't that have beenstrange?  Perhaps we have passed him while we were walking alongKing-street; perhaps he may have come round the corner by the Bank ofMontreal when we were going into Yonge-streetand not a yard between us!But no," she continued, musingly, "I hardly imagine it could have been.I think I should have noticed him, and remembered.  Don't you think youwould have noticed him, grandfather?  He is not like any one elseI meanhe is not the kind of person you would pass in the street withoutremarkingI don't think you would forget.  Oh, yes, I am very glad foryour sake, grandfather, that you have made his acquaintance; and I hopeyou will become good friendsalthough he is young.  You want some one totalk toand not that dreadful HobsonI can't bear your talking toHobson, grandfather""I am no respecter of persons, Maisrie," said the old man, pompously,"so long as people know their place, and keep it.""But that is just the worst of Hobson, grandfather!" she exclaimed."His fawning and cringing is so despicable.  He is not a man at all.And you should tell him the truth about those verses of his,grandfather: I can't imagine how you see anything in them""There have been worsethere have been worse," said Mr. Bethune, with amagnanimous toleration. "And on the two occasions on which I got theChronicle to let him see himself in print, the gratitude of the poorcreature was quite pathetic.  A little act of kindness is never thrownaway, Maisrie, my dear.  So now you'll just get out your violin, and fora little while we will cross the Border, and forget that we are here inthe heart of this stifling London."But Maisrie begged to be excused.  She said she was rather tired, andwas going back to her own room very soon.  And indeed, when she hadbrought her grandfather his accustomed hot water, and sugar, andspirits, and generally made everything comfortable for him, she kissedhim and bade him good night and went away upstairs.It was not to go to bed, however.  Having lit the gas, she proceeded tohunt among her books until she discovered a little album entitled "Viewsof Toronto;" and having spread that open on her dressing-table, she drewin a chair, and, with her elbows resting on the table, and her headbetween her hands, began to pore over those pictures of the longthoroughfares and the pavements and the public buildings.  She seemed tofind the rather ill-executed lithographs interestingso interesting thatwe may leave her there with her eyes fixed intently on the brown pages.Meanwhile Hobson had fulfilled his mission, and returned with theaddress of the house into which he had seen the young man disappear; andnot only that, but he volunteered to gain any further information thatMr. Bethune might wish; it would be easy for him, he said, to make theacquaintance of one of the menservants in Grosvenor Place."Not at allnot at all!" the old man made response, with an affectationof indifference.  "I have no wish to pry.  Indeed, I cannot say that Ihave any particular curiosity in the matter.  And you need not mentionto any one that I know even as much as that.  I cannot recall now whatmade me aska momentary impulsenothing of any consequencefor in truthit matters little to me where the young man lives.  Well, good-night,Hobsonand thank you.""Good-night, sir," said Hobson, with his eyes dwelling lingeringly onthe hot water and whisky. But he received no invitation (for old GeorgeBethune was more amenable to his granddaughter's remonstrances than hehimself was aware) and so, with another effusive "Good-night!" thelandlady's husband humbly withdrew.Sometimes, after Maisrie had gone to bed, or, at least, retired to herown room, her grandfather would wander away out in the streets byhimself. The night air was cool; there were fewer passers-by to impedehis aimless peregrinations; sheltered by the dark and the dulllamp-light, he could lift up his voice and sing "London's bonnie woodsand braes," or "Cam' ye by Athol," or "There's nae Covenant now,lassie," when he happened to be in the mood, as he generally was.  Andon this particular evening he sallied forth; but the straight-forwarddirection of his steps showed that he had an objective point.  He wentalong Oxford-street, and down Regent-street; and eventually, by way ofGarrick-street, Covent Garden, and the Strand, reached Fleet-street,where he stopped at a building almost wholly consisting of offices ofcountry newspapers.  At this time of the night the place was at itsbusiesta hive of industry: messengers coming and going, the operatorsassiduous at the special wires, the London correspondents constructingtheir letters out of the latest news, with a little imagination thrownin here and there to lend colour.  Old George Bethune ascended to thefirst floor, passed into the premises owned by the Edinburgh Chronicle(Daily and Weekly) and was admitted to an inner room, where he foundMr. Courtnay Fox.  Now Mr. Foxa heavy and somewhat ungainly person, whorolled from side to side as he crossed the room, and whose small blueeyes twinkled behind his spectacles with a sort of easy and readysarcasmdid not like being interrupted; but, on the other hand, Mr.Bethune was a friend, or at least a favoured acquaintance, of the chiefproprietor of the Chronicle, and the London correspondent wastherefore bound to be civil; so he asked the old man what he could dofor him."If you have anything for the Weekly," he observed, "you'd much bettersend it on direct to Edinburgh, instead of sending it down here.  Thatwill save one postagea point which I should have thought would occur toa Scotch mind," he added, with a bit of a half-concealed grin."You are always girding at Scotland, Mr. Fox," George Bethune said,good-naturedly."I?  Oh, not I.  I'm sure no one admires the virtues of economy andfrugality more than I do. That is why I am pretty certain Shakespearemust have lived in ScotlandI don't mean 'The rain it raineth everyday'but 'a tanner will last you nine year.'  Now how could he havelearned that money could be made to go so far but by observation of theScotch?""I know this," said the old man, with some dignity, "that few have seenso much of the world as I have, in various countries and climes; and themost generous and hospitable peoplegenerous and hospitable to the pointof extravaganceI have ever met with have invariably been the Scotch.It may suit you to revile the country from which you get your living""Oh, I meant nothing so serious, I assure you," the ponderous journalistsaid at once.  "Come, tell me what I can do for you.""I should like to look at the Post Office Directory first, if I may."Courtnay Fox waddled across the room and returned with the heavy volume:Mr. Bethune turned to the street and number that had been furnished himby his spy, and discovered that the name given was Harland Harrisnodoubt Vincent Harris's father."Ah, yes," the old man said.  "Now I can tell you what I want; and I amcertain I have come to the right place for information.  For while yourevile my countrymen, Mr. Fox, because you don't know them, I wonderwhom amongst your own countrymenwho have any position at allyou don'tknow?"This was an adroit piece of flattery: for it was a foible of the fatcorrespondent to affect that he knew everybodyand knew no good ofanybody."Of course the man I mean may be a nobodyor a nonentityand a veryrespectable person as well," continued Mr. Bethune, "but his son, whoseacquaintance I have made, talks as if his name were familiar to thepublic.  Mr. Harland Harris""Harland Harris!" the journalist exclaimedbut with much complacency,for he might have been found wanting.  "Don't you know HarlandHarris?or, at least, haven't you heard of him?""I have lived much out of England," the old man said."And you want me to tell you who and what Harland Harris is?  Is thatit?  Well, then, I will.  To begin with," proceeded Mr. Courtnay Fox,with a baleful light in his small twinkling eyes, "he is a solemn andportentous assa pedantic priga combination of a drill sergeant and aschoolmaster, with the self-sufficiency ofofI don't know what.  He isan enormously wealthy manwho preaches the Divine Beauty of Poverty; asocialistwho would abolish the income-tax, and have all taxationindirect; a Communistwho can eat only off gold plate.  This sham JeanJacques would not only abandon his children, he would let the wholehuman race go to the mischief, as long as you left him on a pinnacle,with a M.S. lecture in his hand.  Harland Harris!  Do you want to knowany more?  Well, I will tell you this, that long ago his vanity wouldhave inflated and burst him only that he was defeated in his candidaturefor the Lord Rectorship of Edinburgh Universityand that let out alittle of the gas.  But even now his inconsistencies are colossalalmosta madness; I think he must be drunk with a sense of his own superiority,as George Sand says""He does not seem to have made a very favourable impression on you,"said Mr. Bethune slowly and thoughtfully."Did he ever on any human being?" the other retorted.  "Not any one thatever I heard of!""And his sondo you know anything of him?"Mr. Courtnay Fox was not likely to admit that he knew nothing."Oh," said he, scornfully, "the enfant gt of the political world.has made a pet of him; and so people imagine there is something inhim.  Of course he'll talk for a few years about universal brotherhoodand the advancement of humanity and that kind of stuff; and then, whenhe succeeds to his father's money, he'll make a bid for a peerage, orelse marry a widowed and withered Countess, and subside into a solid,substantial, beef-headed bulwark of the Tory party.  That's the way theyall go!""Well, I'm very much obliged," said old George Bethune, rising.  "Andsorry to have interrupted you.  Good-nightand thanks.""Good-night," said the journalist, curtly, as he turned to his deskagain, and its litter of reports and telegrams.Next morning, when they were about to set forth on their accustomedstroll, Maisrie paused at the door for a second, and saidwith a verycurious hesitation, and a face grown rose-red"Grandfather, what shall I tell Mrs. Hobson you would like for dinner?"He did not notice her confusion; he answered, carelessly"Oh, never mind just now.  Later on we will see.  Food is not of muchimportance in this hot weather."Thereafter she was silent for some considerable time.  It was not untilthey had got down to the Serpentine, and when he was about to take outhis newspaper, that she ventured again to address him."Grandfather," she said, timidly, "do you thinkMr. Harrisexpectsusexpects that we should dine together again this evening?  He did askif we had no engagementandand perhaps he may imagine there is someunderstanding""Well, Maisrie," the old man made answer, with a playful irony, "if yourway of it is to be carried out, the arrangement wouldn't last very long.I don't suppose our little income could comfortably support three forany great space of time.""Oh, but, grandfather," she said, persuasively, "you know it was butright you should pay; we were two, and he only one; of course, if wewere to dine together againand he wished it to be his turnyou mightdivide""I think, Maisrie," said he, somewhat sententiously, "it would be betterfor you to leave our small financial affairs in my hands.  These thingsare well understood as between men; it is easy to make an arrangement.Especially easy if you are the only son of a very wealthy manwhat are afew shillings or a few sovereigns one way or the other to him?  And Iwish you to remember that a young lady's purse is not usually producedat a restaurant.""I am sorry if I did anything wrong, grandfather," she said humbly;"butbut I thoughtbefore a strangeror almost a strangerit was a pityyou had forgotten"He had opened the newspaper, so that the subject was dismissed; andMaisrie was left to her absent dreams and reveries.All that day there came no message from the other side of the street;and likewise the afternoon wore away in silence; while Maisrie, whatevershe hoped or feared, had not again asked her grandfather whatarrangements he proposed for the evening.  About six o'clock, however,there came a rap at the door below.  Maisrie was in her room upstairs.Her grandfather was seated at the little table in the parlour, drawingout in water-colour a coat of arms; and he had already finished theBethune part of itthat is to say, the first and fourth quarters of theshield were argent, with a fesse between three mascles, or; and likewisehe had surmounted it with the crestan otter's head, erased, ppr.; butas the second and third quarters were still vacant it was impossible tosay with which other family he proposed to claim alliance.  At thismoment Vincent made his appearance at the door, looking very cheerfuland good-humoured, and modest withal; and he came into the room as if healready felt quite at home there."I have taken a little liberty," said he, "with regard to this evening.I understood that you and Miss Bethune had no engagement, and mightthink of going to that same restaurant again; but then I thought youmight prefer a change; and so I have ordered dinner at the"  And henamed a well-known hotel in the neighbourhood of Burlington Gardens."Oh, you have ordered dinner?""Yes, sir," said Vincent, respectfully; and then seeing there was noobjection, he went on with a gayer air: "It does seem absurd that whenpeople want to meet each other, and to talk, and get thoroughlyacquainted, they must needs sit down and eat together; but there is somesense in it too; for of course we have all of us our differentoccupations during the day; and dinner-time is the time at which we allfind ourselves free, so that the meeting is easily arranged.  I hopeMiss Bethune wasn't fatigued after her long walk of last evening""Oh, no, no," said her grandfather, rising and going to the door.  "Imust call and tell her we are going out by and bye""Yes, but of course she is coming too!" the young man said quickly."If she likesif she likes.  I myself should prefer it.  I will askher."And on this occasion also, when she came downstairs, Maisrie Bethuneappeared in that simple dress of cream-coloured cashmere; and again hewas struck by the alteration in her aspect; she was no longer the shyand timid schoolgirl he had at first imagined her to be, but a youngwoman, of quite sufficient self-possession, tall, and elegant ofbearing, and with more than a touch of graceful dignity in her manner.This time she smiled as she gave him her hand for a moment; and then sheturned away; always she seemed to assume that this newly-foundrelationship existed only as between her grandfather and the young man,that she was outside of it, and only to be called in as an adjunct, nowand again when it happened to suit them.Nevertheless, as they by-and-bye walked away down to Burlington Gardens,she was much more animated and talkative than he had before seen her;and he observed, too, that her grandfather paid heed to her opinions.Nay, she addressed the younger of her two companions also, occasionally;and now she was not afraid to let a smile dwell in her eyes, when shechanced to turn to him.  He was bewildered by it all; it was more, farmore, than he dared have hoped for; in fact he was the last person inthe world to suspect that his own bearingthe buoyant unconsciousaudacity, the winning frankness, as well as a certain youthfulmodestywas at the root of the mystery of this sudden friendship.  Forone thing, he had told them a good deal about himself and hiscircumstances, during that morning in Hyde Park and during the previousafternoon and evening; and there was something in the position of thesethree folk, now brought together after wide wanderings through theworld, that seemed to invite confidence and intimacy.  Then old GeorgeBethune had an excellent fund of good-fellowship, so long as the presentmoment was an enjoyable one.And, as it turned out, this evening proved to be one of those enjoyablemoments.  The small festivity to which Vincent had invited his newacquaintances was not in the least the haphazard affair he hadhalf-intimated it to be; he had arranged it with care; they foundthemselves in a pretty room, with plenty of flowers on the table; whilethe little banquet itself was far more elaborate, both as regards foodand wine, than there was any call for.  The old gentleman did notprotest; anything that happenedso long as it was pleasantwas welcometo him; and he declared the claret to be as excellent as any he had metwith for years back.  He could not understand why their youthful hostwould not join him (as if it were likely that Vincent was going to drinkwine, now that he discovered that Maisrie Bethune drank only water!) buthe had all the more for himself; and he waxed eloquent and enthusiasticon his favourite theme."Why sir," said he, with a kind of proud elation in his tone, "I myselfheard Henry Ward Beecher pronounce these words in the City Hall ofGlasgow'I have been reared in a country whose history is brief.  Sovast is it, that one might travel night and day for all the week, andyet scarcely touch historic ground.  Its history is yet to be written;it is yet to be acted.  But I come to this land, which, though small, isas full of memories as the heaven is full of stars, and almost asbright. There is not the most insignificant piece of water that does notmake my heart thrill with some story of heroism, or some rememberedpoem; for not only has Scotland had the good fortune to have men whoknew how to make heroic history, but she has reared those bards who haveknown how to sing their deeds.  And every steep and every valley, andalmost every single league on which my feet have trod, have made me feelas if I were walking in a dream.  I never expected to find my eyesoverflow with tears of gladness that I have been permitted, in the primeof life, to look upon this beloved land.'  Well spokennobly spoken!When I take my granddaughter here to visit her native countryfor tothat country she belongs, in all the essentials of blood and traditionand descentI hope she will be in a similarly receptive mood; and willsee, not the bare hills, not the lonely islands, not the desolate moors,but a land filled with the magic of association, and consecrated by thelove and devotion of a thousand song-writers, known and unknown. I willsay with Johnson 'That man is little to be envied whose patriotism wouldnot gain force upon the plain of Bannockburn, or whose piety would notgrow warmer among the ruins of Iona'""Not Bannockburn: Marathon, wasn't it, grandfather?" said Maisrie, inher gentle way."Well, well," he said, not heeding the interruption. "'Almost everysingle league,' said Ward Beecher; and that is true.  I could make apilgrimage throughout the length and breadth of Scotland, guided by thefinger of Scottish song. Indeed, I have often thought I should like, ifthe years were spared to me, to collect materials for a volumeasplendid and magnificent volumeon the Scotland of the Scotch songs andballads.  The words and the music are already there; and I would havethe pencil add its charm; so that Scotland, in her noblest and fairestaspects, might be placed before the stranger, and might be welcomed onceagain by her own sons.  I would have the lonely Braes o' Balwhidder, andRob Roy's grave in the little churchyard on the hillside; I would haveTannahill's Arranteeniethat is on Loch Long side, I think; and theBonnie House o' Airlie:'It fell on a day, a bonnie summer's day,When the corn grew green and fairly,That the great Argyle, wi' a' his men,Cam' to plunder the bonnie house o' Airlie.'Then the Vale of Yarrowwell, perhaps that would have to be a figuresubjectthe grief-stricken maiden bending over the body of her slainlover'Pale though thou art, yet best, yet best beloved,O could my warmth to life restore thee!Ye'd lie all night between my breasts;No youth lay ever there before thee.'And ColonsayLeyden's Colonsaythe haunted island that mourns like asea-shell'And ever as the year returns,The charm-bound sailors know the day;For sadly still the mermaid mournsThe lovely chief of Colonsay.'Gala Water" the old man continued, in a sort of exalted rhapsody; andhis eyes were absent, as if he were beholding a succession of visions."Hunting TowerCraigie-burn Woodthe solitude sought out by Bessie Belland her girl companion when they fled from the plagueEttrick Banksthebush aboon Traquairin short, an endless series! And where the pencilmay fail, imagination must come in'I seebut not by sight alone,Loved Yarrow, have I won thee;A ray of fancy still survivesHer sunshine plays upon thee!'It would be something to do for the sake of 'puir auld Scotland;' andthink what an enchanted wandering that would be for both Maisrie andmyself.  Tweed and Teviotthe silver Forththe stately Clyde: well,perhaps she would be better pleased to gather a flower or twoalucken-gowan or a speedwellon 'the bonnie banks o' Ayr.'""But, grandfather," Maisrie Bethune interposed, "before you can beginsuch a book, or even think of it, you know there is something else to bedone.""I suppose it would be an expensive volume to bring out?" Vincentsuggested inquiringly."Oh, yes, yes," the old man saidand now he had relinquished thatrhapsodical strain, and had assumed his usual dignified, not to saygrandiose, demeanour.  "The drawings must be done by the first artists;they must not fall below the poetic pitch of the old ballads and thestill older airs.  It would be an expensive book to bring out, no doubt;but then it would be a noble undertaking; it would be a sumptuous andvaluable work.  I should think, now," he went on, reflectively, "thatthere ought to be a large paper editionand perhaps five guineas wouldnot be too much to chargequarto, I meanquartoand five guineas forsuch a handsome volume mightn't be too much""Five guineas?" repeated Vincent.  "Well, sir, if you choose to bringout the book by subscription, I will undertake to get you fiftysubscribers for that edition."  And then he added recklessly, "AhundredI will assure you a hundred subscribers!""No, Mr. Harris," said Maisrie, and she addressed herself in a moredirect manner than she had ever yet done to the young man.  "It is notto be thought of.  My grandfather has work to do that he must finishbefore entertaining any other schemes. It would be simply wasting timeto begin and arrange about another book."He felt himself silenced and humbled, he hardly knew why.  Had sheconstrued his proffered assistance into an offer of charity, andresented it accordingly?  But he could find no trace of offended pridein the refined and gentle features when next he ventured to look at her.She had said her say; and that was enough.  And her grandfather seemedto know she was in the right; nothing further was mentioned about thenew proposalat least at this particular time.  Dessert had come; andthe business of choosing from among those abundant fruits made a kind ofbreak.When at length they were about to depart, there was no confusion aboutthe bill, for Vincent intimated to the old man that he had alreadyarranged about that; and Mr. Bethune seemed satisfied, while Maisrie hadpassed on in front and did not hear.  She was very light-hearted andtalkative as they walked away home.  Her protest against the proposedpublication, if it showed a little firmness at the time, had left nopained feeling behind it; she was now as blithe as a bird; to Vincentshe seemed to shed a radiance around her, as if she were somesupernatural being, as she passed through those twilight streets.  Onceshe said something in Frenchin Canadian Frenchto her grandfather; andthe young man thought that never in all his life had he heard anythingso sweet and fascinating as the soft and blurred sound of the r's.  Hewas to hear a little more of that Canadian French on this evening.  Whenthey reached their lodgings, the old gentleman again asked his youngfriend to come in for a little while; the temptation was too great; heyielded; and followed them up into the dusky small parlour."Now we will have a serious smoke," said George Bethune, with decision,as he took down his long clay pipe.  "A cigarette after dinner is a merefrivolity.  Maisrie, lass, bring over that box of cigars for Mr.Harris."But Mr. Harris firmly declined to smoke, even as he had declined to takeany wine: what was he going to sacrifice next as a subtle tribute to theexalted character of this young creature? Maisrie Bethune seemed hardlyto understand, and was a little surprised; but now she had to go awayupstairs, to lay aside her things: so the two men were left alone, tochat about the affairs of the day until her return.When she came down again, her grandfather said"Sing something, Maisrie.""You know I can't sing, grandfather, but I never refuse you, for it isnot of any use," said she, contentedly, as she took the violin out ofits case. "But Mr. Harris has had enough of Scotch songs this evening.I must try something else.  And perhaps you may have heard the air inCanada," she added, addressing the young man from out of the partialdarkness.And now what was this new enchantment she was about to disclose andpractise?  In plain truth, she had very little voice; but he did notnotice that; it was the curiously naive, and simple, and sincereexpression of tone that thrilled through his heart, as she proceeded torecite rather than to sing the well-known "C' tait une frgate," theviolin aiding her with its low and plaintive notes:C' tait une frgate(Mon joli coeur de rose)Dans la mer a touch(Joli coeur d' un rosier).And here again were those softly slurred r'snot sharply trilled, asin the English fashionbut gentle and half-concealed, as it were.  Thesimple story proceededY avait une demoiselle(Mon joli coeur de rose)Su' l' bord d' la mer pleurait,(Joli coeur d' un rosier).Dites-moi donc, la belle,(Mon joli coeur de rose)Qu' a' vous  tant pleurer?(Joli coeur d' un rosier).Je pleur; mon anneau d' or,(Mon joli coeur de rose)Dans la mer est tomb,(Joli coeur d' un rosier).Then he asks the weeping damsel what she would give to any one who wouldfind for her her ring of gold that has fallen into the sea.Je suis trop pauvre fille,(Mon joli coeur de rose),Je ne puis rien donner,(Joli coeur d' un rosier).Qu' mon coeur en mariage(Mon joli coeur de rose)Pour mon anneau dor(Joli coeur d' un rosier).But the young man sitting there in the twilight hardly heard furtherthan that.  The phrase 'qu' mon coeur en mariage' had something morebeautiful in it than even the soft sound of the r's as she pronouncedthem; it dwelt in his heart with a mysterious charm; even as she went onto tell how the bold gallant who dived for the ring of gold was drowned,what he still seemed to hear was "Je ne puis rien donner, qu' mon coeuren mariage;" and when she had finished, and there was silence, he didnot speak; there was a kind of bewilderment in the tones of her voice;and he could not offer her commonplace thanks."Now I am going to light the gas," she said, cheerfully, as she laidaside her violin, "and, grandfather, you can challenge Mr. Harris to agame of chess, or draughts, or dominoes, whichever he likes best, sothat I may get to my work, for it cannot always be playtime."And so it was that, when the gas had been lit, she returned to her owncorner and to her needlework, while her grandfather and Vincent took todominoes, the old man having his hot water and whisky brought to him toaccompany his second pipe. Dominoes is a mechanical game; you can playwell enough even if there is the refrain of a song ringing through yourmemory; the young man did not care who won; and, indeed, he had quiteforgotten who was the victor as he shortly thereafter made his way souththrough the lamp-lit streets, with his lips half-trying to re-pronouncethat strangely fascinating phrase, "qu' mon coeur en mariagequ' moncoeur en mariage."Well, this was but the beginning of a series of evenings, until it cameto be understood that these three dined together each night,subsequently returning to old George Bethune's rooms, for a little musicor dominoes before parting.  Vincent assumed the management of thesemodest little merry-makings; varied the scene of them as much aspossible; and so arranged matters that no financial question came up toask for Maisrie Bethune's interference.  It is true, she sometimesseemed inclined to remain at home, so as to leave the two men greaterfreedom, perhaps; but he would not hear of that; and his ever increasingintimacy now lent him a franker authority.  He was high-handed in hisways: she smiled, and yielded.At last there came a proposition that was somewhat startling in itsboldness.  Cunningly he deferred bringing it forward until the very endof the evening, for then he knew that the old gentleman would be moreinclined to welcome any gay and audacious scheme, without particularlyweighing pros and cons.  Accordingly having chosen his opportunity, heinformed them that he had been offered the use of a house-boat duringthe Henley week (which was literally true: he had been offered itforthe sum of 30) and said that he had a great mind to accept if only hecould persuade Mr. Bethune and his granddaughter to go down as hisguests."I understood you to say," he continued, without giving either of themtime to reply, "that you had never seen Henley at the regatta-time.  Butit is a thing you ought to seeit is the prettiest sight in Englanditis perfectly uniquethere is nothing else like it in the world.  Andthen they make those house-boats so comfortable; it is simply a smallfloating home; or, on the other hand, you can sit outside, and be in thevery midst of all the fun.  There is no scrambleno crowdno hustlingsofar as we are concerned; and we shall have our own cook and steward.  Ifyou do not care to stay the whole week, we could go down on Tuesdayafternoonthe races begin on Wednesdayand remain for the illuminationsand fireworks on Friday night.  It would be awfully good-natured of youboth; of course I could not think of going down and occupying ahouse-boat by myself.  Now what do you say, Miss Bethune?I appeal firstto you.""Yes, what do you say, Maisrie?" the old man said, seeing that hisgranddaughter hesitated; and then he added with a condescending smile:"A question of dress, is it?  I have heard that the costumes at Henleyare rather extravagant.""Oh, I assure you, no," the young man protested (he would have swornthat the sky was pea-green if that would have helped.)  "They are quitesimple summer dresseslight in colour, of courseoh, yesbut quite plainand simple: who would take gorgeous gowns to go boating?""Very well, very well," Mr. Bethune said, with an easy good-nature.  "Iwill answer for both Maisrie and myself: we shall be delighted.  Let usknow the conditions; let us know what may be expected of us; we are oldtravellers and ready for anything.  And don't you be over particularabout your preparations, my young friend; we can rough it; and indeedI'm afraid of late we've been falling into somewhat too luxurious ways.Not that I am an anchorite; noGod forbid; if the present momentcommends itself, I welcome it; I see no wisdom in schooling one's selfto bear hardships that may not arise.  Yes, I have heard of HenleytheThames in Julythe brilliant company""It is awfully kind of you," said Vincent, rising, and preparing to go."I am sure you won't regret it; it is the very prettiest thing inEngland.  And to-morrow night I will let you know all the arrangements."Full of joy was the heart of this young man as he strode away down toGrosvenor Place; and reckless and extravagant were the projects crowdingin upon his brain as to how he should play the part of host.  For onething, he had the wherewithal; apart from the allowance given him by hisfather, an uncle had died leaving him a considerable sum; while his ownpersonal habits were of the most inexpensive kind; so that he had plentyof moneytoo much moneyto spend when any whim entered his head.  Andnow, for the first time, old George Bethune and the fair Maisrie were tobe openly and ostensibly his guests; and what was he not going to do inthe way of entertaining them? If only he could make sure that Maisrie'scream-coloured costume would go well with calceolarias?then with massesof calceolarias that house-boat would be smothered from stem to stern!Nor did the knowledge that Mrs. Ellison would very likely be at Henleytrouble him one bit.  He was not ashamed of this recently-formedfriendship; no; rather he was ready to proclaim it to all the world.Supposing Mrs. Ellison, shrewd-eyed as she was, were to come and inspectthem, where could she find two more interesting human beingsthe old manwith his splendid nerve and proud spirit; amidst all his misfortunes,and in his old age, too, still holding his head erect; firm andunyielding as his own Craig-Royston:the young girl with her pensive andmysterious beauty, her clear-shining, timid eyes, her maidenly dignity,her patience with the old man, and persuasive and affectionate guidance?Ashamed of this friendship?he was more inclined to parade it, to boastof it; he would have scorned himself otherwise.  Of course (as he couldnot hide from himself) Mrs. Ellison might be inclined to speculate uponulterior motives, and might begin to ask what was to come of all thiswarmth of friendship and constant association.  But any futurepossibilities Vincent put away even from himself; they were all too wildand strange as yet; he was content with the fascination he found inthese pleasant little merry-makings, in the more intimate companionshipof the small parlour, in listening, there or elsewhere and always, toMaisrie Bethune's voice.  And perhaps it was only the sweetness of thatvoice, and the softly murmured r's, that had vibrated through hisheart when she sang "Je ne puis rien donner, qu' mon coeur enmariage?"  What other charm could lie in so simple a phrase?  At allevents, he thought he would ask Maisrie to take her violin down toHenley with her, just in case Mrs. Ellison should some evening pay avisit to the White Rose.CHAPTER VI.FAIRY LAND.It was a soft summer night, cool and fragrant after the heat of the longJuly day; and here, under an awning in the stern of the house-boatWhite Rose, were George Bethune, his granddaughter Maisrie, andVincent Harris, looking out upon the magic scene that stretched awayfrom them on each hand up and down the river.  All the dusk was on firewith illuminations; the doors and windows of the house-boats sent fortha dull golden glow; there were coloured lamps, crimson, blue, andorange; there were strings of Chinese lanterns that scarcely moved inthe faint stirring of wind; and now and again an electric launch wouldgo bystealthily and silentlywith brilliant festoons of fierce whitelights causing it to look like some gigantic and amazing insectirradiating the dark.  The smooth surface of the stream quivered withreflections; here and there a rowing boat glided along, with a coolplash of oars; a gondola came into view and slowly vanishedthewhite-clad gondolier visionary as a ghost.  Everywhere there was a scentof flowers; and on board this particular house-boat there was but theone prevailing perfume; for the sole decoration of the saloon consistedof deep crimson rosesa heavy splendour against the white and goldwalls.  From some neighbouring craft came the tinkle of a banjo; therewas a distant hum of conversation; the unseen reeds and waterliliescould be imagined to be whispering in the silence.  Among the furtherwoods and meadows there was an occasional moving light; no doubt thecampers-out were preparing to pitch their tents."Mr. Talkative of Prating-row is hardly wanted here to-night," oldGeorge Bethune was saying, unmindful of his own garrulous habits."Music is better.  What is that they are singing over there, Maisrie?""'The Canadian Boat Song,' grandfather.""Oh, yes, of course: I thought it was familiar. And very pretty itsounds, coming across the waterthough I do not know whether the air ismodern or old.  What I am certain of," he continued, raising his voiceslightly as he usually did when he was about to discourse, "is that thefinest national airs are ancient beyond the imagination of man toconceive.  No matter when words may have been tacked on to them; theoriginal melodies, warlike, or pathetic, or joyous, were the voice ofmillions of generations that passed away leaving us only theseexpressions of what they had felt.  And if one could only re-translatethem!if one could put back into speech all the human suffering thatfound expression in such an air as 'The Last Rose of Summer,' wouldn'tthat electrify the world?  I wonder how many millions of generationsmust have suffered and wept and remembered ere that piteous cry couldhave been uttered; and when I come to Tom Moore's wretchedtrivialities""Grandfather," interposed Maisrie Bethune, quickly (for there werecertain subjects that angered him beyond endurance) "you must not forgetto show Mr. Harris that old play you foundwith the Scotch airs, Imean""Yes, that is curious," said the old man, yielding innocently."Curious, is it not, that long before either Burns or Scott was born, aScotchman named Mitchell should have collected over fifty of thebest-known Scotch airs, and printed them, with words of his own; andthat he should have chosen for the scene of his play the Borders of theHighlands, so as to contrast the manners and customs of the Highlandchieftains and their fierce clansmen with those of the Lowland lairdsand the soldiery sent to keep the peace between them.  The HighlandFair was produced at Drury Lane about 1730, if I remember aright; but Icannot gather whether Ewen and Colin, and Alaster and Kenneth, impressedthe Londoners much.  To me the book is valuable because of theairsthough I could wish for the original songs instead of Mitchell's"Here Maisrie, seeing that her grandfather was started on a safersubject, quietly rose; and at the first pause she said"I see some of them are putting out their lights, and that is a hint forme to be off.  I suppose we shall be wakened early enough to-morrowmorning by the boats going by.  Good-night, Mr. Harris! Good-night,grandfather!"She shook hands with both, and kissed her grandfather; then she passedinto the glow of that wonderful rose-palace, and made her way along tothe ladies' cabin, into which she disappeared.  Vincent now lit acigarthe first during this day.But when old George Bethune resumed his monologue, it was neitherHighland clans nor Lowland songs that concerned him; it was somethingthat proved to be a good deal more interesting to his patient listener.It was of Maisrie's youth that he spoke, and that in a far more simpleand natural way than was his wont.  There were no genealogicalvauntings, no exalted visions of what she should be when she came in forher rights; there were reminiscences of her earlier years, and of hisand her wanderings together; and there was throughout a certainwistfulness in his tone.  For once he talked without striving foreffect, without trying oratorically to convince himself; and it is to beimagined how entirely Vincent was engrossed by this simple recital.  Notthat there was any consecutive narrative.  The young man could onlyvaguely gather that Maisrie's father had been a railway-engineer; thathe had married a young Scotch lady in Baltimore before going out west;that Maisrie had been born in Omaha; that shortly thereafter her motherdied; then came the collapse of certain speculations her father had beenled into, so that the widower, broken in heart and fortune, soonfollowed his young wife, leaving their child to the care of her onlysurviving relative.  Whether there were some remains of the shatteredfortune, or whether friends subscribed to make up a small fund for them,it appeared that the old man and his granddaughter were not quitepenniless; for he took credit to himself that he had spent nearly alltheir little income, arising from this unspecified source, on Maisrie'seducation."I wish to have her fitted for any sphere to which she might be called,"he went on, in a musing kind of way.  "And I hope I have succeeded.  Shehas had the best masters I could afford; and something of her teaching Ihave taken upon myself.  But, after all, that is not of the greatestimportance.  She has seen the worldfar more than most of her years; andshe has not been spoiled by the contact.  I could have wished her,perhaps, to have had more of the companionship of her own sex; but thatwas not often practicable, in our wandering life.  However, she has anintuitive sympathy that stands for much; and if in societywhich is notmuch in our wayshe might show herself shy and reserved, well, I, forone, should not complain: that seems to me more to be coveted thanconfidence and self-assertion.  As for outward manner she has neverwanted any school-mistress other than her own natural tact and her ownrefinement of feeling; she is a gentlewoman at heart; rudeness,coarseness, presumption would be impossible to her""The merest stranger can see that," Vincent ventured to say, in rather alow voice."And thus so far we have come through the world together," the old mancontinued, in the same meditative mood.  "What I have done I have donefor the best.  Perhaps I may have erred: what could I tell about theuprearing of a young girl? And it may be that what she is now she is inspite of what I have done for her and with herwho knows such mysteries?As for the future, perhaps it is better not to look to it.  She isalone; she is sensitive; the world is hard.""I know many who would like to be her friends," the young man said,breathlessly."Sometimes," old George Bethune continued, slowly and thoughtfully, "Iwonder whether I have done my best.  I may have built on false hopesandtaught her to do the same.  I see young women better equipped for thebattle of the world, if it is to come to that.  Perhaps I have beenselfish too; perhaps I have avoided looking to the time when she and Imust in the natural course of things be separated.  We have been alwaystogether; as one, I might say; the same sunlight has shone on us, wehave met the same storms, and not much caring, so long as we were theone with the other. But thenthe years that can be granted me now arebut few; and she has no kinsman to whom she can go, even to glean in thefields and ask for a pitcher of water.  And when I think ofheraloneamong strangersmy Maisrie"His voice chokedbut only for a moment.  He suddenly sprang to his feet,and flung his arms in the air, as if he would free himself from thisintolerable burden of despondency and doubt."Why," said he, in accents of scornful impatience, "have I gone mad, orwhat pestilent thing is this! Sursum corda!  We have faced the worldtogether, she and I, and no one has ever yet found us downhearted.'We've aye been provided for, and sae will we yet': I do not mean asregards the common necessities of lifefor these are but of smallaccountbut the deeper necessities of sympathy and hope and confidence.Stand fast, Craig-Royston!'this rock shall fly, from its firm base assoon as I!'  Well, my young friend," he continued, quite cheerfully andbravely, "you have seen me in a mood that is not common with me: youwill say nothing about itto her, especially. She puts her trust in me;and so far, I think, I have not failed her.  I have said to her 'Comethe three corners of the world in arms, and we shall shock them'; illfortune buffets uselessly against 'man's unconquerable mind.'  She knowsthe race she comes of, and the motto of that race: Craig-Royston holdsits front!  Well, well, now, let me thank you for this beautifulevening; and on her behalf too; she is at the time when the mind shouldbe stored with pleasant memories.  Perhaps I have beenover-communicative, and made you the victim of idle fears; but therewill be no more of that; to-morrow you shall find me in my right mind."He held out his hand.  The young man did not know what to saythere wasso much to say!  He could only make offer of some further littlehospitalities, which Mr. Bethune declined; then the steward wassummoned, to put out the lamps and make other preparations, so that theWhite Rose should fold its petals together, for the slumber of thenight.  And presently a profound peace reigned from stem to stern; andthe last plashing of the oars outside had died away.But it was not to sleep that Vincent devoted the early hours of thisnight and morning.  His mind was tossed this way and that by all kindsof moods and projects, the former piteous and the latter wildlyimpracticable.  He had never before fully realised how curiouslysolitary was the lot of these two wanderers, how strange was theirisolation, how uncertain was their future.  And while the old man'scourage and bold front provoked his admiration, he could not helplooking at the other side of the shield: what was to become of her, whenher only protector was taken from her?  He knew that they were none toowell off, those two; and what would she do when left alone?  But if onthe very next day he were to go to Mrs. Ellison and borrow 10,000 fromher, which he would have mysteriously conveyed to old George Bethune?He could repay the money, partly by the sacrifice of his own smallfortune, and partly by the assigning over of the paternal allowance;while he could go away to Birmingham, or Sheffield, or wherever theplace was, and earn his living by becoming Mr. Ogden's privatesecretary.  They need never know from whom this bounty came, and itwould render them secure from all the assaults of fortune.  Away upthere in the Black Country he would think of them; and it would lightenthe wearisome toil of the desk if he could imagine that Maisrie Bethunehad left the roar and squalor of London, and was perhaps wanderingthrough these very Thames-side meadows, or floating in somewhite-garnitured boat, under the shade of the willows.  There would berest for the pilgrims at last, after their world-buffetings.  And so helay and dreamed and pitied and planned, until in the window of the smallstate-room there appeared the first blue-gray of the dawn, about whichtime he finally fell asleep.But next morning all was briskness and activity around themflagsflying, coloured awnings being stretched, pale swirls of smoke risingfrom the stove-pipes, the pic-nickers in the meadows lighting theirspirit-lamps for the breakfast tea.  The sun was shining brightly, butthere was a cool breeze to temper the heat; the surface of the streamwas stirred into silver; the willows and rushes were shivering andswaying; a scent of new-mown hay was in the air.  Already there wereplenty of craft afloat, on business or on pleasure bent; early visitsbeing paid, or masses of flowers, ferns, and palms being brought alongfor purchasers.  Maisrie was the first to be up and out; then old GeorgeBethune could be heard gaily singing in his state-room, as anaccompaniment to his toilet"Hey, Jonnie Cope, are ye waukin yet,And are your drums a-beatin yet,If ye were waukin, I would waitTo meet Jonnie Cope in the morning?"Finally when Vincent, with many apologies for being late, made hisappearance outside, he found the old man comfortably seated in thestern-sheets, under the pink and white awning, reading a newspaper hehad procured somewhere, while Maisrie was on the upper-deck of thehouse-boat watering the flowers with a can that she had got from thesteward.And indeed to this young man it appeared a truly wonderful thing thatthese three, some little while thereafter, in the cool twilight of thesaloon, should be seated at breakfast together; they seemed to form alittle family by themselves, isolated and remote from the rest of theworld.  They forgot the crowded Thames outside and the crowded meadows;here there was quiet, and a charming companionship; a band that wasplaying somewhere was so distant as to be hardly audible.  Then thesaloon itself was charming; for though the boat was named the WhiteRose, there was a good deal of pale pink in its decorations: theflutings and cornice were pink where they were not gold, and pink werethe muslin curtains drawn round the small windows; while the profusionof deep crimson roses all round the long room, and the masses of grapesand pineapples on the breakfast-table made up a picture almost typicalof summer, in the height of its luxuriance and shaded coolness."This seems very nice," said the young host, "even supposing there wereno river and no racing. I don't see why a caravan like this shouldn't beput on wheels and taken away through the country. There is an idea foryou, Mr. Bethune, when you set out on your pilgrimage through Scotland;wouldn't a moveable house of this kind be the very thing for MissBethune and you?you could set it afloat if you wanted to go down ariver, or put it on a lorry when you wanted to take the road.""I'm afraid all this luxury would be out of place in 'Caledonia, sternand wild,'" the old man said. "No, no; these things are for the gaysouth.  When Maisrie and I seek out the misty solitudes of the north,and the graves of Renwick and Cargill, it will be on foot; and if webring away with us some little trifle to remind us of Logan's streamsand Ettrick's shaws, it will be a simple thinga bluebell or a bit ofyellow broom.  I have been thinking that perhaps this autumn we mightbegin""Oh, no, grandfather," Maisrie interposed at once. "That is impossible.You know you have the American volume to do first.  What a pity it wouldbe," she went on, with an insidious and persuasive gentleness which theyoung man had seen her adopt before in humouring her grandfather, "ifsome one else were to bring out a book on the same subject before you.You know no one understands it so thoroughly as you do, grandfather: andwith your extraordinary memory you can say exactly what you require; sothat you could send over and get the materials you want without anytrouble.""Very well, very well," the old man said, curtly. "But we need not talkbusiness at such a time as this."Now there was attached to the White Rose a rowing boat; and a veryelegant rowing-boat it was, too, of varnished pine; and by and byeVincent proposed to his two guests that they should get into thestern-sheets, and he would take a short pair of sculls, and pull them upto the bridge, to show them the other house-boats, and the people, andthe fun of the fair generally."But wouldn't you take the longer oars," said Maisrie, looking down intothe shapely gig, "and let me have one?""Oh, would you like that?" he said, with pleasure in his eyes.  "Yes, byall means, if you care to row. It is a light boat though it's long; youwon't find it hard pulling.  By the way, I hunted about everywhere toget a gondola for you, and I couldn't.""But who told you I had ever tried an oar in a gondola?" she asked, witha smile."Why, you yourself: was I likely to forget it?" he said reproachfully.And oh! wasn't he a proud young man when he saw this rare and radiantcreatureclad all in white she was, save for a bunch of yellow king-cupsin her white sailor hat, and a belt of dull gold satin at her waistwhenhe saw her step down into the boat, and take her place, and put out thestroke oar with her prettily shaped hands.  Her grandfather was alreadyin the stern-sheets, in possession of the tiller-ropes.  When they movedoff into mid-stream, it was very gently, for the river was alreadybeginning to swarm; and he observed that she pulled as one accustomed topulling, and with ease; while, as he was responsible for keeping time,they had nothing to be ashamed of as they slowly moved up the course.Indeed, they were only paddling; sometimes they had to call a haltaltogether, when there was a confusion; and this not unwelcome leisurethey devoted to an observation of the various crewsgirls in thelightest of summer costumes, young men in violent blazersor to a covertinspection of the other house-boats, with their parterres and festoonsof flowers, their huge Japanese sun-shades and tinted awnings, and thebrilliant groups of laughing and chatting visitors."Oh, Mr. Harris, do lookisn't that a pretty one!" Maisrie exclaimed, inan undertone.He glanced in the direction indicated, and there beheld a very handsomehouse-boat, all of rich-hued mahogany, its chief decoration beingflowerboxes in blue tiles filled with marguerites.  At the same instanthe found that a pair of eyes were fixed on himeyes that werefamiliarand the next moment he knew that Mrs. Ellison, from the upperdeck of that mahogany house-boat, was regarding him and his companionswith an intense curiosity.  But so swift was her scrutiny, and soimpassive her face, that ere he could guess at the result of herinvestigation she had made him a formal little bow and turned away totalk to her friends.  Of course, with one hand on the oar he raised hishat with the other: but the effect of this sudden recognition was toleave him rather breathless and bewildered.  It is true, he had halfexpected her to be there; but all the same he was not quite prepared;andand he was wondering what she was thinking now. However, theofficials were beginning to clear the course for the first race; so thegig was run in behind one of the tall white poles; and there the smallparty of three remained until the rival crews had gone swiftly by, whenit was permitted them to return to the White Rose.After luncheon he said he would leave his guests to themselves for alittle while, as he wished to pay a visit to a friend he had seen on oneof the other house-boats; then he jumped into the gig, made his wayalong to the Villeggiatura, got on board, went up the steps, and foundhimself among a crowd of people.  Mrs. Ellison, noticing him, discreetlyleft the group she was with, and came to him, taking him in a measureapart."Wait a moment, Vin," she said, regarding the young man.  "If you wishitif you prefer itI have seen nothing.""What do you mean, aunt!" he said, with some haughty inclination toanger.  "Why should I seek any concealment?  I want you to come alongthat I may introduce to you two friends of mine."Instinctively she seemed to draw back a littlealmost as if she wereafraid."Oh, no, thanks, Vin.  No, thanks.  Please leave me out.""Why?" he demanded.The pretty young widow was embarrassed and troubled; for she knew thefiery nature of young men; and did not want to provoke any quarrel by anunguarded expression."Wellit is simply this, you knowthey are strangersI meanI supposethat neither your father nor any of the family have met themthey seemedsomehow like strangersunusual lookingandand I shouldn't like to bethe first. Leave me out, there's a good boy!""Why?" he demanded again.So she was driven to confession."Well, look here, Vin; I may be wrong; but aren't these new friendssomehow connected with your being so much away from home of latewithyour being in those lodgings?  Was it there you made theiracquaintance?""If you want to know, I saw them first at Lord Musselburgh's," said hewith an amazing audacity; for although the statement was literally true,it was entirely misleading.And apparently it staggered the pleasant-eyed young widow."Oh, at Lord Musselburgh's?" said she, with a distinct (but cautious)change of manner.  "Oh, really.  Lord Musselburgh's.  But why should youwant to introduce me to them, Vin?""Because," said he, "they have never met any member of our family: andas you are the most goodnatured and the prettiest, I want to produce afavourable impression at the outset."She laughed and was not displeased."There are some other qualities that seem to characterise ourfamilyimpudence for one," she observed.  "Well, come along, then, Vin:where are your friends?""In a house-boat down therethe White Rose.""The White Rose?  I noticed it yesterdayvery prettywhose is it?""Mine for the present; I rented it for the week," he replied."Who are the other members of your party?""Noneonly those two."But here she paused at the top of the steps; and said in an undertone"Really, Vin, this is too much!  You, a young man entertaining thosetwoand no lady chaperon"He turned and looked at her, with straight eyes."Oh, it's quite right," she said, hastily.  "It's quite right, ofcoursebutbut so much en videnceso prominentpeople might talk""I never try to hinder people from talking," said he, with a certainscorn.  "And if they busy themselves with my small affairs, they arewelcome to ring their discoveries from the tops of the steeples.  I didnot ask anybody's permission when I invited two friends of mine, who hadnever been to Henley before, to be my guests during the regatta-week.""Of course not, of course not," she said, gently; "but you are doing itin such a marked way""Come, come, aunt," said he, "it isn't like you to niggle about nothing.You are not a prude; you have too much goodnatureand too much commonsense.  And I don't want you to go on board the White Rose with anykind of prejudice in your mind."They could not get away just then, however, for the course was beingcleared for the next race; so they lingered there until they saw, faraway on the open river, two small objects like water-insects, withslender quick-moving legs, coming rapidly along.  The dull murmur of thecrowd became a roar as the boats drew nearer.  Then the needle-likecraft shot by, almost neck and neck; and loud were the shouts thatcheered this one or that; while straining eyes followed them along tothe goal.  The sudden wave of enthusiasm almost immediately subsided;the surface of the river was again being crowded by the boats that hadbeen confined behind the white poles; and now Vincent got his faircompanion down into the gig and, with some little difficulty and delay,rowed her along to the White Rose.He was very anxious as he conducted her on board; but he affected asplendid carelessness."Mr. Bethune," said he, "let me introduce you to my aunt, Mrs.EllisonMiss Bethune, Mrs. Ellison: now come away inside, and we'll getsome tea or strawberries or somethingracing isn't everything at Henley"It isn't anything at all, as far as I have seen," said Mrs. Ellison,goodhumouredly, as she followed her nephew into the saloon.  "Well, thisis very prettyvery pretty indeedone of the simplest and prettiestsocool-looking.  I hear this is your first visit to Henley," she continuedaddressing the old man, when they had taken their seats: Vincentmeanwhile, bustling about to get wine and biscuits and fruit, for thesteward had gone ashore."It is," said he, "and I am glad that my granddaughter has seen it insuch favourable circumstances.  Although she has travelled much, I doubtwhether she has ever seen anything more charming, more perfect in itskind.  We missed the Student's Serenade at Naples last year; but thatwould have been entirely different, no doubt; this is a vast waterpicnic, among English meadows, at the fairest time of the year, and withsuch a brilliancy of colour that the eye is delighted in everydirection."He was self-possessed enough (whatever their eagerly solicitous younghost may have been); and he went on, in a somewhat lofty and sententiousfashion, to describe certain of the great public festivals andspectacles he had witnessed in various parts of the world.  Mrs. Ellisonwas apparently listening, as she ate a strawberry or two; but in realityshe was covertly observing the young girl (who sate somewhat apart) andtaking note of every line and lineament of her features, and even everydetail of her dress.  Vincent brought Mr. Bethune a tumbler of claretwith a lump of ice in it; he drained a deep draught; and resumed hisstory of pageants.  Maisrie was silent, her eyes averted: the young manasked himself whether the beautiful profile, the fine nostrils, thesensitive mouth, would not plead for favour, even though she did notspeak. It seemed a thousand pities that her grandfather should be inthis garrulous mood.  Why did not Mrs. Ellison turn to the girldirect?he felt sure there would be an instant sympathy between thosetwo, if only Maisrie would appeal with her wonderful, true eyes.  Whaton earth did anyone want to know about the resplendent appearance of theWhite Cuirassiers of the Prussian Guard, as they rode into Prague a weekor two after the battle of Kniggrtz, with their dusty and swarthyfaces and their copper-hued breastplates lit up by the westering sun?But, on the other hand, Mrs. Ellison was not displeased by thisone-sided conversation; quite the contrary; she wanted to know all aboutthese strange people with whom her nephew had taken up; and the more theold man talked the better she resented the intervention of a race whichMaster Vin dragged them all away to see; and as soon as it was overtheywere now seated in the stern-sheets of the boatshe turned to Mr.Bethune with a question."I understand," she said, in a casual sort of way, "that you know LordMusselburgh?"At this Maisrie looked up startled."Oh, yes," said her grandfather, in his serene and stately fashion."Oh, yes.  A most promising young mana young man who will make hismark. Perhaps he is riding too many hobbies; and yet it might not beprudent to interfere and advise; a young man in his position is apt tobe hot-headed""Mrs. Ellison," interposed Maisrie, "we are only slightly acquaintedwith Lord Musselburghvery slightly indeed.  The fact is, he was kindenough to interest himself in a book, that my grandfather hopes to bringout shortly.""Ob, really," said the pretty widow with a most charming smile (perhapsshe was glad of this opportunity of talking to the young lady herself)"and may I askpardon my curiositywhat the subject is.""It is a collection of poems written by Scotchmen living in America andCanada," answered Maisrie, quite simply.  "My grandfather made theacquaintance of several of them, and heard of others; and he thoughtthat a volume of extracts, with a few short biographical notices, mightbe interesting to the Scotch people over here.  For it is about Scotlandthat they mostly write, I think, and of their recollectionsperhaps thatis only natural.""And when may we expect it?" was the next question.Maisrie turned to her grandfather."Oh, well," the old man made answer, with an air of magnificentunconcern, "that is difficult to say.  The book is not of such greatimportance; it may have to stand aside for a time.  For one thing, Ishould most likely have to return to the other side to collectmaterials; whereas, while we are here in the old country, there are somany opportunities for research in other and perhaps more valuabledirections, that it would be a thousand pities to neglect them.  Forexample, now," he continued, seeing that Mrs. Ellison listened meekly,"I have undertaken to write for my friend Carmichael of the EdinburghChronicle a series of papers on a branch of our own family thatattained to great distinction in the Western Isles during the reign ofthe Scotch Jamesesthe learned Beatons of Islay and Mull.""Oh, indeed," said Mrs. Ellison, affecting much interest."Yes," resumed old George Bethune, with much dignified complacency, "itwill be a singular history if ever I find time to trace it out.  Thewhole of that family seem to have been regarded with a kind ofsuperstitious reverence; all their sayings were preserved; and even now,when a proverb is quoted in the Western Isles, they add, 'as the sage ofMull said' or 'as the sage of Islay said.'  For ullahm, I may informyou, Mrs.Mrs.""Ellison," she said, kindly."Mrs. EllisonI beg your pardonmy hearing is not what it was.Ullahm, in the Gaelic tongue means at once a Doctor of Medicine and awise man""They distinguish between the terms in English," put in Vincent."and doctors most of them appear to have been," continued the old man,quite oblivious of interruption: indeed he seemed to be readingsomething out of his memory, rather than addressing particularly any oneof his audience.  "A certain Hector Beaton, indeed, got a considerablegrant in Islay for having cured one of the Jameses when all theEdinburgh Faculty had failed; and I myself have seen in the island ofIona the tombstone of the last of the Mull doctors of the name, who diedso late as 1657.  Hic jacet Johannes Betonus Maclenorum familiMedicus: no doubt there must be some mention of those Beatons in thearchives of the various families of Maclean in Mull.  Then I daresay Icould get a drawing of the tombstonethough I can remember theinscription well enough. The coat of arms, too, has the three mascles ofthe Bethunes""Of the Bethunes?then you are of the same family?" said Mrs. Ellison,this time with a little genuine curiosity.But the interruption had the effect of rousing him from his historicalreverie."I would rather say," he observed, with some stiffness, "that they wereoriginally of our family. The Norman de Bethune would easily be changedinto the Scotch Beaton.""Then there was Mary Beaton, of the Queen's Maries," Mrs. Ellisonsuggested.But at this the old man frowned: he did not wish any fictitiouscharacters brought into these authentic annals."An idle talea popular rhyme," said he. "There is no real foundationfor the story of Mary Hamilton that ever I could get hold of.  Of coursethere may have been a Mary Beaton at Queen Mary's courtwhat morelikely?and Mary Beaton would come trippingly to the popular tongue inconjunction with Mary Seton; but that is all.  It is with real people,and important people, I shall have to deal when I get to the AdvocatesLibrary in Edinburgh.""Oh, yes, certainlyof courseI quite understand," she said, humbly.And then she rose. "Well, I must be getting back to my friends, Vin, orthey will think I have slipped over the side and been drowned.""But won't you stay to dinner, aunt?" said he. "I wish you would!""Oh, no, thanks, I really couldn't," she answered with a suddenearnestness that became more intelligible to him afterwards.  "Icouldn't run away from my hosts like that."  Then she turned to Mr.Bethune and his granddaughter.  "By the way," she said, "LordMusselburgh is coming down to-morrowmerely for the dayand he will beon board the Villeggiatura.  Would you all of you like to come alongand have a look over the boat; or shall I send him to pay you a visithere?"It was Maisrie who repliedwith perfect self-composure."Our acquaintance with Lord Musselburgh is so very slight, Mrs.Ellison," said she, "that it would hardly be worth while making eitherproposal.  I doubt whether he would even remember our names."Whereupon the young widow bade good-bye to Maisrie with a pretty littlesmile; the old gentleman bowed to her with much dignity; and then shetook her seat in the stern of the gig, while her nephew put out thesculls.  When they were well out of hearing, Mrs. Ellison saidwith acurious look in her eyes of perplexity and half-frightened amusement"Vin, who is that old man?""Well, you saw, aunt," he made answer."Ob, yes, I saw.  I saw.  But I am none the wiser.  I could not make himout at all.  Sometimes I thought he was a self-conceited old donkey, whowas simply gabbling at random; and again he seemed really to believewhat he was saying, about his connection with those Beatons and deBethunes and the Scotch kings.  But there's something behind it all,Vin; I tell you there is; and I can't make it out.  There's somethingmysterious about him""There's nothing mysterious at all!" he exclaimed, impatiently."But who is he, then?" she persisted.  "What is he?  Where is hisfamily?  Where are his relatives?""I don't think he has any, if it comes to that, except hisgranddaughter," her nephew replied."What does he do, then?  How does he exist?"He was beginning to resent this cross-examination; but yet he saidcivilly enough"I am not in the habit of making inquiries about the income of everyoneI meet; but I understand they have some small sum of money betweenthemnot much: and then he has published books; and he writes for theEdinburgh Weekly Chronicle.  Is that enough?""Where does he live?""In Mayfair.""I don't believe a word of it!" she said, and she even ventured to laughin a half-embarrassed way. "I believe he dwells in a cavehe is atroglodytehe comes out at duskand wanders about with a lantern and apickaxe.  Really, when I looked at his shaggy eyebrows, and his piercingeyes, and his venerable beard, I thought he must be some Druid come tolife againor perhaps one of those mythical island-doctors survivingfrom the fourteenth century""At all events, aunt," Vincent said, with an ominous distinctness oftone, "his age and what he has come through might procure for him alittle respect.  It isn't like you to jeer and jibe simply because a manis old""My dear boy, I am not jibing and jeering!" she protested.  "I tell youI am puzzled.  There's something about that old man I can't make out.""How could you expect to understand anybodyin half-an-hour's talk atHenley Regatta!" he said, indignantly.  "I gave you the opportunity ofgetting to know them both, if only you had come along this evening, andspent some time with them.  I am not aware that either of them wants toconceal anything.  They are not ashamed of their poverty. Perhaps theold man talks too much: you, at least, pretended to find what he saidinteresting.  And as for the girl, no doubt she was silent: she isn'tused to be stared at and examined by critical and unsympathetic eyes."The young widow elevated her brows: here was something unexpected!"Vin Harris," she said, solemnly, "are you quarrelling with mebecausebecause I am not glamoured?  Is it as bad as that?  If so, thenI am extremely glad I did not accept your invitation for this evening.I am compromised far enough already""What do you mean by compromised?" he demanded.But just at this moment she had to call to him to look out, for they hadalmost arrived at the Villeggiatura.  He glanced over his shoulder,pulled a stroke with his right oar, shipped the other, and then, havinggripped the stern of the house-boat, he affixed the painter of the gig,and, letting her back fall into the stream, returned to the thwart hehad occupied."I wish to ask you, aunt," said he, in a sufficiently stiff and formaltone, "how you consider you have been compromised through meeting anyfriends of mine.""Oh," said she, half inclined to laugh, yet a little bit afraid too,"don't ask me.  It isn't as serious as thatI mean, I didn't think youwould take it seriously.  No doubt it's all right, Vin, your choosingyour own friends; and I have nothing to say against them; only I wouldrather you left me out, if you don't mind.  You see, I don't know yourintentions""Supposing I have none?" he demanded again."Well, no one can say what may happen," the young widow persisted; "andI should not like to be appealed toNow, now, Vin, don't be sopassionate!have I said a single word against your new friends?  Notone.  I only confess that I'm a selfish and comfort-loving woman, and Idon't wish to be drawn into any family strife.  There may be no familystrife?  Very well; so much the better. But my having no furtheracquaintance with Mr. Bethune and Miss Bethunemy having no knowledge ofthem whatever, for it practically comes to thatcannot injure them; andleaves me free from responsibility.  Now don't quarrel with me, Vin; forI will not allow it; I have been talking common sense to youbut Isuppose that is what no man of twenty-five understands."He hauled up the gig to the stern of the house-boat, as an intimationthat she could step on board when she chose."There," said she, as she gave him her hand in parting, "I see I haveoffended you; but what I have said has been for your sake as well asmine."Well, he was vexed, disappointed, and a little inclined to be angry.But all that darkness fled from his spirithe forgot all about Mrs.Ellison's friendly monitionshe had no care for any speculations as tothe futurewhen he was back again in the White Rose, sitting byMaisrie Bethune, he and she together looking abroad on the gay crowd,and the boats, and the trembling willows, and the slow-moving skies nowgrowing warmer with the afternoon sun.  Then, when the last of the raceswas over, came dinner; and as twilight stole over the river and themeadows, the illuminations began, the rows of coloured lanterns showingone after the other, like so many fire-flies in the dusk.  Of coursethey were sitting outside nowon this placid summer nightin fairyland.CHAPTER VII.CLAIRE FONTAINE.But something far more strange and wonderful happened to him the nextmorning; and that was his first tte--tte conversation with MaisrieBethune. It was quite unexpected, and even unsought; nay, when hestepped outside and found that she was alone on deck, he would haveshrank back, had that been possible, rather than break in upon hersolitude.  For even here at Henley, during the regatta-time, which maybe regarded as the High Festival of Joyance and Flirtation, there was nothought of pretty and insidious love-making in this young man's head orheart.  There was something mysteriously remote and reserved about thisisolated young creature, whose very beauty was of a strangely pensiveand wistful kind.  Even the gentle self-possession and the wisdom beyondher years she showed at times seemed to him a pathetic sort of thing; hehad a fancy that during her childhood she never had had the chance ofplaying with young children.But it was too late to retreat; and indeed she welcomed him with apleasant smile as she bade him good morning.  It was he who wasembarrassed. He talked to her about the common things surrounding them,while anxiously casting about for something better fitting such a rareopportunity. And at last he said"Yes, I am sure your grandfather and I get on very well.  And I havebeen wondering whether, when you and he make that pilgrimage throughScotland, he would let me accompany you."In her beautiful and child-like eyes there was a swift flash of joy thatmade his heart leap, so direct and outspoken an expression it was of hergladness to think of such a thing; but instantly she had altered herlook, and a faint flush of colour had overspread her facethe palewild-rose had grown pink."Your way of travelling and ours are so different," the said, gently."Oh, but," said he, with eagerness, "you don't understand how the ideaof a long wandering on foot has fascinated me: why, that would be thewhole charm of it!  You don't know me at all yet. You think I care forthe kind of thing that prevails herethat I can't get on withoutpine-apples and chairs with gilt backs?  Whybut I don't want to talkabout myself at all: if you would let me come with you on thatpilgrimage you would find out a little.  And what an opportunity it willbe, to go with your grandfather: history, poetry, and romance allbrought together: Scotland will be a wonderful country for you beforeyou have done with it.  Andandyou seeI have gone on pedestrianexcursions beforeI have a pretty broad backI can carry things.  Youmight engage me as porter; for even when you send your luggage on, therewill be a few odds and ends to fill a knapsack with; and I can tramplike any gaberlunzie."She smiled a little, and then said more seriously"I am glad to have the chance of speaking to you about that scheme of mygrandfather's; because, Mr. Harris, you must try to dissuade him from itas much as possible.""Dissuade him?""Yes," said she, quietly.  "You must have seen how completely mygrandfather lives in a world of imagination, and how one thingcaptivates him after another, especially if it is connected withScotland and Scottish song.  And I have no doubt he would write abeautiful book about such a tour as that; for who knows more about allthe places and the legends and ballads?  It would be a pleasure for metooI have dreamed of it many a time. But it is impossible for thepresent; and it will be a kindness to me, Mr. Harris, if you will notencourage him in it.  For the fact is," she continued, with a littleembarrassment, "my grandfather has undertaken to write somethingelseandand he is under personal obligations about itand he must notbe allowed to forget them.""Oh, yes, I quite understand," Vincent said. "I have heard of thatvolume about the Scotch poets in America.  Well, you know what yourgrandfather says, that he would have to go to the other side to collectmaterials; while, being here in this country just now, he might as welltake you to those scenes and places that would make up another book, tobe written subsequently. However, I have no doubt you are right.  Thepossibility of my going along with you two on such an excursion has beena wonderful thing for me to speculate on; but whatever you wish, that isenough. I am against the Scotch trip now, so far as I have any right tospeak."She was looking at him enquiringly, and yet diffidently, as if she wereasking herself how far she might confide in him."Perhaps you have not noticed it, Mr. Harris," she added, stillregarding him, "but my grandfather has a strange faculty for makinghimself believe things.  I daresay, if he only planned the Americanbook, he could convince himself that he had written it, and so got ridof thosethose obligations.  Well, you will help me, will you not?for Iam anxious to see it done; and he may say I am too young and tooignorant to give adviceas I am""Why," said Vincent, almost indignantly, "do you think I cannot see howyou guide and lead him always, and with such a tact and wisdom andgentleness as I never beheld anywhere!"Maisrie flashed downright red this time; but she sought to conceal herconfusion by saying quickly"Then again you must not misunderstand me, Mr. Harris; you must notthink I am saying anything against my grandfather; I am only telling youof one little peculiarity he has.  Saying anything against him!I thinkI could not well do that; for he has been goodness itself to me sinceever I can remember anything.  There is nothing he would not sacrificefor my sake; sometimes it is almost painful to me to see an old man, whoshould be the petted one and the cared for, so ready to give up his ownwants and wishes, to please a mere girl who is worthy of noconsideration whatever. And consideration is not the word for what Ihave received from my grandfather always and always; and if I couldforget all he has done for me and been to meif I could be so ungratefulas to forget all those years of affection and sympathy and constantkindness"She never finished the sentence.  He fancied her eyes were moist as sheturned her head away; anyhow he dared not break in upon the silence;these confidences had been sacred things.  And indeed there was noopportunity for further speech on this subject; for presently old GeorgeBethune made his appearance, radiant, buoyant, high-spirited, with asonorous stanza from Tannahill to greet the awakening of the new day.Now no sooner had Lord Musselburgh arrived on board the Villeggiaturaon the same morning than Mrs. Ellison went to him and told him all herstory, which very much surprised him, and also concerned him not alittle, for it seemed as though he was in a measure responsible for whathad happened to Vincent."My dear Mrs. Ellison," said he, "I can assure you of one thing: it isquite true that your nephew was in the room when Mr. Bethune and hisgranddaughter called on me, but I am positively certain that there wasno introduction and that he did not speak a single word to them there.How he got to know them I cannot imagine; nor how they could have becomeso intimate that he should ask them to be his guests down here atHenley.  And his sole guests, you say?Yes, I admit, it looks queer.  Ihope to goodness there is no kind of entanglement""Oh," said Mrs. Ellison, in sudden alarm; "don't imagine anything fromwhat I have told you I There may be nothing in it: he as good asdeclared there was nothing in it: and he is so fiery and sensitiveonthis one pointwhy, that is the most serious feature of it all!  Helooks you straight in the face, and dares you to suspect anything.  Butreallyreallyto have those two companionsand no otherson a house-boatat Henley: it is a challenge to the world!""Looks rather like it," said Lord Musselburgh; and then he added: "Ofcourse you know that Vin has always been a Quixotic kind of chapdoingimpossible things if he thought them rightand all that sort of thing.But it's very awkward just at this moment.  There must be some powerfulattraction, of one kind or another, to have made him give himself overso completely to these new friends; for he has not been near me of late;and yet here I have in my pocket a letter that concerns him veryclosely, if only he would pay attention to it.  I don't mind tellingyou, Mrs. Ellison, for you are discretion itself""I think you may trust me, Lord Musselburgh," she said, with a smile."Very well, then," said he, lowering his voice. "I hear that there willbe a vacancy at Mendovercertainly at the next General Election, butmore probably much sooner: old Gosford has become such a confirmedhypochondriac that he will hardly leave his room; and his constituentsare grumbling as much as they darefor he has got money, you know, andthe public park he gave them wants further laying out, and statues, andthings.  Very well; now I have in my pocket a darkly discreet letterfrom the Committee of the Mendover Liberal Association asking me to godown and deliver an address at their next meeting, and hinting that if Icould bring with me an acceptable candidate"He paused, and for a second a cynical but perfectly good-humoured laughappeared in his eyes."My dear Mrs. Ellison," said he, "I am deeply grateful.  I thought youmight express some astonishment at my being consulted in so important anaffair.  But the fact is, I, also, am expected to do something for thatpark; and perhaps this invitation was only a little hint to remind me ofmy local responsibilities.  However, that is how the case stands; and Ihad thought of taking your nephew down with me"A vacancy at Mendover," said Mrs. Ellison, in awe-struck tones, "whereyou are simply everybody!  Oh, Lord Musselburgh, what a chance for Vin!""And then, you know," continued the young peer, "I want to bring him outas a Tory Democrat, for that is a fine, bewildering sort of thing, thatprovokes curiosity: you call yourself a Tory and can be as revolutionaryas you like, so that you capture votes all round.  Why, I've got Vin'sprogramme all ready for him in my pocket: a graduated income-tax, freeeducation, leasehold enfranchisement, compulsory insurance, anything andeverything you like except disestablishmentdisestablishment won't workat Mendover.  Now, you see, Mrs. Ellison, if I could get Vin properlycoached, he has all the natural fervour that unhappily I lack; and afterI had made my few little jokes which they kindly take for a speech, Icould produce him and say 'Here, now, is the young politician of the newgeneration; here's your coming man; this is the kind of member the nextquarter-of-a-century must return to the House of Commons.'  But if thereis any Delilah in the way"Mrs. Ellison crimsoned."No, Lord Musselburgh," she said.  "No.  You need have no fear."However, she seemed perturbedperhaps in her anxiety that her nephewshould not miss this great opportunity.  Presently she said"Tell me, what do you know of this old man?I can't make him out atall.""I?  I know nothing, or next to nothing," he said, lightly, as he gazedabroad on the busy river.  "I remember Vin asking me the same questionIsuppose out of curiosity about the girl.  My recollection of her is thatshe was extremely prettyrefined-lookinglady-like, in fact""She is, indeed," said Mrs. Ellison, with decision, "and that is whatmakes the situation all the more dangerousassuming, of course, thatthere is any ground for one's natural suspicions.  No, Vin is the lastman in the world to be captured by any vulgar adventuress; he is at oncetoo fastidious and too proud.  But then, you see, he is well known to bethe son of a very wealthy man; and there might be a design"  Shehesitated for a moment: then she said, half impatiently: "LordMusselburgh, tell me how you came to know this old man: he could nothave sprung out of the earth all of a sudden."He told her, as briefly as might be."That was all?" she repeated, eyeing him shrewdly."Yes.""You are sure?""What do you mean?  That is really all I know of the old gentleman:isn't that what you asked?""But was that the whole of the interview, if I may be so impertinent asto inquire?" she demanded again."Ob, yes, it was," Lord Musselburgh said; and then he added,indifferently: "Of course I subscribed something towards the publicationof a book he mentionedhe had written to me before about the project.""Oh, there was money?" she said.A slight tinge on Lord Musselburgh's forehead showed that he had notintended to make this admission."Oh, nothinga trifleit is usual when a book is coming out bysubscription."Mrs. Ellison sate silent for a little while: there was plenty going onon the river to interest her companion.  Then by-and-bye she saidslowly"Well, I had intended to keep clear of these new friends of Vin's.  Ithought it would be more prudent for me to know nothing.  It is true, Iwas introduced to them yesterday afternoon; but I wished that to be all;I thought I would rather withdraw; and let things take their course.But I don't know that that would be honest and right. Vin is a young manwith many fine and noble qualitiesperhaps a little too fine and noblefor the ordinary work-a-day world; and I think he ought to have thebenefit of my sadly-earned experience and callous nature"Lord Musselburgh laughed: he did not take her too seriously."He is my own boy," she continued, "I would do anything for him.  AndI'm not going to let him be entrappedif that is what all this means.  Iknow he is very angry with me just now; probably he would not speak tome if he were to meet me this minute; but that won't prevent my speakingto him.  I'm going to put my pride in my pocket, Lord Musselburgh.  I'mgoing to find out something more about this picturesque old gentleman,who talks so grandly about the Beatons, and the de Bethunes, and theircoats of arms, and who accepts a 10 noteor perhaps only a 5 note?onaccount of a book that is not yet published.  And if there is any sortof scheme on foot for getting hold of the son of so notoriously wealthya man as Harland Harris, then I want to make a little inquiry. YesterdayVin indignantly complained that I was prejudiced, and that I had noright to form any opinion about those friends of his because I would notgo along and dine with him and them last evening.  Very well, I will goto him, and make up the quarrel, and ask him to repeat the invitationfor this evening""For this evening?" repeated Lord Musselburgh, in tones of deepdisappointment.  "You don't mean you are going to leave all your friendshere and go and dine somewhere else?""If I can procure an invitation.  It is my duty. I'm not going to let myboy be made a fool of, even if I have to sacrifice a little of my ownpersonal comfort.""Yes, that's all very well," said Lord Musselburgh, gloomily, "but I didnot bargain for your going away like that on the only evening I shall behere. If I had known"He was on the point of saying he would not have come down: but thatwould have been too bold an avowal.  He suddenly hit upon another happysuggestion."You said that Vin had only those two on board with him?  Well, if heasks you to dine with him, won't he ask me too?"Mrs. Ellison laughed, and shook her head."No, no.  Another stranger would put them on their guard.  I must managemy Private Investigation all by myself.  But you need not look sodisconsolate.  There are some really nice people here, as you'll findout by-and-bye; and the Drexel girls are driving over from GreatMarlowthey are Americans, so you will be properly appreciated: theywill try their best to make you happy.""How late shall you stay on board Vin's boat?" he asked, heedless ofthese smaller attractions."I shall be back here by tenperhaps by half-past nine.""Is that a promise?""Yes, it isten at latest.""Otherwise I should go back to town in the afternoon," said he, frankly."What nonsense!" the young widow exclaimed (but she did not seemresentful).  "Well, now, I must go along to the White Rose, and makemy peace, and angle for an invitation; and then, if I get it, I mustconcoct my excuses for Mrs. Lawrence. Anyhow I shall be on board theVilleggiatura all the afternoon; and then I hope to have the pleasureof introducing you to Louie Drexelthat is the young lady I havedesigned for Vin, when he has shaken off those adventurers and come tohis right mind."Almost immediately thereafter Mrs. Ellison had secured a boatman to pullher along to the White Rose; and as she drew near, she perceived thatMaisrie Bethune was alone in the stern of the house-boat, standingupright on the steering-thwart, and with both hands holding a pair offield-glasses to her eyesan unconscious attitude that showed thegraceful figure of the girl to the best advantage.The observant visitor could also remark that her costume was simplicityitself: a blouse of white soft stuff, with wide sleeves and tight cuffs;a belt of white silk round her waist; and a skirt of blue serge.  Shewore no head-covering; and her neatly-braided hair caught severalsoft-shining hues from the sunnot a wonder and glory of hair, perhaps,(as Vin Harris would have deemed it) but very attractive all the same tothe feminine eye, and somehow suggestive of girlhood, and making forsympathy.  And then, when a "Good-morning!" brought round a startledface and a proud, clear look that was nothing abashed or ashamed, Mrs.Ellison's conscience smote her that she had made use of the wordadventuress, and bade her wait and see."Good-morning!" Maisrie Bethune answered; and there came a touch ofcolour to the fine and sensitive features as she knew that the youngmatron was regarding her with a continuation of the curiosity of thepreceding afternoon."Have the gentlemen deserted you?  Are you all alone?" Mrs. Ellisonsaid."Oh, no; they are inside," was the response. "Would you like to see Mr.Harris?  Shall I call him?""If you would be so kind!"and therewith Maisrie disappeared into thesaloon, and did not return.It was Vincent that came outwith terrible things written on his brow."Don't look at me like that, Vincent Harris!" Mrs. Ellison exclaimed,half-laughing and half-annoyed.  "What have I done?  It is you who areso hasty and inconsiderate.  But I've come to make it all up with you;and to ask you to ask me to dine with you to-night.""No, thank you, aunt," he said, civilly enough. "You are very kind; butthe fact is you would come with a prejudice; and so you'd better notcome at all."Well, she had to be circumspect; for not only was her own boatman behindher, but there was a possibility of some stray sentence penetrating intothe saloon."Come," she said, in a sort of undertone, to him; and she had a pretty,coaxing, goodnatured way with her when she chose, "I am not going toallow you to quarrel with me, Vin; and I bring a flag of truce; andhonourable proposals.  I saw you were offended with me last evening; andperhaps I was a little selfish in refusing your invitation; but you seeI confess the error of my ways, for here I am begging you to ask meagain.""Oh, if you put it that way, aunt""Oh, no, I don't put it that way!" she said. "Not if you speak likethat.  Come, be amiable! I've just been talking to Lord Musselburgh""And, of course, you crammed all your wild ideas into his head!" heexclaimed."Whoever heard of poor me having ideas!" she said, with a winninggood-humour to which he could not but yield.  "It isn't for me to haveideas; but I may have prejudices; and I'm going to leave them, all onboard the Villeggiatura this evening, if you say yes.""Of course I say yeswhen you are like yourself, aunt," he responded atonce, "and I shall be very glad indeed.  And what is more," said he, ina still lower tone, "when you have really metcertain peopleand whenyou have to confess that you have been unjust, I don't mean to triumphover you.  Not a bit.  If you have done any injustice, you know yourselfhow to make it upto them. Now that's all right and settled: and I'mreally glad you're coming.  Seven o'clock; and the dress you've got on.""Oh, but, mind you," said she, "you don't seem to appreciate my goodnessin humbling myself so as to pacify your honourable worship.  Do you knowwhat I shall have to do besides?  How am I to explain to the Lawrencesmy running away from their party?  And here is Lord Musselburgh comedown; and the Drexel girls are expected; so you see what I am doing foryou, Vin""You're always good to me, auntwhen you choose to be reasonable andexercise your common-sense""Common-sense!" she retorted, with a malicious laugh in her eyes.  Thenshe said, quite seriously: "Very well, Vin: seven o'clock: that is anexcellent hour, leaving us all a nice long evening; for I must get backto the Villeggiatura early."And so that was all well and amicably settled. But Master Vin, thoughyoung in years, had not tumbled about the world for nothing; and alittle reflection convinced him that his pretty aunt's change ofpurposeher abandonment of her resolve to remain discreetly aloofhadnot been prompted solely, if at all, by her wish to have that littlemisunderstanding between him and her removed. That could have been doneat any time; a few words of apology and appeal, and there an end. Thishumble seeking for an invitation which she had definitely refused theday before meant more than that; it meant that she had resolved to findout something further about these strangers.  Very well, then, she waswelcome: at the same time he was resolved to receive this second visitnot as he had received the first.  He was no longer anxious about theimpression these two friends of his might produce on this the first ofhis relatives to meet them.  She might form any opinion she chose: hewas indifferent.  Nay, he would stand by them on every point; andjustify them; and defy criticism. If he had dared he would have gone toMaisrie and said: "My aunt is coming to dinner to-night; but I will notallow you to submit yourself to any ordeal of inspection.  You shalldress as you like, as carelessly or as neatly as you like; you shallwear your hair hanging down your back or braided up, without any thoughtof her; you shall be as silent as you wishand leave her, if shechooses, to call you stupid, or shy, or sulky, or anything else."  Andhe would have gone to the old man and said: "Talk as much and as long asever you have a mind; you cannot babble o' green fields too discursivelyfor me; I, at all events, am sufficiently interested in your claims ofproud lineage, in your enthusiasm about Scotland and Scottish song, inyour reminiscences of many lands.  Be as self-complacent and pompous asyou please; fear nothing; fear criticism least of all."  And perhaps, inlike manner, he would have addressed Mrs. Ellison herself: "My dearaunt, it is not they who are on their trial, it is you.  It is you whohave to show whether you have the courage of honest judgment, or are themere slave of social custom and forms."  For perhaps he, too, hadimbibed a little of the "Stand Fast, Craig Royston!" spirit? Bravado maybe catchingespecially where an innocent and interesting young creatureof eighteen or so is in danger of being exposed to some deadly approach.Of course this carelessly defiant attitude did not prevent his beingsecretly pleased when, as seven o'clock drew near, he perceived thatMaisrie Bethune had arranged herself in an extremely pretty, if clearlyinexpensive, costume; and also he was in no wise chagrined to find thatMrs. Ellison, on her arrival, appeared to be in a very amiable mood.There was no need to ask her "O come ye in peace here, or come ye inwar?": her manner was most bland; in particular she was adroitlyflattering and fascinating towards old George Bethune, who acceptedthese little attentions from the charming widow with a grave andconsequential dignity.  The young host refused to sit at the head of thetable; he had the places arranged two and twoMrs. Ellison, of course,as the greater stranger and the elder woman, on his right, and Maisrieopposite to him.  During the general dinner-talk, which was mostly aboutthe crowd, and the races, and the dresses, Mrs. Ellison casuallyinformed her nephew that she had that afternoon won two bets, and alsodiscovered that she and Lord Musselburgh were to meet at the same housein Scotland the coming autumn: perhaps this was the explanation of herextreme and obvious good humour.And if any deep and sinister design underlay this excessive amiabilityon her part, it was successfully concealed; meantime all waspleasantness and peace; and the old gentleman, encouraged by her artlessconfidences, spoke more freely and frankly about the circumstances ofhimself and his granddaughter than was his wont."I see some of the papers are indignant about what they call the vulgardisplay of wealth at Henley regatta," the young widow was saying, in avery unconcerned and easy fashion; "but I wish those gentlemen wouldremember that there is such a thing as imputation of motives, and thatimputing motives is a common resource of envy.  If I have a house-boat,and try to make it as pretty as ever I can, both inside and out, whyshould that be considered display of wealthdisplay of any sort?  I likenice things and comfortable things around me; I don't mind confessingit; I am a selfish woman""There are some who know better, aunt," her nephew interposed."Young gentleman," said she, promptly, "your evidence isn't worthanything, for you have expectations. And I am not to be flattered.  Iadmit that I am a selfish and comfort-loving woman; and I like to seepretty things around me, and an abundance of them; and if I can onlyhave these at the cost of being charged with ostentation and display,very well, I will pay the price.  If it comes to that, I never sawanything beautiful or desirable in poverty.  Poverty is not beautiful;never was, never is, never will be beautiful; it is base and squalid andsordid; it demeans men's minds, and stunts their bodies.  I dare saypoverty is an excellent disciplinefor the rich, if they would onlysubmit to a six mouths' dose of it now and again; but it is not adiscipline at all for the poor; it is a curse; it is the most cruel andbaleful thing in the world, destroying self-respect, destroying hope,ambition, everything.  Oh, I know the heresy I'm talking. There's MasterVin's papa: he is never done preaching the divine attributes of poverty;and I have no doubt there are a good many others who would be content tofall down and worship la bonne desse de la pauvreton 30,000 ayear!"Master Vin sniggered: he was aware that this was not the only directionin which the principles of the philosopher of Grosvenor Place weresomewhat inconsistent with his practice.  However, it was old GeorgeBethune who now spokeas one having experience."I quite agree," said he to Mrs. Ellison.  "I can conceive of nothingmore demoralising to the nature of man or woman than harsh and hopelesspoverty, a slavery from which there is no prospect of escape. Mygranddaughter and I have known what it is to be poor; we know it now;but in our case every day brings possibilitieswe breathe a wider air,knowing that at any moment news may come.  Then fancy plays her part;and imagination can brighten the next day for us, if the present be darkenough. Hopeless povertythat is the terrible thing; the weary toilleading to nothing; perhaps the unfortunate wretch sinking deeper anddeeper into the Slough of Despond.  Maisrie and I have met with trials;but we have borne them with a stout heart; and perhaps we have beencheeredat least I know I have beenby some distant prospect of theBonnie Mill-dams o' Balloray, and a happier future for us both.""Balloray?" she repeated, inquiringly."Balloray, in Fife.  Perhaps you have never heard of the Balloraylaw-suit, and I will not inflict any history of it upon you at present,"he continued, with lofty complaisance.  "I was merely saying thatpoverty is not so hard to bear when there are brighter possibilitiesalways before you.  If, in our case, we are barred in law by the Statuteof Limitations, there is no Statute of Limitations in the chapter ofaccidents.  And some remarkable instances have occurred.  I remember onein which a father, two sons, and a daughter were all drowned at once bythe sinking of a ship, and the property went bodily over to the youngerbranch of the family, who had been penniless for years.  It is theunexpected that happens, according to the saying; and so we move fromday to day towards fresh possibilities; and who can tell what morningmay not bring us a summons to make straight for the Kingdom of Fife?Not for myself do I care; I am too old now; it is for my granddaughterhere; and I should pass happily away and contented if I could leave herin sole and undisputed possession of the ancient lands of the Bethunesof Balloray."What pang was this that shot through Vincent's heart?  He suddenly sawMaisrie removed from hima great heiressunapproachableguarded by thisold man with his unconquerable pride of lineage and birth.  She mightnot forget old friends; but he?  The Harris family had plenty ofmoney; but they had nothing to add to the fesse between three mascles,or, and the otter's head; nor had any of their ancestors, so far aswas known, accompanied Margaret of Scotland on her marriage with theDauphin of France, or taken arms along with the great Maximilien deBethune, duc de Sully.  In imagination the young man saw himself alonely pedestrian in Fifeshire, regarding from a distance a vastbaronial building set amid black Scotch firs and lighter larches, andnot daring even to draw near the great gate with the otter's head instone over the archway.  He saw the horses being brought round to thefront entrancea beautiful white Arab and a sturdy cob: the hall dooropensthe heiress of Balloray descends the wide stone stepsshe isassisted to mount, and pats that beautiful white creature on the neck.And will she presently come cantering byher long hair flowing to thewinds, as fair as it used to be in the olden days when the shiftinglights and mists of Hyde Park gave it ever-varying hues?  Can he stealaside somewhere?he has no desire to claim recognition!  She hasforgotten the time when, in the humble lodgings she used to sing "Je nepuis rien donner, qu' mon coeur en mariage"; she has wide domains now;and wears an ancient historic name. And so she goes along the whitehighway, and under the swaying boughs of the beeches, until she is lostin a confusion of green and gold..."And in the meantime," said Mrs. Ellison (Vincent started: had thatbewildering and far-reaching vision been revealed to him all in onebrief, breathless second?) "in the meantime, Mr. Bethune, you mustderive a great deal of comfort and solace from your literary labours.""My literary labours," said the old man, slowly and absently, "I amsorry to say, are mostly perfunctory and mechanical.  They occupyattention and pass the time, however; and that is much. Perhaps I havewritten one or two small things which may survive me for a year or two;but if that should be so, it will be owing, not to any merit of theirown, but to the patriotism of my countrymen. Nay, I have much to bethankful for,", he continued, in the same resigned fashion.  "I havebeen spared much.  If I had been a famous author in my younger days, Ishould now be reading the things I had written then with the knowledgethat I was their only reader.  I should be thinking of my contemporariesand saying 'At one time people spoke of me as now they are speaking ofyou.'  It is a kind of sad thing for a man to outlive his fame; for thepublic is a fickle-minded creature, and must have new distractions; butnow I cannot complain of being forgotten, for I never did anythingdeserving of being remembered.""Grandfather," said Maisrie, "surely it is unfair of you to talk likethat!  Think of the many friends you have made through your writings.""Scotch friends, Maisrie, Scotch friends," he said. "I admit that.  TheScotch are not among the forgetful ones of the earth.  If you want to bemade much of," he said, turning to Mrs. Ellison, "if you want to beregarded with a constant affection and gratitude, and to have yourwritings remembered and repeated, by the lasses at the kirn, by theploughman in the field, by gentle and simple alike, then you mustcontrive to be born in Scotland. The Scottish heart beats warm, and isconstant.  If there is a bit of heather or a blue-bell placed on mygrave, it will be by the hand of a kindly Scot."Dinner over, they went out and sate in the cool twilight and had coffee,while the steward was clearing away within.  Mrs. Ellison, faithful toher promise to Lord Musselburgh, said she had not long to stay; but hernephew, having a certain scheme in his mind, would not let her go justyet; and by and bye, when the saloon had been lit up, he asked her, in acasual kind of fashion, whether before she went she would not like tohear Miss Bethune sing something."Oh, I should like it of all things!" she replied instantly, with areckless disregard of truth.Maisrie glanced at her grandfather."Yes, certainlywhy not?" said he."Then," said their young host, "I propose we go in to the saloon again;it will be quieter."  For there was still a plash of oars on the river,and an echoing call of voices in the meadows beyond.When they had returned into the saloon, Maisrie took up her violin; andMrs. Ellison bravely endeavoured to assume an air of interestedexpectancy.  The fact was she disliked the whole proceeding; here wouldbe some mere exhibition of a schoolgirl's showy accomplishments; shewould have to say nice things; and she hated telling lieswhen nothingwas to be gained.  Maisrie made some little apology; but said thatperhaps Mrs. Ellison had not heard the Claire Fontaine, which is afavourite song of the Canadians.  Then she drew her bow across thestrings.Vincent need not have been so anxious.  Hardly had Maisrie begun with"A la claire fontaine,M'en allant promener"than Mrs. Ellison's air of forced attention instantly vanished; sheseemed surprised; she listened in a wondering kind of way to the low,clear tones of the girl's voice that were so curiously sincere andpenetrating and simple.  Not a schoolgirl's showing off, this; but akind of speech, that reached the heart."Sur la plus haute brancheLe rossignol chantait.Chante, rossignol, chante,Toi qui as le coeur gai.Lui ya longtemps que je t'aime,Jamais je ne t'oublierai."Did she notice the soft dwelling on the r's, Vincent asked himself;and had she ever heard anything so strangely fascinating?  Then thesimple pathos of the storyif there was any story"Chante, rossignol, chante,Toi qui as le coeur gai;Tu as le coeur  rire,Moi je l'ai-t- pleurer.Tu as le coeur  rire,Moi j'e l'ai-t- pleurer:J'ai perdu ma matresseSans l'avoir mrit.Lui ya longtemps que je t'aime,Jamais je ne l'oublierai.""That is enough," said Maisrie, with a smile, and she laid the violin inher lap.  "It is too long. You never hear it sung altogether inCanadaonly a verse here and thereor perhaps merely the refrain""But is there more?oh, please sing the rest of itit is delightfulsoquaint, and simple, and charming!" Mrs. Ellison exclaimed; and MasterVin was a proud and glad young man; he knew that Maisrie had all unaidedstruck home.The girl took up her violin again, and resumed:"J'ai perdu ma matresseSans l'avoir mrit.Pour un bouquet de rosesQue je lui refusai.Pour un bouquet de rosesQue je lui refusai.Je voudrais que la roseFt encore au rosier.Je voudrais que la roseFt encore au rosier,Et moi et ma matresseDans les mem's amitis.Lui ya longtemps que je t'aime,Jamais je ne t'oublierai!"Well, when the singing, if it could be called singing, was over, Mrs.Ellison made the usual little compliments, which nobody minded one wayor the other.  But presently she had to leave; and while she was beingrowed up the river by her nephew she was silent.  When they reached theVilleggiatura (the people were all outside, amid the confused light ofthe lanterns in the dusk) she said to him, in a low voice, as she badehim good-bye"Vin, let me whisper something to youa confession.  Claire Fontainehas done for me.  That girl is a good girl.  She is all right, any way."CHAPTER VIII.AN ALARM.On a certain still, clear, moonlight night a dog-cart containing twoyoung men was being driven away from the little town of Mendover, outinto the wide, white, silent country.  The driver was Lord Musselburgh,and he seemed in high spirits, talking to his companion almostcontinuously, while he kept the stout little cob going at a rattlingpace."I am more pleased than I can tell you," he was saying.  "Quite atriumph!  Why, you took to it as a duck takes to water.  Of coursethere's something in having a responsive audience; and you can alwaysget a noble band of patriots to cheer your proposal for a progressiveincome-tax when not one in ten of them has any income-tax to pay. I'mafraid they weren't quite so enthusiastic about your scheme ofcompulsory insurance; indeed they seemed a little disappointed andoffended; the Champion of the Proletariat was playing it a little lowdown on them; but a heavily increasing income-taxoh, yes, that wassplendid!they saw the Rothschilds caught at last, and had visions of aland in which there shall be no more poor-rates or police-rates, perhapsnot even water-rates or gas-rates.  But it was your confounded coolnessthat surprised meno beating about the bushwalking straight into itandwithout preparation, too""I knew what I had to say," Vincent interposed, with a becoming modesty,"and it seemed simple enough to say it.""Yes, and so it iswhen you have acquired the knack of forgettingyourself," said the young nobleman, oracularly.  "And that appears tohave come naturally to you, my boy.  However, this is why I am soparticularly pleased with your successful first appearance," LordMusselburgh proceeded, as the dog-cart went bowling along the silent,white highway, between the black hedges.  "I am about to unfold to you agreat idea, Vinperhaps prematurely, but you will be discreet.  Theproject is mine; but I want help to carry it through; you and I mustwork together; and years and years hence we shill be recognised as theGreat Twin Brethren, who saved the falling fortunes of England."Was he in jest or earnest?  Vincent, knowing his friend's sub-cynicalhabit of speech, listened without interposing a word."We shall earn for ourselves a deathless renown, at very little costtous; it's the other people who will have to pay, and we shall have allthe glory. Now what I propose is briefly this: I propose to give allthose good folk who profess a warm regard for their native country achance of showing what their patriotism is worth.  I don't want them tofight; there isn't any fighting going on at present to speak of; and inany case the rich old merchants, and maiden ladies, and portly bishops,and ponderous judgeswell, they'd make an awkward squad to drill; but Imean to give them an opportunity of testifying to their affection forthe land of their birth; and you, my blazing young Tory-Democrat, if youcan speak as freely as you spoke to-night, you must carry the fierytorch north, south, east, and westtill you've secured Westminster Abbeyfor both of us, or at least a tablet in St. Paul's.  Then look what asubject for your eloquence you havethe guarding of England from anypossible combination of her foesthe island-citadel madeimpregnable'compass'd by the inviolate sea'defence not defianceyouunderstand the kind of thing.  But really, Vin, you know, there is goingto be an awful stramash, as my old nurse used to say, in Europe beforethe century is out; and England's safety will lie in her being strongenough to remain aloof.  And how?  Why, by trebling her present navy.""Trebling her present navy!" Vincent repeated, in a vague sort of way."Yes," Musselburgh went on, coolly.  "And it can easily be done, withoutinvolving a single farthing of taxation.  I want the people of thiscountry to show what they can do voluntarily; I want them to make atremendous effort to render Great Britain secure from attack for acentury at least; and the manner of doing it is to form a NationalPatriotic Fund, to which everybody, man and woman, merchant andapprentice, millionaire and club-waiter, can subscribe, according totheir means and the genuineness of their patriotism. Here is a chancefor everybody; here is a test of all those professions of love ofcountry.  Why, it would become a point of honour, with the very meanest,if the nation were thoroughly aroused, and if a splendid example wereset in high places. The Queen, nowwho is more directly interested inthe safety of the country than she is?why should she not head the listwith 100,000?  I would call the fund the Queen's Fund; and I should notwonder if we were to get two or three maniacsvery usefulmaniacspatriots they would have been called in other daysto cut theirpossessions in half, and hand the one half bodily over to Her Majesty:that would be something like an example!""But is it all a wild speculation, Musselburgh?" asked Vincent, who waspuzzled.  "Or do you mean it seriously?""Ha and hum," said the young peer, significantly. "That depends.  Ishould want to sound some of the dukes about it.  And first of all Imust have some sort of scheme ready, to get rid of obvious objections.They might say 'Oh, you want to treble the Navy?  Then in twenty yearsyou'll find yourself with a crowd of obsolete ships, and all your moneygone.'  That is not what I mean at all.  I mean the formation of animmense voluntary national fund, which will keep the Navy at double ortreble its present strength, not by a sudden multiplication of ships,but by gradually adding vessels of the newest construction, asimprovements are invented.  An immense fund, doubtless; for of coursethere would be maintenance; but what couldn't a rich country likeEngland do if she chose?  And that's what I'm coming to, with regard toyou, my young Demosthenes.  It would be infinitely betterit would besaferit would be building on securer foundationsif the demand for sucha movement came from the country itself.  If the Queen, and the dukes,and the millionaires were to subscribe as if in answer to an appeal fromthe people, the enthusiasm would be tremendous; it would be such a thingas never happened before in the history of England: talk about nobleladies flinging their jewels into the public treasury?why, everyschool-girl would bring out her hoarded pocket-money, with her lipswhite with patriotic fervour.  England can subscribe on all possibleoccasions for the benefit of other countries: for once let her subscribeon her own behalf!"  Lord Musselburgh went on, though it might have beenhard to say what half-mocking bravado intermingled with his apparententhusiasm.  "And that's where you would come in.  You would be theemissary, the apostle, the bearer of the fiery torch.  You've done verywell with the grocers' assistants of Mendover; but fancy having to wakeup England, Canada, Australia, and the Cape to the necessity for makingthe Mother Country once for all invulnerable, in the interests of peaceand universal freedom.  Why, I could become eloquent about it myself.They cheered your graduated income-tax; but what would they say to this?Fancy what could be done if every man in this country were to pledgehimself to give a year's income!  We don't ask him to go out and havehis legs or his arms amputated, or his head shot off; we only ask for ayear's incometo secure peace and prosperity for himself and hischildren and his children's children. If there is any patriotism in thecountry at all, who would say no?  And then when there is an iron beltround England, and when there is a floating mass of iron that could besent at any moment to form a wall round any of her dependencies, then, Isuppose, there might be a splendid assemblage in Westminster Hall; andyou and Ias the instigators of this great national movementbut myimagination stops short: I don't know what they will make of us."He himself had to stop short, for he was passing through a wide gatewayinto the grounds surrounding the Bungalow, and the carriage-drive wasalmost invisible under the overshadowing trees. Presently they had drawnup in front of the long, low, rambling house; and here were lit windows,and an open door, and servants.  The two young men descended, andentered, and went into the billiard-room, where cigars and soda-waterand similar things had been set out in readiness for them; and here LordMusselburgh, lying back in a cane-bottomed chair, proceeded to talk in aless random fashion about this project of his, until he had almostpersuaded his companion that there was something reasonable andpracticable in it, if only it could be properly initiated."Anyhow," said he to his guest, as they were both retiring for thenight, "it is some big movement like that, Vin, my lad, that you want toget identified with, if your aim is to make a position in English publiclife.  You have advantages.  You can speak well.  You will have plentyof money. You are beginning with the proletariatthat is laying afoundation of popularity.  You have youth and heaps of strength on yourside.  Then  is known to be your friend.  What more?"What more, indeed?  The future seemed to smile on this young man; and ifhis dreams, waking or sleeping, had been of great achievements andpublic triumphs, who could have wondered?  But curiously enough, just atthis time, the forecasts that came to him in moments of quiet were aptto be sombre. He dreaded he hardly knew what.  And these vagueforebodings of the day took a more definite shape in the far-reachingvisions of the night; for again and again there recurred to him thatphantasmal picture that had suddenly startled him when old GeorgeBethune was talking of the possibilities that might be lying in storefor his granddaughter.  Vin Harris had never seen Balloraydid not knowwhere it was, in fact; but night after night he beheld with a strangedistinctness the big baronial building, and the black firs, and the gatewith the otter's head in stone. Had that been all!  But as regularlythere came forth the tall young girl with the long-flowing hair; and hewas a poor wanderer, cowering away from recognition; and again she wouldride by, along the white road, until she was lost in the dappled sun andshadow under the beeches.  Then there was a song somewhereperhaps itwas the trembling leaves that whispered the refrainbut it was all aboutseparation, and loneliness, and the sadness of remembrance and of loss.Chante, rossignol, chante, toi qui as le coeur gaithis was what heheard, or seemed to hear, away in that distant land, where he had beenleft alone ... J'ai perdu ma matresse, sans l'avoir mrit ... It wasstrange that no birds sang in these woods, that no lark hung quiveringin those skies: all was silencesave for that continuous murmur offarewell.... Lui ya longtemps que je t'aime, jamais je ne t'oublierai.And sometimes the murmur rose into a larger monotone; the big greybuilding, and the black firs, and the highway, and the beeches,disappeared; and behold in their stead was a great breadth of sea,desolate, and rain-swept, and void of all sign of life.  And was thisthe barrier now between him and her?  Not merely that she was theheiress of Balloray, under the guardianship of her implacably proud oldgrandfather, but that she was away in some far land, beyond thosenever-ending myriad voices of the deep? ... Pour un bouquet de roses,que je lui refusai ... What wrong had he done her? What had he deniedher, in the time when they were as boy and girl togetherwhen there wasno thought of her being the heiress of Balloraywhen she used to walkdown through Hyde Park, in her simple dress, and sit on the bench, whileher grandfather read his newspaper?  Then the grey dawn would come; andhe would awake to the knowledge that he had been tortured by merephantasies; and yet these left something in his mind, even during theactual and practical daylight hours.  He begun to wish that there wassome bondof what nature he had not determinedfor it was all a vaguelonging and wistful desirea bond that could so bind Maisrie and himtogether that that great width of sea should not intervene. For it was asorrowful kind of thingeven when the white hours of the daylight toldhim he had only seen it in a dream.But apart from all these dim anxieties and this haunting unrest, camethe strictly matter-of-fact consideration that within an appreciabletime old George Bethune and his granddaughter would be returning to theUnited States.  That was no spectral ocean that would then lie betweenMaisrie and him, but three thousand miles of the Atlantic; and who couldtell when the two wanderers might ever see England again?  Nay, had nothe himself been implored to help in bringing about this separation?Maisrie had begged of him to urge upon her grandfather the necessity ofgetting the American book done first, before setting out on the poeticpilgrimage through Scotland which was to yield fruit of another kind;and, of course, if the old man consented, the first step to be taken wasa voyage to New York. Vincent had drawn many a fancy picture of a littlegroup of three, wandering away through the rich-hued autumn days, by"lone St. Mary's silent lake," or by the banks of the silver Tweed; butnow all that was to be sacrificed; and he himself was to do what hecould towards sending the old man back to America, and Maisrie with him.Then there would be no more of the long, quiet days of study, made happyby anticipations of the evening; no more of the pleasant little dinnersin this or that restaurant; no more of those wonderful twilights in thelittle parlour, with their enchantments of music and happy converse.London, with Maisrie Bethune three thousand miles away: that would be astrange thingthat he could even now hardly imagine to himself.Nay, it was a thing that he looked forward to with such an unreasoningdread and dismay that he began to construct all sorts of mad schemes fordefeating any such possibility; and at last he hit upon one that seemedmore or less practicable, while it would in the meantime virtuallyabsolve him from his promise to Maisrie.  On the morning after themeeting of the Mendover Liberal Association, the two young men werereturning to town by train; and Vincent said to his companion"You were telling me the other night of the Scotch newspaper-man whomyou got to know in New York: what did you say his name was?""Oh, you mean Hugh Anstruther?  I hope I spoke no ill of him; for anenthusiastic patriotism such as his is really something to admire inthese days.  A capital fellow, Hugh; until I fell across him in New YorkI did not know that I had one virtue transcending all the other virtues,and that was simply my being a brother Scot.""What did you say was the name of the paper that he edits?""The Western Scotsman.""And it was he who gave Mr. Bethune a letter of introduction to you?"But here Lord Musselburgh's manner instantly changed: he had beenanswering these questions in a careless way, looking out of the carriagewindow most of the time: now he turned to his companion, and regardedhim with some scrutiny."Why do you ask, Vin?" he said.  "Do you want to find out somethingfurther about the old man?"Vincent's forehead flushed; and his eyes gloomed dark."I do not," he made answer, in distinct tones.  "I thank goodness mynature is not so suspicious.  It seems to me extraordinary that twohuman beings who have done nothing in the world to deserve it should beregarded with a constant mistrust and doubt.  Why?  Do you suspecteverybody else in the same way?""Oh, don't say that I suspect them," Lord Musselburgh exclaimed atoncefor he was an exceedingly good-natured young man and had no wish tooffend. "I don't know them well enoughdon't know anything at all aboutthem, in fact.""You told me yourself that my aunt and you had been talking them over;and I gathered enough from what you said," was the younger man's retort."Mrs. Ellison is naturally anxious about anything that concerns yourfuture, Vinor seems likely to concern it," Musselburgh said.  "And youshould be the last to object.""But I do object," he said, stiffly.  "I object altogether to hercanvassing the character of any friends of mine; and to her putting herdoubts and suspicions and hints about them into any third person'simaginations.  Oh, yes, I could make out quite clearly what she had beensaying.  That night at Henley she came on a visit of inspection; it wasperfectly obvious.  And what is more, she came with the hope of havingher suspicions confirmed; and I suppose she was horribly disappointedthat Maisrie Bethune did not drop her h's, and that Mr. Bethune didnot beg the loan of a sovereign from her!""Why so passionate, Vinwhy so indignant?" his companion put in,glancing at him curiously."Because I say it is a shamea monstrous shame," the young man said,with flaming eyes, "that anyone should be insulted so!  Is it theirfault that they have no friends, that they are unknown, that they arepoor?  To be wealthy is to be virtuous, of course; if you have a longbalance at your bankers', you are above suspicion then; if you havehouse-boats, and four-in-hands, and gold plate, you're all right.  Isuppose," said he, altering his tone, "that it was on that veryeveningthe evening of her inspectionthat my aunt was kind enough totalk over those two friends of mine with you, and tell you of all theportentous things she suspected of them.  But I presume she did notrepeat to you the very last words she used to me as she saidgood-night?""About what?""About Miss Bethune," said Vincentthough it cost him an indescribableeffort to pronounce her name."Well, I believe she did," Lord Musselburgh admitted.  "For she had justcome away from hearing Miss Bethune sing some Canadian song or another;and she was very much struck; and she said she had confessed as much toyou.  Oh, more than thatI don't precisely remember the words. Butreally, Vin, when you come to think of it, you must acknowledge thatthere is not much guidance as to character, or antecedents, or any thingelse, in the mere singing of a song.  Mrs. Ellison, who is always posingas a callous woman of the world, is really very sympathetic andgenerous, and warm-hearted; and she was quite taken captive by the charmand simplicity of this Claire Fontaineis that the name of it?but atthe same time I should not place too great a value""I quite agree with you," the younger man said, interrupting withoutapology.  "I place no more value on my aunt's acquittal and commendationthan on her previous suspicions.  Andandif you don't mind,Musselburgh, I would rather not have the question discussed further, norMiss Bethune's name mentioned in any way whatsoever.""Oh, but remember I said nothing against her," Lord Musselburgh finallyadded, in perfect good humour.  "How could I?  I hope your new friendsare all you think them; and as for the young lady, it is difficult tobelieve any harm of so refined and sweet a face.  But I hope you won'tconcern yourself too much with them, Vin; you have other, and perhapsmore serious, interests in life; and it seems to me that everythingpromises well for you.  Why, at this moment, man, don't you know whatought to be occupying all your attention?""What?" his companion askedperhaps glad enough to get away from thatdelicate topic."At least I know what I should be thinking of if I were in your shoes.I should be wondering how much space the editor of the Mendover WeeklyGuardian was going to give me on Saturday morning next."It was another editor whom Vincent had in his mind at that moment.  Assoon as he got back to London he wrote and despatched the followingletter, which was addressed to "Hugh Anstruther, Esq., WesternScotsman Office, New York, U.S.A.""DEAR SIR,"I hope you will be so kind as to consider the contents of this note asstrictly private and confidential.  In a recent conversation with LordMusselburgh he informed me that it was you who had given a letter ofintroduction to him to Mr. George Bethune; and from Mr. Bethune himselfI learn that he, Mr. Bethune, is about to bring out a volume on theScottish poets in America, as soon as he can conveniently get thematerials together.  But to this end it would appear that he mustrevisit the United States and Canada, to obtain particulars of the livesof the various poets and verse-writers, and perhaps, also, examples oftheir work.  Now I wish to ask you, as a friend of Mr. Bethune's,whether all this fatigue and travel might not be spared him, supposingthere were some person or persons in this country willing to defray thecost of having those materials collected for him.  To speak plainly, doyou, sir, know of any writer, connected with the press or otherwise, whowould undertake, for a sufficient consideration, to bring togetherbiographical memoranda of the authors in question, along with specimensof their work, which could be sent over here to Mr. Bethune, for him toput into shape and issue in book-form? Mr. Bethune, as you know, is anold man, who must surely have had enough of travelling; moreover he hasin mind a leisurely ramble through Scotland which, while also leading toliterary results, would involve much less fatigue than a voyage to theUnited States and Canada.  I should be greatly obliged if you would tellme whether you consider it practicable to collect those materials bydeputy; also, if you know of anyone capable of undertaking the task; andwhat remuneration he would probably require.  I beg you to forgive me, astranger, for thus appealing to you; but I know you will not grudge alittle trouble for the sake of a friend and a fellow Scotchman."Yours faithfully and obediently,"VINCENT HARRIS."After sending off that letter the young man's spirits lightenedconsiderably; he saw there was still a chance that Maisrie Bethune, hergrandfather, and himself might together set out on that covetedperambulation of the legend-haunted districts of the North.  And now heand they had returned to their ordinary mode of lifewhich perhapspleased him better than the ostentatious festivities of Henley.  Herewas no staring crowd, here were no suspicious friends, to break in upontheir close and constant companionship.  He rejoiced in this isolation;he wished for no fourth person at the quiet little dinners in therestaurants; he had no desire that anyone should share the privacy ofthe hushed small parlour where old George Bethune loftily discoursed ofpoetry and philosophy, of ancient customs and modern manners, and whereMaisrie played pathetic Scotch airs on the violin, or sang in her lowclear voice of le pont d'Avignon or perhaps of Marianson, damejolie.  Moreover, he could not fail to perceive, and that with anever-increasing delight, that her old expression of sad and wistfulresignation was gradually being banished from her eyes; and not onlythat, but a quite fresh colour was come into her cheeks, so that thepale sun-tinge was less perceptible.  Perhaps it was the companionshipof one nearer to her own age that had made a difference in her life; atall events much of her former shyness was gone; she met his lookfrankly, sometimes with a touch of gratitude, sometimes with simplegladness, as if his mere presence was something that pleased her.  Whenshe was watering the flowers in the little balcony, and caught sight ofhim over the way, she nodded and smiled: he wondered whether it was thatfaint-sun-tinge of the complexion that made her teeth seem so clearlywhite.  He began to forget those dreams of a wide intervening sea: thispresent existence was so peaceable, and contented, and happy.  And inspite of Maisrie's injunction, those dreams of Scotland would recur: hesaw three newly-arrived strangers walking along Princes Street,Edinburgh, in the silver glare of the morning; and the middle one of thethreelooking away up to the dusky shadows of the Castle rockwas noother than Maisrie Bethune herself, with light and gladness shining inher eyes.And what had old George Bethune to say to this constant association andthis fast friendship between the two young people?  Well, old GeorgeBethune had an admirable capacity for enjoying the present moment; andso long as the dinner was fairly cooked and the claret to his taste, solong as he had a small and faithful audience to listen to his rhapsodiesabout Scottish song and Scottish heroism, and so long as Maisrie'sviolin was in tune and her hand as sensitive as ever on the tremblingstrings, he did not seem to pay much heed to the future. Perhaps it wasbut natural that one who had wandered so far and wide should welcome alittle peace at last; and perhaps he intentionally blinded his eyes; atall events the young people were allowed the utmost freedom ofcompanionshipit was as if these three formed but one family.One night, as Vincent was about to leave, the old gentleman said to him"About to-morrow evening: I presume we dine at Mentavisti's?""Oh, yes, certainly: we've tried a good many places, and we can't dobetter than Mentavisti's," the young man answeredas if it mattered onebrass farthing to him what sort of dinner there was, or where he got it,so long as Maisrie was at the same table!"Ah, very well.  For this is how I am situated," said Mr. Bethune,gravely and grandly as befitted the seriousness of the theme.  "I havean appointment in Jermyn-street at six o'clock.  I may be detained.  NowI can undertake to be at Mentavisti's Restaurant at sevenand when thedinner-hour is once fixed, to play shilly-shally with it seems to meabominablebut I am not so sure that I shall have time to return homefirst.  It will be better, therefore, and everyway safer, for Maisrie tocome down by herself in a cab""But mayn't I call for her?" the young man suggested at once.  "You knowshe would much rather walk down than drive.""Oh, very well, very well, if you don't mind," said Mr. Bethune, with alofty condescensionor indifference; while Maisrie, instead of being inthe least confused by this proposal, looked up with perfectly frank andpleased eyes, apparently giving him a little message of thanks.Nor was she in the least embarrassed on the following evening, when hewas ushered upstairs by the landlady's daughter.  Maisrie was alone inthe little parlour, ready-dressed except as regarded her gloves, and shewas putting a final touch to the few flowers with which she had adornedthe table."Good evening," said she, quite placidly.  "I will be with you in amoment, as soon as I have dried my fingers."She disappeared for a second, and returned. He hesitated beforeaccompanying her to the door."Won't you give me one of those flowers?" said he, rather breathlessly.She seemed a little surprised."Now that I think of it," she said, "I have never seen you wear a flowerin your coat, as other gentlemen do.  And I'm afraid there isn't onehere nearly fine enough""If you were to give me a flower, I should not destroy it by wearing itin my coat!" said he."Oh, merely a flower?" she asked.  She went to the table.  "Will thisone do?"It was a white geranium that she handed him, simply enough: he took outhis pocket-book, and carefully placed it between the leaves.  For thebriefest instant she regarded him as if in wonder that he should seek topreserve so worthless a trifle; but she made no remark; and thenunconcernedly and cheerfully she led the way downstairs, and togetherthey passed out into the open street.It was a marvellous and bewildering thing to think that he should be insole and complete charge of her, here in the midst of the great and busyworld of London.  Did these hurrying people guess at his proud elation,his new-found sense of guardianship and responsibility, his anxiety thatall things should be pleasant to her; or had they hardly time even tonotice this beautiful young creature, her step light as a fawn, freshcolour in her fair cheeks, happiness radiant in her eyes? Perhaps theyheeded her and the tall and handsome youth by her side as little as sheheeded them; for indeed she seemed to be entirely engrossed in hercompanion, talking, smiling, replying to him without a shadow ofself-consciousness or restraint.  To him this new relationship was anamazing kind of thing: she did not seem even to perceive it.  To him itwas an epoch in his life, to be for ever remembered: to herwell, nearlyevery evening she walked out in similar fashion with her grandfather,and she did not appear to notice any difference: at least she showed nosign.But all at once Maisrie altered her manner; and that was when he in thelightness of his heart informed her that there was still a chance oftheir setting out on that long contemplated pilgrimage to the variouspoetic shrines of Scotland."Mr. Harris," she said, proudly, "you made me a promise""Yes, I know I did," he said; "but things have changed, and I'm going toexplain to you; and I think you'll find everything satisfactory.  Butfirst of all, before I begin, I wish you wouldn't call me 'Mr. Harris.'It sounds detestable.  You who are so natural and straightforward in allyour wayswhy don't you call me Vincent?""Don't you think that Mr. Vincent might be a fair compromise?" she askedgently, and with her eyes lowered."I've called you Maisrie once or twice, by accident, and you didn't seemto mind," he pointed out."I am sure I did not notice," she made answer at once.  "How should I?I am used to nothing else.""Then I am to be allowed to call you Maisrie?" said he, clutchingeagerly at this new-found privilege.  "And you will call me Vincentwhenyou find Mr. Vincent become too formal: is it a compact?""Yes, it isMr. Vincentif you like," said she, with a smile.  "But whydo you make it so very serious?""Because," said he, gravely, "when any solemn bargain is completed,people shake hands to make it secure.""Not in the middle of Oxford-street?" she said."We will postpone the ceremony, if you prefer it; and now I will beginand tell you how it is still possible we may have that long ramblethrough Scotland together.  You were anxious that before anything of thekind were attempted, your grandfather should go back to the UnitedStates to get materials for his book on the Scottish poets in America.Well, now, it seems a pity to make such a long voyage if it can be donewithout; and so I have taken the liberty of sending over to New York tosee if there isn't some handy young fellow theresome clerk orreporterwho would undertake to collect all the necessary materials, andsend them over here for your grandfather to work up.  Then we could goto Scotland all the samethat is, if you will let me accompany you.""Someone to collect the materials and send them over?" she repeated; andthen she said: "But would that be fair, Mr. HarrisMr. Vincentwouldthat be honest?  Surely not!  The book would not be my grandfather'sbook at all; properly it would belong to the young man in New York.""I beg your pardon," said he, with decision.  "He only supplies thebricks; he does not build the house.  When a Chancellor of the Exchequerproduces his budget, of course he claims it as his own; but he has gothis facts from the heads of departments, and most likely his quotationshave been hunted out for him by his private secretary.  It would be yourgrandfather's book, solely and wholly.""But the cost?" she said, after a second.  "Supposing it werepracticable, the expense""Oh, never mind about that," said he, lightly. "It will be next tonothingyou needn't mind about that.  Our deputy in New York will findvery little difficulty in getting the memoranda that he wants.  There isno sort of unnecessary modesty about minor poets; they will be gladenough to give him specimens of their work, as soon as it is known whathe aims at.  And in Scotland," he continued (grown suddenly bold),"don't you see how it would work?  Your grandfather must have anoccasional morning to give to his MSS; then you and I could leave him inabsolute peace and quiet; and we might go away for a stroll up toArthur's Seat, or round the ramparts of the Castle, and return to him bylunch-time.  Wouldn't that be an excellent arrangement?""Yes, that would be very nice indeed," said she, with a pleasedexpression: she seemed to look forward to this close and constantcompanionship as the most natural thing in the world.And in fact so sanguine was the young man about the success of his newscheme that, when the three of them were seated at a small table inMentavisti's Restaurant, he ventured to hint to old George Bethune hisfond hope that he might be allowed to join in that prolonged excursionthrough Scotland; and the old man at once acquiesced."Yes, yes, why not?" he said; and then he went on, absently: "Yet mynerve is not what it was. Sometimes I hesitate.  It would grieve me morethan I can say if Maisrie here were to be disappointed.  It is a longtime since I was in the country; perhaps I remember only the beautifulthings; and it is only of these she has heard me talk.  When Sturrockthinks of the old home, the dappled hills shine for him: you remember,Maisrie?'Oh native land!  Oh cherished home,I've sailed across the sea,And, though my wandering footsteps roam,My heart still turns to thee!My thoughts and dreams are sweet and brightWith dew which love distils;While every gleam of golden lightFalls on the Scottish hills.'He forgets the mists and the rain and the darkened days.  And you,Maisrie, you have been brought up under fair blue skies; you have neverlearnt how sombre days and wild and driving clouds stir the imagination;perhaps, if you stood in the very street where the 'bonnie Earl o' Moraycame sounding through the town,' you would see only the wet pavementsand the dull windows; and you might turn to me and say 'Is this what youhave talked about to me, grandfather?'"  Then all of a sudden he seemedto throw off this despondent fit as by a violent effort.  "No, no!" saidhe, in quite a different tone.  "I will not believe but that there arestill yellow cornfields and silver lakes in bonnie Scotland, and thelark singing as high in the heavens as when Tannahill, or Hogg, orMotherwell paused to listen.  I will show you the red rowans hangingfrom the mountain crag, and the golden bracken down by the side of theburn; and if we go still further awayto the lonely islands of thewestern seasthen you must learn to forget the soft prettiness of thesunnier south, and to let the mysterious charm of isolation hold you,and the majesty of the darkened mountains, and the pathetic beauty ofthe wandering veils of rain.  I would sooner forget the mother that boreme," he said, with a proud ring in his voice, "than believe that bonnieScotland had lost her glamour and wonder and fascination.  And you wouldbe no holiday-tourist, Maisrie; you belong by blood to the 'land of wildweather'; and imagination is part of the dowry of youth.  No, no; I donot fear. II made a mistake when I said I was afraidI am not afraid ofyou, Maisrienot afraid of youyou have the fine sympathy, theintelligence, the quick imagination that I can trustI am not afraid ofyou, Maisrie""You need not be afraid, grandfather," the girl said, gentlyfor she sawthat he was somewhat disturbed.  "Why should you be afraid, grandfather?I shall be looking with your eyes."But the curious thing was that despite all this talking about theprojected pilgrimage, it never seemed to come any nearer.  No mention ofa date or even of any approximate time, was ever made. In like manner,their return to America, though the old gentleman spoke of it now andagain as a fixed and definite and necessary thing, kept recedingbackwards and backwards into a perfectly nebulous future.  The presentmoment was everything to old George Bethune, whether he was engaged witha roe-deer cutlet at a restaurant in Regent-street, or lighting his pipeand mixing his toddy on his return home, while he was descanting onBarbour, and Drummond, and Sir David Lindesay, or Ramsay, and Ferguson,and Burns.  People were beginning to leave town; Vincent had received,and declined, an invitation to join a big house-party in Argyllshire,notwithstanding that it was to the same house that Mrs. Ellison and LordMusselburgh were going; but old George Bethune and his granddaughterappeared to pay no heed to the changing times and seasons; their placid,uneventful life seemed quite enough for them.  And was it not enough forthis young man also, who had been admitted to be their constantassociate and friend? Why should he vex himself about literary schemesthat were none of his devising?  Day by day he waved a good-morning toMaisrie as she came to water her flowers, and an answer came from hersmiling eyes; sometimes he walked out into the parks in the afternoon,with her grandfather and herself, and ever he rejoiced to see that thefine peach-bloom on her cheek was surmounting the sun-tinge that hadbeen left there by travel; then in the evening they had all London tochoose from, as to where they should dine, with a quiet stroll homewardthereafter, to music, and dominoes, and careless talk.  What more?  Thegreat outer world might go on its way, and welcome.But Master Vin was about to be startled out of this dreamful ease.  Atlast there came an answer to the communication he had sent to the editorof the Western Scotsman, with many apologies for unavoidable delay: Mr.Anstruther, it appeared, had been in Canada, taking his annual holidayamong his kinsmen and countrymen there."I must say your letter has astonished me beyond measure," the writerwent on, "and I would fain believe that there is some great mistakesomewhere, which is capable of explanation.  It is quite true that whenI gave my venerable friend Mr. Bethune a note of introduction to LordMusselburgh, I was aware that he had in view various literaryprojectsin fact, his brain teems with them as if he were a young man offive-and-twentythe perfervidum ingenium Scotorum in his case hastaken hold of his imagination; but I cannot understand how he could haveincluded in these the publication of a volume on the Scottish poets inAmerica, for the simple reason that he must have known that such a workwas not only in progress here, but that it was near completion.  Why, Imyself showed Mr. Bethune proofs of the early sheets of this volume; forthe author is a particular friend of mine; and as it was being set up,he used to send me the sheets as they were printed; and Mr. Bethunebeing in the habit of calling at my office, I not only showed them tohim, but I fancy I let him take some of them away, that he might readthem at his leisure.  How he should now propose to bring out a similarworkand bespeak Lord Musselburgh's patronage for it, as I presume hedidpasses my comprehension, except on the ground that, being an oldman, he may have suffered from some temporary attack of mentalaberration and forgetfulness.  I would rather believe this than that aman whom I had taken for a thorough Scot, loyal and true to thebackbone, and proud of his country and of his own name and lineage,should be endeavouring to supplant another worker who is already inpossession of the field. However, no actual harm can be done; for thevolume I speak of is on the eve of publication, and no doubt it will beissued simultaneously in England.  That is all I have to say, on asubject which at present seems to me to have something of a painfulaspectthough I hope a satisfactory explanation may be forthcoming.  Inconclusion may I beg of you to keep this letter private?  The facts areas I have stated; but I would rather Mr. Bethune did not know you hadthem from me."Yours faithfully,"HUGH ANSTRUTHER."For some time Vincent sat with this letter in his hand, in a sort ofstupefaction.  Curiously enough his first question to himself wasWhatif Mrs. Ellison should get to know?would she not triumphantly declarethat her worst suspicions had been confirmed?  That was but a firstthought.  There must be some explanation!  He had not associated socontinually with George Bethunehe had not heard the old man's voicethrill with proud emotion as he spoke of Scotland's hills and daleshehad not seen his eyes fill with unbidden tears as he talked of hisgranddaughter and the loneliness that might be in store for herall fornothing: not at once could he be convinced that this old man was a merecharlatan, a thief, a begging-letter impostor.  But he had beenstartled; and when he reached his lodgings in that small thoroughfare,he hardly dared look across the way: he knew not what to think.CHAPTER I.DOUBTS AND DREAMS.And at first Vincent was for rebelliously thrusting aside and ignoringthis information that had reached him so unexpectedly.  Was he, on thestrength of a statement forwarded by an unknown correspondent in NewYork, to suspectnay, to condemn unheardthis proud and solitary old manwith whom he had all this while been on terms of such close and friendlyintimacy?  Had he not had ample opportunities of judging whether GeorgeBethune was the sort of person likely to have done this thing that wasnow charged against him?  He went over these past weeks and months.  Wasit any wonder that the old man's indomitable courage, his passionatelove of his native land, and the constant and assiduous care andaffection he bestowed on his granddaughter, should have aroused alikethe younger man's admiration and his gratitude? What if he talked withtoo lofty an air of birth and lineage, or allowed his enthusiasm aboutScotland and Scottish song to lead him into the realms of rodomontade:may not an old man have his harmless foibles?  Any one who had witnessedMaisrie's devotion to her grandfather, her gentle forbearance andconsideration, her skilful humouring of him, and her never-failing faithin him, must have got to know what kind of man was old George Bethune.And yet, when Vincent turned to the letter, it seemed terribly simple,and straightforward, and sincere.  There was no vindictiveness in it atall; rather there was a pained surprise on the part of the writer that aloyal Scotone, too, who had been admitted into that fraternity ofsong-writing exiles over the watershould have been guilty of such aflagrant breach of trust.  Then Lord Musselburgh's patronage, as theyoung man knew very well, had taken the form of a cheque; so that thecharge brought by the writer of this letter practically was that GeorgeBethune had obtained, and might even now be obtaining, money by fraudand false pretences.  It was a bewildering thingan impossible thingtothink of.  And now, as he strove to construct all sorts of explanatoryhypotheses, there seemed to stand in the background the visionary formof Mrs. Ellison; and her eyes were cold and inquiring.  How had she cometo suspect? It was not likely that she could be familiar with theScotch-American newspaper offices of the United States.No, he could make nothing of it; his perplexity only increased.  Allkinds of doubts, surmises, possible excuses went chasing each otherthrough his brain.  Perhaps it was only literary vanity that hadprompted the old man to steal this project when it was placed beforehim?  Or perhaps he thought he had a better right to it, from his wideknowledge of the subject?  Vincent knew little of the laws and bye-lawsof the literary world; perhaps this was but a bit of rivalry carried toofar; and in any case, supposing the old man had erred in his eagernessto claim this topic as his own, surely that did not prove him to be acharlatan all the way through, still less a professional impostor? Butthen his making use of this scheme to obtain moneyand that not onlyfrom Lord Musselburgh? Oh, well (the young man tried to convincehimself) there might not be so much harm in that.  No doubt he lookedforward to issuing the volume, and giving his patrons value in return.Old George Bethune, as he knew, was quite careless about pecuniarymatters: for example, if the bill for those little dinners at thevarious restaurants was paid by some one, that was enough; the oldgentleman made no further inquiries.  He was content to let his youngfriend settle these trivial details; and Master Vin was willing enough.In fact, the latter had devised a system by which the awkwardness ofcalling for the bill in Maisrie's presence was avoided; this systemworked admirably; and Mr. Bethune asked no questions.  Doubtless, if hehad remembered, or taken the trouble, he would have paid his shot likeanyone else.But amid all these conflicting speculations, there was one point onwhich the mind of this young man remained clear and unswerving; and thatwas that whatever might be the character or career of old GeorgeBethune, his principles or his practice, Maisrie was as far apart anddissociated from them as if worlds intervened.  If there had been anymalfeasance in this matter, she, at least, was no sharer in it.  And themore he pondered, the more anxious he became to know whether Maisrie hadany idea of the position in which her grandfather was placed.  How muchwould he be entitled to tell her, supposing she was in ignorance?  Andwhen could he hope for an opportunity?  And then again, failing anopportunity, how was he to go and spend the evening with those twofriends of his, pretending to be entirely engrossed by their littleamusements and occupations outdoors and in, while all the time there waslying in his pocket this letter, unanswered and perhaps unanswerable?Fortune favoured him.  Towards evening, a little before six o'clock, heheard a door shut on the other side of the street; and, lifting hishead, he perceived that it was Mr. Bethune who had just come out of thehouse, alone.  Here was a chance not to be missed.  Waiting for a coupleof minutes, to make sure that the coast was clear, he passed downstairs,crossed the little thoroughfare, and knocked.  The landlady told himthat Miss Bethune was upstairs, and upstairs he went.  The next moment avoice that he knew well invited him to enter, and therewithal the twoyoung people found themselves face to face."You are early," she said, with a little smile of welcome, as shestopped in her sewing."Yes," said he, and he added quite frankly, "I saw your father go out,and I wished to speak with you alone.  The fact is, Maisrie," hecontinued, taking a chair opposite her, "I have heard from Americato-day about that proposal I madeto get some one to collect materialsfor your grandfather's book; and the answer is rather a strange oneIdon't quite understandperhaps you can tell me something about it."  Hehesitated, and then went on: "Maisrie, I suppose it never occurred toyou thatthat some one else in America might be proposing to bring out asimilar book?"She looked up quickly, and with a certain apprehension in her eyes."Oh, yes, I knew.  My grandfather told me there had been talk of such athing.  What have you heard?"He stared at her."You knew?" said he.  "Then surely you might have told me!"There was something in his tonesome touch of reproachthat brought theblood to her face; and yet she answered calmly and without resentment"Did I not tell you?nor my grandfather? But perhaps neither of usthought it of much importance.  It was only some vague talk, as Iunderstood; for everyone must have known that no one was so familiarwith the subject as my grandfather, and that it would be foolish to tryto interfere with him.  At the same time I have always been anxious thathe should get on with the book, for various reasons; and if you haveheard anything that will induce him to begin at once, so much thebetter."It was clear that she was wholly in ignorance of the true state of thecase."No," said he, watching her the while.  "What I have heard will not havethat effect, but rather the reverse.  To tell you the plain truth, theAmerican or Scotch-American writer has finished his book, and it will beout almost directly."She sprang to her feet with an involuntary gesture, and stood still fora moment, her lips grown suddenly pale, and her eyes bewildered: andthen she turned away from him to hide her emotion, and walked to thewindow.  Instantly he followed her."Maisrie, what is the matter!" he exclaimed in astonishment, for hefound that tears had sprung to her eyes."Oh, it is a shameit is a shame," she said, in broken accents, and herhands were clenched, "to steal an old man's good name from him, and thatfor so small a thing!  What harm had he ever done them?  The book wassuch a small thingthey might have left it to himwhat can they gainfrom it""But Maisrie!""Oh, you don't understand, Vincent, you don't understand at all," shesaid, in a despairing sort of way, "how my grandfather will becompromised! He undertook to bring out the book; he got friends to helphim with money; and nownowwhat will they think?what can I say tothem?what can I do?  II must go to thembutbut what can I say?"Her tears were running afresh now; and at sight of them the young manthrew to the winds all his doubts and conjectures concerning GeorgeBethune's honesty.  That was not the question now."No, you shall not go to them!" said he, with indignant eyes.  "You?yougo to any onein that way?  No, you shall not.  I will go.  It is aquestion of money: I will pay them their money back.  Tell me who theyare, and the amounts; and they shall have every farthing of their moneyback, and at once: what can they ask for more?"For a second she regarded him with a swift glance of more thangratitude; but it was only to shake her head."No, how could I allow you to do that?  What explanation could you make?There must be some other wayoften I have wished that ray grandfatherwould let me try to earn somethingI am willing enoughand I am neversure of my grandfather, because he can believe things so easily."  Shehad grown calmer now; and over her face there had come the curious lookof resignation that he had noticed when first he saw her, and thatseemed so strange in a young girl.  "I might have expected this," shewent on, absently and sadly. "My grandfather can persuade himself ofanything: if he thinks a thing is done, that is enough.  I am sure Ihave urged him to get on with this booknot that I thought anybody couldbe so mean and cruel as to step in and forestall himbut that he mightget free from those obligations; but I suppose when he had once arrangedall the materials in his own mind he felt that the rest was easy enoughand that there was no hurry.  He takes things so lightlyand nowthehumiliationwell, I shall have to bear that""I say you shall not," he said, hotly.  "I claim the privilege of afriend, and you cannot refuse. Who are the people to whom yourgrandfather is indebted over this volume?" he demanded."For one, there is Lord Musselburgh," she said, but indifferently, as ifno hope lay that way.  "And there is Mr. Carmichael, who owns anEdinburgh paperthe Chronicle.""Very well," said he, promptly.  "What is to hinder my explaining tothem that circumstances have occurred to prevent Mr. Bethune bringingout the volume he had projected; and that he begs to return them themoney they had been good enough to advance?"She shook her head again and sighed."No.  It is very kind of you: You are always kind.  But I could notaccept it.  I must try some way myselfthough I am rather helpless: itis so difficult to get my grandfather to see things. I told you before:he lives in a world of imagination, and he can persuade himself thateverything is well, no matter how we are situated.  But it was shamefulof them," she said, with her indignation returning, and her lipsbecoming at once proud and tremulous, "to cheat an old man out of sopoor and small a thing!  Why, they all knew he was going to write thisbookall the writers themselvesthey were known to himselfpersonallyand glad enough they were to send him their verses.  Well,perhaps they are not to blame.  Perhaps they may have been told that hehad given up the ideathat is quite likely.  At all events, I don't envythe miserable creature who has gone and taken advantage of mygrandfather's absence"She could say no more just then, for there was a sound below of the doorbeing opened and shut; and the next minute they could hear old GeorgeBethune coming with his active step up the flight of stairs, while hesang aloud, in fine bravura fashion, "'Tis the march'tis the march'tisthe march of the Cameron men!"The little dinner in the restaurant that evening was altogether unlikethose that had preceded it. The simple and innocent gaietythe sense ofsnugness and good-comradeshipappeared to have fled, leaving behind it acertain awkwardness and restraint.  Vincent was entirely perplexed.  Thestory he had heard from America was in no way to be reconciled withMaisrie's interpretation of her grandfather's position; but it waspossible that the old man had concealed from her certain material facts;or perhaps had been able to blind himself to them.  But what troubledthe young man most of all was to notice that the old look of pensiveresignation had returned to Maisrie's face.  For a time a brighter lifehad shone there; the natural animation and colour of youth had appearedin her cheeks; and her eyes had laughter in them, and smiles, andkindness and gratitude; but all that had gone nowquite suddenly, as itseemedand there had come back that strange sadness, that look ofunresisting and hopeless acquiescence.  Alone of the little party ofthree George Bethune retained his usual equanimity; nay, on thisparticular evening he appeared to be in especial high spirits; and inhis careless and garrulous good-humour he took little heed of thesilence and constraint of the two younger folk.  They made all thebetter audience; and he could enforce and adorn his main argument withall the illustrations he could muster; he was allowed to have everythinghis own way.And perhaps Vincent, thinking of Maisrie, and her tears, and thehopelessness and solitariness of her position, may have been inclined toresent what he could not but regard as a callous and culpableindifference.  At all events, he took the first opportunity thatpresented itself of saying"I hope I am not the bearer of ill-news, Mr. Bethune; but I have justheard from New York that someone over there has taken up your subject,and that a volume on the Scotch poets in America is just about ready,and will be published immediately."Maisrie glanced timidly at her grandfather; but there was nothing tofear on his account; he was not one to quail."Oh, indeed, indeed," said he, with a lofty magnanimity.  "Well, I hopeit will be properly and satisfactorily done: I hope it will be done in away worthy of the subject.  Maisrie, pass the French mustard, if youplease.  A grand subject: for surely these natural and simpleexpressions of the human heart are as deeply interesting as the morefinished, the more literary, productions of the professional poet.  Asingle verse, rough and rugged as you likeand the living man standsrevealed. Ay, ay, so the book is coming out.  Well, I hope the publicwill be lenient; I hope the public will understand that these men arenot professional poets, who have studied and written in leisure alltheir lives; it is but a homely lilt they offer; but it is genuine; itis from the heartand it speaks to the heart""But, grandfather," said Maisrie, "you were to have written the book!""What matters it who compiles the pages?that is nothing at all; that isin a measure mechanical.  I am only anxious that it should be well done,with tact, and discretion, and modesty," he continuedand with suchobvious sincerity that Vincent was more than ever perplexed.  "For thesake of old Scotland I would willingly give my help for nothinga littleguidance here and therea few biographical factseven an amended line.But after all the men must speak for themselves; and well they willspeak, if the public will but remember that these verses have for themost part been thought of during the busy rush of a commercial life, andwritten down in a chance evening hour.  It will be a message across thesea, to show that Scotland's sons have not forgotten her. MacGregorCrerarDonald RamsayHugh AinslieEvan MacCollAndrew WanlessI wonderif they have got Wanless's address to the robin that was sent to himfrom Scotlandyou remember, Maisrie?'There's mair than you, my bonnie bird,Hae crossed the raging main,Wha mourn the blythe, the happy days,They'll never see again.Sweet bird, come sing a sang to me,Unmindfu' o' our ills;And let us think we're ance again'Mang our ain heather hills!'The book will be welcomed by many a proud heart, and with moist eyes,when it gets away up among the glens, to be read by the fireside andrepeated at the plough; and I think, Maisrie, when you and I take a walkalong Princes-street in Edinburgh we may see more than one or two copiesin the bookseller's windows.  Then I hope Blackwood will have afriendly word for it; and I am sure Mr. Carmichael will allow me to giveit a hearty greeting in the Weekly Chronicle.""But, grandfather," said Maisrie, almost piteously, "surely you forgetthat you undertook to bring out this book yourself!""Yes, yes," said he, with perfect good humour. "But 'the best laidschemes o' mice and men, gang aft agley.'  And I do not grudge to someother what might have been mineI mean the association of one's namewith such a band of true and loyal Scotchmen.  No; I do not grudge it;on the contrary I am prepared to give the volume the most generouswelcome in my power; it is not for a brother Scot to find fault in sucha case, or to be niggard of his praise.  I hope we are capable ofshowing to the world that 'we're a' John Thampson's bairns.'"Maisrie was growing desperate.  Her grandfather would not understand;and how was she to speak plainwith Vincent listening to every word?And yet she knew that now he was aware of all the circumstances;concealment was impossible; and so she forced herself to utterance."Grandfather," said sheand her face was flushed a rose-red, though sheseemed to take no heed of her embarrassment, so earnest and imploringwas her speech, "You cannot forget the obligations you put yourselfunderto Lord Musselburgh and Mr. Carmichael, and perhaps others.  Youundertook to write the book.  If that is impossible now, it is a greatmisfortune; but at least there is one thing you must do; you mustexplain to them what has happened, and give them back the money."The old man could no longer shelter himself behind his gay anddiscursive optimism; he frowned impatiently."I have already told you, Maisrie," said he, in severely measuredaccents, "and you are grown up now, you might understand foryourselfthat there are times and seasons when the introduction ofbusiness matters is uncalled for, and, in fact, unbecoming; and one ofthese is, surely, when we come out to spend a pleasant evening with ouryoung friend here.  I do not think it necessary that we should discussour business affairs before himI presume he would consider such a thingsomewhat inappropriate at a dinner-table."Maisrie's lips quivered; and her grandfather saw it.  Instantly hechanged his tone."Come, come," said he, with a cheerful good nature.  "Enough, enough.  Ican quite comprehend how the res angusta domi may tend to give money,and questions of money, an over-prominence in the minds of women.  Butmoney, and the obligations that money may place us under, are surely avery secondary affair, to one who looks at human nature with a largerview.  I thank God," he went on, with much complacency, "that I havenever been the slave of avarice, that even in times of great necessity Ihave kept subsidiary things in their proper sphere.  I do not boast; ourdisposition is as much a matter of inheritance as the shape of ourfingers or feet; and that disposition may be handed down without theaccompanying circumstances that developed it.  You follow me, Mr.Harris?""Oh, yes," said the younger man, gloomily; that quiver of Maisrie's lipswas still in his mind.For the first time since he had known them Vincent was glad to get awayfrom his companions that night: the situation in which he found them andhimself alike involved was altogether so strange that he wanted time tothink over it.  And first of all he put aside that matter of theScotch-American book as of minor importance: no doubt some kind ofexplanation was possible, if all the facts were revealed.  It was whenhe came to consider the position and surroundings of Maisrie Bethunethat the young man grew far more seriously concerned; indeed, his heartbecame surcharged with an immeasurable pity and longing to help.  Hebegan to understand how it was that a premature sadness and resignationwas written on that beautiful face, and why her eyes so rarely smiled;and he could guess at the origin of that look of hopelessness, as thoughshe despaired of getting her grandfather to acknowledge the realitiesand the responsibilities of the actual life around him.  To Vincent thecircumstances in which this young girl was placed seemed altogethertragic; and when he regarded the future that might lie before her, itwas with a blank dismay.Moreover, he now no longer sought to conceal from himself the nature ofthis engrossing interest in all that concerned her, this fascination andglamour that drew him towards her, this constant solicitude about herthat haunted him day and night.  Love had originally sprung from pity,perhaps; her loneliness had appealed to him, and her youth, and thewistful beauty of her eyes. But even now that he knew what caused hisheart to leap when he heard her footfall on the stairs, or when hehappened to look up at the table to find her regard fixed on him, therewas no wild desire for a declaration of his fond hopes and dreams.Rather he hung backas if something mysteriously sacred surrounded her.He had asked her for a flower: that was all.  Probably she hadforgotten. There seemed no place for the pretty toyings of love-makingin the life of this girl, who appeared to have missed the gaiety ofchildhood, and perhaps might slip on into middle-age hardly knowing whatyouth had been.  And yet what a rose was ready to blow therehe said tohimselfif only sunshine, and sweet rains, and soft airs werepropitious!  It was the wide, white days of June that were wanted forher, before the weeks and the months went by, and the darkness and thewinter came.No, he did not speak; perhaps he was vaguely aware that any abruptdisclosure on his part might startle her into maiden reserve; whereas intheir present relations there existed the frankest confidence.  She madeno secret of the subdued and happy content she experienced in thisconstant companionship; her eyes lit up when he approached; oftentimesshe called him 'Vincent' without seeming to notice it.  She had givenhim a flower?yes, as she would have given him a handful at any or everyhour of the day, if she fancied it would please him, and withoutulterior thought.  They were almost as boy and girl together in thisdaily intercourse, this open and avowed comradeship, this easy andunrestricted familiarity.  But sometimes Vincent looked aheadwith dimforebodings.  He had not forgotten the murmur of that wide sea ofseparation that he had beheld as it were in a vision; the sound of it,faint, and sad, and ominous, still lingered in his ears.It was in one of these darker moments that he resolved, at whateverrisk, to acquaint old George Bethune with something of his irresolutehopes and fears.  The opportunity arrived quite unexpectedly. Onemorning he was as usual on his way to his lodgings when, at the cornerof Upper Grosvenor Street, he met Mr. Bethune coming into Park Lanealone."Maisrie is well?" Vincent asked, in sudden alarm, for it was the rarestthing in the world to find grandfather and granddaughter separated."Oh, yes, yes," the old man said.  "She has some household matters toattend todressmaking, I think.  Poor lass, she has to be economical;indeed, I think she carries it to an extreme; but it's no use arguingwith Maisrie; I let her have her own way.""I wanted to speak to youabout her," Vincent said, and he turned andwalked with the old man, across the street into Hyde Park.  "I haveoften wished to speak to youandand of course there was no chance whenshe herself was present"He hesitated, casting about for a beginning; then he pulled himselftogether, and boldly flung himself into it."I hope you won't take it for impertinence," said he.  "I don't mean itthat wayvery different from that.  But you yourself, sir, you mayremember, you spoke to me about Maisrie when we were down at Henleytogetherabout what her future might be, if anything happened to youandyou seemed concerned.  Well, it is easy to understand how you should betroubledit is terrible to think of a young girl like thatso sensitive,toobeing alone in the world, and not over well-provided for, as youhave hinted to me.  It would be so strange and unusual a position for ayoung girl to be inwithout relationswithout friendsand having no oneto advise her or protect her in any way.  Of course you will say it isnone of my business""But you would like to have it made your business," said old GeorgeBethune, with a bland and good-natured frankness that considerablyastounded his stammering companion.  "My dear young friend, I knowperfectly what you would say. Do you think I have been blind to thefriendly and even affectionate regard you have shown towards mygranddaughter all this while, or to the pleasure she has enjoyed inhaving you take part in our small amusements?  No, I have not beenblind.  I have looked on and approved.  It has been an added interest toour lives; between you and her I have observed the natural sympathy ofsimilar age; and I have been glad to see her enjoying the society of onenearer her own years.  But nownow, if I guess aright, you wish for somemore definite tie.""Would it not be better?" the young man said, breathlessly.  "If therewere some clear understanding, would not a great deal of the uncertaintywith regard to the future be removed?  You see, Mr. Bethune, I haven'tspoken a word to Maisrienot a word.  I have been afraid.  Perhaps Ihave been mistaken in imagining that she might in timebe inclined tolisten to me"He stopped: then he proceeded more slowlyand it might have been noticedthat his cheek was a little paler than usual.  "Yes, it may be as yousay.  Perhaps it is only that she likes the companionship of one of herown age.  That is natural. And then she is very kind and generous: I mayhave been mistaken in thinking there was a possibility of somethingmore."He was silent now and abstracted: as he walked on he saw nothing of whatwas around him."Come, come, my friend!" George Bethune exclaimed, with much benignity."Do not vex yourself with useless speculations; you are looking too farahead; you and she are both too young to burden yourselves with graveresponsibilities.  A boyish and girlish attachment is a very pretty andengaging thing; but it must not be taken too seriously"And here for a second a flash of resentment fired through Vincent'sheart: was it well of this old man to speak so patronisingly of Maisrieas but a child when it was he himself who had thrust upon her more thanthe responsibilities and anxieties of a grown woman?"Take things as they are!  Do you consider that you have much cause tocomplain, either the one or the other of you?" old George Bethuneresumed, in a still lighter strain.  "You have youth and strength, goodhealth, and a constant interest in the life going on around you: is notthat sufficient? Why, here am I, nearing my three score years and ten;and every morning that I awake I know that there lies before me anotherbeautiful, interesting, satisfactory day, that I am determined to enjoyto the very utmost of my power.  To-morrow?to-morrow never yet belongedto anybodynever was of any use to anybody: give me to-day, and I amcontent to let to-morrow shift for itself!  Yes," he continued, in firmand proud and almost joyous accents, and he held his head erect, "youmay have caught me in some unguarded momentsome moment of nervousweakness or depressionbeginning to inquire too curiously into thefuture; but that was a transient folly; I thank God that it is not myhabitual mood!  Repining, complaining, anticipating: what good do youget from that? Surely I have had as much reason to repine and complainas most; but I do not waste my breath in remonstrating with 'fickleFortune.'  'Fickle Fortune!'" he exclaimed, in his scorn"if theill-favoured jade were to come near me I would give her a wallop acrossthe buttocks with my staff, and bid her get out of my road!  'FickleFortune!' She may 'perplex the poor sons of a day;' but she shall neverperplex meby God and Saint Ringan!"He laughed aloud in his pride."Why," said he, suddenly changing into quite another vein, "have you notyet come to know that the one priceless thing to think of in theworldthe one extraordinary thingis that at this precise moment you cansee?  For millions and millions of years these skies have been shining,and the clouds moving, and the seas running blue all round the shores;and you were dead and blind to them; unknowing and unknown.  Generationafter generation of menthousands and thousands of themwere looking atthese things; they knew the hills and the clouds and the fields; theworld existed for them; but you could see nothing, you were as if lyingdead.  Then comes your brief instant; it is your turn; your eyes areopened; and for a little whilea passing secondthe universe is revealedto you.  Don't you perceive that the marvellous thing is that out of thevast millions of ages it should be this one particular moment, thispresent moment, that happens to be given to you?  And instead ofreceiving it with amazement and wonder and joy, why, you must begin tofret and worry and lay schemes, as if you were unaware that the gates ofthe empty halls of Pluto were waiting to engulf you and shut you up oncemore in darkness and blindness.  Look at those elm-treesat the waterdown thereat the moving clouds: isn't it wonderful to think that in theimmeasurable life of the world this should happen to be the one momentwhen these things are made visible to you?"Vincent perceived in a kind of way what the old man meant; but he didnot understand why this should make him less concerned about Maisrie'sposition, or less eagerly covetous of winning her tender regard."Well, well," said old George Bethune, "perhaps it is but natural thatyouth should be impatient; while old age may well be content with suchsmall and placid comforts as may be met with.  I should have thoughtthere was not much to complain of in our present manner of lifeif youwill allow me to include you in our tiny microcosm.  It is not exciting;it is simple, and wholesome; and I hope not altogether base and gross.And as regards Maisrie, surely you and she have enough of each other'ssociety even as matters stand.  Let well alone, my young friend; letwell alone; that is my advice to you.  And I may say there are especialand important reasons why I should not wish her to be bound by anypledge.  You know that I do not care to waste much thought on what maylie ahead of us; but still, at the same time, there might at any momenthappen certain things which would make a great difference in Maisrie'scircumstances"Vincent had been listening in a kind of absent and hopeless way; butthese few words instantly aroused his attention: perhaps this was thereal reason why the old man wished Maisrie to remain free?"A great and marvellous change indeed," he continued, with some increaseof dignity in his manner and in his mode of speech.  "A change whichwould affect me also, though that would be of little avail now.  But asregards my granddaughter, she might be called upon to fill a positionvery different from that she occupies at present; and I should not wishher to be hampered by anything pertaining to her former manner of life.Not that she would ever prove forgetful of past kindness; that is not inher nature; but in these new circumstances she might find herselfconfronted by other duties.  Enough said, I hope, on that point.  Andwell I know," he added, with something of a grand air, "that in whateversphere Maisrie Bethune may be placed, she will act worthily of her nameand of the obligations it entails."He suddenly paused.  There was a poorly-clad woman going by, carrying inone arm a baby, while with the other hand she half dragged along a smallboy of five or six.  She did not look like a professional London beggar,nor yet like a country tramp; but of her extreme wretchedness therecould be no doubt; while there was a pinched look as of hunger in hercheeks."Wait a bit!where are you going?" old George Bethune said to her, inblunt and ready fashion.The woman turned round startled and afraid."I am making for home, sir," she said, timidly."Where's that?" he demanded."Out Watford way, sirAbbot's Langley it is.""Where have you come from?""From Leatherhead, sir.""On foot all the way?""Yes, indeed, sir," she said, with a bit of a sigh."And with very little food, I warrant?" said he."Little indeed, sir.""Have you any money?""Yes, sira matter of a few coppers left.  I gave what I had to my oldmothershe thought she was dying, and sent for me to bring the twolittle boys to see herbut she's better, sir, and now I'm making forhome again.""Oh, you gave what you had to your mother? Well," said he, deliberately,"I don't know whether what I have will amount to as much, but whateverit is you are welcome to it."He dived into his trousers pockets and eventually produced about half ahandful of shillings and pence; then he searched a smallwaistcoat-pocket and brought forth two sovereigns.  It was all hiswealth."Here, take that, and in God's name get yourself some food, woman!" saidhe, unconsciously lapsing into a pronounced Scotch accent.  "You lookstarved.  And this bit of a laddie, herebuy him some sweet things aswell as bread and butter when you get up to the shops.  And then whenyou're outside the town, you'll just give some honest fellow a shilling,and you'll get a cast of an empty cart to help you on your road.  Well,good-day to yeno, no, take what there is, I tell ye, woman!bless me,you'll need most of it before you get to your own fireside.  On yourways, now!and when you reach the shops, don't forget the barley-sugarfor this young shaver."So he turned away, leaving the poor woman so overwhelmed that she hadhardly a word of thanks; and when he had gone for some little distanceall he said waswith something of a rueful laugh"There went my luncheon; for I promised Maisrie I should not return hometill near dinner-time.""And you have left yourself without a farthing?" the young manexclaimed.  "Well, that's all rightI can lend you a few sovereigns.""No, no," said old George Bethune, with a smile, and he held up his handin deprecation.  "I am well pleased now; and if I should suffer anypangs of starvation during the day, I shall be glad to think that I canendure them better than that poor creature with the long tramp beforeher.  To-night," said he, rubbing his palms together with muchsatisfaction, "to-night, when we meet at Mentavisti's, I shall be allthe hungrier and all the happier. Ah, must you go now?good-bye, then!We shall see you at half-past six, I suppose; and meantime, my friend,dismiss from your mind those cares and anxious thoughts about thefuture.  'To the gods belongs to-morrow!'"Now this little incident that had just happened in Hyde Park comfortedVincent exceedingly. Here was something definite that he could proudlyset against the vague and unworthy suspicions of Mrs. Ellison.  Surelythe man was no plausible impostor, no charlatan, no crafty schemer, whocould so readily empty his pockets, and look forward to a day'sstarvation, in order to help a poor and unknown vagrant-woman?  No doubtit was but part and parcel of his habitual and courageous disregard ofconsequences, his yielding to the generous impulse of the moment; but,if the truth must be told, Master Vin was at times almost inclined toenvy old George Bethune his splendid audacity and self-confidence.  Whyshould the younger man be the one to take forethought for the morrow;while the venerable gray beard was gay as a lark, delighted with thepresent hour, and defiant of anything that might happen?  And what ifthe younger man were to follow the precepts of the elder, and lapse intoa careless content?  Their way of living, as George Bethune had pointedout, was simple, happy, and surely harmless.  There were those threeforming a little coterie all by themselves; enjoying each other'ssociety; interested in each other's pursuits. The hours of the daytimewere devoted to individual work; then came the glad reunion of theevening and the sallying forth to this or the other restaurant;thereafter the little dinner in the corner, with its glimpses of foreignfolk, and its gay talk filled with patriotism and poetry andreminiscences of other lands; finally the hushed enchantment of thatlittle parlour, with Maisrie and her violin, with dominoes, anddiscussions literary and political, while always and ever there reigneda perfect frankness and good-fellowship.  Yes, it seemed a happy kind ofexistence, for these three.  And was not old George Bethune in the rightin thinking that the young people should not hamper themselves by anytoo grave responsibilities?  A boyish and girlish attachment (as hedeemed it to be) was a pretty and amusing and engaging thing; quite alittle idyll, in factbut not to be taken too seriously.  And where thefuture was all so uncertain, was it not better to leave it alone?Specious representations, indeed!  But this young man, who had his ownviews and ways of thinking, remained stubbornly unconvinced.  It wasbecause the future was so vague that he wanted it made more definite;and as he thought of Maisrie, and of what might befall her when she wasalone in the world, and as he thought of his own far-reaching resolvesand purposes, he did not in the least consider the relationship nowexisting between him and her as being merely a pretty little pastoralepisode, that would lead to nothing.  No doubt their present way ofliving had many charms and fascinations, if only it would last.  But itwould not last; it was impossible it should last.  Looking back overthese past months, Vincent was surely grateful enough for all thepleasant and intimate companionship he had enjoyed; but his temperamentwas not like that of George Bethune; the passing moment was noteverything to him.  He had an old head on young shoulders; and it neededno profound reflection to tell him that life could not always consist ofthe Restaurant Mentavisti and La Claire Fontaine.CHAPTER II.BY NORTHERN SEAS.Here, in front of the great, square, old-fashioned Scotch mansion, whichwas pleasantly lit up by the morning sun, stood the family waggonettewhich had just been filled by those of the house-party who were boundfor church; and here, too, in the spacious porch, was Mrs. Ellison,smiling her adieux with rather a sad air."Good-bye, dear," said her kindly hostess.  "I hope you will have gotrid of your headache by the time we get back."  And therewith thecarriage was driven away along the pebbled pathway, through an avenue ofmagnificent wide-spreading elms.Then the tall and graceful young widow, who carried a book in her hand,glanced around her. There was no living thing near except a whitepeacock that was solemnly stalking across the lawn.  Mrs. Ellisonstrolled towards a hammock slung between two maples, and stood there fora moment, and considered.  Should she attempt it? There was no onlooker,supposing some slight accident befell.  Finally, however, her couragegave way; she returned to the front of the house; and took possession ofa long, low lounging-chair, where she could sit in the sun, and yet havethe pages of her book in shadow.There was a footfall behind her: Lord Musselburgh made his appearance,smoking a cigarette."Why," said she, with a prettily affected surprise, "haven't you gone tochurch?  I made sure you had walked on.""How could I leave you all by yourself," said the young man, with tendersympathy, "and you suffering from a headache?"Then she professed to be vexed and impatient."Oh, do go away to church!" she said.  "You can be in plenty of time, ifyou walk fast enough. If you stop here you know what will go on atlunch. Those Drexel girls can look more mischief than any other twentygirls could say or do.""Oh, no," said he, plaintively, "don't send me away!  Let us go for awalk rather.  You know, a woman's headache is like her hatshe can putit on or off when she likes.  Come!""I consider you are very impertinent," said she, with something ofoffended dignity.  "Do you think I shammed a headache in order to staybehind?""I don't think anything," said he, discreetly."You will be saying next that it was to have this meeting with you?""Why, who could dare to imagine such a thing!""Oh, very well, very well," said she, with a sudden change togood-nature, as she rose from the chair.  "I forgive you.  And I will bewith you in a second."She was hardly gone a couple of minutes; but in that brief space of timeshe had managed to make herself sufficiently picturesque; for to thesimple and neat grey costume which clad her tall and slim and elegantfigure she had added a bold-sweeping hat of black velvet and blackfeathers, while round her neck she had wound a black boa, its two longtails depending in front.  Thus there was no colour about her, save whatshone in her perfect complexion, and in the light and expression of hershrewd, and dangerous, and yet grave and demure blue eyes."And really and frankly," said she, as they left the house together, "Iam not sorry to have a chance of a quiet talk with you; for I want totell you about my nephew; I am sure you are almost as much interested inhim as I am; and you would be as sorry as I could be if anything were tohappen to him.  And I am afraid something is going to happen to him.His letters to me have entirely changed of late.  You know how proud Vinis by natureand scornful, too, when you don't act up to his loftystandard; and when I ventured to hint that he might keep his eyes openin dealing with that old mountebank and his pretty granddaughter, oh!the tempestuous indignation of my young gentleman!  He seemed to thinkthat a creature such as Ifilled with such base suspicionswas not fitto live.  Well, I did not quarrel with my handsome boy; in fact, Irather admired his rage and disdain of me; it was part of the singlenessof his nature; for he believes everybody to be as straightforward andsincere as himself; and he has a very fine notion of loyalty towards hisfriends. And vindictive, too, the young villain was; I can tell you Iwas made to feel the enormity of my transgression; I was left to wallowin that quagmire of unworthy doubt in which I had voluntarily plungedmyself.  So matters went on; and I could only hope for one of twothingseither that he might find out something about those people thatwould sever his connection with them, or that his passing fancy for thegirl would gradually fade away.  I made sure he would tire of thatoracular old humbug; or else he would discover there was nothing at allbehind the mysterious eyes and the tragic solemnity of that artful youngmadam.  Oh, mind you," she continued, as they walked along under theover-branching maples, amid a rustle of withered October leaves, "mindyou, I don't suspect her quite as much as I suspect the venerable Druid;and I don't recall anything that I said about her.  I admit that shebeglamoured me with her singing of a French Canadian song; but what isthat?what can you tell of any one's moral or mental nature from a trickof singingthe thrill of a notesome peculiar quality of voice?  Why,the greatest wretch of a man I ever knew had the most beautiful,innocent, honest brown eyesthey could make you believe anythingall thewomen said he was so good, and so different from other menwell, I willtell you that story some other timeI found out what the honesty of theclear brown eyes was worth."Here she was interrupted by his having to open an iron gate for her.When they passed through, they came in sight of a solitary little bay ofcream-white sand, touched here and there with russet weed, and ending ina series of projecting rocky knolls covered with golden bracken; whilebefore them lay the wide plain of the sea, ruffled into the intensestblue by a brisk breeze from the north. Still further away rose the greatmountains of Mull, and the long stretch of the Morven hills, all of afaint, ethereal crimson-brown in the sunlight, with every glen andwater-course traced in lines of purest ultramarine.  They had all thisshining world to themselves; and there was an absolute silence save forthe continuous whisper of the ripples that broke along the rocks; whilstthe indescribable murmurthe strange inarticulate voicesof the greaterdeep beyond seemed to fill all the listening air."And I might have known I was mistaken in Vin's case," she went on,absently.  "He was never the one to be caught by a pretty face, and becharmed with it for a time, and pass on and forget. He always kept alooffrom that kind of thingperhaps with a touch of impatient scorn.  No; Imight have known it was something more serious: so serious, indeed, isit, that he has at last condescended to appeal to mefancy that!fancyVin coming down from his high horse, and appealing to me to bereasonable, to be considerate, and to stand his friend.  And the pageshe writes to persuade me!  Really, if you were to believe him, you wouldthink this old man one of the most striking and interesting figures theworld has ever seenso fearless in his pride, so patient in his poverty,so stout-hearted in his old age.  Then his splendid enthusiasm aboutfine things in literature; his magnanimity over the wrongs he hassuffered; his pathetic affection for his granddaughter and his tendercare of herwhy, you would take him to be one of the grandest humancreatures that ever breathed the breath of life!  Then about the girl:don't I remember La Claire Fontaine?  Oh, yes, I remember La ClaireFontaineand little else! You see, that is just where the trouble comesin as regards my nephew.  Hard-headed as he is, and brusque ofspeechsometimes, not alwayshe is just stuffed full of Quixotism; and Idaresay it is precisely because this girl is shy and reserved, and hasrather appealing eyes, that he imagines all kinds of wonderful thingsabout her, and has made a saint of her, to be worshipped.  A merry lass,with a saucy look and a clever tongue, would have no chance with Vin; hewould stare at herperhaps only half-disguising his contempt; and then,if you asked him what he thought of her he would probably say, with acurl of the lip, 'Impertinent tomboy!'  But when he comes to speak ofthis one, why, you would think that all womanhood had undergone someprocess of deification in her solitary self.  Come here, and by thisdivine lamp you shall read and understand whatever has been great andnoble and pure and beautiful in all the song and story of the world! Andyet perhaps it is not altogether absurd," the pretty Mrs. Ellisoncontinued, with a bit of a sigh. "It is pathetic, rather.  I wish therewere a few more such men as that; the world could get on very well witha few more of them.  But they don't seem to exist nowadays.""Ah, if you only knew!  Perhaps your experience has been unfortunate,"her companion said, wistfully: whereupon the young widow, withoutturning her head towards him, perceptibly sniggered."Oh, you!" she exclaimed, in derision.  "You! You needn't pretend tocome into that exalted categoryno, indeed""I suppose people have been saying things about me to you," said he,with a certain affectation of being hurt.  "But you needn't havebelieved them all the same.""People!" she said.  "People!  Why, everybody knows what you are!  Aprofessional breaker of poor young innocent girls' hearts.  Haven't weall heard of you?  Haven't we all heard how you went on in America?  Nosuch stories came home about Vin, I can assure you.  Oh, we all knowwhat you are!""You may have heard one story," said he, somewhat stiffly; "but if youknew what it really was, you would see that it was nothing to jokeabout. Some time I will tell you.  Some other time when you are in amore friendly, a more believing and sympathetic, mood.""Oh, yes," she said, laughing.  "A very heart-rending story, no doubt!And you were deeply injured, of course, being so extremely innocent! Youforget that I have seen you in a good many houses; you forget that Ihave been watching your goings-on with Louie Drexel, in this very place.Do you think I can't recognise the old handthe expertthe artist?  LordMusselburgh, you can't deceive me.""Probably not," said he, sharply.  "If all tales be true you haveacquired some experience yourself.""Oh, who said that about me!" she demanded, with indignation (but hereyes were not indignant, they were rather darkly amused, if only he hadmade bold to look at them.)  "Who dared to say such a thing?  And ofcourse you listened without a word of protest: probably you assented!What it is to have friends!  But perhaps some day I, also, may have alittle story to tell you; and then you may understand me a littlebetter."Here there was another farm-gate for him to open, so that their talk wasagain interrupted. Then they passed under a series of lofty grey cragshung with birch, and hazel, and rowan, all in their gorgeous autumnaltints; until they came in sight of another secluded little bay, withsilver ripples breaking along the sand, and with small outlying islandscovered with orange seaweed where they were not white with gulls.  Andhere was a further stretch of that wind-swept, dark blue, striated sea,with the lonely hills of Morven and Kingairloch, sun-dappled andcloud-dappled, rising into the fair turquoise sky.  There was a scent ofdew-wet grass mingling with the stronger odour of the seaweed the breezewas blowing freshly in.  And always there came to them the long,unceasing, multitudinous murmur of those moving waters, that must havesounded to them so great and vast a thing beside the small trivialitiesof their human speech."Have you read Vin's article in the Imperial Review?" said Mrs.Ellison, flicking at a thistle with her sun-shade."Not yet.  But I saw it announced.  About American State Legislatures,isn't it, or something of that kind?""It seemed to me very ably and clearly written," she said.  "But that isnot the point.  I gather that Vin has been contemplating all kinds ofcontingencies; and that he is now trying to qualify for the post ofleader-writer on one of the daily newspapers.  What does that mean?itmeans that he is determined to marry this girl, and that he thinks itprobable there may be a break between himself and his father inconsequence.  There may be?there will be, I give you my word!  Myamiable brother-in-law's theories of Socialism and Fraternity andUniversal Equality are very pretty toys to play withand they have evengained him a sort of reputation through his letters to the Times; buthe doesn't bring them into the sphere of actual life.  Of course, Vinhas his own little money; and I, for one, why, I shouldn't see himstarve in any case; but I take it that he is already making provisionfor the future and its responsibilities.  Now isn't that dreadful?  Ideclare to you, Lord Musselburgh, that when I come down in the morningand find a letter from him lying on the hall-table, my heart sinksjustas if I heard the men on the stair bringing down a coffin.  Because Iknow if he is captured by those penniless adventurers, it will be allover with my poor lad; he will be bound to them; he will have to supportthem; he will have to sacrifice friends and fortune, and a future surelysuch as never yet lay before any young man.  Just think of it!  Who everhad such possibilities before him?  Who ever had so many friends, allexpecting great things of him?  Who ever was so petted and caressed andadmired by those whose slightest regard is considered by the world atlarge an honour; andI will say this for my boy-who ever deserved itmore, or remained all through it so unspoiled, and simple, and manly?Oh, you don't know what he has been to mewhat I have hoped for himasif he were my only brother, and one to be proud of!  His father is wellknown, no doubt; he has got a sort of academic reputation; but he is notliked; people don't talk about him as ifas if they cared for him.  ButVincent could win hearts as well as fame: ah, do you think I don'tknow?trust a woman to know!  There is a strange kind of charm andfascination about him: I would put the most accomplished lady-killer inEngland in a drawing-room, and I know where the girls' eyes would go themoment my Vin made his appearance: perhaps it is because he is sohonestly indifferent to them all.  And it isn't women only; it isn'tmerely his good looks; every one, young and old, man and woman, is takenwith him; there is about him a sort of magic and glamour ofyouthandand bright promiseand straightforward intentionoh, I can'ttell you what!butbutit's something that makes me love him!""That is clear enough," said he; and indeed there was a ring ofsincerity in her tone, sometimes even a tremor in her voiceperhaps ofpride."Well," she resumed, as they strolled along under the beetled crags thatwere all aflame with golden-yellow birch and blood-red rowan, "I am notgoing to stand aside and see all that fair promise lost.  I own I am aselfish woman; and hitherto I have kept aloof, as I did not want to getmyself into trouble.  I am going to hold aloof no longer.  The more Ihear the more I am convinced that Vin has fallen into the hands of anunscrupulous sharperperhaps a pair of them; and I mean to have his eyesopened.  Here is this new revelation about that American book, whichsimply means that you were swindled out of 50""One moment," her companion said hastily, and there was a curious lookof mortification on his face. "I had no right to tell you that story.  Ibroke confidence: I am ashamed of myself.  And I assure you I was notswindled out of any 50.  When the old man came to me, with his Scotchaccent, and his Scotch patriotism, and his Scotch plaid thrown over hisshoulderwell, 'my heart warmed to the tartan'; and I was glad of theexcuse for helping him.  I did not want any book; and I certainly didnot want the money back.  But when Vin came to me, and madeexplanations, and finally handed me a cheque for 50, there wassomething in his manner that told me I dared not refuse.  It wassomething like 'Refuse this money, and you doubt the honour of the womanI am going to marry.'  But seeing that I did take it, I have now nothingto say. My mouth is shutought to have been shut, rather, only you and Ihave had some very confidential chats since we came up here.""All the same, it was a downright swindle," said she, doggedly; "and thefact that Vin paid you back the money makes it none the less a swindle.Now I will tell you what I am about to do.  I must be cruel to be kind.I am going to enlist the services of George Morris""Sir George?" he asked."No, no; George Morris, the solicitorhis wife and I are very greatfriendsand I know he would do a great deal for me.  Very well; he mustget to know simply everything about this old manhis whole historyandif it turns out to be what I imagine, then some of us will have to go toVin and tell him the truth.  It won't be a pleasant duty; but duty neveris pleasant.  I know I shall be called a traitor for my share in it.Here is Vin appealing to me to be his friendas if I were not hisfriend!begging me to come and take this solitary and friendless girl bythe hand, and all the rest of it; and instead of that I go behind hisback and try to find out what will destroy his youthful romance forever.  But it's got to be done," said the young widow, with a sigh.  "Itwill be a wrench at first; then six months' despair; and a life-time ofthankfulness thereafter.  And of course I must give George Morris allthe help I can.  He must make enquiries, for one thing, at the office ofthe Edinburgh Chronicle: I remember at Henley the old gentleman spokeof the proprietor as a friend of his. Then the man you know in New York,who gave Mr. Bethune a letter of introduction to you: what is his nameand address?""Oh, no," said Lord Musselburgh, shrinking back, as it were.  "No; Idon't want to take part in it.  Of course, you may be acting quiterightly; no doubt you are acting entirely in Vin's interests; butbut Iwould rather have nothing to do with it.""And yet you call yourself Vin's friend!  Come, tell me!" she said,coaxingly.Again he refused."Mind you, I believe I could find out for myself," she went on.  "I knowthat he is the editor of a newspaper in New Yorka Scotch newspaper:come, Lord Musselburgh, give me his name, or the name of the newspaper!"He shook his head."Nonot fair," he said.Then she stopped, and faced him, and regarded him with arch eyes."And yet it was on this very pathway, only yesterday morning, that youswore that there was nothing in the world that you wouldn't do for me!""That was different," said he, with some hesitation. "I meant as regardsmyself.  This concerns some one else.""Oh, very well," said she, and she walked on proudly.  "I dare say I canfind out."He touched her arm to detain her."Have you a note-book?" he asked.She took from her pocket a combined purse and note-book; and without awordor a smileshe pulled out the pencil."'Hugh Anstruther, Western Scotsman Office, New York,'" said he,rather shamefacedly."There, that is all right!" she said, blithely, and she put thenote-book in her pocket again.  "That is as far as we can go in thatmatter at present; and now we can talk of something else.  What is thename of this little bay?""Little Ganovan, I believe.""And the other one we passed?""Port Bn.""What is the legend attached to the robber's cave up there in therocks?""The legend?  Oh, some one told me the gardener keeps his tools in thatcave.""What kind of a legend is that!" she said, impatiently; and then shewent on with her questions. "Why doesn't anybody ever come round thisway?""I suppose because they know we want the place to ourselves.""And why should we want the place to ourselves?"This was unexpected.  He paused."Ah," said he, "what is the use of my telling you?  All your interest iscentred on Vin.  I suppose a woman can only be interested in one man atany one time.""Well, I should hope so!" the young widow said, cheerfully.  "Shall wego round by the rocks or through the trees?"For they were now come to a little wood of birch and larch and pine; andwithout more ado he led the way, pushing through the outlying tallbracken and getting in underneath the branches."I suppose," said he, in a rather rueful tone, "that you don't know whatis the greatest proof of affection that a man can show to a woman?  No,of course you don't!""What is it, then?" she demanded, as she followed him stooping."Why, it's going first through a wood, and getting all the spider's-webson his nose."But presently they had come to a clearer space, where they could walktogether, their footfalls hushed by the carpet of withered fir-needles;while here and there a rabbit would scurry off, and again they wouldcatch a glimpse of a hen-pheasant sedately walking down a glade betweenthe trees. And now their talk had become much more intimate andconfidential; it had even assumed a touch of more or less affectedsadness."It's very hard," he was saying, "that you should understand me solittle.  You think I am cold, and cynical, and callous.  Well, perhaps Ihave reason to be.  I have had my little experience of womankindof onewoman, rather.  I sometimes wonder whether the rest are anything likeher, or are capable of acting as she did.""Who was she?" his companion asked, timidly.And therewith, as they idly and slowly strolled through this littlethicket, he told his tragic tale, which needs not to be set down here:it was all about the James river, Virginia, and a pair of southern eyes,and betrayal, and farewell, and black night.  His companion listened inthe deep silence of sympathy; and when he had finished she said, in alow voice, and with downcast eyes"I am sorryvery sorry.  But at least there was one thing spared you:you did not marry out of spite."He glanced at her quickly."Oh, yes," she said, and she raised her head, and spoke with a proud andbitter air, "I have my story too!  I do not tell it to everyone.Perhaps I have not told it to anyone.  But the man I loved was separatedfrom me by liesby lies; and I was fool and idiot enough to believethem!  And the one I told you aboutthe one with the beautiful, clear,brown eyesso good and noble he was, as everyone declared!it was he whocame to me with those falsehoods; and I believed themI believedthemlike the fool I was!  Oh, yes," she said, and she held her headhigh, for her breast was heaving with real emotion this time, "it iseasy to say that every mistake meets with its own punishment; but I waspunished too muchtoo much; a life-long punishment for believing whatlying friends had said to me!"  She furtively put the tips of herfingers to her eyes, to wipe away the tears that lay along the lashes."And then I was mad; I was out of my senses; I would have marriedanybody to show thatthat I cared nothing forfor the other one; andandI suppose he was angry toohe would not speakhe stood aside, and knewthat I was going to kill my life, and never a single word!  That was hisrevengeto say nothingwhen he saw me about to kill my life!  Cruel, doyou call it?  Oh, no!what does it matter?  A woman's heart brokenwhatis that?  But now you know why I think so of menandand why I laugh atthem"Well, her laughing was strange: she suddenly burst into a violent fit ofcrying and sobbing, and turned away from him, and hid her face in herhandkerchief.  What could he do?  This was all unlike the gay youngwidow who seemed so proud of her solitary estate and so well content.Feeble words of comfort were of small avail.  And then, again, it hardlyseemed the proper occasion for offering her more substantialsympathythough that was in his mind all the while, and very nearly onthe tip of his tongue.  So perforce he had to wait until her weeping wasover; and indeed it was she herself who ended the scene by exclaimingimpatiently"Thereenough of that!  I did not intend to bother you with my smalltroubles when I stayed behind for you this morning.  Come, shall we goout on to the rocks, and round by the little bay? What do you callitGanovan?""Yes; I think they call it Little Ganovan," he said, absently, as he andshe together emerged from the twilight of larch and pine, and proceeded,leisurely and in silence, to cross the semicircular sweep of yellowsand.When they got to the edge of the rocks, they sat down there: apparentlythey had nothing to do on this idle morning but to contemplate thatvast, far-murmuring, dark blue plaintouched here and there with a sharpglimmer of whiteand the range upon range of the Kingairloch hills,deepening in purple gloom, or shining rose-grey and yellow-grey in thesun.  In this solitude they were quite alone save for the sea-birds thathad wheeled into the air, screaming and calling, at their approach; butthe terns and curlews were soon at peace again; a cloud of gullsreturned to one of the little islands just in front of them; while aslow-flapping heron winged its heavy flight away to the north.  All oncemore was silence; and the world was to themselves.And yet what was he to say to this poor suffering soul whose tragicsorrows and experiences had been thus unexpectedly disclosed?  He reallywished to be sympathetic; and, if he dared, he would have reminded herthat'Whispering tongues can poison truth;And constancy lives in realms above;And life is thorny; and youth is vain;And to be wroth with one we loveDoth work like madness in the brain.'only he knew how difficult it is to quote poetry without making one'sself ridiculous; and also he knew that the pretty young widow's eyes hada dangerous trick of sudden laughter.  However, it was she who firstspoke."I wonder what those who have gone to church will say when they discoverthat we have spent all the morning here?""They may say what they like," he made answer, promptly.  "There arethings one cannot speak about in drawing-rooms, among a crowd.  And howcould I ever have imagined that you, with your high spirits and merrytemperament, and perpetual good-humour, had come through such trials?  Iwonder that people never think of the mischief that is done byintermeddling""Intermeddling?" said she proudly.  "It wasn't of intermeddling I had tocomplain: it was a downright conspiracyit was false storiesI wasdeceived by those who professed to be my best friends.  There isintermeddling and intermeddling. You might say I was intermeddling inthe case of my nephew.  But what harm can come of that? It is not lies,it is the truth, I want to have told him.  And even if it causes himsome pain, it will be for his good.  Don't you think I am right?"He hesitated."I hope so," he said.  "But you know things wear such a differentcomplexion according to the way you look at them""But facts, Lord Musselburgh, facts," she persisted.  "Do you think aman like George Morris would be affected by any sentimentalconsiderations one way or the other?  Won't he find out just the truth?And that is all I honestly want Vin to knowthe actual truth: then lethim go on with his eyes open if he chooses.  Facts, Lord Musselburgh:who can object to facts?"  Then she saidas she gave him her hand thathe might assist her to rise"We must be thinking of getting back home now, for if we are late forlunch, those Drexel girls will be grinning at each other like a coupleof fiends."Rather reluctantly he rose also, and accompanied her.  They made theirway across a series of rough, bracken-covered knolls projecting into thesea until they reached the little bay that is known as Port Bn; andhere, either the beauty and solitude of the place tempted them, or theywere determined to defy sarcasm, for instead of hastening home, theyquietly strolled up and down the smooth cream-white beach, now and againpicking up a piece of rose-red seaweed, or turning over a limpet-shell,or watching a sandpiper making his quick little runs alongside theclear, crisp-curling ripples.  They did not speak; they were as silentas the transparent blue shadows that their figures cast on thesoft-yielding surface on which they walked.  And sometimes LordMusselburgh seemed inclined to write something, with the point of hisstick, on that flawless sand; and then again he desisted; and still theycontinued silent.She took up a piece of pink seaweed, and began pulling it to shreds.  Hewas standing by, looking on."Don't you think," said he at last, "that there should be a good deal ofsympathya very unusual sympathybetween two people who have comethrough the same suffering?""Oh, I suppose so," she said, with affected carelessnessher eyes stillbent on the seaweed."Do you know," said he, again, "that I haven't the least idea what yourname is!""My name?  Oh, my name is Madge," she answered."Madge?" said he.  "I wonder if you make the capital M this way?" andtherewith he traced on the sand an ornamental M in the manner of thelast century."No, I don't," she said, "but it is very pretty. How do you write therest?"Thus encouraged, he made bold to add the remaining letters, and seemedrather to admire his handiwork when it was done."By the way," she said, "I don't know your Christian name either!""Hubert.""Can you write that in the same fashion?" she suggested, with a simpleingenuousness.So, grown still bolder, he laboriously inscribed his name immediatelyunderneath her own.  But that was not all.  When he had ended he drew acircle right round both names."That is a ring to enclose them," said he: and he turned from the scorednames to regard her downcast face.  "Butbut I know a much smaller ringthat could bring them still closer together. Will you let me tryMadge?"He took her hand."Yes," she said, in a low voice.And thenOh, very well, then: thenbut after a reasonable delaythenthey left those creamy sands, and went up by the edge of the blue-greenturnip-field to the pathway, and so to the iron gate; and as he openedthe gate for her, she said"Oh, I don't know what happened down there, and what I've pledged myselfto; but at all events there will now be one more on my side, to help meabout Vin, and get him out of all this sad trouble. You will help me,won't youHubert?"Of course he was eager to promise anything."And you say he is sure to get in for Mendover? Why, just think of himnow, with everything before him; and how nice it would be for all of usif he had a smart and clever wife, who would hold her own in society,and do him justice, and make us all as proud and fond of her as we areof him.  And just fancy the four of us setting out on a winter-trip toCairo or Jerusalem: wouldn't it be simply too delicious?  The four ofusonly the four of usall by ourselves.  Louie Drexel is rather young,to be sure; yet she knows her way about; she's sharp; she's clever; shewill have some money; and she has cheek enough for anything.  And by thewayHubert" said she (and always with a pretty little hesitation whenshe came to his Christian name) "I must really ask youwith regard toLouie Drexelwellyou knowyou have beenjust a little"He murmured something about the devotion of a lifetimethe devotionwhich he had just promised to herbeing a very different thing fromtrivial drawing-room dallyings; whereupon she observed"Oh, yes, men say so by way of excuse""How many men have said so to you?" he demanded, flaring up."I did not say they had said so to me," she answered sweetly.  "Don't goand be absurdly jealous without any cause whatever.  If any one has aright to be jealous, it is I, considering the way you have been going onwith Louie Drexel. But of course if there's nothing in it, that's allwell and done with; and I am of a forgiving disposition, when I'm takenthe right way.  Now about Vin: can you see anybody who would do betterfor him than Louie Drexel?"Be sure it was not of Vin Harris, much as he was interested in him, thatLord Musselburgh wished to talk at this moment; but, on the other hand,in the first flush of his pride and gratitude, any whim of hers was lawto him; and perhaps it was a sufficient and novel gratification to beable to call her Madge."I'm afraid," said he, "that Vin is not the kind of person to have hislife arranged for him by other people.  And besides you must remember,Madge, dear, that you are assuming a great deal.  You are assuming thatyou can show Vin that this old man is an impostor""Oh, can there be any doubt of it!" she exclaimed. "Isn't the story youhave told me yourself enough?"Lord Musselburgh looked rather uncomfortable; he was a good-natured kindof person, and liked to think the best of everybody."I had no right to tell you that story," said he."But now I have the right to know about that and everything else,haven't IHubert?" said she, with a pretty coyness."And besides," he continued, "Vin has a perfect explanation of the wholeaffair.  There is no doubt the old man was just full of this subject,and believed he could write about it better than anyone else, evensupposing the idea had occurred to some other person; he was anxiousabove all things that his poetical countrymen over there in the Statesand Canada should be done justice to; and when he heard that the volumewas actually published he immediately declared that he would doeverything in his power to help it""But what about the 50Hubert?""Oh, well," her companion said, rather uneasily, "I have told you thatthat was a gift from me to him.  I did not stipulate for the publicationof any book."She considered for a moment: then she said, with some emphasis"And you think it no shameyou think it no monstrous thingthat our Vinshould marry a girl who has been in the habit of going about with hergrandfather while he begged money, and accepted money, from strangers?Is that the fate you wish for your friend?""No, I don't wish anything of the kind," said he, "ifif matters wereso.  But Vin and you look at these things in a very different light; andI can hardly believe that he has been so completely imposed on.  Iconfess I liked the old man: I liked his splendid enthusiasm, hismagnificent self-reliance, yes, and his Scotch plaid; and I thought thegirl was remarkably beautifuland more than thatrefined anddistinguished-lookingsomething unusual about her somehow""Oh, yes, you are far too generous, Hubert," his companion said.  "Youaccept Vin's representations without a word.  But I see more clearly.And that little transaction about the book and the 50 gives me a key tothe whole situation.  You may depend on it, George Morris will find outwhat kind of person your grandiloquent old Scotchman is like.  And then,when Vin's eyes are opened""Yes, when Vin's eyes are opened?" her companion repeated."Then he will see into what a terrible pit he was nearly falling.""Are you so sure of that?" Musselburgh said. "I know Vin a little.  Itisn't merely a pretty face that has taken his fancy, as you yourselfadmit. If he has faith in that girl, it may not be easy to shake it.""I should not attempt to shake it," she made answer at once, "if thegirl was everything she ought to be, and of proper upbringing andsurroundings.  But even if it turned out that she was everything sheshould be, wouldn't it be too awful to have Vin dragged down into analliance with that oldthat oldoh, I don't know what to call him!""Madge, dear," said he, "don't call him anything, until you learn moreabout him.  And in the meantime," he continued, rather plaintively,"don't you think we might talk a little about ourselves, consideringwhat has just happened?""There is such a long time before us to talk about ourselves," said she."And you knowHubertyou've come into our family, as it were; and youmust take a share in our troubles."They were nearing the house: five minutes more would bring them in sightof the open lawn."Wait a minute, Madge, dear," said he, and he halted by the side of alittle bit of plantation. "Don't be in such a hurry.  I wish to speak toyou about""About what?" she asked, with a smile."Oh, a whole heap of things!  For example, do you want the Somervillesto know?""I don't particularly want them to know," she answered him, "but I fearthey will soon find out.""I should like you to tell Mrs. Somerville, anyway.""Very well.""Indeed, I don't care if all the people in the house knew!" said he,boldly."Hubert, what are you saying!" she exclaimed, with a fine simulation ofhorror.  "My life would be made a burden to me!  Fancy those Drexelgirls: they would shriek with joy at the chance of torturing me!  Ishould have to fly from the place.  I should take the first train forthe South to-morrow morning!""Really!" said he, with considerable coolness. "For I have been thinkingthat those names we printed on the sands""That you printed, you mean!""were above high-water mark.  Consequently they will remain there forsome little time. Now it is highly probable that some of our friends maybe walking along to Port Bn this afternoon; and if they were to catchsight of those hieroglyphics""Hubert," said she, with decision.  "You must go along immediately afterluncheon and score them out.  I would not for the world have thoseDrexel girls suspect what has happened!""Won't you come with me, Madge, after luncheon?""Oh, we can't be haunting those sands all day like a couple ofsea-gulls!""But I think you might come!" he pleaded."Very well," said she, "I suppose I must begin with obedience."And yet they seemed in no hurry to get on to the house.  A robin perchedhimself on the wire fence not four yards away, and jerked his head, andwatched them with his small, black, lustrous eye. A weasel came trottingdown the road, stopped, looked, and glided noiselessly into theplantation. Two wood-pigeons went swiftly across an opening in thetrees; a large hawk soared far overhead. On this still Sunday morningthere seemed to be no one abroad; and then these two had much to sayabout a ring, and a locket, and similar weighty matters.  Moreover,there was the assignation about the afternoon to be arranged.But at length they managed to tear themselves away from this secludedplace; they went round by the front of the big grey building; and in sodoing had to pass the dining-room window."Oh my gracious goodness!" Mrs. Ellison exclaimedand in no stimulatedhorror this time. "They're all in at lunch, every one of them, and Idon't know how long they mayn't have been in! What shall I do!"And then a sudden thought seemed to strike her."Hubert, my headache has come back!  I'm going up to my room.  Will yougive my excuses to Mrs. Somerville?  I'd a hundred times rather starvethanthan be found out.""Oh, that is all nonsense!" said hebut in an undertone, for they werenow in the spacious stone-paved hall.  "Go to your room, if you like;and I'll tell Mrs. Somerville, and she'll send you up something.  Youmustn't starve, for you're going round with me to Port Bn in theafternoon."And, of course, the gentle hostess was grieved to hear that her friendhad not yet got rid of her headache; and she herself went forthwith toMrs. Ellison's room, to see what would most readily tempt the appetiteof the poor invalid.  The poor invalid was at her dressing-table, takingoff her bonnet. She wheeled round."I am so sorry, dear, about your headache" her hostess was beginning,when the young widow went instantly to the door and shut it.  Then shecame back; and there was a most curious lookof laughter, perhapsin herextremely pretty eyes."Never mind about the headache!" she said to her astonished friend, whosaw no cause for this amused embarrassment, nor yet for the exceedinglyaffectionate way in which both her hands had been seized.  "The headacheis gone.  I'veI've something else to tell youoh, you'd never guess itin the world!  My dear, my dear," she cried in a whisper, and hertell-tale eyes were full of confusion as well as laughter.  "You'd neverguessbutbut I've gone and made a fool of myself for the second time!"CHAPTER III."HOLY PALMER'S KISS."This was a bright and cheerful afternoon in November; and old GeorgeBethune and his granddaughter were walking down Regent-street.  Abrilliant afternoon, indeed; and the scene around them was quite gay andanimated; for the wintry sunlight was shining on the big shop-fronts,and on the busy pavements, and on the open carriages that rolled by withtheir occupants gorgeous in velvet and silk and fur.  Nor was GeorgeBethune moved to any spirit of envy by all this display of luxury andwealth; no more than he was oppressed by any sense of solitariness amidthis slow-moving, murmuring crowd.  He walked with head erect; he paidbut little heed to the passers-by; he was singing aloud, and that in acareless and florid fashion"The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith,Fu' loud the wind blaws frae the ferry,The ship rides by the Berwick Law,And I maun leave my bonnie Mary."But suddenly he stopped: his attention had been caught by a window, orrather a series of windows, containing all sorts of Scotch articles andstuffs."Maisrie," said he, as his eye ran over these varied wares and fabrics,"couldn't youcouldn't you buy some little bit of a thing?""Why, grandfather?" she asked."Oh, well," he answered, with an air of lofty indifference, "it is but atriflebut a trifle; only I may have told you that my friend Carmichaelis a good Scotgood friend and good Scot are synonymous terms, to mythinkingandand as you are going to call on him for the first time, youmight show him you are not ashamed of your country.  Isn't theresomething there, Maisrie?" he continued, still regarding the articles inthe window.  "Some little bit of tartan ribbonsomething you could putround your neckwhatever you likemerely to show that you fly yourcountry's colours, and are not ashamed of them""But why should I pretend to be Scotch, grandfather, when I am notScotch?" she said.He was not angry: he was amused."Younot Scotch?  You, of all people in the world, not Scotch?  What areyou, then?  A Bethune of Ballorayay, and if justice were done, theowner and mistress of Balloray, Ballingean, and Cadzowand yet you arenot Scotch?  Where got you your name?  What is your lineageyourbloodyour right and title to the lands of Balloray and Ballingean?  AndI may see you there yet, Maisrie; I may see you there yet.  Strangerthings have happened.  But come away nowwe need not quarrel about a bitof ribbonand I know Mr. Carmichael will receive you as his countrywomaneven if you have not a shred of tartan about you."Indeed he had taken no offence: once more he was marching along, withfearless eye and undaunted front, while he had resumed his gallantsinging"But it's not the roar o' sea or shoreWad mak' me langer wish to tarry,Nor shouts o' war that's heard afarIt's leaving thee, my bonnie Mary!"They went down to one of the big hotels in Northumberland Avenue; askedat the office for Mr. Carmichael; and after an immeasurable length ofwaiting were conducted to his room. Here Maisrie was introduced to atall, fresh-coloured, angular-boned man, who had shrewd grey eyes thatwere also good-humoured.  Much too good-humoured they were in Maisrie'sestimation, when they chanced to regard her grandfather: they seemed toconvey a sort of easy patronage, almost a kind of good-natured pity,that she was quick to resent.  But how could she interfere?  These werebusiness matters that were being talked of; and she sate somewhat apart,forced to listen, but not taking any share in the conversation.Presently, however, she heard something that startled her out of thisapathetic concurrence, and set all her pulses flying.  The tall,raw-boned, newspaper proprietor, eyeing this proud-featured old man witha not unkindly scrutiny, was referring to the volume on the ScottishPoets in America which George Bethune had failed to bring out in time;and his speech was considerate."It is not the first case of forestalling I have known," said he; "andit must just be looked on as a bit of bad luck.  Better fortune nexttime. By the way, there is another little circumstance connected withthat bookperhaps I should not mention itbut I will be discreet.  Nonames; and yet you may like to hear that you have got another friendsomewheresomewhere in the background"It was at this point that Maisrie began to listen, rather breathlessly."Oh, yes, your friendyour unknown friendwanted to be generous enough,"Mr. Carmichael continued.  "He wrote to me saying he understood that Ihad advanced a certain sum towards the publication of the work; and hewent on to explain that as certain things had happened to prevent yourbringing it out, he wished to be allowed to refund the money.  Oh, yes,a very generous offer; for all was to be done in the profoundestsecrecy; you were not to know anything about it, lest you should beoffended.  And yet it seemed to me you should be glad to learn thatthere was someone interesting himself in your affairs."The two men were not looking at the girl: they could not see the prideand gratitude that were in her eyes.  "And Vincent never told me aword," she was saying to herself, with her heart beating warm and fast.But that was not the mood in which old George Bethune took this matter.A dark frown was on his shaggy eyebrows."I do not see what right anyone has to intermeddle," said, he, in tonesthat fell cruelly on Maisrie's ear, "still less to pay money for me onthe assumption that I had forgotten, or was unwilling to discharge, ajust debt""Come, come, come, Mr. Bethune," said the newspaper proprietor, with asort of condescending good-nature, "you must not take it that way.  Tobegin with, he did not pay any money at all.  I did not allow him.  Isaid 'Thank you; but this is a private arrangement between Mr. Bethuneand myself; and if he considers there is any indebtedness, then he canwipe that off by contributions to the Chronicle.'  So you see you haveonly to thank him for the intention""Oh, very well," said the old man, changing his tone at once.  "No harmin that.  No harm whatever. Misplaced intentionbutbut creditable. Andnow," he continued, in a still lighter strain, "since you mention theChronicle, Mr. Carmichael, I must tell you of a scheme I have had forsome time in mind.  It is a series of papers on the old ballads ofScotlandor rather the chief of themtaking one for each weekly article,giving the different versions, with historical and philological notes.What do you think of that, now?  Look at the materialthe finest in theworld!the elemental passions, the tragic situations that are farremoved from any literary form or fashion, that go straight to the heartand the imagination.  Each of them a splendid text!" he proceeded, withan ever-increasing enthusiasm.  "Think of Edom o' Gordon, and the Wifeof Usher's Well, and the Baron o' Brackla; Annie of Lochryan, HyndeEtin, the piteous cry of 'Helen of Kirkconnell,' and the Rose of Yarrowseeking her slain lover by bank and brae.  And what could be moreinteresting than the collation of the various versions of those oldballads, showing how they have been altered here and there as they weresaid or sung, and how even important passages may have been dropped outin course of time and transmission.  Look, for example, at 'BarbaraAllan.'  The version in Percy's Reliques is as bad and stupid as it canbe; but it is worse than that: it is incomprehensible.  Who can believethat the maiden came to the bedside of her dying lover only to flout andjeer, and that for no reason whatever?  And when she sees his corpse'With scornful eye she looked downe,Her cheek with laughter swellin''"Well, I say that is not true," he went on vehemently; "it never wastrue: it contradicts human nature; it is false, and bad, and impossible.But turn to our Scottish version!  When Sir John Graeme o' the WestCountrie, lying sore sick, sends for his sweetheart, she makes noconcealment of the cause of the feud that has been between themof thewrong that is rankling at her heart:'O dinna ye mind, young man,' said she,'When the red wine ye were filling,That ye made the healths gae round and round,And slighted Barbara Allan?'And proud and indignant she turns away.  There is no sham laughter here;no impossible cruelty; but a quarrel between two fond lovers thatbecomes suddenly tragic, when death steps in to prevent the possibilityof any reconciliation.He turned his face unto the wa',And death was with him dealing:'Adieu, adieu, my dear friends a',Be kind to Barbara Allan!'Can anything be more simple, and natural, and inexpressibly sad as well?It is the story of a tragic quarrel between two true lovers: it is notthe impossible and preposterous story of a giggling hoyden grinning at acorpse!"And here it was probable that old George Bethune, having warmed to hissubject, and being as usual wildly enamoured of his latest scheme, wouldhave gone on to give further instances of the value of collation andcomparison, but that Mr. Carmichael was forced to interrupt.  Theproprietor of the Edinburgh Chronicle was a busy man during his briefvisits to town."Very well, Mr. Bethune," said he.  "I think your idea a very goodonean excellent one, in fact, for the weekly edition of a Scotch paper;and I will give you carte blanche as to the number of articles.  Whoknows," he added, with a condescending smile, "but that they may grow toa bookto take the place of the one that was snatched out of yourhands?"And again, as his visitors were leaving, he said in the samegood-humoured way"I presume it is not necessary for us to discuss the question of terms,especially before a young lady. If you have been satisfied with us sofar""I am quite content to leave that with you: quite," interposed the oldman, with some little dignity."I was only going to say," Mr. Carmichael resumed, "that a series ofarticles such as you suggest may require a good deal of research andtrouble: so that, when the reckoning comes, I will see you are put onthe most favoured nation scale. And not a word more about the Americanbook: we were disappointedthat is all."This latter admonition was wholly unnecessary. When George Bethune gotout into the street again, with Maisrie as his sole companion andconfidante, it was not of that lost opportunity he was talking, it wasall of this new project that had seized his imagination.  They had tomake one or two calls, in the now gathering dusk; but ever, as they cameout again into the crowded thoroughfares, he returned to the old balladsand the opportunities they presented for a series of discursive papers.And Maisrie was about as eager in anticipation as himself."Oh, yes, grandfather," she said, "you could not have thought of ahappier subject.  And you will begin at once, grandfather, won't you?Do you think I shall be able to help you in the very least way?it wouldplease me so much if I could search out things for you, or copy, or helpyou in the smallest way.  And I know it will be a labour of love foryou; it will be a constant delight; and all the more that the days aregetting short now, and we shall have to be more indoors.  And then youheard what Mr. Carmichael said, grandfather; and if he is going to payyou well for these articles, you will soon be able to give him back themoney he advanced to you about that unfortunate book""Oh, don't you bother about such things!" he said, with an impatientfrown.  "When I am planning out an important work, I don't want to bereminded that it will result in merely so many guineas.  That is not thespirit in which I enter upon such an undertaking.  When I write, it isnot with an eye to the kitchen.  Unless some nobler impulse propels,then be sure the result will be despicable.  However, I suppose womenare like that; when you are thinking of the literature of your nativelandof perhaps adding some little tributary wreaththey are lookingtowards grocers' bills.  The kitchenthe kitchen is before themnot thedales and vales of Scotland, where lovers loved, and werebroken-hearted.  The kitchen"But Maisrie was not disconcerted by this rebuke."And you will begin at once, grandfather," she said, cheerfully.  "Oh, Iknow it will be so delightful an occupation for you.  And I don't wonderthat Mr. Carmichael was glad to have such a chance.  Then it won'tinvolve any expense of travelling, like the other book you thought of,about the Scotland of Scotch songs.  The winter evenings won't be sodull, grandfather, when you have this to occupy you; you will forget itis winter altogether, when you are busy with those beautiful scenes andstories.  And will you tell Vincent this evening, grandfather? he willbe so interested: it will be something to talk of at dinner."But Vincent was to hear of this great undertaking before then.  WhenMaisrie and her grandfather reached the door of their lodgings, he saidto her"You can go in now, Maisrie, and have the gas lit.  I must walk along tothe library, and see what books they have; but I'm afraid I shall haveto get Motherwell, and Pinkerton, and Allan Cunningham, and the rest ofthem from Scotland.  Aytoun they are sure to have, I suppose."So they parted for the moment; and Maisrie went upstairs and lit the gasin the little parlour. Then, without taking off her bonnet, she satedown and fell into a reverienot a very sad one, as it seemed.  She wassitting thus absorbed in silent fancies, when a familiar sound outsidestartled her into attention; she sprang to her feet; the next instantthe door was opened; the next again she was advancing to the tall andhandsome young stranger who stood somewhat diffidently there, and bothher hands were outstretched, and a light of joy and gratitude wasshining in her eyes."Oh, Vincent, I am so glad you have come over!" she said, in a way thatwas far from usual with her, and she held both his hands for more than asecond or two, and her grateful eyes were fixed on his without anythought of embarrassment.  "I was thinking of you.  You have been sokindso generous! I wanted to thank you, and I am so glad to have thechance""But what is it, Maisrie?I'm sure there is nothing you have to thank mefor!" said he, as he shut the door behind him, and came forward, andtook a seat not very far away from her.  He was a little bewildered.  Inher sudden access of gratitude, when she took both his hands in hers,she had come quite close to him; and the scent of a sandal-wood necklacethat she wore seemed to touch him as with a touch of herself.  He knewthose fragrant beads; more than once he had perceived the slight andsubtle odour, as she passed him, or as he helped her on with her cloak;and he had come to associate it with her, as if it were part of her,some breathing thing, that could touch, and thrill.  And this time ithad come so nearBut that bewilderment of the senses lasted only for a moment.  MaisrieBethune was not near to him at all: she was worlds and worlds away.  Itwas not a mere whiff of perfume that could bring her near to him.Always to him she appeared to be strangely unapproachable and remote.Perhaps it was the loneliness of her position, perhaps it was theuncertainty of her future, and those vague possibilities of which hergrandfather had spoken, or perhaps it was the reverence of undivided andunselfish love on his part; but at all events she seemed to live in asort of sacred and mysterious isolationto be surrounded by a spellwhich he dared not seek to break by any rude contact.  And yet surelyher eyes were regarding his with sufficient frankness and friendliness,and even more than friendliness, now as she spoke."This afternoon we called on Mr. Carmichael," said Maisrie, "Mr.Carmichael of the Edinburgh Chronicle.  He told us someone had offeredto repay the money he had advanced to my grandfather on account of thatAmerican book: and though he did not mention any name, do you think Idid not know who it was, Vincent?  Be sure I knewin a moment!  And younever said a word about it!  I might never have known but for thisaccidentI might never have had the chance of thanking youasas Ishould like to do nowonlyonly it isn't quite easy to say everythingone feels""Oh, but that is nothing at all, Maisrie!" said he, coming quickly toher rescue.  "You have nothing to thank me fornothing!  It is true Imade the offer; but it was not accepted; and why should I say anythingabout it to you?""Ah, but the intention is enough," said she (for she knew nothing abouthis having paid Lord Musselburgh the 50).  "And you cannot prevent mybeing very, very grateful to you for such thoughtfulness and kindness.To save my grandfather's self-respectto prevent him being misunderstoodbyby strangersbecausebecause he is so forgetful: do you think,Vincent, I cannot see your motive, and be very, very grateful?  Andnever saying a word, too!  You should have told me, Vincent!  But Isuppose that was still further kindnessyou thought I might beembarrassedand not able to thank youwhich is just the case""Oh, Maisrie, don't make a fuss about nothing!" he protested."I know whether it is nothing or not," said she, proudly.  "Andandperhaps if you had lived as we have livedwandering from place toplaceyou would set more store by an act of friendship. Friends arelittle to youyou have too many of them""Oh, Maisrie, don't talk like that!" he said. "You make me ashamed.What have I done?nothing! I wish there was some real thing I could doto prove my friendship for your grandfather and yourselfthen you mightsee""Haven't you proved it every day, every hour almost, since ever we haveknown you?" she said, in rather a low voice."Ah, well, perhaps there may come a chance" said he; and then hestopped short; for here was old George Bethune, with half-a-dozenvolumes under his arm, and himself all eagerness and garrulity about hisnew undertaking.At the little dinner that evening in the restaurant, there was quite anunusual animation, and that not solely because this was the ninth ofNovember, and they were proposing to go out later on and look at theilluminations in the principal thoroughfares. Vincent thought he hadnever seen Maisrie Bethune appear so light-hearted and happy; and shewas particularly kind to him; when she regarded him, there still seemedto be a mild gratitude shining in the clear and eloquent deeps of hereyes.  Gratitude for what!he asked himself, with a touch of scorn. Itwas but an ordinary act of acquaintanceship: why should this beautiful,sensitive, proud-spirited creature have to debase herself to thank himfor such a trifle?  He felt ashamed of himself.  It was earninggratitude by false pretences.  The very kindness shining there in hereyes was a sort of reproach: what had he done to deserve it?  Ah, if sheonly knew what he was ready to dowhen occasion offered!And never before had he seen Maisrie so bravely confident about any ofher grandfather's literary projects."You see, Vincent," she said, as if he needed any convincing, when shewas satisfied! "in the end it will make a far more interesting book thanthe Scotch-American one; and in the meantime there will be the series ofarticles appearing from week to week, to attract attention to thesubject.  And then, although grandfather says I take a low and mercenaryview of literature, all the same I am glad he is to be well-paid for thearticles; and there are to be as many as he likes; and when they arecompleted, then comes the publication of the book, which should be asinteresting to Mr. Carmichael, or Lord Musselburgh, or anyone, as theScotch-American volume.  And grandfather is going to begin at once; andI am asking him whether I cannot be of any use to him, in the humblestway.  A glossary, grandfather; you must have a glossary of the Scotchwords: couldn't I compile that for you?""I have been wondering," the old man said, absently, and withoutanswering her question, "since I came into this room, whether it wouldbe possible to classify them into ballads of action and ballads of thesupernatural.  I imagine the former belong more to the south country;and that most of the latter had their origin in the north.  And yet evenin the Battle of Otterburn, the Douglas says'But I hae dreamed a dreary dream,Ayont the Isle o' Skye,I saw a deid man win a fight,And I think that man was I.'Well, that may have been an interpolation; at all events, it is aHighland touch; the strong, brisk, matter-of-fact Border ballad hasseldom anything of that kind in it.  The bold Buccleuch and KinmontWillie were too much in the saddle to have time for wraiths.  Youremember, Maisrie, when they brought word to 'the bauld Keeper' thatKinmont Willie was a captive in Carlisle Castle?He has ta'en the table wi' his hand,He garred the red wine spring on hie'Now a curse upon my head,' he cried,'But avenged on Lord Scroop I'll be!O is my basnet a widow's curch,Or my lance a wand of the willow-tree,Or my arm a lady's lily hand,That an English lord should lichtly me?'That is more like the ballad of the south: sharp and vivid, full ofaction and spirit, and the audacious delight of life: when you wantmystery and imagination and supernatural terrors you must turn to thebrooding and darkened regions of the north. The Demon Lover is clearlyof northern origin; its hell is the Scandinavian hell; not the fieryfurnace of the eastern mind, but a desolation of cold and wet.'O what'n a mountain's yon,' she said,'Sae dreary wi' frost and snow?''O yon is the mountain o' hell,' he cried,'Where you and I maun go!'""The Demon Lover?" said Maisrie, inquiringly; and Vincent could not butnotice how skilfully and sedulously she fanned the old man's interest inthis new scheme by herself pretending to be deeply interested."Don't you know it, Maisrie?" said he.  "It is the story of two loverswho were parted; and he returns after seven years to claim thefulfilment of her vows; and finds that in his absence she has takensomeone else for her husband.  It is a dangerous positionif he wishesher to go away with him; for a woman never forgets her first lover; whatis more, she attributes all the natural and inevitable disillusionmentof marriage to her husband, whilst the romance attaching to her firstlove remains undimmed.  Therefore, I say let Auld Robin Gray beware!thewife is not always so loyal to the disillusioniser as was the Jeannie ofthe modern song.  Well, in this case, she who has been a falsesweetheart, proves a false wife'If I was to leave my husband dear,And my twa babes also,O where is it you would tak' me to,If I with thee should go?'And the lover becomes the avenger; together they sail away on a strangeship, until they descry the mountains of hell; and the lover turneddemon warns her of her doom.And aye when she turned her round about,Aye taller he seemed for to be,Until that the tops o' that gallant shipNae taller were than he.He struck the topmast wi' his hand,The foremast wi' his knee;And he brak that gallant ship in twain,And sank her in the sea.""Will there be illustrations, sir?" asked Vincent (in humble imitationof Maisrie).  "And an dition de luxe?  For that, I imagine, is wheremy co-operation might come in.  Maisrie seems so anxious to help; and Ishould like to take my part too.""It is a far cry to the completion of such an undertaking as that," saidthe old man, rather wistfully.But Maisrie would not have him lapse into any despondent mood."You must not look so far ahead, grandfather," she said, cheerfully."You must think of your own pride and satisfaction in beginning it; andI know you will be delighted; for who can do it as well as you?  And ifI am so very mercenary, I can't help it; only I shall be all the betterpleased to remember that you are being properly paid for your work.Supposing the kitchen is my department?Oh, very well!somebody mustlook to that. It will be a labour of love for you, grandfather, all theway through; and then, when the book is nearing completion, just thinkof the pride you will have in choosing someone, some distinguishedperson, for the dedication.  It will be far more your own work thanmerely giving specimens of the Scottish-American poets; indeed it willbe all your own; for the ballads are only to be texts, as you say.  AndI think we should go home now, and you will look over some of the books.I don't care about the illuminationsnot I.  What is the Lord Mayor'sDay to Vincent or mewhen you might be telling us about KatherineJanfarie and May Collean?""No, no, Maisrie," said he, as he rose from the table.  "Give me alittle time for preparation.  We promised to show you the streets litup.  And mind you wrap yourself well, Maisrie, for the evenings aregetting cold now."But little did Vincent Harris, as he helped her on with her cloak, andmade ready to go out into the dusky and glaring thoroughfares, foreseewhat was going to befall him that night.When they issued forth into Regent-street, there was as yet no verydense crowd, though here and there the front of a tall building flamedin yellow fire; but nevertheless Maisrie said"We must not get separated, grandfather.  Let me go between you two; andI will take your arm on the one side and Vincent's on the other; and ifwe have occasionally to go sideways, we can always keep together.""Oh, I shan't let you be dragged away, Maisrie," the younger man said."And if you don't mind, I think this will be a better way of holding onto you" and therewith he made bold to pass his hand underneath thehanging sleeve of her cloak, and there he took hold of her arm from theinsiderather timidly, perhaps, but then his grasp could be tightened,if needs were."Yes," said she, placidly, and she made a little movement as though shewould draw both her companions closer to her.  "This is verycomfortable.  Which way, grandfather?"And so the little group of friends, knit together by many intimateinterests and much association, adventured out into the great world ofLondon that was all astir now with a vague and half-subdued excitement.There was no need for them to talk; they had but to look at the blazingstars, and feathers, and initial letters, and to make their way throughthe murmuring throng.  There was no jostling; the crowd was entirelygood-natured; and if these three could not always go abreast, they thenwent diagonally for a second or so, and were not separated.  Of course,Vincent had to hold Maisrie a little more firmly now; his arm wasparallel with hers, and his hand had hold of her wrist; and there was anintoxicating sense of warmth as well as of close companionship in thismutual clinging.  Thus they slowly and idly passed away downRegent-street, well content with their own silence and the brilliantsights around them.  Then a little incident occurred.  A vehicle wascoming along one of the smaller thoroughfares they had to cross; therewas a brief bit of a scrimmage; and Maisrie, the better to keep hold ofher companion, slipped her hand from the muff that was slung round herneck, and seized his hand, that was ready enough, be sure, to respond.They got over without further trouble; they mixed once more in thisvast, slow-moving assemblageonly he retained the hand she had givenhim, and that with no uncertain grasp.It was a wonderful, mysterious, secret thing to be happening in themidst of all this great, careless, dusky crowd.  Her hand, that wasungloved, was soft and warm after coming out of its cosy resting-place;and it was not likely to get cold, when it was held so tight, under theconcealment of the hanging sleeve.  And thenwell, probably the girl didnot know what she was doing; she was affected by all this excitementaround her; it was "Look, grandfather, look!" from time to time; mostlikely she thought no more of her hand being held than if she werecrossing a meadow in the spring-time with some carelessgirl-companionbut however that may be, what must she do but open herfingers, so that his should interclasp with hers! Nay, she opened themagain, and shut them again, the better to adjust that gentle clasp; andevery touch thrilled through him, so that he walked as one in a dream.He dared hardly breathe, he durst not speak, lest some stray word of hismight startle her into consciousness, and shatter this miracle.  She didnot seem to be in the least aware: it was "Which way, grandfather?" or"Take care, grandfather!" and her eyes were turned to the brilliant andparti-coloured devices in front of the Pall Mall clubs, and not at allto the handsome lad who walked so close to her that now and again hecould detect some faint trace of the odour of sandal-wood that seemed tohover around her neck and her hair.  What did he see or hear of thecrowd now, or of the garish lights along the houses?  He walked in anenchanted land: there were only two people in it: and they were boundtogether, in subtle intercommunion, by this magic grasp.  There waswonder as well as joy in his mind; the sensation was so new and strange.Did he remember that "palm to palm" was "holy palmer's kiss"?  No, heremembered nothing; he only knew that he held Maisrie's hand interlockedwith his, in this secret fashion; and that all the wild phantasmagoriaaround them was something unreal and visionary with which neither he norshe had any concern.And even now his cup of bliss and bewilderment was not yet full, on thismarvellous night.  When at last they drew away from the crowded streetsand found themselves in quieter thoroughfares on their way home, the oldman drew a breath of relief."This is better, Maisrie," he said.  "It seems as if we had been out ona roaring sea, and had at length drifted into stillness and peace.""And we were not separated once, grandfather," said she, cheerfully."Not once all the time."And then it was Vincent who spoke."I don't see why we should ever separate," said he.  "Friends are fewenough in this world.""Yes, indeed, good friends are few," Maisrie said; and therewithalerehe could tell what was happeningshe had taken his hand that she held inhers and raised it, and for one brief moment pressed it against herheart.  The little impulsive movementof gratitude perhaps; perhaps ofaffection; perhaps of both combinedcould not have been perceived by anypasser-by; and yet the young man seemed to be struck by a sudden shockof fear; he could not speak; his own heart was beating so that speechwas impossible.  For it appeared to him in that swift second as if thescales had fallen from his eyes.  To him she was no longer an elusivephantoma miragea visionpensive, and mysterious, and remote; now hesaw her a beautiful young creature of flesh and blood, whose hands andheart were warm, who could cling for help and companionship andsympathy, who was not afraid to speak and act, when love or gratitudeprompted her.  No longer the strangely isolated maiden: theunapproachable had all at once come near; so near that the scent ofsandalwood touched him from time to time; so near that her soft fingerswere interclasped with his, pulsating there, nestling there, notrelaxing their hold, nor inclined to do that.  This was no piece ofstatuary, to be worshipped from afar: this was Maisrie Bethune, whosearm lay close and caressing against his, under the friendly shelter ofthat hanging sleeve, whose step went with his step as they walkedtogether, whose breathing he could almost overhear, in the silence ofthis gracious night.  And what had she not confessed, in that artlessway?And then amid his bewilderment and breathless exultation a horrid fancyshot across his brain. Perhaps that was no confession at all; but aquite simple, unpremeditated, even unconscious, act of mere friendlinessand sympathy?  Did she know that she had done it?  Would she repeat it?Would she give him further assurance?  Might she not herself wish to becertain that he had understoodthat he had received a message that wasto change all his life?Well, he had hold of her hand.  Gently and with trembling and eagertouch he tried to raise ithe would have her replace his own hand wherethat had been for one delirious moment: perhaps to ask if her heart hadstill, and for ever and always, the same message to send.  Alas! she didnot yield to the mute invitation.  Perhaps she did not comprehend it.For here they were at the corner of the little street in which theylived; and she unclasped her fingers, so that his also might be releasedfrom their too happy imprisonment; and she was talking to hergrandfather when the door of the house was reached.  Nor did her eyessay anything as he bade her good-bye for the night. Perhaps it was all amistake, then?some little involuntary act of kindness, and nothingmore?CHAPTER IV.INTERPOSITION.Yes, she had come nearso near that she seemed to absorb his very life.He could think of nothing but her.  As he walked away down through thedark streets, he imagined her to be still by his side; he tried to fancyhe could detect some faint perfume of sandal-wood in the surroundingair; his right hand tingled yet with the touch of her warm,interclasping fingers.  And if at one moment his heart beat high withthe assurance that she had confessed her love and given herself to him,the next he tortured himself with vague alarms, and wondered how thelong night was to be got through, before he could go up to her in themorning, and challenge her to speak.  All the future was filled withher; and there again he saw himself by her side, her strong andconfident protector.  And yet if he had mistaken that mute declarationof hers?  What if, after all, it were merely a timid expression,involuntary and unpremeditated, of her friendship, her kindness, hergratitude?Well, he knew he could get no confirmation of either his audacious hopesor his depressing fears until the next day; and as the alternationbetween the two moods was altogether a maddening thing, he resolved toseek relief and distraction.  As soon as he got to his own room down inGrosvenor Place he took out a foolscap sheet of paper which had certainpencillings on it.  These formed, in fact, an outline sketch of alecture which he had undertaken to deliver before the Mendover FreeLibrary Association; and it was high time he was getting on with it, forthe meeting was to be held in the following week.  But strange thingshappened with this sheet of paper.  Apparently the pencilled heading was"The Unscrupulousness of Wealth;" but the longer he looked at thetitle, the more clearly did it spell out "Maisrie Bethune."  Thesub-headings, too, began to reveal hidden mysteries.  Here was one whichon the face of it read "Circumstances in which the capitalist maybecome a tyrant in spite of himself."  But behold! that scrawl slowlydisappeared, and in its place a picture grew into existence.  He seemedto recognise the big grey buildingwas it not the mansion-house ofBalloray?and well he knew the figure of the tall young girl with thelong-flowing hair who, in riding-habit, came out on to the terrace,above the wide stone steps.  Is that her grandfather, proud-featured,lion-hearted, with the same undaunted demeanour as of old, come to waveher good-bye?  The splendour of the morning is all around her; there isa white road outside the grounds, and an avenue of beech trees dappledwith sun and shade: when she vanishes into that wonderland of foliage,she seems to take the light of the day away with her.  And again, whatfurther miracle is this?  Another vision interposes, and at lengthbecomes dominant; and this one is very different; this one is of astreet in Toronto.  And here also is a young girl; but now she is all inblack; and she is aloneshe knows not one of those passers-by.  Pale andpensive she walks on; her eyes are downcast; perhaps she is thinking ofwide intervening seas, and of her loneliness, and of one who used to beher friend.  Tears?but of what avail are these, here in this strangecity?they are only a confession of helplessnessperhaps of despair...Vincent Harris got up and walked about the room: at this rate themembers of the Mendover Free Library Association were not likely toreceive much instruction.  And indeed he did not return to that sheet offoolscap; his brain could conjure up quite sufficient visions of thefuture without having recourse to any palimpsest discoveries; while asfor his handwell, perhaps the hand that Maisrie had held over her heartfor one wild, startling moment, was a little too unsteady to use apencil. If only the hours would go by!  He tried to readand could not.He got hold of a map of Scotland, and traced out the line of travel heshould like to follow if Maisrie and her grandfather and himself shouldever start on their long-projected tour.  He turned to a map of theUnited States, and sought out Omaha: Maisrie's birthplace was notdistinguished by any difference of type, and yet he regarded those fiveletters with a curious interest and fascination.  He recalled his havingstood on the heights of Council Bluffs, and looked across the yellowMissouri; and now he marvelled that he could have contemplated the wide,straggling city with comparative indifference.  Perhaps, by diligentseeking on the morrowfor the capital of Nebraska is an importantplacehe might even in London discover a photograph or two to put on hismantel-shelf; and then he could stand opposite them and say, "Why,Maisrie must have passed that railway station many a time!" or "Maisriemust often have looked up to the spire of the High School, there on thehill."  To think that he had been twice in Omahawithout caringwithoutknowing!  And so his eyes rested on this little word in the middle ofthe big map; but his imagination was far away.Well, the longest night must have an end; and yet the new dawn broughtno surcease to his anxieties; for how was he to have an opportunity ofspeaking with Maisrie alone?  He was up in the little Mayfair streetbetimes; and made some pretence of beginning work; but that was soonabandoned.  He could not keep his eyes on any book or paper when therewere those two windows over the way.  When would she appear there towater the chrysanthemums in the little balcony? If she accidentallycaught sight of him, might not some tell-tale flush reveal all he wantedto know? Or she might be coming out on some errandso that he couldquickly follow her?  Or perhaps her grandfather might be going to thelibrary, leaving her at home by herself?  The door of the house oppositegrew to be as fascinating as the windows; unknown possibilities might besprung upon him at any moment.It was quite a cheerful morningfor London in November.  If pale mistshung about the thoroughfares, at least some trace of blue wasdiscernible overhead; and on the panes of the higher windows thesunlight shone here and there a dull gleaming gold.  The butcher's boywhistled loudly as he marched by; the cabman flicked at his horse out ofmere good humour; the ostlers in the adjacent mews made merry withbandied jests.  It seemed too fine a morning for the collation of Scotchballads; and so indeed it proved to be; for about eleven o'clock thedoor across the way was opened, and out came Mr. Bethune and hisgranddaughter into the wintry sunlight.  Maisrie did not look up. Thetwo were talking together as they went along the little thoroughfare andturned into Park Street. The next moment Vincent had snatched up his hatand gloves, and was off in pursuit.But he did not seek to overtake them.  On the contrary, he kept as widea space between them and him as he had done before he had ever dared toaddress them; and yet the distance was not so great but that he couldobserve Maisrie's every gesture and the graceful motion of every step.She wore those hanging sleeves, too, that had hidden his arm on thepreceding nightthose hanging sleeves that had allowed her to saysomething in secret to him, even amid the noise and movement of a greatcrowd.  And now that he saw her actual self instead of the vague phantomof his reveries, he plucked up courage.  Yes, she must have known whatshe was doing.  Those were flesh and blood fingers that had taken holdof his; when she raised his hand to her heart, it could not have beenaltogether through inadvertence.  Once or twice a wild fancy got intohis head that here and now he would hasten forward, and seize her arm,as if by right, and say 'Maisrie, there is no need of words between us:I am here at your side, and mean to remain here.  Whatever that messagemeant, I claim you as mine.'  And then again he drew back.  What ifthere were some mistake?  Hyde Park did not seem a fitting place forexplanations.  And then, her grandfather might be more than astonished.Yet hour after hour of this terrible day went by, and brought him nonearer to the discovery he longed for.  When Maisrie and her grandfatherreturned from their stroll through the Park, the young man went back tothe sheet of foolscap on which he meant to shadow forth the outlines ofhis lecture.  The effort was absurd.  He might keep his eyesmechanically fixed on the paper; but his brain refused to act.Industrycapitalthe proposed resumption by the workers of the world ofthe mines, factories, docks, ships, canals, railways which their labourhad constructedthe impracticability of land nationalisationand soforth: what were these but mere lifeless phrases, when his heart waslistening for the smallest sound on the other side of the street?  Andill-luck pursued him. She did not come once to the window.  Thechrysanthemums in the little balcony were quite neglected.  Theafternoon passed, and neither she nor her grandfather came out alone.Then, when he went over as usual about half-past six, there was nochance of his speaking to her by herself; in fact, both she and hergrandfather were seated at the one table, with a heap of books andpapers before them."Enough, Maisrie, enough," Mr. Bethune said blithely, and he rose atonce.  "You have had your wishthough I don't see why you shouldundertake any such drudgery"She also rose to receive the visitor; and as she gave him her hand for amoment, and regarded him with very friendly eyes, there was not theleast trace of self-consciousness in her manner."Yes," said she, with a bright and frank smile, "grandfather hasconferred a new dignity on me. I am become his amanuensis.  Not that Iam the slightest real use to him, I suppose; it is only done to pleaseme; still, I take it seriously, and pretend to be doing my share.  Timeto go, is it?very well, I shall be ready in a minute."He was amazed and mortified beyond measure by this perfectself-possession.  Had nothing whatever happened the night before, then?There was no secret between them at all?  She had made noconfessiongiven him no message?  And then wounded pride stepped in andspokewith its usual violence and cruel injustice.  Perhaps there werepeople who dispensed their caresses so freely that they thought nothingof them?  What had startled him, a man, might be only a matter of courseto her, a girl?  Nay,for what will not a lover say in a passion ofjealous anger and disappointment?perhaps he was not the first nor theonly one who had been similarly bewildered?He had no word for Maisrie on her return to the room.  When the three ofthem went out into the street, he forsook his usual post by her side,and walked with her grandfather, to whom he talked exclusively.  And ofcourse, as his questions were all about the projected compilation ofballads, and as old George Bethune was always keenly enthusiastic aboutany new undertaking, there was no stint to their conversation.  Maisriewalked on in silence and unheeded.  When they reached the restaurant,and as they were taking their seats at the little table, she glanced atthe young man; but his eyes did not happen to meet hers.  And there wasno place for her in their talk."No," old George Bethune was sayingand with considerable animation, forhe appeared to have been looking over some of the ballads during theday, and his mind was still fired by the recollection of them, "I thinkthey are beyond the reach of illustration, even if there should be andition de luxe.  I have considered your suggestion more than once;but I fear the drawing would in almost every instance be an anticlimaxto the power and simplicity and pathos of the printed page.  No picturecould be as vivid and clear and striking as the verses themselves: why,just think of such lines as these''Tis not the frost that freezes fell,Nor blowing snaw's inclemencie;'Tis not sic cauld that makes me cry,But my love's heart grown cauld to me.When we came in by Glasgow town,We were a comely sight to see;My love was clad i' the black velvet,And I myself in cramoisie.'What picture could better that?  What picture could do anything butweaken it?  You remember in 'Edom o' Gordon' how the young maiden islowered from the burning tower only to be slain by Edom o' Gordon'sspear'They row'd her in a pair o' sheets,And tow'd her owre the wa';But on the point o' Gordon's spearShe gat a deadly fa'.O bonnie, bonnie was her mouth,And cherry were her cheeks,And clear, clear was her yellow hair,Whereon the red blood dreeps.Then wi' his spear he turned her owre;O but her face was wan!He said, "Ye are the first that e'erI wish'd alive again."He turned her owre and owre again,O but her skin was white!"I might hae spared that bonnie faceTo hae been some man's delight."Busk and boun, my merry men a',For ill dooms I do guess;I cannot look on that bonnie faceAs it lies on the grass,"'What illustration could improve on that?why, it burns clear as flame!Then, again, take the girl who was drowned by her sister in 'the bonniemill-dams o' Balloray'"At this point the silent and neglected Maisrie suddenly lookedupglancing from her grandfather to the young man in a curiouslyappealing way. She seemed to say 'Grandfather, you forget: it is notBalloray, it is Binnorie;' and again 'Vincent, he has forgotten: that isall.'  But neither of them took any notice of her; nay, the younger man,in his insensate indignation and disappointment, would not look her wayat all; while old George Bethune, with his mind fixed on those imaginarypictures, went on in a rapt fashion to repeat certain of the verses"Ye couldna see her yellow hair,Balloray, O Balloray,For gowd and pearls that were sae rare,By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.Ye couldna see her middle sma',Balloray, O Balloray,Her gowden girdle was sae braw,By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.Ye couldna see her lily feet,Balloray, O Balloray,Her gowden fringes were sae deep,By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.'Sair will they be, whae'er they be,Balloray, O Balloray,The hearts that live to weep for thee!'By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray!""It is like a picture by one of the pre-Raphaelites," Vincent said; andthen the old man proceeded to talk of paper and type and binding, as ifthe new work were just ready for press.But silence was not to reign for ever between those two.  On their wayhome Mr. Bethune was talking of "The Demon Lover," of its allegedItalian origin, and of a suggestion he had seen somewhere that it was noforsaken sweetheart who had come to tempt the wedded wife, but a fiendadopting that disguise.  When they reached the little parlour he beganto search about for the volume in which "The Demon Lover" was thustreated; but could not find it; whereupon he went off upstairs, to seeif it was not among his books and papers there.  As soon as he had gone,Maisrie rose and came over to where the young man was standing by thefireplace."What have I done, Vincent?" she said."Oh, nothing," he made answer, avoiding her eyes."I have a right to know," she said, proudly."It is nothing," said he.  "II made a mistake; that is all."She looked at him in mute reproach: then she turned away, and went backto her seat.  There was a paper-knife on the table beside her; she tookthat into her hands, and began to finger it; her eyes were downcast; hewas free to go now, when he chose.But he did not go.  On the contrary, after a second or two ofvacillation, he followed her."Maisrie," said he, in a very different tone, "perhaps it's all amistake on my part.  If so, I am sorry.  I don't want to vex you"I don't want to vex you, Vincent," said she, in a somewhat low voice."Tell me what it is.""Well," said he, "I came here this afternoon thinkinghopingthere mightbe some more definite understanding between you and me: yes, I washoping for muchand thenand then I found you quite careless andthoughtless, just as if nothing at all had happened last night""Last night?" she repeated."Yes," said he, rather reproachfully.  "Don't you remember what happenedlast night?  Don't you know that you pressed my hand to your heart? Butperhaps that was nothingperhaps that meant nothing at all""It meant a very great deal, Vincent," said she, warmly, looking up athim with honest eyes.  "We were talking of the value of true friendsandI could not say muchyet I wished to tell you what I thought of all yourgoodness and kindness.  Indeed, indeed it meant a great deal,Vincentand I hoped you would understand""I have understood too much," said he, and he was silent for a second.Then he went on.  "I thought you had something more than that to say tome, Maisrie.  For why need I tell you what you must have guessedalready?  You know I love you; you must have seen it all this time;there was no need for me to speak.  And when the future has but the onehope for me, that some day or other you should be my wife, then perhapsI was too eager to believe it had all come truethat you were giving mea promise in that quiet wayand no need of a spoken word between us.But I was mistaken, I see. You only meant friendship.  You only wantedto say 'Thank you!' to a friend"But by this time she had risen from her chair; and there was in her eyesthe strangest look of pride, and joy, and perhaps, too, of sadness."Do you know what you are saying, Vincent?" she said, quite gently."Youof all people in the world"She hesitated: she regarded, with admiring, and grateful, andaffectionate eyes, this handsome lad on whom fortune had shed all goodthingsand perhaps she could not quite confess all she thought."Youof all people in the worldevery one making much of youevery onehoping such great things of youand you come seeking a wife here."  Sheglanced round at the shabby little apartment. Then she turned her eyestowards him again; and there was a smile in them, of an unstable kind;and tears were gathering in the lashes.  "Well," she said, "it will besomething for me to think of.  It will be something for me to be proudof.  There can be no harm in that.  I shall be able to say to myself'Vincent thought so well of you that he once asked you to be hiswife'""But I don't know what you mean, Maisrie!" he exclaimed, and in spite ofher he seized her hand and held it tight between his two.  "What do youmean?  You are going to be my wife!  Oh, I don't want you to make rashpromises; I don't want to frighten you; no, I want you to be of goodheart, and you will see things will turn out all right in the end.  Andif you don't know your own mind yetif you are afraid to sayanythingwon't you let me guess?  Surely we have not been all this timetogether, and seeing so much of each other, without getting to know eachother pretty intimately?  And if I did make a mistake last nightwell,that is a trifling matterand I was too presumptuous"She managed to release her hand."Sit down, Vincent, and let me talk to you," she said.  "Perhaps I maynot have another chance; and I do not wish you ever to look back and sayI was ungrateful, or unreasonable, or cold-hearted. Cold-hearted?notthatnot thattowards you!"  And then she went on in rather a sad way,"I think the time has about come that we should part.  It has been apleasant companionship: I am not likely ever to forget it.  But yourfuture is so important, and ours so uncertain, that I am sure the soonerwe go separate ways the better.  And I am anxious to make a change now.I think if my grandfather and I went away somewhere where we could livemore cheaplywhere there would be fewer temptations towards the spendingof moneyI could do something to support him, and leave him the luxuryof his books.  I am a woman nowI want to work""You work?  Not while I can!" he said, hotly.She went on without heeding him."That is why I have been glad to see him so eager about this book ofballads.  If he could only get rid of all indebtedness, to friends andothers, through this book, then we should start clear; and I should askhim not to fret any more about his literary schemes.  He is an old man.He has done everything for me: why should I not do something for himnow?  And I have no pride.  The story about those Scotch estates wasalways a kind of fairy tale to me; I never had any real belief in thepossibility of their coming to us; I was never a fine lady even inimagination.  So that it matters little to me what I turn my hand to; ifwhat little education I have had is useless, I would take to somethingelse; I would work about a farm-house as soon as anythingfor I am agreat deal stronger than you may imagine""Oh, what are you talking about, Maisrie!" he said, with simulatedanger.  "If you think I am going to allow any such folly, you aremistaken. There are plenty of dairymaids in the world without you.  AndI have the right to say somethingI claim the right: I am going tointerfere, whether you like it or not.  When you speak of your dutytowards your grandfather, that I understand.  He has been everything toyou: who would ask you to forsake him?  But, as you say, he is an oldman.  If anything were to happen to him, think of your own position.You have hardly a friend in the worlda few acquaintances in Canada,perhapsbut what is that?  You will want some one to protect you: giveme that right!  If I let you go from me now, how am I to find youagain?how am I to know what may happen?  Maisrie, have courage!befrank!tell me that the little message of last night meant somethingmore!"The eloquence was not in the words, but in the vibrating tones of hisvoice; and there were tears in her eyes as she answered"Vincent, I cannotI dare not!  You don't know how grandfather and I aresituated: you are so generous, so open-minded, thatthat you seeeverything in so favourable a light; but then other people might stepin"Between you and me?  Who?" he demanded, with set lips."Ah," she said, with a sigh, "who can tell?  And besidesbesidesdo younot think I am as proud of you as any one?do you not think I am lookingforward to all that is expected of you?and when I hear of you as thisor that, I will say to myself 'I knew what Vincent was going to do; andnow he is glad that he did not hamper himself out ofout of pityfor afriendless girl'"But here she broke down altogether, and covered her face with her hands,and sobbed without possibility of concealment.  He was by her side in amoment; he laid his hand on the down-bent headon the soft hair."Maisrie," he said, with the utmost gentleness, "don't make me angry.If you have anything to say why you cannot, or will not, be my wife,tell me; but do not be unreasonable and foolish.  You speak of myfuture: it is nothing to me without you. You talk of the expectations ofmy friends: I tell you that my life is my own.  And why should you beany drag or hamperyou!  I wish you would think of yourself a little:not of me.  Surely there is something better in the world than ambition,and figuring before the public in newspapers."  Then he stopped for asecond or two; and resumed in a lower and different tone.  "Of course,if you refuse me your love, that is different.  That I can understand. Ihave done nothing to deserve it: I have come to you as a beggar.  If yourefuse me that, there is nothing more to be said.  I do not blame you.If I have made a mistake, so much the worse for me"She rose."Vincent," she said, between her half-stifled sobs, "you are not verykind.  But it is better somuch better.  Now I must go and helpgrandfather to find that book.  And as this is to be the last wordwell,thendear frienddon't be so ungenerous to me when in after years youlook back"But he was not likely to let her go like that. He interposed between herand the door; nay, he drew her towards him, and took her head betweenhis hands, and pushed back the hair from her brow, as though he wouldread down to the very depths of those beautiful, tear-dimmed eyes."You have not refused me your love, Maisriebecause you dare not!" hesaid.  "And what do I care whether you say it or notwhen I know?"  Andtherewith he kissed her on the mouthand againand again.  "Now you aremine.  You dare not deny your loveand I claim you as my wife"She struggled backward to be free from him, and said almost wildly"No, noVincent, you do not understandI have not been frank with youIcannot ever be your wife!some day I will tell you"There was no chance for any further entreaty or explanation, for at thismoment there was the sound of a footstep outside, the door was opened,and old George Bethune appeared, carrying in his hands some half-dozenbooks.  When he saw those two standing opposite to each other, the youngman pale and agitated, the girl also pale and with her eyes streamingover with tears, he glanced from the one to the other in silence.  Thenhe walked deliberately forward to the table, and laid down the books.Maisrie escaped from the room.  Vincent returned to the fireplace, toobewildered by her last words to care much what construction might beplaced upon this scene by her grandfather.  But he had to recallhimself: for the old man, just as if he had observed nothing, just as ifnothing had happened, but yet with a certain measured precision in histones, resumed his discussion of "The Demon Lover," and proceeded togive his reasons for thinking that the story had migrated from the farnorth to the south.But presently Mr. Bethune had turned from those books, and was staringinto the fire, as he said with a certain slow and significant emphasis"It will be an interesting subject; and yet I must guard against beingwholly absorbed by it. And that for my granddaughter's sake.  I imaginewe have been living a much too monotonous life for some time back; andthat is not well for anyone, especially for a young girl.  A limitationof interests; that is not wholesome.  The mind becomes morbid; andexaggerates trifles.  And in the case of Maisrie, she has been used tochange and travel; I should think the unvarying routine of our life oflate, both as regards our employments and amusements, extremelyprejudicial to her health and spirits""Why, she seems very well!" Vincent said, anxiouslyfor he knew not whatall this might mean."A change will do her goodwill do all of us good, perhaps," said theold man.  "Everyone knows that it is not wise for people to see too muchof each other; it puts too heavy a strain on friendship. Companionshipshould be a volunteered thingshould be a reward, indeed, for previousisolation and work"Vincent's forehead flushed; and the natural man within him was cryingout 'Oh, very well, then; I don't press any further acquaintance onyou!'  But for Maisrie's sake he curbed his pride.  He said, as quicklyas might be"In our case I thought that was precisely how our companionship stoodalittle relaxation after the labours of the day.  However, if you thinkthere has been too much of that""I was speaking of general principles," Mr. Bethune said, withequanimity.  "At the same time I confess that, as regards Maisrie, Ithink that some alteration in our mode of existence might be beneficial.Her life of late has been much too monotonous.""Again and again she has told me that she delights in the quietude ofit!" the young man protestedfor it suddenly occurred to him thatMaisrie was to be dragged away from England altogether.  "Surely she hashad enough of travel?""Travel?  That is not what I have in mind," old George Bethune said."We have neither the time nor the means.  I should merely propose topack up a few books and things, and take Maisrie down to some sea-sideplaceBrighton, perhaps, as being the most convenient."The young man's face flashed instant relief; Brightonthat was somethingdifferent from what he had been dreading.  BrightonBrighton was notToronto nor Montreal; there was going to be no wide Atlantic between himand her; a trivial matter of an hour's railway journey or something ofthe kind!"Oh, Brighton?" said he, quite gladly.  "Yes, that will be very pleasantfor her.  Brighton is brisk and lively enough at this time of the year;and if there is any sunlight going, you are sure to get it there.  I amafraid you will find the hotels full""We shall not trouble the hotels," Mr. Bethune said, with grave dignity."Some very humble lodgings will suffice.  And perhaps we might get roomsin a house on the hill at the back of the town; that would give meseclusion and quiet for my work.  Yes, I think the change will bewholesome; and the sooner we set about it the better."Well, to Vincent it did not seem that this proposal involved any greatalteration in their mode of life, except that he himself was obviouslyand unmistakeably excluded; nevertheless, he was so glad to find thatthe separation from Maisrie was of a mild and temporary nature that heaffected to give a quite cordial approval.  He even offered to engagethe services of his aunt, Mrs. Ellison, in securing them apartments; butMr. Bethune answered that Maisrie and he were old travellers, and wouldbe able to shift for themselves.  And when did they propose to go?Well, to-morrow, if his granddaughter were content.While they were yet talking, Maisrie made her appearance.  She hadbathed her eyes in water, and there was not much trace of her recentagitation, though she was still somewhat pale.  And Vincentto show herthat he refused to be alarmed by her parting wordsto show her that hewas quite confident as to the futurepreserved his placid, not to saygay, demeanour."Do you know what your grandfather is going to do with you, Maisrie?"said he.  "He is going to take you down to Brighton for a time.  Yes,and at onceto-morrow, if you care to go."She glanced quickly from one to the other, as if fearing some conspiracybetween them."And you, Vincent?" she asked, turning to him.He did not meet her look."I?  Oh, I must keep to work; I can't afford to go away down and idleamong those fashionable folk. My Mendover lecture isn't half sketchedout yet. And then, again, you remember the article I told youabout?before beginning it I ought really to run down to Scotland, or atleast to Yorkshire, and see one of those Municipal Lodging-houses inactual operation.  They seem to me marvellous institutions," continuedthis consummate hypocrite (as if the chief thought in his mind at thismoment was the housing of the industrious poor!), "and of the greatestimportance to the country at large; worked at a profit, too, that is theamazing thing!  Fancy at Huddersfield; threepence a day includes use ofcooking and table utensils, a smoking-room, reading-room, andconversation-room, and then a bed at nightall for threepence!Belonging to the rate-payers, themselvesunder the management of theCorporationand paying a profit so that you can go on improving andextending.  Why, every big town in the kingdom ought to have a MunicipalLodginghouse, or half a dozen of them; and it only needs to be shown howthey are worked for the example to be copied everywhere""And when do you go, Vincent?" she asked, with downcast eyes."Oh, I am not sure yet," he made answer cheerfully.  "Of course, I oughtin duty to go; but it will cost me half what I shall get for thearticle. However, that is neither here nor there.  But if this is to beour last night together for a little while, Maisrie," he went on, tokeep up his complacent acquiescence in this temporary separation, "youmight give us a little musicwon't you?you haven't had the violin outof its case for a long time."She was very obedient.  She went and got the violinthough she was in noplaying or singing mood."What, then, grandfather?" she said when she was ready."Whatever you please."Then she began, and very slowly and tenderly she played the air of aScotch song"Annie's Tryst."  It is a simple air, and yet pathetic inits way; and indeed so sensitive and skilful was her touch that theviolin seemed to speak; any one familiar with the song might haveimagined he could hear the words interpenetrating those vibrant notes"Your hand is cauld as snaw, Annie,Your cheek is wan and white;What gars ye tremble sae, Annie,What maks your e'e sae bright?The snaw is on the ground, Willie,The frost is cauld and keen,But there's a burnin' fire, Willie,That sears my heart within.*      *      *      *      *Oh, will ye tryst wi' me, Annie,Oh, will ye tryst me then?I'll meet ye by the burn, Annie,That wimples down the glen.I daurna tryst wi' you, Willie,I daurna tryst ye here,But we'll hold our tryst in heaven, Willie,In the springtime o' the year.""That is too sad, Maisrie," her grandfather said, fretfully.  "Why don'tyou sing something?"She turned to Vincent: there was a mute question in her eyes."Will you sing the Claire Fontaine, Maisrie?" said he.She seemed a little surprised: it was a strange song to ask for on anight of farewell; but she did as she was bidden.  She went and got thebook and placed it open before her on the table: then she drew her bowacross the strings.But hardly had she began to sing the little ballad than it becameevident that there was something added to the pure, clear tones of hervoicesome quality of an indefinable naturesome alien influence thatmight at any moment prove too strong for her self-control.Sur la plus haute tranchethis was the point at which she beganLe rossignol chantait;Chante, rossignol, chante,Toi qui as le coeur gaiAnd so far all was well; but at the refrainLui ya longtemps que je t'aime,Jamais je ne t'oublieraiher voice shook a little, and her lips were tremulous. Vincent cursedhis folly a hundred times over: why had he asked her to sing the ClaireFontaine?  But still she held bravely on:Chante, rossignol, chante,Toi qui as le coeur gai;Tu as le coeur  rire,Moi je l' ai-t- pleurerAnd here she could go no further for those choking tears in her voice;she stood for a moment all uncertain, trying to master herself; then shelaid the violin on the table, and with a broken "Good-night, Vincentandgood-bye!" she turned and left the room, her hands hiding her face, herframe shaken by the violence of her sobbing.There was an instant of silence."Yes, it is time she was taken away," old George Bethune said, with adeep frown on his shaggy eyebrows.  "Her nerves are all wrong.  Whyshould she make such a to-do about leaving London for a fortnight?"But Vincent Harris knew better than that.  It was not this unexpecteddeparture that was in Maisrie's mind: it was the words that he hadspoken to her, and she to him, earlier in the evening.  It was of nofortnight's absence she was thinking, but of a far wider and longerfarewell.CHAPTER V.THE GNAWING FOX.But he was not disheartened by those ominous words of hers, not even onthe following morning, when he found the little thoroughfare sostrangely silent and empty, and the two windows over the way becomevacant and devoid of charm.  He had the high courage and impetuous willof youth; seeing no difficulties or dangers ahead, he refused to believein any; Maisrie had not denied him her love, therefore she must be hiswife; and all the future shone fair.  And so he set to work on hisMendover lecture; and made good progress, even if his thoughts wentsometimes flying away down to Brighton.  As for the lecture itselfwell,perhaps certain of its contentions and illustrations would havesurprised and even shocked that Communist-capitalist, his father; butthe young man was accustomed to think for himself.Yes, this little street was terribly empty, and those windowsindescribably blank.  And the room was lonely, work or no work.  But ashe was standing looking out, cigarette in hand, after his frugalluncheon, a happy inspiration sprung into his head; for here was Hobson,the husband of the landlady across the way, coming along the pavement;and would it not be a comforting thing to have him in to talk about thetwo lodgers who had just left?  Vincent opened the window a bit, andsaid into the street (there was no need to call)"Hobson!"The man looked up."Yes, sir?""I want you for a moment."Then Vincent went himself downstairs and opened the door; and here wasthe shabby-genteel ex-butler, obsequiously waiting, with an excess ofimbecile amiability in his weak, prominent, nervous eyes."Come in and have a smoke, Hobson," the young man said.  "You must belonely over there now. Makes a difference, doesn't it?""Wonderful, sir, wonderful;" and the docile Hobson obediently followedup the stairs, and accepted a big cigar, and was prevailed on to draw ina chair to the fire.  Vincent took a seat opposite him, and lit anothercigarettein a quite friendly fashion."You've seen a good deal of Mr. Bethune since he came to live in yourhouse?" the young man began, in a sort of tentative and encouraging way.And Hobson responded with instant enthusiasm"Ah, yes, indeed, sir, and proud of the same. A great man, siroh, avery great manand how he came to be where he is, sir, well, that beatsme, sir.  And that haffable, sir!if he ave somethink on the table,he'll say, 'Hobson, bring two tumblers'yes, sir'Hobson, bring twotumblers'and I must take a seat, just as kind and condescending as youare, sir.  'Fill your glass, Hobson,' he says, just that haffable like""Oh, I beg your pardon," said Vincent, looking guiltily towards hisvacant sideboard.  "The fact is, I haven't anything of the kind in theserooms; but I can send out.  Which would you like, gin or whiskey?""Whichever you please," said Hobson, complacently, "being so kind as tothink of it, sir."The necessary fluid was soon procured; and Hobson was liberally helped.And when at length he began to expatiate on the character and thewonderful attainments and abilities of Maisrie's grandfather, there mayhave been a little exaggeration (for gin tends towards exaggeration) inhis speech; but his aim and admiration were genuine enough at the core.He grovelled in the dust before that impressive old man.  He spoke inalmost a breathless way of his haffability.  Why, that a great personagein literature should condescend to read his, Hobson's, poor littleverses was extraordinary; but that he should give advice, too, andencouragement, that was overwhelming.  And as for the young ladybuthere Hobson's language failed him.  With tears in his eyes he declaredthat she was a hangel of sweetnesswhich did not convey much toVincent's eager-listening ears. But when he went on to tell about allsorts of little acts of kindness and considerationwhen he spoke of herpatience with the old gentleman's temper, of her cheerfulness over smalldisappointments happening to herself, of her gentleness, and sunniness,and invariable good humourhere he was on more intelligible ground; andhis delighted and grateful audience was not slow to press on him anothercigar, which was not refused.  Indeed, what with so much courtesy shownhim, and what with the stimulating influence of the gin and water,Hobson grew valiant; and began to broach wild and iconoclastic theoriesabout filthy lucre, and to describe in dark colours the character of anyonepresumably his own wifewho could be so base as to take everyfarthing of her rent, fortnight after fortnight, from a grand and nobleold gentleman and a beautiful young lady both of whom seemed to haveknown better days."Do you know how long they are to be away?" Vincent asked."Well, sir, the old gentleman, sir, he says perhaps two weeks andperhaps three.""I see you've put up a notice that the rooms are to be let.""Yes, sir; but that ain't much use, not for so short a time, sir."And here another sudden fancy struck the young man."But I know how you can get them let," said he."How, sir?""You can let them to me.""Law, sir!"There was a doubtful look about Hobson's big, vacuous eyes: being of apoetic and sensitive nature he did not like jokes, and was suspicious.However, the young gentleman, to judge by his manner, seemed fair andhonest and above-board."I will take them," said Vincent, "until Mr. Bethune and hisgranddaughter come back.  Not to occupy them myself, you understand; butI don't want any stranger to be going into these rooms, you seethat isall.""How kind, sirhow thoughtful!" Hobson said, in a pathetic way.  "Thatit is to have good, kind friends!""And as the rooms are now mine, I suppose I might go over and look atthemif you will finish up your tumbler?""Certainly, sir, certainly," Hobson said, jumping to his feet withalacrity, and hastily draining his glass.  "They're all tidied up, sir,against the chance of a lodger.  And won't the missus be surprised!forthe women, sir, the women, you see, sir, they likes to haggle andbargain, but with men, sir, begging your pardon, sir, it's a word anddone!"Indeed he seemed quite proud of the promptitude with which he hadconducted and concluded this negotiation; and it was with an unusual airof authority and importance that he led the way upstairs and showedVincent into the little parlour, with which he was already abundantlyfamiliar. There were few alterations.  The old man's books, Maisrie'smusic, and similar personal belongings, had disappeared; and a hideouspurple vase stood for ornament in the middle of the table.  The pallidlithographs were still on the walls; Maisrie's chrysanthemums were outthere in the little iron balcony."Would you like to see the rooms upstairs, sir?"The young man hesitated for a second."Oh, very well."Hobson led the way up to the next landing; and there the first door hecame to he flung wide open."The young lady's room, sir."But Vincent did not accept the implied invitation. He hung shamefacedlyback."Oh, yes, that's all right," said he.  "II only wished toto have itkept for her."And yet he lingered for another second at the door of this chamberthatseemed so sacredthat seemed to shut him out.  He could see thedressing-table, the chest of drawers, the neatly folded bed, the ratherdingy window."Look here, Hobson," said he, "if I were to get a few things to make theroom a little more cheerful, I suppose that could be done withoutletting Miss Bethune know who sent them?  The looking-glass thereyouknow, that is not the right kind of thing at all; there should be apretty mirror on the dressing-table, with some lace round the top ofit"Here he ventured in half a step or so, and rather timidly looked round."That one gas-jet can't be half enough, when Miss Bethune is dressing togo out in the evening," he said, complaininglyperhaps to conceal hisincomprehensible diffidence and shyness.  "She must have candlesone oneach side of the mirror, for example.  And that screen across thewindow, why, it is so common!it ought to be a piece of pale silkto letthe light through."He ventured a few inches further, and again looked round."What do you call that thing?the coverletthe counterpaneisn't it?Well, it shouldn't be white, and cold, and cheerless like that; itshould be a deep crimson satinand there should be pretty things at thehead of the bedloops and bows of ribbonmy goodness, what is Mrs.Hobson about!a young lady's room shouldn't be like a cell in a prison!""Law, sir, I'm very sorry," Hobson said, in a bewildered way: a crimsonsatin coverlet sounded a grand thing; but it also meant a heap of money."But come away out and I will talk to you," Vincent said, just as ifthey were in a mysteriously sacred shrine, where the discussion ofbusiness affairs was a sort of profanation.  Or perhaps he resented theintrusion of the amiable but gin-odorous Hobson?  At all events, he didnot resume the conversation until they were both downstairs again in theparlour."You understand, then," he said, and there was no more timidity abouthis speech now, "I am willing to get a number of things for the room,and to make you and Mrs. Hobson a present of them, on the distinctcondition that Miss Bethune is kept in absolute ignorance how they camethere. One word to herand out they come again, every rag and stick.Why, you can easily invent excuses!  You can tell them you took theopportunity of their absence to brighten up the place a bit.  It is inyour own interest to keep the rooms smart: it doesn't imply any favourconferred on your lodgers.  Don't you see?""Yes, sir.  Very kind of you, sir, indeed," said Hobson, who seemed alittle confused.  "And what did you want me to do?""Do?  I want you to do nothing: and I want you to say nothing.  Don'tyou understand?  I am going to send in a few things to smarten up thatroom; and they are yours so long as not any one of you hints to MissBethune where they came from. Isn't that simple enough?"But far less simple was his own part in this transaction, as he wasspeedily to discover.  For when he went outside again, and made awaytowards Regent-street, thinking he would go to a famous shop there, andbuy all sorts of pretty things, it gradually dawned on him that he hadundertaken a task entirely beyond his knowledge. For example, he couldpurchase any quantity of crimson satin; but how or where was he going toget it made up into a coverlet, or counterpane, or quilt, or whateverthe thing was called?  Then supposing he had the mirror and the lace,who was going to put the lace round the top of the mirror?he could notdo that for himself.  A little set of ornamental book-shelves he couldbuy, certainly; but how was he going to ask for the bows of ribbon, orthe silk drapery, or whatever it was that ought to adorn the brass rodsat the head of the bed? The more he considered the matter the moreclearly he saw that he must consult a woman, and the only woman he couldconsult in confidence was his aunt, Mrs. Ellison, who had now returnedto Brighton. And perhaps he strove to conceal from himself what it wasthat so easily and naturally drew his thoughts to Brighton; perhaps hewas hardly himself aware how this secret hunger of the soul was minuteby minute and hour by hour increasing in its demands.  Maisrie had notbeen so long away; but already he felt that one brief glimpse of her, nomatter at what distance, would be a priceless thing.  And then again itwould not be breaking any compact.  He would not seek to go near her, ifthere was this understanding that these two were for the presentseparated the one from the other. She would not even know he was in thetown. And surely it would be a new and wonderful experience to look atMaisrie from afar off, as if she were a stranger.So instead of going to Regent-street, he went to the nearest post-officeand telegraphed to Mrs. Ellison, asking if she could take him in for aday or two.  Then he walked on home; and by the time he had reachedGrosvenor Place, the answer was there awaiting him; he was to go down atonce.  He put a few things in his bag; jumped into a hansom and drove toVictoria-station; caught the four-thirty train; and eventually arrivedat Brunswick Terrace about six.  He guessed that his aunt's afternoonvisitors would be gone; and he would have ample opportunity of a longtalk with her before dinner.His anticipations proved correct.  When he was shown into the bigdrawing-roomwhich looked very snug and warm amid its magnificencehefound the tall and bright-eyed young widow in sole possession; and shecame forward to welcome him with great complaisance."Very sensible of you, Vin.  You know I can always make room for you, nomatter who is in the house.""If I had gone to a hotel, aunt, you would have made an awful row; and Idon't want to quarrel with you just at present: the fact is, I have cometo you for advice and help," said he.  "But firstmy congratulations!  Iwas hardly surprised when I got your letter; and I am sure no one canwish you more happiness than I do""Oh, be quiet," she said; and she took a seat at a little distance fromthe fire, by the side of a small table, and put a fan between her eyesand the crimson-shaded lamp.  "Congratulations?  Well, I suppose thereare no fools like old fools.  But if grown-up people will play at beingchildren, and amuse themselves by writing things in the sanddid I tellyou how it all happened?they must take the consequences.  And I, whoused to be so content!  Haven't I often told you?  Perhaps I boasted toomuch""Oh, yes, pretend you regret it!" said he.  "And you talk of your beingso oldyou!why, what girl of all your acquaintance has half your lifeand spirit, or half your good looks, either""Vincent Harris," said she, and she turned round and faced him, "what doyou want?"He laughed."It is a very simple matter, aunt."And then he began to tell her of the little predicament in which he wasplaced; and to beseech her help.  Would she come and choose the thingsfor him?  There were plenty of bric--brac shops in Brighton: she wouldknow what was most appropriate: her own house was evidence of her taste.But his ingenuous flattery was of no avail. Mrs. Ellison's face grewmore and more serious, until at length she exclaimed"Why, Vin, this is the very madness of infatuation! And I had beenhoping for far other things. I had imagined from the tone of your lastletter that perhaps there might be a changethat your eyes had beenopened at last.  So this is going on just the same as ever?""It is going on, as you call it, aunt; and is likely to go onso long asI live.""Then I, for one, wish to have nothing to do with it," she said,sharply.  "And this last proposal is really too audacious.  Whatbusiness have you with that girl's room?what right have you to go intoit?"He was rather taken abackfor a moment."Business?oh, none of course.  None whateverthat is to sayoh, yes, Ihave, though!I have a perfect right to go into it.  The room is nothers.  It is mine.  I have paid for it.  When she comes back it will behers; and where is the harm of her finding it a little prettier?that isall.""I must say, Vin," she continued, in a very reserved fashion, "that theinfatuation of a young man may excuse a good deal; but this is alittlea little too much.  Do you consider it quite nicequite becoming?A satin counterpane!  I wonder what the girl would think herselfif shehas any refinement of feelingif she has any delicacy"His face grew very pale."'If she has any refinement of feelingif she has any delicacy,'" herepeated.Then he rose."It is useless to say anything further, aunt; there is an end thistime."But she had risen too.  He tried to pass herand failed; nay, she wentto the door, and stood with her back against it, and faced him."No, you shall not go," she said.  "Why should there be any dissension?You are my own dear boy; I would do anything for youexcept in this onedirection""Except in this one direction!" he repeated, scornfully."Why cannot we remain friends," she said, with appealing eyes, "good andtrue friendsand agree to leave this one subject alone?""This one subjectthat is my life!" he said, vehemently.  "What follyyou talk!  You wish to cut away the very thing I live for; the verything that is my life; and to continue your friendship with whatremainsa senseless stick or stone! And why?  Because of your insensateprejudice, your cruel and baseless suspicions.  Why do you talk to me asif I were a boy?  I have seen twice as much of the world as you have; Ihave had better opportunities of learning how to judge strangers.  Butyouyou live in a narrow grooveyou have your maid to talk toyouracquaintances to call in the afternoonyour friends to dinnerand whatbesides?  That is your world.  What do you know of the human beingsoutside it?  Must they all be dishonestbecause they have not been heardof by your handful of a set?  Must they all be thieves andswindlersbecause they are not in the Court Directory?  But it is littlematter.  If this subject is debarred, then all is debarred, as betweenyou and me.  You can go your own way, and I mine.  I did expect, nowthat you have your own happiness secured, you might show some littlegenerosity, some little sympathy; but I see it is different; and I willnot allow one who is dearer to me than all the world to be treated withsuch enmity, while I am supposed to stand by and accept it as a naturalcondition of affairs.  I do not; I have had enough; and so here is anend, as between you and me; and I hope you will have more happiness thanyou seem to wish for other people."Well, Mrs. Ellison was not used to giving way; but she was very fond ofthis proud and handsome boy; and she gave just one sob, and tearsgathered in her eyes."You are not very kind, Vin," she said.And what marvellous thing was this that instantaneously smote his heart?Why, Maisrie had made use of this very expression on the precedingafternoon!  And all of a sudden he seemed to recognise that hisadversary here was a woman; she was akin to his belovedand therefore tobe treated gently; Maisrie's voice and eyes seemed to be pleading forher: surely that was enough?  He hesitated for a moment: then he said"Very well; let it be as you wish.  We shall see how we get on, with theone thing that is of more importance to me than anything else shut outfrom mention.  But I must say this to you, aunt: I do not see I am doinganything that the most fastidious person can object to if I put a fewpretty things into the room of the girl who is to be my wife.""How do you know that she is to be your wife, Vin?" she said, rathersadly."I know," he made answer."My poor boy!" she said; and then she took him by the hand and led himback to the little table at which they had been sitting; and there theyhad some further conversation about more or less indifferent things,with the one all-important subject carefully avoided.  And then it wastime for them to go away and dress for dinner.Lord Musselburgh dined with them that evening, and remained some timeafter the other guests had gone.  To Vincent it seemed a puzzling thingthat two betrothed people should make so merry.  They appeared so wellcontent with their present estate; they were so assured as to thefuture; no anxieties; no conflicting hopes and fears; they were in thehappiest mood.  Next morning, too, Lord Musselburgh again made hisappearance; and the three of them went out for a stroll along thepromenade. All the world was shining fair and clear; Mrs. Ellison waslooking her best, and seemed to know it; her fianc was in a gay humour.Why, they were almost like the 'lover and his lass' of whom ThomasMorley sang nigh three hundred years agothose 'pretty country folks'who lived in a perpetual spring-time, with birds singinghey-ding-a-ding-a-ding to them through all the jocund hours. The talland elegant young widow blushed and laughed like a maid; her eyes weresarcastic, playful, amused, according to her varying mood; the sunlighttouched her pretty brown hair.  There was, indeed, a sort of audacity ofcomeliness about her, that set Vincent thinking of a very different kindof beautythe beauty that seems to be dowered with a divine and angelicsadness.  He was walking with these two; but he did not take part intheir frolic talk; nor did he pay much attention to the crowd of people,the butterflies of fashion, who had come out into the pleasant sunshine.He seemed to see before him a face that, with all its youth, and itstouch of colour, and its grace of outline, was strangely pensive andwistful.  And again he asked himself, as many a time he had askedhimself, what that expression meant: whether it had been brought thereby experience of the many vicissitudes of life, or by loneliness, orwhether it was not something more tragic stillthe shadow of animpending fate. There was more than that he could not understand: hercurious resignation, her hopelessness as to the future, her wish to getaway.  And what was it she had concealed from him?  And why had shedeclared she could not ever be his wife?"You are very silent, Vin," his fair neighbour said, turning her merryeyes towards him at last. "Here is Lord Musselburgh declaring that if hewere a Jew he would turn dentist, to have it out with the Christians forwhat they did in the Middle Ages.  A horrid revenge, wouldn't it be?andso meanunder pretence of affording relief.  Oh, look at that girl overthereI do believe the ruff is coming backwe shall all be Elizabethansby-and-by.""But what business had women ever with ruffs?" Lord Musselburghinterposed.  "Why, when the dandies and bucks of Henry VIII.'s timebegan to make themselves splendid by puffing themselves out round theneck, of course it was in imitation of the stagas the stag becomes whenhe is supposed to captivate the fancy of the hinds; but you don't findthe hinds with any similar adornments.  Such things are proper to males:why should women try to look magnificent round the back of the neck? Whyshould a hen covet a cockscomb?  It's all wrongit's against naturallaws.""Natural laws in a milliner's shop!" she said. "Oh, do look at those twoItalian girls; what English peasant-girl could choose colour like that?I should like to speak to themfor a moment."Lord Musselburgh did not seem inclined to interfere."I dare say they may have been long enough in England," said he, "tohave picked up a little of the Italian that English ladies speak.  Youmay try them."But she refrained; for at this moment one of the girls began to play afew bars of Funiculi-funicula evidently as an introduction to thesinging of her companion; whereupon Lord Musselburgh proposed that Mrs.Ellison should cross over to look at the windows of one or twojewellers' shopsin which both of them happened to be much interestedjust at this time.The morning went by, and Vincent had caught no glimpse of MaisrieBethune or her grandfather; but indeed he had not expected that; the oldman would be busy with his books, and it was not likely that Maisriewould come wandering by herself through this fashionable throng.  Whenat last the three friends got back to Brunswick Terrace, it was close onluncheon-time; though here Mrs. Ellison was much surprised to learn thatLord Musselburgh had engaged Vincent to lunch with him at the BedfordHotel."What's the matter?" said she.  "Business or billiards?""Neither," her fianc made answer, "I only wanted to give you a littleholiday, for an hour or two.""Not longer, then," she said.  "For I am going out driving at three, andI shall expect you both."Soon the two young men were seated at a little window-table in thespacious and cheerful coffee-room; and again Vincent was struck by theeminently practical manner in which his companion spoke of hisforthcoming marriage.  It was going to be, he frankly intimated, a veryuseful arrangement for both Mrs. Ellison and himself; and their combinedfortunes would enable them to do what hitherto had been impossible foreither of them. Mrs. Ellison was fond of society; he had always lookedforward to the formation of a political salon when once he got married;and now he thought he could afford to have a much bigger house, whichwould be necessary for that purpose, than his present one in Piccadilly.Then there were speculations as to whether he, Musselburgh, ought toaccept officesome subsidiary office, of course, as befitting hisyearswhen his party came into power again: you see, Vin Harris wasbeing consulted now as if he were a friend of the family.  But as forVincent's own affairsnot a word: Lord Musselburgh had received a hint;and he was discretion itself.And yet if ever in his life the younger of those two friends had need ofa confidant, it was that afternoon; for something then happened thatseemed to strike at the very roots of his being.  When it was about timefor them to go along to keep their appointment with Mrs. Ellison,Vincent was standing in the hall of the hotel, waiting for LordMusselburgh, who had momentarily gone upstairs; and he was idly lookingout upon the passing crowd. Idly and absently; there was no one there tointerest him; very different it would be (he was saying to himself)towards six or seven o'clock, when perhaps Maisrie and her grandfatherwould come out for a stroll before going to dine at one of therestaurants.  At present he had no sort of concern with all those peoplewho went driving and walking past, in the dull wintry sunshine.  It wasa pretty show; and that was all.But of a sudden his heart stood still; and his startled vision beheldwhat seemed incredible, and yet was there, and actual, and beyond anydoubt. Ere he was aware, a vehicle had driven bya tall dog-cart, withtwo figures in front and one behind; but another glance revealed to himthat the one behind was old George Bethune: who could mistake at anydistance the powerful and striking head, the shaggy eyebrows, theflowing white hair?  And the two in front?one was a young man, toVincent unknown: the othera terrible misgiving told him that wasMaisrie, though they were now some way off.  What did it all mean?  Hehad never heard of their knowing anyone in Brighton.  They had come downfor seclusion, for work; yet here they were in the midst of thefashionable crowd; and a young mana strangerwas making ostentatiousdisplay of his acquaintance with them.  A thousand wild surmises, theoffspring of a very madness of jealousy, sprang into his brain.  Why hadthe old man so clearly intimated to him that he was not wantedthat theywished to go to Brighton by themselves?  And who was this person who wasmaking such open parade of his intimacy with them?  Alas! there was noanswer to these burning and bewildering questions; and he stood therebreathless, alarmed, yet not daring to ask the cause of his alarm.Lord Musselburgh came along the hall."Sorry to have kept you waiting, Vin""Oh, don't mind that," the young man said, striving to conceal hisagitation.  "The fact isII don't think I will go driving thisafternoon: will you make my excuses to my aunt?""What's the matter?" said Musselburgh, regarding him.  "You look as ifyou had seen a ghost or a creditor: what is it, man?""Never mindnever mindit is nothing," Vin said, hastily.  "I will seeyou later on.  Will you make my excusesthanks!"The hall porter swung the door open; and before his astonished companioncould remonstrate, he had passed out and down the stone steps.  Hecrossed over, to lose himself in the throng on the opposite promenade.The dog-cart would be coming by again: he would see who this new friendwas. Could he not hide somewhere?he felt like a spy, like a traitor,with all those dire imaginings surging through his brain.  And suddenwrath, too: he would demand to know by what right any stranger wasallowed to make Maisrie Bethune so conspicuous.  Why, it was toopublic!it was a boast; and hardly decent, either; ought not respect forage and white hair to have placed the old man in front, instead ofinviting all the world to witness the flattering of a young girl?  Andas for Maisriewell, even in his wildest and blackest surmises he couldthink no serious harm of Maisrie; but she was too yielding; she was toogenerous with her favours; she ought to make distinctions; she ought notto permit this great, idle crowd to draw false conclusions.  It was illdone of herbehind his back: had she so soon forgotten that he hadpledged his life to her not so very many hours ago?By-and-bye he knew rather than saw that they were returning.  He was onthe seaward side of the road; there were a good many people passing toand fro; moreover, he was partly concealed by an open fly that stoodclose to the railings.  The tall dog-cart came swiftly along: anunprejudiced spectator would have said that the young man who wasdriving was rather a good-looking young fellow, of the pink and whitetype, with a small yellow moustache carefully waxed at the ends, andclear grey eyes.  He wore a buff-coloured coat, with a velvet collar ofsimilar hue; he had a flower in his button-hole.  Then, again, histurn-out was faultlessa neatly-appointed carta beautiful,high-stepping roan.  All this was visible at a glance.But it was on Maisrie Bethune that Vincent's gaze was bent; and as shedrew near, his heart was smitten at once with remorse and withgratitude. Had he expected, then, that she would be smirking and smilingand coquetting with this new acquaintance? On the contrary, Maisrie satethere grave and silent and reserved; her eyes were neither observant norconscious: once or twice they were turned towards the sea.  To Vincentshe seemed so distinguished-looking, so refined, and noble, andself-possessed, as contrasted with that fresh-complexioned country clownwho had the monstrous audacity to claim her as his companion!  Then, asthe dog-cart went by, he caught sight of George Bethune.  He was sittingrather side-ways, to permit of his addressing an occasional remark tothe young gentleman who was driving: no doubt that was why Maisrie wasallowed to remain silent. Perhaps she was thinkingof someone whom shethought to be far away?Strangely enough, as soon as they had disappeared from view, his doubtsand imaginings grew black again.  For a moment, that vision of Maisrie'ssweet face had charmed him out of himself; but now these hideousquestions rushed back upon him, demanding an answer where there was noanswer. He did not attempt to reason himself out of this paroxysm ofjealousy; that would have been useless; he could but submit to thisgnawing torture of anxiety and suspense, while walking up and down, andwaiting, and fearing to find them coming within sight once more.They did not return.  Shortly after four the dusk began to fall; byhalf-past five black night had enveloped sky and sea, and the town wasall ablaze with golden stars.  There were hardly any carriages now; thepeople had betaken themselves to the other side of the road, to look inat the glaring shop-windows on their way home.  Vincent found himselfmore alone than ever; and knew not what to do or which way to turn.  Inhis present frame of mind he dared not go near the house in BrunswickTerrace; he could not submit to cross-examining eyes.  It would drivehim mad to talk, while those rankling conjectures were busy at hisheart.  He wanted to see Maisrie again; and yet dreaded to see her, lesthe should find her once more in the society of that man.But about half-past six his aimless perambulation of the streets becamecircumscribed.  He drew nearer to the neighbourhood of the restaurants.If old George Bethune had brought his London habits down with him, asmany people did, would not he soon make his appearance, along with hisgranddaughter?  Here in East-street, for example, were cafs, bothFrench and Italian, where they could have a foreign dinner if theychose.  Would he venture to address them?  Would he confess he had seenthem drivingin the hope they might volunteer information for which hedared not ask? He could not tell; his brain was in a bewilderment ofanxiety and unreasoning misery; and this grew worse, indeed, as the slowminutes went by, and there was no sign of the two figures for whom hewas so eagerly watching.And then a sickening thought occurred to him. What if those two had beeninvited to dine at a hotel by the country clodby the young man from theploughby the rustic dandy with the velvet collar?  At the Old Ship,most likelya private rooma profusion of flowersplenty ofchampagneHodge Junior gay and festivecigarettes between thecoursesArry having learnt so much from the cheap society journals; andwill not Miss Bethune be persuaded to join?  Ah, well, perhaps afterdinner, when the liqueurs come to be handed round? There is a piano inthe room: will Miss Bethune oblige with an accompaniment?here is asmart little thing"Kiss me on the sly, Johnnie!"the latest draw at themusic halls....Seven by the big clock over the stationer's shop; and still no sign ofthem.  Clearly they were not coming to any restaurant hereabouts.  So atlength he left East Street, and went down to the King's-road, andwandered slowly along, glancing furtively into this or thathotelespecially where some coffee-room window happened to have beenleft with the blind up.  It was a vain quest, and he was aware of it;but something, he knew not what, drew him on.  And meanwhile his mindwas busy with picturesof a private room, and flowers, and three figuresseated at table.  Ach weh! mein Liebchen war die Braut!At a quarter to eight, Lord Musselburgh was shown into Mrs. Ellison'sdrawing-room."Haven't you seen anything of Vin?" she said, with astonished eyes."Nonor you?""Nothing at alland now he won't have time to dress for dinner.""I shouldn't wonder if he did not turn up for dinner," Musselburgh said."Something very peculiar happened to him to-dayI could not preciselygather whatbut he was obviously upset.""Yes," said Mrs. Ellison, and her face was graver than its wont."Something has indeed happened to him to-daythough he himself is notaware of it as yet."She went to a little cabinet, and took from it two letters."I thought you ought to see both of these," said she.  "One is from mybrother-in-law; I got it just a minute or two after you left.  The otheris my answer; I will have it posted as soon as you have read it."He took the first letter, which was from Vincent's father, and read itcarefully through, without a word of comment.  Then he took the other,which ran as follows:"DEAR HARLAND,"It is very terrible; but I half suspected as much; and terrible as itis there is nothing to be done but to tell Vin the whole truth, and atonce.  Telegraph for him to-morrow morningon business of importance; ifhe wants to come down again, I shall be ready with such consolation as Ican think of.  I fancy from one or two things that those people are herein Brighton just now: all the more reason why you should summon him homeat once.  Poor boy, it will be a sad awakening.  But he is young; hewill get over it; and perhaps be none the worse in the end for thiscruel experience of the deceit and wickedness of the world.  Let me knowhow he takes it."Yours affectionately,"MADGE."No, Vincent did not come in to dinner that evening.  He was stillwalking up and down the King's-road, glancing now and again, but with asort of hopelessness, at any little group of people that might appear atthe hall-door of this or that hotel; and all the while there was a fireeating at his heart.CHAPTER VI.PUT TO THE PROOF.To say that Vin Harris's jealousy was unreasoning, ungovernable, and thecause of cruel and incessant torture to himself, is merely to say thatit was jealousy; but by an unhappy coincidence this was the very momentchosen by his father to make a disclosure which, for a startled secondor so, seemed to recall and confirm the young man's wildest suspicions.When Vincent, in obedience to the telegraphic summons, arrived at thehouse in Grosvenor Place, he found his father in the library, standingwith his back to the fire.  On this occasion the greatcapital-denouncing capitalist did not wear the suit of hodden greywhich, at dinner in his own house, was designed to show his contempt forconventionality; no; when this interview was over, he meant to lunch atthe Athenum Club, and with a view to that solemn rite he had donned ablack frock-coat which was tightly buttoned over his substantial form.A stiff upstanding collar and a satin tie added to the rigidity of hisappearance; while his manner was, as usual, pompous and cold. With aroll of paper in his hand, he would have looked as if he were going todeliver an afternoon lecture at some public institution."I have sent for you, Vin," he began, "because I have something ofimportance to say to you, and the sooner it is said the better.  You areaware that I have never sought to interfere with your way of life.Indeed I have seen no cause to do so.  Your line of study I approve;your ambitions I would encourage; and as for the amusements andpleasures natural to your years, I can trust you to remember your ownself-respect.  But in one direction I confess I am disappointed.  Mychief aim in your education has been that you should see and know theworld; that you should understand men; and by contact learn to cope withthem, and hold your own.  Yes, I confess I am disappointed; for if I amnot misinformedand I have taken the greatest trouble not to bemisinformedhere are you, after all your travel and experience of theworld, become the dupe of two common begging-letter impostors."The young man looked up quickly; but he held his peace.  Now thissomewhat disconcerted Harland Harris, for he had expected an instant andindignant protest, which would have justified a little judicious warmthon his side in production of proofs. But Vincent sate calm andcollected, listening with apparent respect."Yes, deeply disappointed," his father continued, with a little moreanimation, "for this old charlatan who seems to have got hold of you isaltogether too bare-faced and preposterous.  Did you ever ask yourselfhow he lived; what was his business or profession; where he got themoney to go from one country to another?  Well, if you have not, I have;I have made enquiries; I have had him traced; I can tell you his story,and a very pretty story it is. Would you like to hear it?""I don't know that it concerns me much," said Vincent, with composure."Oh, it does not?" said the gentleman with the pompous professional air,upon whom this indifference seemed to have a somewhat irritating effect."Well, there's nothing very grand about itexcept the magnificent andwholesale lying!  And perhaps also the incredible simplicity of thepeople who allowed themselves to be imposed on.  Why, in Canada hecalled himself Lord Bethune!was there no second-hand copy of Burkeanywhere about to show them there was no such peerage in existence?Lord Bethune haunting newspaper-offices, and borrowing money right andleft, because of his Scotch name, and his bogus literary schemes!  Hissham estateshis sham lineagehis sham coat of arms: did nobody think ofturning up a book?  'Stand Fast, Craig-Royston!'  Craig-Royston!"He crossed the room and took down a volume from one of the shelves."There," he said, putting the book on the table, "there is Black's Guideto Scotland.  Can you find out where Craig-Royston is?  Turn up theindex."Mechanically and carelessly Vincent did as he was bid."No, I don't see it there," he said."I should think not!  Nor Balloray either: can you find Balloray?  Aneasy thing to claim estates that don't exist; and wear armorial bearingsof your own invention!  Cadzowoh, yes, Cadzow you will findCadzowundoubtedly exists; but most people thought that Cadzow belonged to theDuke of Hamilton.  Or does Lord Bethune claim to be Marquis of Douglasand Earl of Angus as well?"He paused; so Vincent was bound to answer."I don't know that it concerns me much," the young man said, repeatinghis former phrase. "Even if all you say is true, what then?  You sent meout to see the world, and take people as I found them.  Well, I found agood many liars; and one more or less doesn't matter much, does it?"But Harland Harris was no fool; he instantly divined wherein lay thesecret of Vincent's real or assumed indifference."Ah, I understand," said he.  "I understand. You don't care so muchabout him.  You are willing to let him go.  You think you can dissociatehim from his granddaughter.  He may be a swindlerbut you fancy shemanages to keep aloof"The young man grew somewhat pale."Take care," said he, and he held up his hand as if he would enjoinsilence.  "Words that are said cannot be unsaid."His father regarded him for a second, and then he endeavoured to bring alittle more friendliness and consideration into his manner."I have heard of this infatuation," he said. "And if you had been likeother young men, Vin, I should have said nothing.  I should have leftyou to find out for yourself.  But, you see, you have the misfortune toimagine other people to be as straightforward and honourable asyourself; you do not suspect; and you are inclined to trust your ownjudgment.  But even if this girl were all you think she is, what madnessit would be for you to contemplate marrying her!  Look at herpositionand at yours: look at her upbringing and presentsurroundingsand at yours; think of what is expected of you; whatchances you have; what an alliance with a great family might do for youin public life.  What good ever comes of overleaping social barriersofQuixotismof self-sacrifice for sentiment's sake?  What does a marriagebetween two people in different spheres mean?what is the inevitableresult?it is not the one that is raisedit is the other that is draggeddown.""These are strange doctrines for a socialist and a communist," Vincentobserved."They are the doctrines of common sense," his father retorted, sharply."However, it is unnecessary to say anything further on that score.  Youwill abandon all this nonsense when you understand who and what thisgirl is; and you will thank God you have had your eyes opened in time.And indeed, if all that I am told is trueif I guess arightif I piecethe story properly togetherI should say she was by far the moredangerous of the two accomplices"Vincent's lips curled: he did not put his disdain into words."A painful revelation?" his father continued, in more oracular fashion."Oh, yes, no doubt.  But occasionally the truth is bitter and wholesomeat the same time.  What you believe about the girl is one thing; what Iknow about her is another: indeed I can gather that it was only throughher artifice that the old man's impostures were accepted, or tolerated,at all.  What is he?a farceura poseurwho would at once have been sentto the right about but for the ingenue by his side, with her innocenteyes and her sad look.  When the writer of the begging-letter calls, hisstory might be inquired into: but no!for here is this interesting youngladyand the hardest heart declines to cross-examine while she isstanding there.  And of course she must go to the newspaper-offices, tobeguile the editor with her silent distress, while her grandfather iswheedling him out of a loan; or she accompanies him to the winemerchant, or the bookseller, or the tailor, so that nothing can be saidabout unpaid accounts while she is by; and of course there is a renewalof credit.  A very simple and effective trick: even where the peopleknow the old man to be a rogue, they are sorry for the girl; and theyhave a pleasing sense of virtue in allowing themselves to be furthermulcted: they little suspect that she is by far the more accomplishedswindler of the two"Here Vincent laughed, in open scorn; but the laugh was a forced one; andhis eyes were lowering."I am glad you consider it a laughing matter," said Mr. Harriswho foundit less easy to combat this contemptuous unbelief than if he had beenmet with indignation and wrath.  "Perhaps, after all, the story is norevelation?  Perhaps your complaisance goes further than merelytolerating the old man's lies?  Perhaps the glamour the girl has thrownover you would lead you to accept her just as she is, her hypocrisy, hercraft, and all?  Or perhaps you have planned out for yourself a stillmore brilliant future than any that had occurred to your friends?Perhaps you aim at being the old man's successor?  It is an easy way ofgetting through life, having a woman like that by your side, to earnyour living for you.  The lover of Manon Lescaut"Vincent leapt to his feet, his eyes aflame."You go too far," he said, breathing hard. "You go too far.  I have beentrying to remember you are my father: don't make it too difficult. Whatdo I care about this farrago of nonsense that some one has put into yourheadthis trashthis venomous guessing?  It is nothing to me.  It isidle air.  I know otherwise.  But when it comes to insultwell, it isall an insult; but something must be forgiven to ignorance: the peoplewho have supplied you with this guess-work rubbish are probably asignorant as yourself about those two. Onlyno more insults, if youplease!  I am your son; butbut there are limits to what you ask me tohear in patience.  You talk of my madness and infatuation; it is yourmadness, your infatuation! What can you say of your own knowledge ofthat old man and his granddaughter?  Why, nothing. You have never spokento them; never seen them. And yet, without an atom of inquiry, withoutan atom of proof, you go and accept all this tissue of guess-workthisrubbishthis trashas if it were gospel; and you expect me to give it apatient hearing?  It is too contemptible!""Yes, but unfortunately," said Mr. Harris, with great calmnessfor nowhe felt he had the advantage on his side, "you are mistaken in supposingthat I have made no inquiry, and have received no proof.  The inquiryhas been made for me with great skill and patience, during the pastmonth; and the proofs seem to me sufficient. Proofs?you yourself shallfurnish one."This was a kind of challenge; and the young man accepted it.  His eyeswere fixed on his adversary."What, then?""When you find," said his father, with deliberation, "two peoplewandering from town to town, without any visible means of subsistence,you naturally wonder how they manage to live.  Very well.  But now, ifyou discover they have a pretty knack of falling in with this or thatrich young gentleman, and allowing him to pay for them on all occasions,isn't the mystery partly solved?  I am informed that these two peopleand yourself have been in the habit for a considerable time back ofdining together in the eveningindeed, I have the name of therestaurant.  Now I wish to ask you this question point-blank: is it notthe fact that in every case you have paid?"Vincent did not answer; he was not thinking of himself at all; nor yetof the direct question that had been put to him.  A terrible wave ofbewilderment had passed over him; his heart seemed to have within it butone sudden cry'MaisrieMaisriewhy were you drivingwith thatstranger?'and all the world grew black with a horror of doubt anddespair.  He thought of the young man driving along the King's Road inBrighton: was there another paying for those two now?had they anotherfriend now to accompany them every evening?  And Maisrie?  But all thiswild agony lasted only a moment.  He cast this palsy of the brain behindhim.  His better self rose confident and triumphantthough there wasstill a strange look left in his eyes."Paid?" he said, with a kind of scornful impatience.  "Who paid?  Oh, Ididmostly. What about that?  That is nothinga few shillingsI found itpleasanter not to have to settle bills before a young lady; and ofcourse she did not know who paid; I made an arrangement""An arrangement by which you gave those people their dinner for nothingfor months and months!""And what then?"For Vincent had entirely recovered his self-command: he affected toregard this story that had been told him as quite unworthy of seriousattention.  It was his father who was growing exasperated."Have you taken leave of your senses?" Mr. Harris demanded.  "Is itnothing that you yourself have shown this old man to be a pauper,getting his dinner on charity every evening? And what better was thegirl?  She must have known!  Do you imagine she was not aware of hisreceiving money for bogus books that he never meant to publish; and ofhis inveigling soft-headed ScotchmenI suppose there must be one hereand thereinto giving him a loan because of his sham patriotism?  Andthese are the people you have chosen to consort with all this time; andthis is the girl you would bring into your familyyou would introduce toyour friends as your wife!  But you cannot be so mad!  You may pretendindifference: you cannot be indifferent.  You may consider it fine andheroic to disbelieve the clearest evidence: the world, on the otherhand, is apt to say that it is only a fool and an idiot who keeps hiseyes shut and walks into a trap blindfolded. Andand I do think, whenyou begin to reflect, that your own common-sense will come to your aid."He turned to the mantel-piece, and took from it some papers."I have given you," he continued, "the sum and substance of theenquiries I have made, in this country and in America.  I can show youhere still further details; but before allowing you to examine thesecommunications, I must exact a promise that they shall be treated as instrictest confidence.""Thank you," said Vincent, "I will not trouble you.  I can guess at thekind of creature who would accept such a task, and at his interpretationof any facts that might come across him."Then he rose."And is this the important business on which you sent for me?" he asked,but quite civilly."You do not think it is important?" the other demanded.  "But at leastyou have been warned. You have been advised to keep your eyes open. Youhave been shown what kind of people they are who have got hold of you:it is for you yourself to say whether you will be any longer theirdupe.""Very well," said the young man; and he rose and took up his hat andcane.  "Oh, by the way, I presume you have come to an end of yourenquiries?  Because, if not, I would advise your spyyour detective, orwhatever he isnot to come prowling to any restaurant or keyhole when Iam along with my friends, or he might find things become very unpleasantfor him.  Good-morning!"So this was the end of the interview; and Harland Harris shortlythereafter made off for the Athenum Club, well satisfied that hisnarrative had produced a far deeper impression than the young man wouldacknowledge.  And in truth it had.  When Vincent left the house, andwalked away to the solitary little rooms in Mayfair, his face was nolonger scornful; it was serious and troubled; for there was much for himto ponder over.  Not about Maisrie.  He put Maisrie aside. For onething, he was a little vexed and angry with her at the momentquiteunreasonably, as he strove to convince himself; nevertheless, he wouldrather not think about her just then; and, indeed, there was nooccasion, for the idea that she could be the participator in any fraudor series of frauds was simply not a thinkable thing.  He knew betterthan that; and was content.  Maisrie driving with a strangerperhapsthat was not so well done of her; but Maisrie as a skilful andaccomplished professional swindler?then you might expect to see thestars fall from their places in the midnight sky.But as regards the old man, that was very different; and he could notdeny that there were certain points in the story just told him whichwere corroborated by his own knowledge.  He knew, for example, thatGeorge Bethune had got money for one book which, as circumstances wouldhave it, was not produced and published; he knew that those dinners atthe Restaurant were paid for by himself; he knew that he had heard Mr.Bethune speak of Cadzow as belonging to his family; and he had toconfess that he could not find Craig-Royston in the index of hisfather's guide-book.  And yet he could not give up this magnificent,this heroic old man all at once.  He could not believe him to be a meanand crafty trickster.  Surely his love for Scotland was sincere.  Surelyhis passionate admiration of the old Scotch ballads was genuine enough.Surely it was not to impose on any one that old George Bethune sangaloud the songs of his youth as he walked through the crowded streets ofLondon. There was a grandeur in his very presence, a dignity in hisdemeanour, that was far from the artful complaisance of a schemer.  Thenhis undaunted couragehis proud spiritand above all, the tender andaffectionate guardianship he bestowed on his granddaughter: Vincentcould not forget all these things.  No, nor could he forget how he hadenjoyed George Bethune's society on these many and pleasant evenings;and how he had learned more and more to respect him, his unflinchingfortitude, his generous enthusiasms, and even, at times, his innocentvanity.  He had had a hard life, this old man, and yet he bore noenmity.  He had had many trials and misfortunes, many hopesdisappointed; yet his temper was not soured.  But the conclusive proof,after all, was the character of Maisrie herselfher noble sweetness, herrefinement, her sympathy, her quick gratitude for the smallest ofkindnesses: could such a beautiful human flower have grown up under thefostering care of an unscrupulous vagabond and knave?When he got to his rooms, the first thing he didbut with no verydefinite purposewas to take up his copy of Black's Guide to Scotland.It was a recent edition; he had got it so that he might trace out thatlong wandering of which old George Bethune and Maisrie had spoken sooften.  And mechanically he turned to the indexwith which he had beenconfronted in his father's library; and mechanically he glanced at thesuccessive columns.  But what was this?why here was Craig-Royston!  Hiseyes were not deceiving him; for he at once referred to the pageindicated, and found Craig-Royston described as a district in theneighbourhood of Loch Lomondthough, to be sure, he could discover notrace of it on the map.  So he had jumped to conclusions all tooprematurely?  He had allowed that unknown enemy of histhat dark andmalignant creature in the backgroundtoo facile a triumph?  He began tobe ashamed of himself.  'Stand fast, Craig-Royston!' had not been hismotto, as it was that of the proud old man whom he had injured bylistening to those childish tales.He returned to the index, and sought for Balloray. Well, there was noBalloray; but then Balloray was a private house; and private houses,unless of historical interest, are seldom mentioned in guide-books.  Andthen again he bethought him: why, the old ballad!the 'bonnie mill-damso' Balloray': surely that was sufficient evidence of there being such aplace?  He could almost hear George Bethune's voice as he recalled theopening lines'There were twa sisters lived in a bower;Balloray, O Balloray;The youngest o' them, O she was a flower!By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.There came a squire frae out the west,Balloray, O Balloray;He lo'ed them baith, but the youngest best,By the bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.'"Why, what a fool he had been, to be disconcerted by an indexand thatthe index of some old and obsolete edition!  He prosecuted hisresearches. He turned to Cadzow.  Yes, here was Cadzow: Cadzow Castleand Cadzow Forest; and undoubtedly these were the property of the Dukeof Hamilton. But might there not be some other property of the samename, as a sort of appanage of Balloray? It was no unusual thing, inScotland or anywhere else, for two places to have the same name; and inthis instance it was the more important one, the ducal one, that wouldnaturally figure in the guide-book.  He seemed to see old George Bethuneregarding him, with something of a haughty look on his face, as thoughhe would say 'Of what next will you accuse me?'"Well, all this was very fine and brave; it was a manful struggling withcertain phantoms; and he was trying to cheat himself into an elation ofconfidence.  But ever and anon there came to him a consciousness ofsomething behind; something inexplicable; and his thoughts would wanderaway back to Brighton.  Fugitive lines of that terrible poem of Heine'swould come into his brainZu Tafel sassen froh die Gst' ... und wieich nacht dem Brautpaar schaut' ... O weh! mein Liebchen war die Braut.He began to imagine for himself what those three had been doing thismorning.  The weather being so fine, no doubt Mr. Bethune had laid asidehis books for the time being; and he and Maisrie would be ready to goout by half-past ten or eleven.  Would their new friend call for them,or would there be some place of appointment down in the King's-road?  Hecould see them walk out the West Pier.  The old man with the firm-setfigure and the flowing white locks would probably be thinking but littleof what was going on around him; as likely as not he would be singinggaily to himself about the Pier o' Leith and Berwick Law, and 'leavingthee, my bonnie Mary.'  Yes, and so far those two others would be leftto themselves; they could talk as they choseeyes meeting eyes. And whathad the bumpkin squire to say?  Oh, horses and houndsthe countyballsthe famous bin of port to be opened at Christmas.  Christmas wascoming near now; might there not be an invitation to the twoworld-wanderersto come and be hospitably entertained at the bigcountry-house and introduced to friends?  And Maisriewould she thinktwice?would she refuse?  The old man would consent to anything thatpromised him present comfort; he accepted favours with a sort of royalcomplacency; it would matter little to him so long as the fire wasbright, the wine good, the company cheerful, and himself allowed a finelatitude of oration.  But Maisrie?It was nearly four o'clock now.  That previous afternoon at Brighton hadbeen a time of misery; and long into the night he had been kept awake bydull and brooding speculation, varied by bitter self-reproach.  All thesame he felt himself irresistibly drawn thither again; whatever washappening down there by the sea-side, he wanted to know; his imaginingswere a more cruel torture than anything his eyes could tell him.  Andperhapshe added to himself, with an ominous darkening of thebrowsperhaps there might be a chance of his meeting this rival of hisface to face, the better to measure him, and learn what both of them hadto expect.He caught the four-thirty express at Victoria, and got whirled awaydown.  But he did not go to Mrs. Ellison's house, nor yet to the BedfordHotel, at which his friend Musselburgh was staying; he went to theBristol, so as to keep himself a little out of observation.  He waslucky enough to get a bedroom; and that was all he required; he did noteven wait to look at it; he left the hotel and went wandering down theMarine Parade, which was now a mass of darkness lit up by innumerablepoints of yellow fire.Whither away then?  If only he knew the street in which they had takenlodgings he could soon find out their daily habits, himself remainingunseen; but he had nothing beyond a vague recollection that they hadspoken of some hill behind the town.  However, Brighton, though nowgrown a big place, has a few leading thoroughfares in which everybodywho is a visitor is pretty sure to be encountered sooner or later; andin this particular instance it was a good deal sooner than he could havedreamed of.He was walking along the seaward side of the Parade, with but a casualglance now and again at this or that passer-by, when suddenly, on theother side, at the corner of German Place, three figures came under theglare of a gas-lamp, and these he instantly recognised.  Occasionally asthey went on they became indistinguishable in the dusk; then again agas-lamp would bring them into vivid reliefthe tall and slim younggirl, the square-set old man with the picturesque white hair, the younggentleman with the yellow cover-coat.  They were talking together, andwalking quickly, for the night was cold."Yes," said Vincent to himself, in the bitterness of his heart, "I amdisplaced and superseded now. Without much difficulty, either.  Quicklydone. And no doubt he is taking them along to some restaurant.  He willhear about the rocks and dales of Scotlandabout the ballads andsongsperhaps he has subscribed for the new book.  Then they will askhim to go home with them again; and Maisrie will take out her violin;and perhapsperhaps she will sing 'C'tait une frgate, mon joli coeurde roseperhaps she will sing that for him, or any other of theCanadian songs, except the one.  But surely, surely, Maisrie will notsing 'La Claire Fontaine'?"And then again he said to himself, with his eyes fixed on those three,but most of all on the young girl who walked with so light and joyous astep"Ah, I have suffered to-day, you do not know how much, in repellinginsinuations brought against you, and in silencing my own doubts; butwhat do you care?  One restaurant is as good as another; one friend asgood as another; let the absent expect to be forgotten, when it is awoman who is asked to remember.  La Claire Fontaine?why not LaClaire Fontaine, for him as well as anyone else? All that pastcompanionship has gone by; here is a new friend to be welcomed withsmiles and graces. And as for the old manwhat does it matter to him solong as there is someone to settle up the tavern score?"Nay, his madness of jealousy overmastered him altogether.  When they gotdown to East-street, they did not at once go into the restaurant, for itwas yet somewhat early; they began to examine the windows of one or twoof the shops, and the trinkets displayed there.  And again and againVincent was on the point of going up to his enemy, and saying "Well, whydon't you buy her something?  If you haven't got money, I will lend itto you!"  Surely this would suffice to provoke a quarrel?to be settlednext morning, out on the downs, and not by any pistol accident or trickof foil, but by a fair stand-up trial of strength, those two facing eachother, with clenched fists and set mouth.  The young man in thecover-coat was looking at some Austrian garnets: little did he know whatwild beast was within springing distance of him.At length they left the shops, and leisurely strolled along to theItalian restaurant, and entered. Vincent gave them time to get settled,and then followed.  He did not wish to interfere with them; he merelywished to see.  And when he went upstairs to the room on the firstfloor, it was with no abashment; he did not slink, he walked resolutely,to a small unoccupied table at the further end; but he was some way fromthem; perchance he might be able to observe without being noticed. Thewaiter came to him.  "Anything!" was his order: gall and wormwood therewere likely to be in any dish that might be brought.  Wine?oh yes, aflask of Chiantiwhy not a flask of Chianti?one might fill a glass, andsend a message to a faithless frienda message to recall her to herselffor a moment.  You who are sitting there, will you not drink to thehealth of all false loversyou who are sitting there in such joyfulcompanytoi qui as le coeur gai!He could see them well enough.  There was champagne on the table: thatwas not of George Bethune's ordering: the booby from the swedes andmangold was clearly playing the part of host.  And what was she sayingto him in return?  What form did her thanks take?  Je ne puis riendonnerqu' mon coeur en mariage: that was easily said; and might meanno more than it meant in the bygone days.  Women could so readily pourout, to any chance new comer, their petit vin blanc of gratitude.But suddenly he became aware of some movement at the table along there;and quickly he lowered his look.  Then he knewhe did not seethatsomeone was coming down the long room.  He breathed hard, with a sort offearand it was not the fear of any man; he wished he had not come intothis place; could he not even now escape?"Vincent!"The voice thrilled through him; he looked up; and here was MaisrieBethune regarding himregarding him with those eyes so beautiful, soshining, so tender, and reproachful!"Did you not see us?  Why should you avoid us?"The tone in which she spoke pierced his very heart; but stillbutstillthere was that stranger at the table yonder."I thought you were otherwise engaged," said he. "I did not wish tointrude.""You are unkind."Then she stood for a moment uncertain.  It was a brave thing for thisgirl to walk down a long room to address a young man, knowing that morethan one pair of eyes would be turned towards her; and here she wasstanding without any visible aim or errand."Won't you come to our table, Vincent?" she asked hesitatingly.And then he noticed her embarrassment; and he felt he would be a cravenhound not to come to her rescue, whatever the quarrel between them."Oh, yes, certainly, if I may," but with no sort of gladness in hisconsent; and then he bade the waiter fetch the things along.She led the way.  When he reached the table he shook hands with GeorgeBethune, who appeared more surprised than pleased.  Then Maisrie made afaint little kind of introduction as between the young men: Vincentwhohad not caught the other's namebowed stiffly, and took the seat thathad been brought for him.  And then, seeing that it was on Maisrie thatall the responsibility of this new arrangement had fallen, he forcedhimself to talkmaking apologies for disturbing them, explaining how itwas he came to be in Brighton, and begging Maisrie not to take anytrouble about him: it was only too kind of her to allow him to jointhem.And yet it was very awkward, despite Maisrie's assiduous littleattentions, and her timid efforts to propitiate everybody.  Thefresh-complexioned young gentleman stared at the intruder; grew sullenwhen he observed Maisrie's small kindnesses; and eventually turned toresume his conversation with Mr. Bethune, which had been interrupted.Vincent, who had been ready, on the smallest provocation, to break forthin flame and fury, became contemptuous; he would take no heed of thisperson; nay, he would make use of the opportunity to show to anyone whomight choose to listen on what terms he was with Maisrie."Where are you living, Maisrie?" said he, and yet still with a certainstiffness.She gave him the number in German Place."Then we are neighbours, or something near it," he said.  "I am at theBristolthe Bristol Hotel.""Oh, really," she made answer.  "I thought you had an aunt living inBrightonthe lady who came to see us at Henley.""Oh, can you remember things as long ago as Henley?" said he.  "I didnot think a woman's memory could go so far back as that.  A weeka dayIthought that was about as much as she could remember."For a moment she was silent, and wounded; but she was too proud tobetray anything to those other two; and she resumed her conversationwith Vincent, though with a trifle more of dignity and reserve. As forhim, he knew not what to do or say.  He could perceive, he could not butperceive, that Maisrie was trying to be kind to him; and he felt himselfa sort of renegade; but all the same there was that other sitting at thetablethere was an alien presenceand all things were somehow awry. Andyet why should he despise that stranger?  In the bucolic dandy he couldsee himself, as he himself was seen by certain of his friends.  Thisother dupe, his successor, had a countrified complexion and a steelyblue eye, he wore a horse-shoe pin in diamonds, and had a bit ofstephanotis in his button-hole; but these points of difference were notof much account.  And the old manthe old man with the grand air and theoracular speech: no wonder he thought himself entitled to call himselfLord Bethune; but why had he chosen to abate his rank and style?  Oh,yes, a striking presence enougha magnificent presencewith which tocozen shopkeepers!For indeed this young man's mind was all unhinged.  He had had a hardfight of it that day; and perhaps if Maisrie had known she would havemade allowances.  What she did clearly see was that her well-meantinvitation had been a mistake. She strove her best to remove thisembarrassment; she tried to make the conversation general; and in someslight measure she succeeded; but always there was an obvious restraint;there were dark silences and difficult pauses; and, on the part of theyoung men, a sullen and dangerous antagonism that might at any momentleap forth with a sudden tongue of flamea retortan insult.This hapless entertainment came to an end at last; and, as Vincent hadexpected, while Maisrie was putting on her cloak, their new friendstepped aside and paid the billthe bill for three, that is. And thenext step?  An invitation that the generous host of the evening shouldgo along to the rooms in German Place?  There would be tobacco, andScotch whiskey, and reminiscences of travel, and dissertations onliterary and philosophical subjectsand perhaps Maisrie would play forhim 'The Flowers o' the Forest' or sing for him 'Isabeau s'y promne.'Perhaps the bucolic soul was penetrable by fine melody?  There would bewhiskey-and-soda, at any rate, and a blazing fire.And as a matter of fact, when the four of them paused for a second atthe door of the restaurant, the new acquaintance did receive thatinvitationfrom George Bethune himself.  But he declined."Thanks, awfully," said he, "but I can't to-night. Fact is, there's abig billiard match on this evening, and I've backed my man for 20, andI may want to hedge a bit if he isn't in his best form.  Some otherevening, if you'll allow me.  But to-morrow morningwhat are you goingto do to-morrow morning?  You can't stay indoors while the weather is sofine; you must leave your work until the wet comes.  So I dare say Ishall find you somewhere along the front about eleven to-morrow; and ifI don't, why, then, I'll come along to German Place, and drag you out.For who ever knew such a glorious December?quite warm in thesunprimroses and violets all a-growing and a-blowingin the baskets.Good-night to you!good-night, Miss Bethune!mind you bring yourgrandfather along to-morrow morning; or I'll have to come and drag youboth out; good-nightgood-night!"and then with a brief nod to Vincent,which was frigidly returned, he departed."You are going our way, Vincent?" Maisrie said, timidly."Oh, yes," he made answer, as they set out together.For a few seconds they walked in silence.  But when they had crossed theOld Steine, and got into the Marine Parade, the moon came into view,away over there in the east; it was at the full, but rather dusky, forthe north wind had blown the smoke of the town down on the sea-front."Bid you notice how clear the moon was last night?" she said, to breakthis embarrassing silence."Yes, I did," he said.  "I was walking about a good deal last night.The moonlight was beautiful on the water.""Oh, were you down in Brighton last night?" she asked, rather anxiously."Yes."That was all.  She did not dare to ask what had brought him down; and hedid not choose to invent an excuse.  Again they walked on for a littlewhile in silence, until they reached the corner of German Place."Well, good-night!" said George Bethune, holding out his hand.  "Quite asurprise to meet youquite a surprise.  Hope we shall see you againbefore you go back."And now it was Maisrie's turn."Good-night, Vincent!" she said, with her eyes seeking his in muteappeal."Good-night," said he; and he did not respond to that look: so these twoparted.And soon, as he walked aimlessly onward, he was away from the townaltogether.  To him it was a hateful placewith its contrarieties, itsdisappointments, its distracting problems in human nature. When heturned to look at it, it was like some vast and dusky pit, with a dull,red glow shining over it from its innumerable fires.  But here, as hewent on again, all was peace.  The silver moonlight shimmered on thewater.  There was not a whisper or murmur along these lofty and solitarycliffs.  A cold wind blew from the north, coming over the bare uplands;but it brought no sound of any bird or beast.  His shadow was his solecompanionvague and indefinite on the grass, but sharper and blacker onthe grey and frosted road.  He was alone, and he wished to be alone; andif certain phrases from the Claire Fontaine would come following andhaunting himjai perdu ma matressesans l' avoir mritpour unbouquet de rosesque je lui refusaihe strove to repel them; he wouldhave none of them; nor any remembrance of what was past and gone.  Theworld was sweet to him here, because he was alone with the sea, and theshore, and the mystic splendour of those shining heavens; and because heseemed to have shaken himself free from the enmities and the treacheriesand ingratitudes that lay festering in yonder town.CHAPTER VII.RENEWING IS OF LOVE.Next morning broke bright and clear, for the north wind had blownfreshly all the night, and swept the smoke of the town right out to sea,where it lay along the horizon as a soft saffron-reddish cloud.Accordingly the sky overhead was of a summer-like blue; and the sea wasof a shining green, save where it grew opaque and brown as it neared theshore; while the welcome sunlight was everywhere abroad, giving promiseof a cheerful day, even now in December.  And Vin Harris was standing ata window of the hotel, looking absently out on the wide and emptythoroughfares.A waiter brought him a note.  He glanced at the handwriting withstartled eyes, then tore the envelope open.  This was what he read"Dear Vincent, I wish to speak with you for a moment if you are notengaged.  I am going down to the breakwater, and will wait there for alittle while."MAISRIE."He called to the waiter."When did this come?""I found it lying on the hall table, sirjust this minute, sir."He did not waste time on further questions.  In a couple of seconds hewas outside and had crossed the road; and there, sure enoughfar belowhimout on the breakwaterwas a solitary figure that he instantlyrecognised.  He went quickly down the steps; he did not stay to ask whatthis might mean, or to prepare himself in any way; as he approached her,all his anxiety was to know if her eyes were kindor hostile.  Well,they were neither; but there was a certain pride in her tone as shespoke."Vincent, you were angry with me last night.  Why?""Maisrie," said he, "why don't you put up that furred collar round yourneck?  It is so cold this morning.  See, let me put it up for you."She retreated an inch, declining: she waited for him to answer herquestion."Angry with you?" he said, with obvious constraint.  "No, but I wasvexed.  I was vexed with a lot of thingsthat I can hardly explain. Notwith you personallyat leastwell, at any rate I did not mean to offendyou.  If I have offended you I ask your pardon"Here he paused: these stammering sentences were so insufficient.  Andthen all at once he said"Maisrie, who was that young man?"She looked surprised."Do you mean Mr. Glover?""Glover?oh, that is his name.  But who is he?what is he?how did youcome to know him so intimately?"Perhaps she began to see a little."I don't know him at all, Vincent.  He is a friend of mygrandfather'sor rather he is the son of a friend of my grandfather'sawine-merchant in London.  We met him on the day we came here""And he lost no time in showing off his acquaintance with you," saidVincent, bitterly, "driving you up and down the King's Road, before allBrighton!"At this she lowered her head a little."I did not wish to go, Vincent.  Grandfather pressed me.  I did not liketo refuse.""Oh," said he, "I have no right to object.  It is not for me to object.If new friends are to be treated as old friendswhat does it matter?"She regarded him reproachfully."You know very well, Vincent, that if I had thought it would vex you, Iwould not have gonenonothing in the world would have inducedmenothing!  And how cruel it is of you to speak of new friendsand tosay that old friends are so quickly forgotten!  Is that all you believeof what I have told you many a time?  Butbut if I have pained you, I amsorry," she continued, still with downcast lashes.  "Tell me what youwish me to do.  I will not speak to him again, if you would rather Ishould not.  If he comes to the house, I will stay in my own room untilhe is goneanything, anything rather than that you should be vexed.  Foryou have been so kind to me!""No, no," said he, hastily.  "No, I have been altogether wrong.  Do justas you please yourself, Maisrie: that will be the right thing.  I havebeen an ass and a fool to doubt you.  Butbut it made me mad to think ofany man coming between you and me""Vincent!"She raised her head; and for one ineffable moment her maiden eyes wereunveiled and fixed upon himwith such a tenderness and pride and trustas altogether bewildered him and entranced him beyond the powers ofspeech.  For here was confession at last!her soul had declared itself:no matter what might happen now, he knew she was his own!  And yet, whenshe spoke, it was as if she had divined his thoughts, and woulddissipate that too wonderful dream."No," she said, rather wistfully, and her eyes were averted again, "thatis the last thing you need think about, Vincent; no man will ever comebetween you and me.  No man will ever take your place in myregardandand esteem""Is that all, Maisrie?" he said, gently; but in truth that suddenrevelation had left him all trembling and overjoyed.  He was almostafraid to speak to her, lest she should withdraw that unspoken avowal."Andand affection: why should not I say it?I may not have anotherchance," she went on. "You need not fear, Vincent.  No man will evercome between you and me; but a woman willand welcome!  You willmarryyou will be happyand no one will be better pleased to hear of itall than I shall.  And why," she continued, with a kind of cheerfulness,"why, even in that case, should we speak of any one coming between us?We shall have the same affection, the same kind thoughts, even then, Ihope""Maisrie, why do you talk like that!" he protested.  "You know quitewell that you will be my wifeor no one."She shook her head."If you do not see for yourself that it is impossibleif you do notunderstand, Vincentthen some day I must tell you""Ah, but you have told me something far more important, and only aminute or two ago," said he. "You have told me all I want to know, thisvery morning!  You are not aware of the confession you have made, sinceyou came out on this breakwater? I have seen in your eyes what I neversaw before; and everything else is to me as nothing. Difficulties?Idon't believe in them.  I see our way as clear as daylight; and there'sneither man nor woman coming between us.  Oh, yes, I have discoveredsomething this morningthat makes our way clear enough!  Maisrie, do youknow what wonderful eyes you have?they can say so many thingsperhapseven more than you intend.  So much the betterso much the betterfor Iknow they speak true."She did not seem to share his joyous confidence."I must be going now, Vincent," she said. "Grandfather will wonder why Iam so long in getting his newspapers.  And I am glad to know you are nolonger vexed with me.  I could not bear that.  And I will take care youshall have no further causeindeed I will, Vincent."She was for bidding him good-bye, but he detained her: a wild wish hadcome into his head."Maisrie," said he, with a little hesitation, "couldn't youcouldn't yougive me some little thing to keep as a souvenir of this happy morning?Ah, you don't know all you have told me, perhaps! Only some littlething: could you give me a sandal-wood bead, Maisriecould you cut oneoff your necklace?and I will get a small gold case made for it, andwear it always and always, and when I open it, the perfume will remindme of you and of our walks together, and the evenings in that littleparlour"But instantly she had pulled off her gloves, and with busy fingersunclasped the necklace; then she touched it with her lips, and placedthe whole of the warm and scented treasure in his hand."I only wanted one of the beads, Maisrie," said he, with something ofshamefacedness."Take it, VincentI have not many things to give," she said, simply."Thenthen would you wear something if I gave it to you?" he asked."Oh, yes, if you would like that," she answered at once."Oh, well, I must try to get something nicesomething appropriate," saidhe.  "I wonder if a Brighton jeweller could make me a small white dovein ivory or mother-of-pearl, that you could wear just as if it hadalighted on your breasta pin, you know, for your neckand the pin couldbe made of a row of rubies or sapphireswhile the dove itself would bewhite.""But, Vincent," she said, doubtingly, "if I were to wear that?""What would it mean?  Is that what you ask? Shall I tell you, Maisrie?It would mean a betrothal!"She shrank back."Nono," she said.  "NoI could not wear that!""Oh, are you frightened by a word?" said he, cheerfully.  "Verywellvery wellit shan't mean anything of the kind!  It will only serveto remind you of a morning on which you and I went for a little strolldown a breakwater at Brighton, when the Brighton people were so kind asto leave it all to ourselves.  Nothing more than that, Maisrie!if youwish it.  Only you must wear the little white doveas an emblem of peaceand goodwilland a messenger bringing you good newsand a lot of thingslike that, that I'm too stupid to put into words.  For this is a morningnot to be forgotten by either of us, all our lives long, I hope.  Youthink you have not said anything?then you shouldn't have such tell-taleeyes, Maisrie!  And I believe them.  I don't believe you when you talkabout vague impossibilities.  Well, I suppose I must let you go; and Isuppose we cannot say good-byeout here in the open""But you are coming, too, Vincenta little way?""As far as ever you will allow me," said he. "Till the end of life, ifyou likeand as I hope."But that was looking too far ahead in the present circumstances."What are you going to do to-day, Maisrie?" he asked, as they wereleaving the breakwater and making up for the Marine Parade.  "Oh, Iforgot: you are going out walking at eleven."She blushed slightly."No, Vincent; I think I shall remain at home.""On a morning like this?impossible!  Why, you must go out in thesunlight.  Sunlight is rare in December."Then she said, with some little embarrassment, "I do not wish to vex youany more, Vincent.  If I went out with grandfather, we should meet Mr.Glover""Mr. Glover?" he said, interrupting her. "Dearest Maisrie, I don't mindif you were to go walking with twenty Mr. Glovers!I don't mind thatnow.  It is the sunlight that is of importance; it is getting you intothe sunlight that is everything.  And if Mr. Glover asks you to godriving with him in the afternoon, of course you must go!it willinterest you to see the crowd and the carriages, and it will keep you inthe fresh air. Oh, yes, if I'm along in the King's Road this afternoon,I shall look out for you; and if you should happen to see me, then justremember that you have given me your sandal-wood necklace, and that I amthe proudest and happiest person in the whole town of Brighton.  Why, ofcourse you must go out, both morning and afternoon," he continued, inthis gay and generous fashion, as they were mounting the steps towardsthe upper thoroughfare. "Sunlight is just all the world, for flowers,and pretty young ladies, and similar things; and now you're away fromthe London fogs, you must make the best of it.  It is very wise of yourgrandfather to lay aside his work while the fine weather lasts. Now be agood, sensible girl, and go out at eleven o'clock.""Vincent," she said, "if I do go with grandfather this morning, will youcome down the town, and join us?""Oh, well," said he, rather hesitating, "II do not wish to inflictmyself on anybody.  But don't mistake, Maisrie: I shall be quite happy,even if I see you walking up and down with the purveyor of bad sherry.It won't vex me in the least: something you told me this morning hasmade me proof against all that.  The important thing is that you shouldkeep in the sunlight!""I ask you to come, Vincent.""Oh, very well, certainly," said henot knowing what dark design was inher mind.He was soon to discover.  When he left her in St. James's Street,whither she had gone to get the morning newspapers for her grandfather,he went back to the hotel, and to his own room, to take out thispriceless treasure of a necklace she had bestowed on him, and to wonderhow best he could make of it a cunning talisman that he could have nearhis heart night and day.  And also he set to work to sketch out designsfor the little breast-pin he meant to have made, with its transverse rowof rubies or sapphires, with its white dove in the centre.  Aninscription?  That was hardly needed: there was a sufficientunderstanding between him and her.  And surely this was a betrothal,despite her timid shrinking back?  The avowal of that morning had beenmore to him than words; during that brief moment it seemed as if Heavenshone in her eyes; and as if he could see there, as in a vision, all theyears to comeall the years that he and she were to be togethershiningwith a soft celestial radiance.  And would not this small white doveconvey its message of peace?when it lay on her bosom, "so light, solight."Then all of a sudden it occurred to himwhy, he had been talking andwalking with an adventuress, a begging-letter impostor, a commonswindler, and had quite forgotten to be on his guard!  All the solemnwarnings he had received had entirely vanished from his mind when he wasout there on the breakwater with Maisrie Bethune.  He had looked intoher eyesand never thought of any swindling!  Had this sandal-woodnecklacethat was sweet with a fragrance more than its ownthat seemedto have still some lingering warmth in it, borrowed from its recent andsecret resting-placebeen given him as a lure?  The whitedovesignificant of all innocence, and purity, and peacewas that torest on the heart of a traitress?  Well, perhaps; but it did not appearto concern him much, as he got his hat and cane, and pulled on a freshpair of gloves, and went out into the open air.Nay, he was in a magnanimous mood towards all mankind.  He would noteven seek to interfere with Sherry, as he mentally and meanly styled hisrival.  If it pleased the young gentleman in the cover-coat to walk upand down the King's Road with Maisrie Bethunevery well.  If he took herfor a drive after luncheon, that would amuse her, and also was well.The time for jealous dread, for angry suspicions, for reproachfulaccusations, was over and gone.  A glance from Maisrie's eyes hadbanished all that.  Sherry might parade his acquaintanceship as much ashe chose, so long as Maisrie was kept in the open air and the sunlight:that was the all-important point.By-and-bye he went away down to the King's Road, and very speedilyespied the three figures he expected to find there, though as yet theywere at some distance.  They were coming towards him: in a few minuteshe would be face to face with them. And he had made up his mind what hemeant to do.  Maisrie should see that he was actuated no longer byjealous rage; that he had confidence in her; that he feared no rivalnow.  And so it was that when they came near, he merely gave them ageneral and pleasant "Good-morning!" and raised his hat to Maisrie, andwas for passing on.  But he had reckoned without his hostor hostessrather."Vincent!" said Maisrie, in expostulation.Then he stopped."Aren't you coming with us?  We are going along to the Chain Pier, toget out of the crowd. Won't you come?""Oh, yes, if I may!" said he, gladly enoughand he knew that the otheryoung man was staring, not to say scowling, at this unwelcome intrusion.Now Maisrie had been walking between her grandfather and young Glover;but the moment that Vincent joined the little party, she fell behind."Four abreast are too many," said she.  "We must go two and two;grandfather, will you lead the way with Mr. Glover?"It was done, and dexterously done, in a moment; and if the selection ofthe new comer as her companion was almost too open and marked, perhapsthat was her intention.  At all events, when the two others had movedforward, Vincent said in an undertone"This is very kind of you, Maisrie."And she replied, rather proudly"I wished to show you that I could distinguish between old and newfriends."Then he grew humble."Maisrie," said he, "don't you treasure up things against me!  It wasonly a phrase.  And just remember how I was situated.  I came away downto Brighton merely to catch a glimpse of you; and about the first thingI saw was this young fellow, whom I had never heard of, driving you upand down among the fashionable crowd.  You see, Maisrie, you hadn'tgiven me the sandal-wood necklace then; and what is of far moreconsequence, you hadn't allowed your eyes to tell me what they told methis morning.  So what was I to think? No harm of you, of course; but Iwas miserable;andand I thought you could easily forget; and all theafternoon I looked out for you; and all the evening I wandered about thestreets, wondering whether you would be in one of the restaurants or thehotels.  If I could only have spoken a word with you!  But then, youknow, I had been in a kind of way shut off from you; andand there wasthis new acquaintance""I am very sorry, Vincent," she said also in a low voice.  "It seemssuch a pity that one should vex one's friends unintentionally; becausein looking back, you like to think of their always being pleased withyou; and then again there may be no chance of making upand you aresorry when it is too late""Come, come, Maisrie," he said with greater freedomfor some people hadintervened, and the other two were now a little way ahead, "I am notgoing to let you talk in that way.  You always speak as if you and Iwere to be separated""Wouldn't it be better, Vincent?" she said, simply."Why?""Why?" she repeated, in an absent kind of way. "Well, you know nothingabout us, Vincent.""I have been told a good deal of late, then!" he said, in carelessscorn.And the next instant he wished he had bitten his tongue out ere makingthat haphazard speech. The girl looked up at him with a curious quickscrutinyas if she were afraid."What have you been told, Vincent?" she demanded, in quite an alteredtone."Oh, nothing!" he said, with disdain.  "A lot of rubbish!  Every one hasgood-natured friends, I suppose, who won't be satisfied with mindingtheir own business.  And although you may laugh at the moment, at themere ridiculousness of the thing, still, if it should happen that justat the same time you should see some one you are very fond ofinin aposition that you can't explain to yourselfwell, then  But what isthe use of talking, Maisrie!  I confess that I was jealous out of allreason, jealous to the verge of madness; but then I paid the penalty, inhours and hours of misery; and now you come along and heap coals of fireon my head, until I am so ashamed of myself that I don't think I am fitto live.  And that's all about it; and my only excuse is that you hadnot told me then what your eyes told me this morning."She remained silent and thoughtful for a little while; but as she madeno further reference to his inadvertent admission that he had heardcertain things of herself and her grandfather, he inwardly hoped thatthat unlucky speech had gone from her memory.  Moreover, they were cometo the Chain Pier; and as those two in front waited for them, so thatthey should go through the turnstile one after the other, there was justthen no opportunity for further confidential talking.  But once on thePier, old George Bethune, who was eagerly discoursing on some subject oranother (with magnificent emphasis of arm and stick) drew ahead again,taking his companion with him.  And Vin Harris, regarding thepicturesque figure of the old man, and his fine enthusiastic manner,which at all events seemed so sincere, began to wonder whether therecould be any grains of truth in the story that had been told him, orwhether it was a complete and malevolent fabrication.  His appearanceand demeanour, certainly, were not those of a professional impostor: itwas hard to understand how a man of his proud and blunt self-assertioncould manage to wheedle wine merchants and tailors.  Had he reallycalled himself Lord Bethune; or was it not far more likely that someignorant colonial folk, impressed by his talk of high lineage and by hispersonal dignity, had bestowed on him that title?  The youngmanguessing and wonderingbegan to recall the various counts of thatsinister indictment; and at last he said to his companion, in a musingkind of way"Maisrie, you know that motto your grandfather is so proud of: 'StandFast, Craig-Royston!'  Have you any idea where Craig-Royston is?""I?  No, not at all," she said simply."You have never been there?""Vincent!" she said.  "You know I have never been in Scotland.""Because there is such an odd thing in connection with it," hecontinued.  "In one edition of Black's Guide to Scotland, Craig-Roystonis not mentioned anywhere; and in another it is mentioned, but only in afootnote.  And I can't find it in the map.  You don't know if there areany people of your name living there now?""I am sure I cannot say," she made answer. "Grandfather could tell you;he is always interested in such things.""And Balloray," he went on, "I could find no mention of Balloray; but ofcourse there must be such a place?""I wish there was not," she said, sadly.  "It is the one bitter thing inmy grandfather's life.  I wish there never had been any such place.  ButI have noticed a change in him of late.  He does not complain now as heused to complain; he is more resigned; indeed, he seldom talks of it.And when I say complain, that is hardly the word.  Don't you think hebears his lot with great fortitude?  I am sure it is more on my accountthan his own that he ever thinks of the estate that was lost.  And I amsure he is happier with his books than with all the land and money thatcould be given to him.  He seems to fancy that those old songs andballads belong to him; they are his property; he is happier with themthan with a big estate and riches.""I could not find Balloray in the index to the Guide," Vincent resumed,"but of course there must be such a placethere is the ballad yourgrandfather is so fond of'The bonnie mill-dams o' Balloray.'"She looked up suddenly, with some distress in her face."Vincent, don't you understand?  Don't you understand that grandfatheris easily taken with a namewith the sound of itand sometimes heconfuses one with another?  That ballad is not about Balloray; it isabout Binnorie; it is 'The bonnie mill-dams o' Binnorie.'  Grandfatherforgets at times; and he is used to Balloray; and that has got into hishead in connection with the ballad.  I thought perhaps you knew.""Oh, no," said he, lightly, for he did not attach any great importanceto this chance confusion. "The two words are not unlike; I quite see howone might take the place of the other.  Of course you will make surethat he puts in the right name when he comes to publish the volume."And so they walked up and down the almost deserted pier, in the brightsunlight, looking out on the lapping green waters, or up to the terracedyellow houses above the tall cliffs.  Sometimes, of course, the four ofthem came together; and more than once the horsey-looking younggentleman insidiously tried to detach Maisrie from her chosencompanionand tried in vain.  At last, when it became about time forthem to be going their several ways home, he made a bold stroke."Come, Mr. Bethune," said he, as they were successively passing throughthe turnstile, "I want you and Miss Bethune to take pity on a poorsolitary bachelor, and come along and have a bit of lunch with me at theOld Ship.  It will be a little change for you, won't it?and we can havea private room if you prefer that."The old gentleman seemed inclined to close with this offer; but heglanced towards Maisrie for her acquiescence first."Oh, thank you, Mr. Glover," said she, promptly; "but I have everythingarranged at our lodgings; and we must not disappoint our landlady.  Someother time, perhaps, thank you!  Good morning!"Then the moment he was gone, she turned to her companion."Vincent, have you any engagement?  No? Then, will you be verycourageous and come with us and take your chance?  I can promise you abiscuit at least.""And I'm sure I don't want anything more," said he, most gratefully; forsurely she was trying her best to show him that she distinguishedbetween old and new friends.And then again, when they reached the rooms, and when the three of themwere seated at table, she waited upon him with a gentle care andassiduity that were almost embarrassing.  He wished the wretched thingsat the bottom of the sea: why should commonplace food and drinkinterfere with his answering Maisrie's eyes, or thinking of heroverwhelming kindness?  As for old George Bethune, the sharp air and thesunlight had given him an admirable appetite; and he allowed the youngpeople to amuse themselves with little courtesies, and attentions, andprotests just as they pleased.  Cheese and celery were solid andsubstantial things: he had no concern about a drooping eyelash, or somepretty, persuasive turn of speech.And yet he was not unfriendly towards the young man."Wouldn't you like to go to the theatre this evening, Maisrie?" Vincentasked.  "It is the Squires Daughter.  I know you've seen it already;but I could go a dozen timestwenty timesthe music is so delightful.And the travelling company is said to be quite as good as the Londonone: Miss Kate Burgoyne has changed into it, you know, and I shouldn'twonder if she sung all the better because of the 3000 damages that SirPercival Miles has had to pay her.  Shall I go along and see if I canget a box?""What do you say, grandfather?" the girl asked."Oh, yesvery well, very well," said he, in his lofty way.  "A littleidleness more or less is not of much account.  But we must begin to worksoon, Maisrie; fresh air and sunlight are all very well; but we mustbegin to workwhile the day is with us, though luckily one has not tosay to you as yetjam te premet nox, falulque Manes, et domus exilisPlutonia.""Then if we go to the theatre," said Maisrie, "Vincent must come in herefor a little while on his way home; and you and he will have a smoketogether; and it will be quite like old times."And Vincent looked ather, as much as to say, 'Maisrie, don't make me too ashamed: haven't youforgiven me yet for that foolish phrase?'The afternoon passed quickly enough: to Vincent every moment was golden.Then in the evening they went to the theatre; and the young people atleast were abundantly charmed with the gay costumes, the pretty music,and the fun and merriment of the bright little operetta.  George Bethuneseemed less interested.  He sate well back in the box, his face inshadow; and although his eyes, from under those shaggy eyebrows, werefixed on the stage, it was in an absent fashion, as if he were thinkingof other things.  And indeed he was thinking of far other things; forwhen, after the piece was over, those three set out to walk home throughthe dark streets, Maisrie and Vincent could hear the old man, who walkedsomewhat apart from them, reciting to himself, and that in a proud andsustained voice.  It was not the frivolity of comic opera that he had inhis mind; it was something of finer and sterner stuff; as they crossedby the Old Steine, where there was a space of silence, they could makeout clearly what this was'Thy faith and troth thou sall na get,And our true love sall never twin,Until ye tell what comes of women,I wot, who die in strong travailing?''Their beds are made in the heavens high,Down at the foot of our good Lord's knee,Weel set about wi' gillyflowers,I wot sweet company for to see.'O cocks are crowing a merry midnight,I wot the wild-fowl are boding day;The psalms of heaven will soon be sung,And I, ere now, will be missed away.'There was a curiously solemn effect about this solitary voice, here inthe dark.  The old man did not seem to care whether he was overheard ornot; it was entirely to himself that he was repeating the lines of theold ballad.  And thereafter he walked on in silence, while the twolovers, busy with their own little world, were murmuring nothings toeach other.But Maisrie, for one, was soon to be recalled to the actualities, andeven grim incongruities, of every day life.  When they reached theirlodgings the servant girl, who opened the door to them, paused for asecond and looked up and down the street."Yes, sir, there he is," said she."Who?" George Bethune demanded."A man who has been asking for you, sirand said he would wait."At the same moment there came out of the gloom a rather shabby-lookingperson."Mr. George Bethune?" he said."Yes, that is my name," the old man answered, impatiently: probably hesuspected."Something for you, sir," said the stranger, handing a folded piece ofpaperand therewith he left.It was all the work of a second; and the next instant they were indoors,and in the little parlour; but in that brief space of time a greatchange had taken place.  Indeed, Maisrie's mortification was a piteousthing to see; it seemed so hard she should have had to endure thishumiliation under the very eyes of her lover; she would not look his wayat all; she busied herself with putting things on the table; herdowncast face was overwhelmed with confusion and shame.  For surelyVincent would know what that paper was?  The appearance of the manhishanging abouther grandfather's angry frownall pointed plainly enough.And that it should happen at the end of this long and happy daythis dayof reconciliationwhen she had tried so assiduously to be kind tohimwhen he had spoken so confidently of the future that lay beforethem!  It was as if some cruel fate had interposed to say to him: 'Nowyou see the surroundings in which this girl has lived: and do you stilldream of making her your wife?'And perhaps old George Bethune noticed this shame and vexation on thepart of his granddaughter, and may have wished to divert attention fromit; at all events, when he had brewed his toddy, and lit his pipe, anddrawn his chair in towards the fire, he set off upon one of hismonologues, quite in the old garrulous vein; and he was as friendlytowards Vincent as though this visit had been quite anticipated.Maisrie sat silent and abashed; and Vincent, listening vaguely, thoughtit was all very fine to have a sanguine and happy-go-lucky temperament,but that hethat is, the younger manwould be glad to have thisbeautiful and pensive creature of a girl removed into altogetherdifferent circumstances.  He knew why she was ashamed anddowncastthough, to be sure, he said to himself that the serving of awrit was no tremendous cataclysm.  Such little incidents mustnecessarily occur in the career of any one who had such an arrogantdisdain of pounds and pence as her grandfather professed.  But thatMaisrie should have to suffer humiliation: that was what touched him tothe quick.  He looked at herat her beautiful and wistful eyes, and thesensitive lines of her profile and under-lip; and his heart bled forher.  And all this following upon her outspoken avowal of that morningseemed to demand some more definite and immediate action on hispartwhen once the quiet of the night had enabled him to consider hisposition.When he rose to leave, he asked them what they meant to do the next day.But Maisrie would hardly say anything; she seemed rather to wish him togo, so distressed and disheartened she was. And go he did, presently;but he bore away with him no hurt feeling on account of his tacitdismissal.  He understood all that; and he understood her.  And as hewent away home through the dark, he began to recall the first occasionson which he had seen Maisrie Bethune walking in Hyde Park with hergrandfather; and the curious fancies that were then formed in his ownmindthat here apparently was a beautiful, and sensitive, and sufferingsoul that ought to be rescued and cheered and comforted, were one foundworthy to be her champion and her friend.  Her friend?she had confessedhe was something more than that on this very morning.  Her lover,then?well, her lover ought to be her champion too, if only the hours ofthe night would lend him counsel.CHAPTER VIII.ON THE BRINK.Nay, he could see but the one clear and resolute way out of all theseperplexities, which was that he should forthwith and without furtherpreamble marry Maisrie Bethune: thereafter his relatives might do or saywhatever it most pleased them to do or say.  This would be his answer tothe vague but persistent suspicions of Mrs. Ellison, and to the moreprecise but none the less preposterous accusations of his father.  Thenas regards Maisrie herself, would not this conclusive act banish allthose dim presentiments and alarms with which she seemed to regard thefuture?  And if her present circumstances involved her in humiliation,lie would take her out of these.  As for old George Bethune, ought henot to welcome this guardianship that would succeed his own?  Thehappiness of his granddaughter seemed to be his first care; and here wasa stay and bulwark for her, a protection for her when his own should bewithdrawn in the natural course of things.This solution of the difficulty seemed reasonable and simple, thoughsometimes his arguments would suddenly get lost in a flood of wildwonder and joy; and entrancing visions of that pretty canary-cage hemeant to securedown by Chelsea way, perhaps, or up about Campden Hill,or it might be out among some suburban gardenswould interfere with thecool and accurate representations he was preparing to lay before hisfriends.  For after all, simple as the solution appeared, there wereways and means to be considered.  Vincent was now about to discovernay,he already perceivedthat for a young man to be brought up without anydefinite calling meant a decided crippling of his independence. Thecanary-cage, charming and idyllic as it might be, would cost something,even if he went as far as Shepherd's Bush or Hammersmith; and the littlefortune that had been left him did not produce much of an annual income.Then again his father: would not the great socialist (on paper)instantly withdraw the handsome allowance he had hitherto made, onhearing that his son contemplated marrying that dangerous person, thatlow-born adventuress, that creature of the slums?  For Vincent Harriswas not given to disguising things from himself. He knew that these werethe phrases which his father would doubtless apply to Maisrie Bethune.Not that they or any other phrases were of much import: thecapitalist-communist was welcome to invent and use as many as he chose.But his opposition to this marriage, which was almost to be counted on,might become a very serious affair for everybody concerned.Next morning Vincent was up betimes; and at an early hour he went alongto the Bedford Hotel. He was told that Lord Musselburgh was in thecoffee-room; and thither he accordingly proceeded."Oh, yes, I'll have some breakfast, thank you," said he, as he took aseat at the small table. "Anythinganything.  The fact is, Musselburgh,I want to speak to you, if you can give me a little time.  Something ofimportance, tooto me at least""Let me tell you this, Vin, first of all," said the elder of the twoyoung men, with a smile.  "You'll have to make your peace with Mrs.Ellison.  She is mortally offended at the notion of your coming toBrighton, and going to a hotel.  I suppose you imagined she didn't knowyou had come down? We saw you yesterday.""Where?" said Vincent, quickly."In the Marine Parade.  We followed you some little wayif you hadturned round you would have seen us.""What time?""Why, about one, I should think.""Thenthen you saw""Yes, we saw" said the other.There was a moment's silence; Vin's eyes were fixed on his companionwith a curious expectancy and prayer; had this friend of his, if he werea friend at all, no approving word to say about Maisrie?Well, Lord Musselburgh was an exceedingly good-natured young man; and onthis occasion he did not allow a selfish discretion to get the better ofhim."I don't know that I intended to tell you," said he.  "Fact is, Mrs.Ellison hinted that I'd better follow her example; and have nothing tosay on a certain subject; but really, Vin, reallyI had noideareally""Yes?what?" said Vincent, rather breathlessly."Well, to be candid with you, I never was so surprised in my life!  Why,you remember that afternoon in Piccadilly, when I first saw themperhapsI did not pay much attention to the girlshe seemed a slip of athingpretty, oh, yes, pretty enough; but yesterdaywhen I saw heryesterdayby George, she's grown to be one of the most beautifulcreatures I ever beheld!  And so distinguished-lookingand apparently sounconscious of it too!  Again and again I noticed people half-turn theirheads to get another glimpse of her as she went byand no wonderwhy,really, such a carriagesuch an air of distinction and quietself-possession, for all she looked so youngI never was so surprised inall my life!  Oh, a most beautiful creature!and that I must say incommon honesty, whatever comes of it."Nay, the very incoherence of his praise was proof of its sincerity; andVincent's face burned with pleasure and pride.  How could sweeter wordshave been poured into a lover's ears?"Did you chance to notice her hair?did you?" said he, eagerly.  "Didyou chance to see the sunlight on it?  Andand you were behind heryoumust have seen how she walkedthe lightness and grace of her step.  Mindyou, Mussel burgh," he went onand his breakfast received but scantattention, now that he had found someone to whom he could talk on thisenchanting and all-engrossing theme.  "A light and graceful step meansfar more than mere youth and healthit means a perfect and supple figureas well.  Did you think she was rather pale?" he askedbut only toanswer his own question.  "Yes, I dare say you might think she wasrather pale.  But that is not because she is delicateoh, dear, no!notin the least: it is the natural fineness of her complexion; and whenbrisk walking, or a cold wind blowing, brings colour into her cheeks,then that is all the rarer and more beautiful.  Of course you couldn'tsee her eyes at all?she doesn't stare at people in the streets; sheseems to find the sea more interesting when we are walking up and clown;but they are the clearest, the most expressive, eyes you could imagine!She hardly has to speakshe has only to look!  I do think blue-grey isby far the prettiest colour of eyes; they vary so much; I've seenMaisrie Bethune's eyes quite distinctly bluethat is when she is verystrong and well, and out in the open air. I don't suppose it possiblethat any reflection from the sky or sea can affect the colour of theeyes; it must be simply that she is in the fresh air, and stimulatedwith exercise and happy"  He paused for a second.  "Is there anythingso very amusing?""To tell you the truth, Vin," his companion admitted, "I was thinkingthat when you came in you announced you had something of importance tosay""Instead of which I have been talking about Miss Bethune," Vincent said,without taking any offence.  "But who began?  I thought it was you whointroduced the subjectand you seemed interested in her appearance""Oh, yes, of course, of course," the young nobleman said, goodnaturedly."I beg your pardon. And I understand how the subject may be ofimportance to you""Well, yes, it is," said Vincent, calmly.  "For I propose to marry MissBethune, and at once, if she will consent."Lord Musselburgh looked up quickly, and his face was grave enough now."You don't mean that, Vin?""That is precisely what I do mean," the young man said."I thoughtI had fanciedthat certain things had been found out," hisfriend stammered, and then stopped; for it was a hazardous topic."Oh, you have been told too?" Vincent said, with a careless disdain."Well, when I heard those charges brought against Miss Bethune'sgrandfather, I did not choose to answer them; but speaking about him toyou is another thing; and I may say to you, once for all, that morepreposterous trash was never invented.  I won't deny," he continued,with a perfectly simple frankness, "that there are one or two thingsabout Mr. Bethune that I cannot quite explainthat I rather shut my eyesto; and perhaps there are one or two things that one might wishalteredfor who is perfect?  But the idea that this old man, with hisalmost obtrusively rugged individuality, his independence, his self-willand pride, should be a scheming impostor and swindlerit is too absurd!To my mindand I think I know him pretty intimatelyhe appears to be oneof the finest and grandest characters it is possible to imagine; apersonality you could never forget, once you had learned to know himeven a little; and that this man, of all men, should be suspected ofbeing a fawning and wheedling writer of begging-lettersit is toolaughable!  I admit that he has little or no moneyif that is a crime.They live in straitened circumstances, no doubt.  And of course thereare many unpleasant things connected with poverty that one would ratherhide from the eyes of a young lady, and that can't well be hidden:though I don't know that her nature, if she has a fine and noble nature,need suffer from that.  For example, it isn't nice for her to see hergrandfather served with a writ; but many excellent people have beenserved with writs; it doesn't follow that Mr. Bethune must be a thiefbecause he has no moneyor perhaps because he has been negligent aboutsome debt or other.  But even supposing that he was a questionablepersoneven supposing that he was in the habit of using doubtful meansto supplement his precarious income; isn't that all the greater reasonwhy such a girl should be taken away from such circumstances?"Lord Musselburgh did not reply to this question. He had heard from Mrs.Ellison that the granddaughter was suspected, or more than suspected, ofbeing an accomplice; and although, of course, he could not in the leastsay whether there was any truth in this allegation, he deemed it wiserto hold his tongue."Now you may put all that aside," Vincent went on.  "That is all rubbishand trasha pack of old wives' stories.  And what I want of you,Musselburgh, is to give me your honest opinion on a certain point.  Iask for your advice.  I want you to tell me what you think would happenin a possible case.  And the main question is this: assuming that Icould persuade Miss Bethune to marry me at once, and assuming also thather grandfather approvedwhen the marriage had actually taken place,what would my relatives say? Or rather, that is not the question: thequestion is what they would do.  I know what they would say. They wouldbe wild enough.  Their heads are full of these foolish fancies andsuspicions; and beside that, I gather that they want me to marry somenoble damsel whose family would have political influence.  Yes, theywould be wild enough, no doubt; but when they found the thing actuallysettled, what would they do?  Would my father make a deadly quarrel ofit and cut me off with a shilling, like something out of a play; orwould he exercise a little common-sense, and make the best of it, seeingthe thing was done?""Really," said Musselburgh, who seemed more concerned than one mighthave expected from his half-cynical, half-careless temperament, "you askme what I can't answer.  And giving advice is a perilous business.  AllI can say is this, Vinyou seem to me to have got into a devilishawkward position, and I wish to goodness you were out of it.""You think I regret anything that has happened?" Vincent said.  "Not I!I would not go backnot for all the world.  But as for this monetarydifficulty, there it is; and it has to be faced. You see, I have beenbrought up to do nothing; and consequently I am in a measure dependenton my father.  My own little income doesn't amount to much.  Then again,if I were to marry Maisrie Bethune, I should have to leave hergrandfather whatever small fund they haveI don't quite understand aboutitanyhow, I couldn't take that away, for I imagine the old gentleman'searnings from newspaper work are not very substantial or regular.  Nowwhat do you think my father would do?""Wouldn't it be the simplest thing to go and ask himto go and ask himnow?" said Lord Musselburgh, who clearly did not wish to assume anyresponsibility in this serious matter."I can tell myself what he would say now," Vincent made answer; "thequestion is what he would say then.""After the marriage?""Yes."His companion across the little table hesitated for a second or two."You see, Vin, it isn't only in plays that fathers getangryunfortunately, it sometimes happens in real life; and occasionallythey get very angry indeed.  According to your own showing, if yourfather refused to acknowledge this marriageif he declared he would havenothing further to do with youyou would find yourself in ratherdesperate straits.  Why should you, with your eyes open, walk into anysuch straits?  You know what may happen.  And thenwith a youngwifewith next to no resourceswhat would you do?  Let us come to onedefinite and immediate thing, that I hope is not far off now; who wouldpay your election expenses at Mendover?""You yourself, Musselburgh, in the interests of the party!""I am glad you can make a jest of the situation, Vin""No, really, I don't," Vincent said, more seriously.  "But if I were toask for my father's consent I should not get itI know that quite well;and meanwhile this girl is supposed to beoh, I need not name thethings!  You don't understand! She is my dearest in all the world; howcan I stand by and allow these base accusations to be brought againsther, without protest?  And that would be my protest!  That would showthem what I thought of their mean suspicions and their preposterouscharges.""And thereafter?" said Lord Musselburgh."Thereafter?  Well, as I say, my father might show some common sense andaccept the thing, seeing it was done.  I can tell you it isn't verypleasant to find myself so dependent on any other human being'sreasonableness.  I haven't been used to it.  I dare say I have beenspoiledthings made too easy for me.  And now when I look round andwonder what I could turn to, I suppose I am simply in the position of athousand others, who haven't had any special training.  The few articlesI have written have paid me well enough; but at present I don't seeanything substantial and permanent in that direction.  If you were inoffice I should ask you for a private secretaryship""Why not ask someone who is in office?""I could not change my coat quite so quickly as that.""Ah, you haven't had much experience in practical politics," LordMusselburgh observed.  "Well, now, Vin, look here: it seems to me youare on the brink of a tremendous catastrophe.  You have asked for myadvice; I will give it you frankly.  For goodness sake, don't marry thatgirl!  She may be everything you say; her grandfather may be everythingyou say; but don't do anything rashdon't do anything irrevocable.  Andconsider this: if your relations should look on such a marriage withdisfavour, it is in your own interest; it is no selfish wish on theirpart that you should marry wellmarry in your own spheremarry some onewho would do you credit and be a fit companion for you. Mind you, I saynothing against Miss Bethunenothing; I would not even if I couldI amnot such a foolfor I should simply anger you without convincing you;but just consider for a moment what her experiences must have been.  Youknow what Mrs. Ellison so frequently talks aboutthe sentimental fallacyof supposing that there is anything intrinsically noble or beautifulabout poverty. I'm afraid she's right.  I am afraid that poverty isaltogether a debasing and brutalising thing, destroying self-respect,stunting the mind as well as the body.""Yes," said Via Harris, rather scornfully, "I am quite aware that is theopinion of poverty held by the rich.  They show it.  They profess tobelieve what the Sermon on the Mount says about the Kingdom of Heavenbeing reserved for the poor; but catch any single man-jack of themputting aside his riches in order to secure that other inheritance!  Notmuch!  He prefers the Kingdom he has gotin consols.""I was only wondering," Musselburgh said, with a little hesitation,"what influence thosethose associations might have had on Miss Bethuneherself. Not the best training for a young girl, perhaps?""If she had been brought up in a thieves' den," said Vincent, hotly,"she would have remained the pure and beautiful-souled creature that sheis now. But I see there is no use talking.  I have asked for youradvicefor your opinion; and you have given it to me.  I thank you, andthere's an end."He rose.  But his friend also rose at the same moment."No, no, Vin, you're not going to quarrel with me.  Come into thesmoking-room, and we'll have a cigarette."Nor did he wish to quarrel.  They left the coffee-room together.  But asluck would have it, in crossing the hall, he chanced to look towards thefront door; and behold!  all the outer world was shining in clearsunlight.  It suddenly occurred to this young man that he had beensitting plunged in gloom, listening to coward counsels, regarding thefuture as something dark; while thereout therethe golden pavements,and the far-shimmering sea, and the wide white skies spoke only of hope,and seemed to say that Maisrie would soon be coming along, proud andtall and sweet.  Why, it was to her that he ought to have appealednotto any timorous, vacillating temporiser; it was her hands he ought tohave taken and held, that he might read the future in her true eyes.And so, with some brief words of apology and thanks, he left LordMusselburgh, and made his way into the outer air: this was to breathemore freelythis was to have the natural courage of youth mounting intothe brain.He walked away along the King's Road; and unconsciously to himself heheld his head erect; as if in imitation of the stout-hearted old manwho, despite his threescore years and ten, could still bear himself sobravely in face of all the world.  Moreover, there were some lines inone of Maisrie's songs haunting him; but not in any sad way; nay, hefound himself dwelling on the r's, as if to recall her softpronunciation:Elle fit un' rencontreDe trente matelots,De trente matelotsSur le bord de l' le.He had thrust aside those pusillanimous counsels: out here was thesunlight and the fresh-blowing wind; his soul felt freer; he would gainnew courage from Maisrie's eyes.  This was the kind of morning to bringa touch of crimson to the transparent pallor of her cheek; her teethwould glisten when she laughed; her graceful step would be lighter, morebuoyant, than ever.  Sursum corda! Nay, he could have found it in hisheart to adopt the proud-sounding 'Stand Fast, Craig-Royston!'if onlyto fling it back in the face of those who had brought those monstrousaccusations.His long and swinging stride soon carried him to the house in GermanPlace, where he found George Bethune and his granddaughter just makingready to come out."This will not do, Maisrie," said old George Bethune, in his gay,emphatic fashion.  "Too much idleness.  Too much idleness.  Fresh air isall very well; but we must not become its slaves. Remember Horace'swarning.  'Tu, nisi ventis debes ludibrium, cave.'""Why, who could keep at work on a morning like this!" Vincent protested."A west wind and brilliant sunlight are not so common in December. Itmakes it hard for me that I've to go away to-morrow.""Are you going away to-morrow, Vincent?" said Maisrie, regarding him."Yes," said he.  "I have to go down to Mendover on Thursday, to delivera sort of addressa lectureand I've only got the heads and divisionssketched out as yet.  I wish I could escape it altogether; but I darenot play any tricks at present; I'm on my best behaviour.  And this timeat least I don't mean to drag Lord Musselburgh down with me; I'm goingalone.""And after that you return to London?" she asked.He hardly knew what to say.  A single word of encouragement from eitherof them, and he would at once and gladly have promised to come back toBrighton at the earliest possible moment; but he had not forgotten theimplied understanding on which Maisrie and her grandfather had come awayfrom their lodgings in Mayfair."Yes, to London," he replied vaguely.  "But I have no definite plans atpresent.  I dare say my aunt, Mrs. Ellison, will want me to come downhere at Christmas."When they were outside, and had gone on to the Parade, he besought histwo companions, instead of taking their accustomed stroll into the town,to come away out into the country.  The Downs, he said, would be lookingvery cheerful on so pleasant a morning.  And of course it matteredlittle to them whither they went.  They acceded at once; and by-and-byethey had left the wide thoroughfare and the houses behind them, and werewalking along the soft turf, alone with the cliffs, and the sea, and thesmooth, faintly-coloured uplands.  The spring-time was not yet; butthere were hues of green and red in those far-stretching breadths ofsoil; and the sky was of a cloudless blue.And how strange it was that out here in the open, in the clear sunlight,those dark imaginings of the Private Inquiry Offices seemed to fallhelplessly away from these two friends of his, and they themselves stoodsharply defined just as he had always known themthe two solitary andstriking figures that his fancy had invested with so pathetic aninterest.  Mentally he addressed Lord Musselburgh: 'Come and see themherein the white light of dayand ask yourself whether you can believein those midnight things you have heard of them.  Look at this girl: yousay yourself she is of extraordinary beauty; but is there not a stillstranger fascinationis there not something that wins the heart tosympathy, and pity, and respect?  Look at the pensive character of hermouthlook at the strange resignation in the beautiful eyes: perhaps herlife has not been altogether too happy?and is that to be brought as acharge against her?  Then this old manlook at his proud bearinglook atthe resolute set of his headhis straight glancethe courage of his firmmouth: has he the appearance, the demeanour, of a sharper, of aplausible and specious thief?'  At this moment, at all events, it didnot seem as if George Bethune's mind was set upon any swindling scheme.As he marched along, with head erect, and with eyes fixed absently onthe far horizon, he was reciting to himself, in sonorous tones, themetrical version of the Hundredth Psalm'O enter then His gates with praise,Approach with joy his courts unto;Praise, laud, and bless His name always,For it is seemly so to do.For why? the Lord our God is good,His mercy is for ever sure;His truth at all times firmly stood,And shall from age to age endure.'No doubt it was some reminiscence of his youthful daysperhaps aSaturday night's taskthat had lain dormant in his memory for sixtyyears or more.The two young folk were mostly silent; they had plenty to thinkaboutespecially in view of Vincent's departure on the morrow.  As forhim, his one consuming desire was to make sure of Maisrie, now that shehad disclosed her heart to him; he wished for some closer bond, somesecurer tie, so that, whatever might happen, Maisrie should not be takenaway from him.  For he seemed to know as if by some inscrutable instinctthat a crisis in his life was approaching.  And it was not enough thather eyes had spoken; that she had given him the sandal-wood necklace;that she had striven with an almost pathetic humility to show heraffection and esteem.  He wished for some clearer assurance with regardto the future.  Those people in the background who had pieced togetherthat malignant story: were they not capable of further and more deadlymischief?  He had affected to scorn them as mere idle and intermeddlingfools; but they might become still more aggressiveenemies striking athim and at his heart's desire from the dim phantom-world that enshroudedthem.  Anyhow, he meant to act now, on his own discretion. LordMusselburgh's advice was no doubt worldly-wise enough and safe; but itwas valueless in these present circumstances.  Vincent felt that hislife was his own, and that the moment had come when he must shape ittowards a certain endfor good or ill, as the years might show.After a pretty long walk along the cliffs, they returned to the town (onthe Parade they met Sherry, who cheerfully informed them that he was onthe point of starting for Monte Carlo, and hoped they would wish himgood luck) and Vincent was easily persuaded by Maisrie to share theirmodest luncheon with them.  Thereafter, when tobacco was produced, shebegged to be excused for a little while, as she had some sewing to do inher own room; and thus it was that Vincent, quite suddenly andunexpectedly, found himself presented with an opportunity of approachingthe old man on the all-important theme.  But on this occasion he wasmuch more precise and urgent in his prayer; for he had thought the wholematter clearly out, through many a sleepless hour; and his plans layfixed and definite before him."You yourself," he went on, "have often hinted that your futuremovements were uncertainyou might have to go awayandand then I don'tsay that either Maisrie or I would forgetonly I am afraid of absence.There appear to be certain people who don't wish you well; there mightbe more stories; who can tell what might not happen? Indeed," said he,regarding the old man a little anxiously, "I have been thinkingthatthat if Maisrie would consentour getting married at once would bethe safest and surest tie of all.  I have not spoken of it to herIthought I would put it before you first"Here he paused, in something of anxious uncertainty."Married at once?" George Bethune repeated, slowly.  There was noexpression of surprise or resentment; the old man waited calmly andcourteously for further elucidation of these plans; his eyes wereobservant and attentivebut quite inscrutable."And I want to show you how I am situated," Vincent went on (but notknowing what to make of that perfectly impassive demeanour).  "I hopethere is no need to conceal anythingindeed, I should think you werepretty well acquainted with my circumstances by this time.  You know myfather is a rich man.  I am his only son; and I suppose I shall inherithis fortune.  I have a little money of my ownnot much of an annualincome, to be sure; and I have some friends who would help me if theworst came to the worst, but I don't see how that necessity shouldarise.  For myself, I have unfortunately been brought up to noprofession; I was trained for public lifefor politiesif for anything:it has never been considered necessary that I should learn some methodof making my own living.  That is a misfortuneI can see that now; butat least I have been trying to do something of late; and I have got someencouragement; if there were any need, I fancy I could earn a modestincome by writing for the newspapers.  You have seen one or two of thosearticlesand I have been offered introductions, as you know.  Well,now"And again he paused.  All this had been more or less of plain sailing:now he was approaching a much more delicate matter."Wellthe fact isthere has been some envious tittle-tattlewretchedstuffnot worth mentioning except for this: that if I went to my fatherand told him I wished to marry your granddaughter, he would be opposedto it.  Yes, that is the truth.  He does not know you; he has never evenseen Maisrie; and of course he goes by what he hearsabsolute folly asit is.  However," Vincent continued, with some effort at cheerfulness(for he was glad to get away from that subject without beingquestioned), "the main point is this: if Maisrie and I were to getmarried, at onceas we have the right to dowe are surely of sufficientagewe know our own mindsI am quite certain my father would accept thewhole affair good-naturedly and reasonably, and all would be well.  Thensee what it would be for Maisrie to have an assured position like that!She would be able to give up her share in the small income you oncespoke of; that would be altogether yours; and surely you would be gladto know that her future was safe, whatever might happen.  There wouldpractically be no separation between you and her; it isn't as if shewere moving into another sphereamong pretentious people; in fact, allthe advantages are on her side; if we have plenty of money, she hasbirth and name and family; and then again, when Maisrie and I took uphouse for ourselves, there would be no more welcome guest than hergrandfather.  I think I can promise that."There was silence for a momentan ominous silence."Has Maisrie," said George Bethune, with slow and measured enunciation,and he regarded the young man from under his shaggy eyebrows, "hasMaisrie intimated to you her wish for thatthat arrangement?""No," said Vincent, eagerly.  "How could she? I thought I was bound tospeak to you first; for of course she will do nothing without yourapproval. But don't you think she has had enough of a wanderinglifeenough of precarious circumstances; and then if her heart says yestoo?"Well, if this venerable impostor had at last succeeded in entrapping arich man's sonin getting him to propose marriage to hisgranddaughterhe did not seem to be in a hurry to secure his prey."Maisrie has said nothing?" George Bethune asked again, in thatcuriously impassive fashion."No""Has expressed no wish?""NoI have not spoken to her about this immediate proposal.""Then, until she has," said the old man, calmly, "I must refuse anyconsent of mine.  I think you have described the whole situation veryfairlyclearly and honestly, as I imagine; but I do not see any reasonfor departing from what I said to you before, that I would rather mygranddaughter was not bound by any formal tie or pledgemuch less bysuch a marriage as you propose.  For one thing, she may have a futurebefore her that she little dreams of.  Of course, if her happiness wereinvolved, if she came to me and said that only by such and such anarrangement could her peace of mind be secured, then I might alter myviews: at present I see no cause to do so.  You are both young: if youcare for each other, you should be content to wait.  Years are avaluable test.  After all, according to your own showing, you aredependent on your father's caprice: some angry objection on his partandwhere would the fortunes of the young married couple be?"But Vincent was too impetuous to be easily discouraged."Even then I should not be quite helpless," he urged.  "And is mywillingness to work to count for nothing?  However, that is not theimmediate question.  Supposing Maisrie's happiness wereconcerned?supposing she were a little tired of the uncertainty of herlife?supposing she were willing to trust herself to mewhat then?  Why,if she came to you, and admitted as much, I know you would consent.  Isnot that so?I know it is so!you would consentfor Maisrie's sake!"The old man's eyes were turned away nowfixed on the slumbering coals inthe grate."I had dreamed of other things," he said, almost to himself."Yes; but if Maisrie came to you?" Vincent said, with the sameeagernessalmost, indeed, with some trace of joyous assurance"She wouldnot have long to plead, I think!  And then again, at any moment, mycircumstances might be so altered as to give you all the guarantee forthe future which you seem to think necessary.  A word from my fatherto-morrow might settle that: if I went to him, and could get him tounderstand what Maisrie really was.  Or I might obtain some definitepost: I have some good friends: I am going up to London to-morrow, andcould begin to make inquiries.  In the meantime," he added hastilyforhe heard someone on the stair"do you object to my telling Maisrie whatyou have said?""What I have said?  I dare say she knows," old George Bethune madeanswer, in an absent sort of wayand at this moment Maisrie entered theroom, bringing her sewing with her, and further speech was impossible.It was on this same afternoon that Lord Musselburgh carried along to hisfair fiance a report of the interview he had had with Vincent in themorning.  The young widow was dreadfully alarmed."Oh, my goodness!" she exclaimed, and she began to pace up and down theroom in her agitation.  "Marry the girl at once?  Why, it isdestruction!  Fancy what all our plans and interests, all our lives,would bewith Vin cut out! It cannot beit shall not beit must beprevented at any cost!  He would be deadworse than deadwe should bepitying him always, and knowing where he was, and not able to go nearhim.  You don't mean to say he is definitely resolved?" she demanded inher desperation."Indeed, there is no doubt about ithe spoke as plainly as you couldwish," said Lord Musselburgh. "And he has argued the thing out; his headis clear enough, for all this wild infatuation of his. He sees that hisfather will not consentbeforehand; so he means to marry, and then hopefor reconciliation when the whole affair is past praying for. That's theprogramme, you may depend on it.""Harland must know at once," said Mrs. Ellison, going instantly to herwriting-desk.  "This must and shall be prevented.  I am not going tohave my boy's life ruined by a pack of begging-letter swindlers andcheats!"CHAPTER IX."AND HAST THOU PLAYED ME THIS!"And now in this time of urgency the appeal was to Maisrie herself; andhow could he doubt what her answer would be, in spite of all thosestrange and inexplicable forebodings that seemed to haunt her mind?But when he got up next morning he found to his dismay that a suddenchange in the weather was like to interfere in a very practical mannerwith his audacious plans.  During the night the wind had backed to thesouth-west, accompanied by a sharp fall of the barometer; and now astiff gale was blowing, and already a heavy sea was thundering in on thebeach.  There was as yet no rain, it is true; but along the southernhorizon the louring heavens were even darker than the wind-drivenwaters; and an occasional shiver of white sunlight that swept across thewaves spoke clearly enough of coming wet.  Was it not altogether toowild and stormy a morning to hope that Maisrie would venture forth?  Andyet he was going away that daywith great uncertainty as to the time ofhis return; and how could he go without having some private speech withher?  Nor was there any prospect of a lightening up of the weatheroutside; the gale seemed to be increasing in fury; and he ate hisbreakfast in silence, listening to the long, dull roar and reverberationof the heavy-breaking surf.Nevertheless here was a crisis; and something had to be done; so abouthalf-past ten he went along to the lodging-house in German Place.  Theservant-maid greeted this handsome young man with an approving glance;and informed him that both Mr. and Miss Bethune were in the parlourupstairs."No, thank you," said he, in answer to this implied invitation, "I won'tgo up.  I want to see Miss Bethune by herself: would you ask her if shewould be so kind as to come downstairs for just a momentI won't detainher"The girl divined the situation in an instant; and proved herselffriendly.  Without more ado she turned the handle of a door near her."Won't you step in there, sir?the gentleman 'as gone out."Vincent glanced into the little parlour.  Here, indeed, was a refugefrom the storm; but all the same he did not like to invade the privacyof a stranger's apartments."Oh, no, thanks," he said.  "I will wait here, if Miss Bethune will beso kind as to come down for a minute.  Will you ask her, please?"The girl went upstairs; returned with the message that Miss Bethunewould be down directly; then she disappeared, and Vincent was left alonein this little lobby.  It was not a very picturesque place, to be sure,for an interview between two lovers: still, it would serveespecially ifthe friendly chambermaid were out of earshot, and if no prying landladyshould come along.  The gale outside was so violent that all the doorsand windows of the house were shaking and rattling: he could not askMaisrie to face such a storm.But in a second or so here was Maisrie herself, all readyapparelledhat, muff, gloves, boa, and the furred collar of her jacketturned up."Why, Maisrie," he said, "you don't mean you are going out on such amorningit is far too wild and stormy!""That is of no consequence," she made answer, simply.  "I have somethingto say to you, Vincent, before you go.""And I have something to say to you, Maisrie. Still," he continued, withsome little hesitation (for he was accustomed to take charge of her andguard her from the smallest harms), "I don't want you to get wet andblown about""What does that matter?" she said: it was not of a shower of rain thatshe was thinking."Oh, very well," said he at last.  "I'll tell you what we'll do; we'llfight our way down to the sea-front, and then go out to the end of theChain Pier. There are some places of shelter out there; and there won'tbe a living soul anywhere about on such a morning.  For I am going toask you to make a promise, Maisrie," he added in a lower voice, "and thesea and the sky will be quite sufficient witnesses."And truly this was fighting their way, as they discovered the momentthey had left the house; for the gusts and squalls that came tearingalong the street were like to choke them.  She clung to his arm tightly;but her skirts were blown about her and impeded her; the two ends of herboa went flying away over her shoulders; while her hair was speedily ina most untoward statethough her companion thought it was alwaysprettier that way than any other.  Nevertheless they leant forwardagainst the wind, and drove themselves through it, and eventually gotdown to the sea-front.  Here, again, they were almost stunned by theterrific roar; for the tide was full up; and the huge, brown, concave,white-crested waves, thundering down on the shelving shingle, filled allthe thick air with spray; while light balls of foam went sailing awayinland, tossed hither and thither up into the purple-darkened sky.  Sofar the driving squalls had brought no rain; but the atmosphere wassurcharged with a salt moisture; more than once Vincent stopped for asecond and took his handkerchief to dry Maisrie's lashes and eyebrows,and to push back from her forehead the fine wet threads of herglistening hair.But soon they had got away from this roar of water and grinding pebbles,and were out on the pier, that was swaying sinuously before these fiercetrusts, and that trembled to its foundations under each successive shockof the heavy surge.  And now they could get a better view of the wideand hurrying seaa sea of a tawny-brownish hue melting into a vividgreen some way further out, and always and everywhere showing swiftflashes of white, that seemed to gleam all the more suddenly and sharplywhere the weight of the purple skies darkened down to the horizon."What a shame it is," he said to her (perhaps with some affectation ofcheerfulness, for she seemed curiously preoccupied), "What a shame it isto drag you out on such a morning!""I do not mind it," she made answer.  "It will be something toremember."When they reached the end of the pier, which was wholly deserted, heensconced her snugly in a corner of one of the protected seats; and hewas not far away from her when he sate down.  Her lips had grown palewith the buffeting of the wind; the outside threads and plaits of herhair were damp and disordered; and her eyes were grave even to sadness;and yet never had the strange witchery of her youthful beauty soentirely entranced him. Perhaps it was the dim fear of losing her, thatdwelt as a sort of shadow in his mind even when he was most buoyed up bythe radiant confidence of four-and-twenty; perhaps it was the knowledgethat, for a time at least, this was to be farewell; at all events hesate close to her, and held her hand tight, as though to make sure sheshould not be stolen away from him."Maisrie," said he, "do you know that I spoke to your grandfatheryesterday?""Yes," she answered.  "He told me.""And what did he say?""At first," she said, with a bit of a sigh, "he talked of Balloray.  Iwas sorry that came up again; he is happier when he does not think ofit. And, indeed, I have noticed that of late he has almost given upspeaking of the possibility of a great change in our condition.  Whatchance is there of any such thing?  We have no money to go to law, evenif the law had not already decided against us.  Then grandfather's ideathat the estates might come to us through some accident, or series ofaccidentswhat is that but a dream?  I am sure he is far more contentwhen he forgets what might have been; when he trusts entirely to his owncourage and self-reliance; when he is thinking, not of lost estates, butof some ballad he means to write about in the Edinburgh Chronicle.Poor grandfather!and yet, who can help admiring his spiritthe verygaiety of his naturein spite of all his misfortunes?""Yes, Maisriebutbut what did he say about you?""About me?" the girl repeated.  "Well, it was his usual kindness.  Hesaid I was only to think of what would tend to my own happiness.Happiness?" she went on, rather sadly.  "As if this world was made forhappiness!"It was a strange speech for one so youngone who, so far as he couldmake out, had been so gently nurtured and cared for."What do you mean, Maisrie?" said he in his astonishment.  "Why shouldyou not have happiness, as well as another?  Who can deserve it morethan youyou who are so generous and well-wishing to everyone""I would rather not speak of myself at all, Vincent," she said.  "Thatis nothing.  I want to speak of you.  I want you to considerwhat isbest for you.  And I understand your positionperhaps more clearly thanyou imagine.  You have made me think, of late, about many things; andnow that you are going away, I must speak frankly.  It will bedifficult.  Perhapsperhaps, if you were more considerate, Vincent?""Yes?" said he.  That Maisrie should have to beg for consideration!"There might be no need of speaking," she went on, after that momentarypause.  "If you were to go away now, and never see us any more, wouldn'tthat be the simplest thing?  There would be no misunderstandingnoill-feeling of any kind.  You would think of the time we knew you inLondonand I'm sure I should always think of itas a pleasant time:perhaps something too good to last. I have told you before: you mustremember what your prospects arewhat all your friends expect of youandyou will see that no good could come of hampering yourselfofintroducing someone to your family who would only bring difficulty andtrouble""Yes, I understand!" he saidand he threw away her hand from him.  "Iunderstand now. But why not tell the truth at oncethat you do not lovemeas I had been fool enough to think you did!""Yes, perhaps I do not love you," she said in a low voice.  "And yet Iwas not thinking of myself. I was trying to think of what was best foryou"Her voice broke a little, and there were tears gathering on hereyelashes: seeing which made him instantly contrite.  He caught her handagain."Maisrie, forgive me!  I don't know why you should talk like that!  If Ihave your love I do not fear anything that may happen in the future.There is nothing to fear.  When I spoke to your grandfather yesterdayafternoon, I told him precisely how I was situated; and I showed himthat, granting there were some few little difficulties, the best way tomeet them would be for you and me to get married at once: theneverything would come right of its own accordfor one must credit one'srelatives with a little common sense.  Now that is my solution of allthis troubleoh, yes, I confess there has been a little trouble; buthere is my solution of itif you have courage, Maisrie. Maisrie, willyou give me your promisewill you be my wife?"She looked at him for a second; then lowered her eyes."Vincent," she said slowly, "you don't know what you ask.  And I havewished that you would understand, without my having to speak.  I havewished that you would understandand go awayand make our friendship amemory, something to think over in after years.  For how can I tell youclearly without seeming cruel and ungrateful to one who has through mywhole life been kindness and goodness to me?no!no!"She withdrew her hand; she turned away from him altogether."Maisrie," said he, "I don't want you to say anything, except that youlove me, and will be my wife.""Your wife, Vincentyour wife!" she exclaimed, in a piteous sort of way."How can you ask any one to be your wife who has led the life that Ihave led?  Can you not guessVincentwithout my having to speak?"He was astoundedbut not alarmed: never had his faith in her flinchedfor a single instant."The life you have led?" said he, rather breathlessly; "Whyaabeautiful lifean idyllic lifeconstant traveland always treated withsuch kindness and care and affectionan ideal lifewhy, who would notenvy you?"She was sobbingwith her head averted."Don't, Vincent, don't!  I cannotI will nottell you," she said, in akind of despair.  "What is the use?  But it is you who have made methinkit is you who have shown me clearly what I have been.  II wasyoungI was only a child; my grandfather was everything to me; whateverhe did was right.  And now I have become a woman since I knew youI cansee myselfand I know that never, never can I be your wife.""Maisrie!"But she paid no heed.  She was strangely excited.  She rose to her feet:and for a moment he thought he saw a look of her grandfather in herface."And yet even in my degradationmy degradation," she said, repeating thewords with cruel emphasis, "I have some pride.  I know what your friendsthink of me: or I can guess.  Perhaps they are right.  Perhaps thestories you spoke of were all to be believed.  That is neither here northere now.  But, at least, they need not be afraid that I am coming tothem as a suppliant.  I will not bring shame upon them; they havenothing to fear from me."He regarded her with astonishment, and with something of reproach also:these proud tones did not sound like Maisrie's voice.  And all of asudden she changed."Why, Vincent, why," she said, "should you put yourself in opposition toyour friends?  Why give up all the splendid future that is before you?Why disappoint all the hopes that have been formed of you?""If need were, for the sake of your love, Maisrie," he said."My love?" she said.  "But you have that, Vincentandand you shall havethat always!"And here she burst into a passionate fit of weeping; and in vain hetried to soothe her.  Nay, she would not have him speak."Let this be the last," she said, through her bitter sobs.  "Onlyonly,Vincent, don't go away with any doubt about that in your mind.  I loveyou!I shall love you always!I will give my life to thinking ofyouwhen you are far too occupiedever to think of me.  Will you believeme, Vincent!Will you believe, always, that I loved youthat I loved youtoo well to do what you askto become a drag on youand a shame."  Thetears were running down her cheeks; but she kept her eyes fixed bravelyand piteously on him, as she uttered her wild, incoherent sentences."My dearestmy dearest in all the worldwill you rememberwill youbelieve that always?  Will you say to yourself, 'Wherever Maisrie is atthis moment, she loves meshe is thinking of me.'  Promise me, Vincent,that you will never doubt that!  Noyou need not put it into words: yourheart tells you that it is true.  And now, Vincent, kiss me!kiss me,Vincent!and then good-bye!"She held up her face.  He kissed her lips, that were salt with thesea-foam.  The tangles of her wind-blown hair touched his cheekandthrilled him.He did not speak for a moment.  He was over-awed. This pure confessionof a maiden soul had something sacred about it: how could he reply withcommonplace phrases about his friends and the future?  And yet, here wasMaisrie on the point of departure; she only waited for a word ofgood-bye; and her eyes, that were now filled with a strange sadness andhopelessness, no longer regarded him.  The farewell had been spokenonher side."And you think I will let you go, after what you have just confessed?"he said to herand his calm and restrained demeanour was a sort ofanswer to her trembling vehemence and her despair.  "You give me theproudest possession a man may have on this earth: and I am to stand idlyby, and let it be taken away from me.  Is that a likely thing?"He took her hand, and put her back into the sheltered corner."Sit down there, Maisrie, out of the wind.  I want to talk to you.  Iwas a fool when I mentioned those stories the other day: I could havecut my tongue out the next moment.  And indeed I thought you took nonotice.  Why should you take any notice?  Insensate trash!  And whoescapes such things?and who is so childish as to heed them?  Then againI remember your saying that I knew nothing about your grandfather oryourself. Do you think that is so?  Do you think I have been all thistime constantly in your societywatching youstudying youyes, andstudying you with the anxiety that goes with lovefor, of course, youwant the one you love to be perfectdo you imagine, after all this thatI do not know you and understand you?  Degradation!very well, I acceptthat degradation: I welcome all the degradation that is likely to beassociated with you. If I were to wash my hands in that sort ofdegradation, I think they would come out a little whiter! I know you tobe as pure and noble as the purest and noblest woman alive; and what doI care about youryour circumstances?""Don't, Vincent!don't be kind to me, Vincent!" she said, piteously."It will be all the harder to think of whenwhen we are separatedandfar away from each other.""Yes, but we are not going to separate," said he briefly.  "Yourgrandfather has left you to decide for yourself; and surely after whatyou have said to me this morning, surely I have the right to decide foryou.  I tell you, we are not going to separate, Maisrieexcept for a fewdays.  When I am up in London I mean to look round and see whatdispositions can be made with regard to the future.  Oh, I assure you Iam going to be very prudent and circumspect; and I am ready to turn myhand to anything.  Then, in another direction, Maisrie, you might giveme a hint," he went on, with much cheerfulness, but watching her to seehow she would take it.  "What part of London do you think you would likebest to live in?  If we could get a small house with a garden upsomewhere about Campden Hillthat would be pleasant; and of course theremust be a library for your grandfather, for we should want the privacyof the morning-room for ourselves."She shook her head."Dreams, Vincent, dreams!" she murmured."But sometimes dreams come true," said he, for he was not to be daunted."And you will see how much dream-work there will be about it when I getthings put into trim in London.  Now I'm not going to keep you here anylonger, Maisrie; for I fancy there is some rain coming across; and youmustn't be caught.  I will go in and say good-bye to your grandfather,if I may; and the next you will hear of me will be when I send you somenews from town.  In the meantime, hearts up, Maisrie!surely thegranddaughter of your grandfather should show courage!"When, that afternoon, Vincent arrived in London, he did not go to histemporary lodgings (what charm had the slummy little street in Mayfairfor him now?) but to Grosvenor Place, where he shut himself up in hisown room, and managed to get on somehow with that detested lecture.  Andnext day he went down to Mendover: and next evening he made hisappearance before the Mendover Liberal Association; and there were thecustomary votes of thanks to wind up the proceedings.  There was nothingin all this worthy of note: what was of importance happened after, whenthe President of the Association, who had occupied the chair in theabsence of Lord Musselburgh, accompanied Vincent home to the Red Lion.This Mr. Simmons was a solicitor, and a great political power inMendover; so, when he hinted that the Red Lion had a certain bin of portthat was famous all over the countyand, indeed, was powerful enough todraw many a hunt-dinner to this hostelry by its own influence alonebesure that Master Vin was not long in having a decanter of the wineplaced on the table of the private parlour he had engaged.  Mr. Simmons,who was a sharp, shrewd-looking little man, with a pale face andintensely black hair and short-cropped whiskers, suggested a cigar, andtook the largest he could find in his host's case.  Then he proceeded tomake himself important and happywith his toes on the fender, and hisshoulders softly cushioned in an easy chair."Yes," said he, complacently, when the cigar was going well, "I think Ican predict some good fortune for you, and that without having my handcrossed with a shilling.  I hope I am breaking no confidence; we lawyersare supposed to be as mum as a priest after confessional; but of coursewhat is said between gentlemen will go no further than the four walls ofthis room.""I think you may trust me for that," Vincent said."Very well, then," continued Mr. Simmons, with an air of blandconsequence.  "I will say this at leastthat in January you may fairlyexpect to be offered a very pretty New Year's present.""Oh, really," said Vincent, without being much impressed: he fancied theLiberal Association were perhaps going to pass a vote of thankspossiblyinscribed on vellumwith the names of all the officials writ large."A very pretty present: the representation of Mendover."But at this he pricked up his ears; and Mr. Simmons smiled."Mr. Richard Gosford is my client, as I think you know," theblack-a-viced little lawyer went on, "but what I am telling you does notcome direct from him to me.  I need not particularise my sources ofinformation.  But from what I can gather I am almost certain that hemeans to resign at the end of the yearhe did talk of waiting for thenext General Election, as Lord Musselburgh may have told you; but hisimaginary troubles have grown on him; and as far as I can see there willbe nothing for you but to slip easily and quietly into his shoes nextJanuary.  A very pretty New Year's present!""But of course there will be a contest!" Vincent exclaimed."Not a bit," Mr. Simmons made answer, regarding the blue curls of smokefrom the cigar.  "The snuggest little seat in England.  Everybody knowsyou are Lord Musselburgh's nominee; and Lord Musselburgh has promised todo everything for our public park that Mr. Gosford ought to have donewhen he presented the ground.  See?  No bribery on your part.  Simple asdaylight.  We'll run you in as if you were an infant on a wheelbarrow.""It's very kind of you, I'm sure," said Vincent. "Is there anything youwould recommend me to do?""Yes; I would recommend you to go and call on old Gosford to-morrow,before you leave for town.""Wouldn't that look rather like undue haste in seizing a dead man'seffects?" Vincent ventured to ask."A dead man?" said Mr. Simmons, helping himself to another glass ofport.  "He is neither dead nor dying, any more than you or I.  Andthat's what you've got to remember to-morrow, when you go to see him.For goodness' sake, don't tell him he's looking wellas you've got tosay to most invalids.  Tell him he's looking very poorly.  Be seriouslyconcerned.  Then he'll be off to bed againand delighted.  For what hesuffers from is simply incurable lazinessand nervous timidity; and solong as he can hide himself under the blankets, and read books, he'shappy.""But what excuse am I to make for calling on him?" Vincent asked again."Oh," said Mr. Simmons, carelessly, "one public character visitinganother.  You were here delivering a lecture; and of course you calledon the sitting member.  You won't want any excuse if you will tell himhe should take extraordinary care of himself in this changeableweather.""And should I say anything about the seat?" Vincent asked further."I must leave that to your own discretion. Rather ticklish.  Perhapsbetter say nothingunless he introduces the subject: then you can talkabout the overcrowding of the House, and the late hours, and the nervouswear and tear of London. But you needn't suggest to him, in set terms,that as he is retiring from business he might as well leave you thegoodwill: perhaps that would be a little too outspoken."As luck would have it, a day or two after Vin's return to town, Mr.Ogden came to dine at Grosvenor Place.  It was a man's dinnera dinnerof political extremists and faddists; but so far from Master Vincentretiring to his own room and his books, as he sometimes did, he joinedthe party, and even stipulated for a place next the great electioneererand wire-puller of the North.  Further than that, he made himself mostagreeable to Mr. Ogden: was most meek and humble and good-humoured (forto what deeps of hypocrisy will not a young man descend when he is madlyin love?), and seemed to swallow wholesale the long-resounding list ofReformsReforms Administrative, Reforms Electoral, Reforms Fiscal,Reforms Social and Political.  For all the while he was saying withinhimself: 'My dear sir, perhaps what you say is quite true: and we're allgoing headlong to the devilwith the caucus for drag.  And I could wishyou to have a few more A's: still, many excellent men have lived anddied without them.  The main point is thisif one might dare to askIsyour Private Secretaryship still open; and, if so, what salary would youpropose to give?'  But, of course, he could not quite ask thosequestions at his own father's dinner-table; besides, he was in no hurry;he wanted a few more days to look round.The guests of this evening did not go up to the drawing-room; theyremained in the dining-room, smoking, until it was time for them toleave: then Harland Harris and his son found themselves alone together.Now the relations between father and son had been very considerablystrained since the morning on which the former had brought hisallegations against old George Bethune and his granddaughter; but onthis occasion Vincent was in a particularly amiable and generous mood.He was pleased with himself for having paid court to Mr. Ogden; helooked forward with some natural gratification to this early chance ofgetting into Parliament; and, again, what was the use of attaching anyimportance to those preposterous charges?  So he lit another cigarette;stretched out his legs before the fire; and told his fatherbut withcertain reservations, for on one or two points he was pledged tosilencewhat had happened down at Mendover."I am heartily glad to hear it," said the communist-capitalist, with acertain cold severity of tone.  "I am glad to hear that you begin torealise what are the serious interests of life.  You are a veryfortunate young man.  If you are returned for Mendover, it will be by aconcurrence of circumstances such as could not easily have beenanticipated.  At the same time I think it might be judicious if you wentdown again and hinted to Mr.what did you say?Simmons?Mr. Simmonsthat in the event of everything turning out well, there would be no needto wait for Lord Musselburgh's contribution towards the completion ofthe public park.  What Lord Musselburgh is going to gain by that passesmy comprehension. I can hardly suppose that he made such a promise inorder to secure your election: that, indeed, would be a wild freak ofgenerosityso wild as to be incredible.  However," continued Mr. Harris,in his pedantic and sententious manner, "it is unnecessary to seek formotives.  We do not need to be indebted to him.  I consider that it isof the greatest importance that you should enter Parliament at an earlyage; and I am willing to pay.  Mendover ought to be a secure seat, if itis kept warm. Promise them what you likeI will see to the rest. Thereare other things besides a park, if they prefer to keep Lord Musselburghto his promise: a free library, for exampleif they have one already,another one: a clubhouse for the football cluba pavilion for thecricketersa refreshment tent for the tennis grounda band to play onthe summer eveningsa number of things of that kind that you coulddiscover from your friend the solicitor."Vincent could have laughed, had he dared.  Here he was invited to playthe part of a great local magnate, plutocrat, and benefactor; and it wasless than half-an-hour ago that he had been anxiously wondering whether200 a year, or 250 a year, would be the probable salary of Mr. Ogden'sprivate secretary.  Harland Harris went on:"It is so rarely that such an opportunity occursin England atleastthat one must not be niggardly in welcoming it.  Simmonsdid yousay Simmons? is clearly of importance: if you make him your agent inthese negotiations, that will be enough for himhe will look afterhimself.  And he will keep you safe: the elected member may steal ahorse, whereas as a candidate he daren't look over the hedge.  And onceyou are embarked on a career of public usefulness""Bribery, do you mean?" said Vincent, meekly."I refer to the House of Commons: once you have your career open to you,you will be able to show whether the training you have undergone hasbeen the right one, or whether the ordinary scholastic routinemixed upwith monkish traditionswould have been preferable.  At all events youhave seen the world.  You have seen men, and their interests, andoccupations: not a parcel of grown-up schoolboys playing games."  Andtherewithal he bade his son good-night.A day or two passed: Vincent was still making discreet inquiries as tohow a young man, with some little knowledge of the world, and a trifleof capital at his back, but with no specific professional training,could best set to work to earn a moderate income for himself; and alsohe was sounding one or two editors for whom he had done some occasionalwork as to whether employment of a more permanent kind might beprocurable.  Moreover, he had ordered the little brooch for Maisrieatiny white dove this was, in mother-of-pearl, on a transverse narrowband of rubies; and besides that he had picked up a few things withwhich to make her room a little prettier, when she should return totown.  Some of the latter, indeed, which were fit for immediateinstallation, he had already sent home; and one afternoon he thought hemight as well go up and see what Mrs. Hobson had done with them.It was the landlady's husband who opened the door; and even as heushered the young man up to the parlour, he had begun his story, whichwas so confused and disconnected and inclined to tears that Vincentinstantly suspected gin."Lor bless ye, sir, we ev bin in such a sad quandary, to be sure, andright glad I am to see you, sir, with them things a comin ome, and youwas so particular about not a word to be said, and there was the missis,a angin of em up, and the beautiful counterpane, all spread out so neatand tidy, 'why,' says she, 'the Queen on the throne she aint got nothinmore splendid, which he is the most generous young genelman, and jest asgood as he's ansome'beggin' your pardon, sir, for women will talk, andthen in the middle of it hall, here comes the old genelman as we werenot expecting of im, sirah, sir, a great man, a wonderful man, sir, insorrowful sikkumstancesand the young lady, too, and hall to be settledup reglaroh, heverythink, sirlike a genelman""What the mischief are you talking about?" said Vincent, in hisbewilderment.  "Do you mean to say that Mr. Bethune and Miss Bethunehave been in London?""Yesterday, sir, yesterday, more's the pity, sir, to give up their roomsfor good and hall, for never again shall we 'ev sich lodgers in thispoor ouse. A honour, sir, as was least knowed when it was mostappreciated, as one might say, sir, a man like that, sir, a great man,sir, though awaitin his time, like many others, and oldin is ead ighagainst fate and fortune whatever the world might say.  And the youngladybeautiful she was, as you know, siras you know, sirand as good asgoldwell, never againin this poor ouse""Look here," said Vincent, impatientlyfor this rigmarole threatened atany moment to dissolve in maudlin weeping, "will you answer me onequestion: am I to understand that Mr. Bethune and his granddaughter arenot coming back here?""Indeed, no, sir, more's the pity, sir, it was a honour to this poreouse, and heverythink paid up like a genelman, though many's the time Iwas sayin to the missis as she needn't be so ard""Where have they gone, then?" the younger man demanded, peremptorily."Lor bless ye, sir, it took me all of a suddentthey didn't say nothinabout that, sirand I was that upset, sir"Vincent glanced at his watch: five minutes past four was the time."Oh, I see," he said, with a fine carelessness (for there were wild andalarming suspicions darting through his brain).  "They're going toremain in Brighton, I dare say.  Well, good-bye, Hobson! About thosebits of things I sent upyou keep them for yourselftell Mrs. Hobson Imake her a present of themyou needn't say anything about them toanybody."He left the house.  He quickly crossed the street, and went up to hisown rooms: the table there was a blankhe had almost expected as much.Then he went out again, hailed a hansom, drove down to Victoria-station,and caught the four-thirty train to Brighton.  When he reached thelodging-house in German Place, he hardly dared knock: he seemed to knowalready what was meant by this hurried and stealthy departure.  Hisworst fears were immediately confirmed.  Mr. BethuneMiss Bethunehadleft the previous morning.  And did no one know whither they had gone?No one.  And there was no messageno letterfor any one who might call?There was no messageno letter.The young man turned away.  It was raining: he did not seem to care.Out there in the dark was the solitary light at the end of the pier:why, how many days had gone by since she had said to him, with tearsrunning down her cheeks'Vincent, I love you!I love you!you are mydearest in all the world!remember that always!'  And what was this thatshe had done?for that it was of her doing; he had no manner of doubt.Enough: his heart, that had many a time been moved to pity by hersolitariness, her friendlessness, had no more pity now.  Pride rose inits placepride, and reproach, and scorn.  There was but the oneindignant cry ringing in his ears"False lovefalse loveand traitress!"CHAPTER I.IN VAININ VAIN.One evening Mr. Courtnay Fox, the London correspondent of the EdinburghChronicle, was as usual in his own room in the office in Fleet-street,when a card was brought to him."Show the gentleman up," said he to the boy.A couple of seconds thereafter Vincent Harris made his appearance."Mr. Fox?" said he, inquiringly.The heavy-built journalist did not rise to receive his visitor; hemerely said"Take a chair.  What can I do for you?""No, thanks," said Vincent, "I don't wish to detain you more than amoment.  I only wanted to see if you could give me any information aboutMr. George Bethune.""Well, that would be only fair," said the big, ungainly man, with thesmall, keen blue eyes glinting behind spectacles; "that would be only afair exchange, considering I remember how Mr. Bethune came down here onenight and asked for information about you."Vincent looked astonished."And I was able," continued Mr. Fox, "to give him all the information hecared fornamely, that you were the son of a very rich man.  I presumethat was all he wanted to know."There was something in the tone of this speecha familiarity borderingon insolencethat Vincent angrily resented; but he was wise enough toshow nothing: his sole anxiety was to have news of Maisrie and hergrandfather; this man's manner did not concern him much."I do not ask for information about Mr. Bethune himself; I dare say Iknow him as well as most do," said he with perfect calmness.  "I onlywish to know where he is.""I don't know where he is," said the burly correspondent, examining thestranger with his small shrewd eyes, "but I guarantee that, wherever heis, he is living on the best.  Shooting stags in Scotland most likely""They don't shoot stags in December," said Vincent, briefly."Or careering down the Mediterranean in a yachtgad, an auxiliary screwwould come in handy for the old man," continued Mr. Fox, grinning at hisown gay facetiousness; "anyhow, wherever he is, I'll bet he's enjoyinghimself and living on the fat of the land.  Merry as a cricketbawlingaway at his Scotch songs: I suppose that was how he amused himself whenhe was in Sing Singperhaps he learnt it there""I thought you would probably know where he is," said Vincent, notpaying much heed to these little jocosities, "if he happened to besending in to you those articles on the Scotch ballads""Articles on Scotch ballads!" said Mr. Fox, with a bit of a derisivelaugh.  "Yes, I know.  A collation of the various versions: a coldcollation, I should say, by the time he has got done with them. Why, mydear sir, have you never heard of Professor Childs, of Harvard College?""I have heard of Professor Child," said Vincent."Well, well, well, well, what is the difference?" said the ponderouscorrespondent, who rolled from side to side in his easy-chair as if hewere in a bath, and peered with his minute, twinkling eyes.  "And indeedit matters little to me what kind of rubbish is pitchforked into theWeekly.  If my boss cares to do that kind of thing, for the sake of a'brother Scot,' that's his own look-out.  All I know is that not a scrapof the cold collation has come here, or has appeared in the Weekly asyet; so there is no clue that way to the whereabouts of old FatherChristmas, old Santa Claus, the Wandering Scotch Jewif that is what youwant.""I am sorry to have troubled you," said Vincent, with his hand on thedoor."Stop a bit," said Mr. Fox, in his blunt and rather impertinent fashion."You and I might chance to be of use to each other some day.  I like toknow the young men in politics.  If I can do you a good turn, you'llremember it; or rather you won't remember it, but I can recall it toyou, when I want you to do me one.  Take a seat.  Let's make a compact.When you are in the House, you'll want the judicious little paragraphsent through the provinces now and again: I can manage all that for you.Then you can give me an occasional tip: you're in 's confidence,people sayas much as any one can expect to be, that is. Won't you takea seat?thanks, that will be better. I want to know you.  I've alreadymade one important acquaintanceship through your friend Mr. Bethune: itwas quite an event when the great George Morris condescended to visitthis humble office""George Morris!" said Vincent."Perhaps you know him personally?" Mr. Fox said, and he went on in themost easy and affable fashion: "I may say without boasting that I amacquainted with most peoplemost people of any consequence: it is partof my business.  But George Morris, somehow, I had never met.  You mayimagine, then, that when he came down here, to ask a few questions, Iwas precious glad to be of such service as I could; for I said to myselfthat here was just the man for me.  Take a great scandal, forexamplethey do happen sometimes, don't they?even in this virtuous landof England: very wellI go to George Morrisa hint from himand there Iam first in the field: before the old mummies of the London press havehad time to open their eyes and stare."Vincent had brought a chair from the side of the room, and was nowseated: there was only the table, littered with telegrams and proofs,between those two."Did I understand you to say," he asked, with his eyes fixed on thisman, "that George Morris had come to you to make inquiries about Mr.Bethune?""You understood aright.""Who sent him?" demanded Vincent, abruptlyfor there were strangefancies and still darker suspicions flying through his head.But Courtnay Fox smiled."George Morris, you may have heard, was not born yesterday.  Hisbusiness is to get out of you what he can, and to take care you getnothing out of him.  It was not likely he would tell me why he camemaking these inquirieseven if I had cared to ask, which I did not.""You told him all you knew, of course, about Mr. Bethune?" Vincent wenton, with a certain cold austerity."I did.""And how much more?""Ah, very goodvery neat," the spacious-waisted journalist exclaimedwith a noisy laugh.  "Very good indeed.  But look here, Mr. Harris, ifthe great solicitor was not born yesterday, you werein a way; and so Iventure to ask you why you should take such an interest in Mr. Bethune'saffairs?"Vincent answered him without flinching."Because, amongst other things, certain lies have been put incirculation about Mr. Bethune, and I wished to know where they arose.Now I am beginning to guess."For an instant Mr. Courtnay Fox seemed somewhat disconcerted; but hebetrayed no anger."Come, come," said he, with an affectation of good humour, "that is astrong word.  Morris heard no lies from me, I can assure you.  Why,don't we all of us know who and what old George Bethune is!  He mayflourish and vapour successfully enough elsewhere; but he doesn't imposeon Fleet-street; we know him too well.  And don't imagine I have anydislike towards your venerable friend; not the slightest; in fact, Irather admire the jovial old mountebank.  You see, he doesn't treat meto too much of his Scotch blague; I'm not to the manner born; and heknows it.  Oh, he's skilful enough in adapting himself to hissurroundingslike a trout, that takes the colour of the pool he findshimself in; and when he gets hold of a Scotchman, I am told his actingof the rugged and manly independence of the Scotof the Drury Lane Scot,I meanis splendid.  I wonder he doesn't go and live in Edinburgh.  Theytake things seriously there.  They might elevate him into a greatpositionmake a great writer of himthey're in sore need of one or two;and then every now and again he could step out of his cloud ofmetaphysics, and fall on something.  That's the way the Scotchmen gethold of a subject; they don't take it up as an ordinary Christian would;they fall on it.  We once had an English poet called Milton; but Massonfell on him, and crushed him, and didn't even leave us an index by whichto identify the remains.  Old Bethune should go back to Scotland, andbecome the Grand Lama of Edinburgh letters: it would be a more dignifiedposition than cadging about for a precarious living among us poorsouthrons."Vincent paid but small heed to all this farrago: he was busily thinkinghow certain undoubted features and circumstances of old George Bethune'slife might appear when viewed through the belittling and sardonicscepticism of this man's mind; and then again, having had that hue andshape conferred upon them, how would they look when presented to theprofessional judgment of such a person as Mr. George Morris?"The Scotch are the very oddest people in all the world," Mr. Foxcontinued, for he seemed to enjoy his own merry tirade.  "They'll claspa stranger to their bosom, and share their last bawbee with him, if onlyhe can prove to them that he, too, was born within sight ofMacGillicuddy's Reeks""MacGillicuddy's Reeks are in Ireland," said Vincent."Well, MacGillicuddy's Breeksno, that won't do; they don't wear suchthings in the north.  Any unpronounceable placeany kind of puddle orbarren rock: to be born within sight of that means that you owneverything of honesty, and manliness, and worth that's goingyes,worthworth is a sweet wordmanly worthit is the prerogative of personswho have secured the greatest blessing on earth, that of being bornnorth of the Tweed.  Now, why doesn't old George Bethune go away backthere; and wave his tartan plaid, and stamp, and howl balderdash, andhave monuments put up to him as the White-haired Bard of Glen-Toddy?That surely would be better than hawking bogus books about London andgetting subscriptions for things that never appear; though he manages todo pretty well.  Oh, yes, he does pretty well, one way and another.  Thecunning old cockroachto take that girl around with him, and get her tomake eyes at tradesmen, so as to swindle them out of pounds of tea!"But at this a sudden flame seemed to go through the young man'sbrainand unhappily he had his stick quite close by.  In an instant hewas on his feet, his right hand grasping the cane, his left fixed in thecoat-collar of the luckless journalist, whose inert bulk he wasattempting to drag from the chair."You vile hound!" Vincent said with set teethand his nostrils weredilated and his eyes afire, "I have allowed you to insult an old manbutnownow you have gone too far.  Come out of thatand I will break everybone in your body!"Down came the stick; but by a fortunate accident it caught on the backof the chair, and the force of the blow sent it flying in two."For God's sakestop!" the other criedbut in a terrified whisperandhis face was as white as death.  "What are you doing!are you mad!I begyour pardoncan I do more?  I beg your pardonfor God's sake, have alittle common sense!"Vincent looked at the man: more abject cowardice he had never beheldthan was displayed in every trembling limb of his huge carcase, in everyfeature of the blanched face.  He flung him from himin disdain."Yes," said Mr. Fox, with a desperate effort at composure, and he eventried to put his coat collar to rights, though his fingers were allshaking, and himself panting and breathless.  "Youyou may thankmeforfor having saved you.  IfI had touched that bellif I had calledoutyou would have been ruinedruined for lifea pretty story for  tohearabout his favourite protgincrease your chances of getting intoParliament, wouldn't it?  Can't you take a bit of a joke?you're not aScotchman!"Vincent was still standing there, with louring brow."When you are busy with your jokes," said he, "I would advise you tokeep any friends of mine out of themespecially a girl who has no one todefend her.  But I am glad I came here to-night. I begin to understandin whose foul mind arose those distortions, and misrepresentations, andlies. So it was to you George Morris came when he wanted to know aboutMr. Bethune and his granddaughter?  An excellent authority!  And it wasstraight from you, I suppose, that George Morris went to my father withhis wonderful tale""One moment," said Courtnay Foxand he appeared to speak with a littledifficulty: perhaps he still felt the pressure of knuckles at his neck."Sit down.  I wish to explain.  Mind you, I could make this a badnight's work for you, if I chose. But I don't, for reasons that youwould understand if you were a little older and had to earn your ownliving, as I have.  It is my interest to make friends""And an elegant way you have of making them," said Vincent, scornfully."and I want to assure you that I never said anything to George Morrisabout Mr. Bethune that was not quite well-known.  Nor had I the leastidea that Morris was going to your father; or that you had the leastinterest or concern in the matter. As for a bit of chaff about Scotland:who would mind that?  Many a time I've had it out with Mr. Bethunehimself in this very room; and do you suppose he cared?hisgrandiloquent patriotism soared far away above my little Cockney jests.So I wish you to perceive that there was no enmity in the affair, nointention to do harm, and no misrepresentation; and when you see that,you will see also that you have put yourself in the wrong, and I hopeyou will have the grace to apologise."It was a most creditable effort to escape from a humiliating positionwith some semblance of dignity."Apologise for what?" said Vincent, staring."Why, for your monstrous and outrageous conduct of this evening!""I am to apologise?" said Vincent, with his brows growing dark again."You introduce into your scurrilous talk the name of a young lady who isknown to meyou speak of her in the most insulting and gratuitousfashionandand I am to apologise!  Yes, I do apologise: I apologise forhaving brought such a fool of a stick with me: I hope it will be aheavier one if I hear you make use of such language again.""Come, come, threats will not serve," said Mr. Foxbut he was clearlynervous and apprehensive. "Wouldn't it be better for you, now, to be alittle civilandand I could promise to send you Mr. Bethune's addressif I hear of it?  Wouldn't that be betterand more reasonable?  Yes, IwillI promise to send you his address if it comes in any way to thisofficeisn't that more reasonable?""I thank you," said Vincent, with formal politeness; and with an equallyformal 'Good night' the young man took his leave.  Mr. Courtnay Foxinstantly hid the broken portions of the cane (until he should have achance of burning them), and, ringing the bell, called in a loud andmanly voice for the latest telegrams.So Vincent was once more thrown back on himself and his own resources.During these past few days he had sought everywhere for the two lostones; and sought in vain.  First of all he had made sure they had leftBrighton; then he had come to London; and morning, noon, and night hadvisited their accustomed haunts, without finding the least trace ofthem.  He went from this restaurant to that; in the morning he walkedabout the Parks; he called at the libraries where they were known; nosign of them could be found anywhere.  And now, when he thought ofMaisrie, his heart was no longer angry and reproachful: nay, he grew tothink it was in some wild mood of self-sacrifice that she had resolvedto go away, and had persuaded her grandfather to take her.  She had gotsome notion into her head that she was a degraded person; that hisfriends suspected her; that no future as between him and her waspossible; that it was better they should see each other no more. Heremembered how she had drawn up her head in maidenly prideinindignation, almost: his relatives might be at peace: they had nothingto fear from her.  And here was the little broochwith its tiny whitedove, that was to rest on her bosom, as if bringing a message of loveand safetyall ready for her; but her place was empty; she had gone fromhim, and perhaps for ever.  The very waiters in the restaurants, when hewent there all alone, ventured to express a little discreet surprise,and make enquiries: he could say nothing.  He had the sandal-woodnecklace, to be sure; and sometimes he wore it over his heart; and onthe way home, through the dark thoroughfares, at times a faint touch ofthe perfume reached his nostrilsbut there was no Maisrie by his side.And then again, a sudden, marvellous vision would come before him: ofMaisrie, her hair blown by the winds, her eyes piteous and full oftears, her eyebrows and lashes wet with the flying spray; and she wouldsay 'Kiss me, Vincent, kiss me!' as if she had already resolved to go,and knew that this was to be a last, despairing farewell.The days passed; and ever he continued his diligent search, for he knewthat these two had but little money, and guessed that they had notdeparted on any far travel, especially at this time of the year.  Hewent down to Scotland, and made enquiries among the Edinburgh newspaperofficeswithout avail.  He advertised in several of the London dailyjournals: there was no reply.  He told the head-waiter at the RestaurantMentavisti, that if Mr. Bethune and his granddaughterwho werewell-known to all in the placeshould make their appearance any evening,and if he, the headwaiter, could manage to send some one to follow themhome and ascertain their address, that would mean a couple of sovereignsin his pocket; but the opportunity never presented itself.  Andmeanwhile this young man, taking no care of himself, and fretting frommorning till evening, and often all the sleepless night through as well,was gradually losing his colour, and becoming like the ghost of his ownnatural self.Christmas came.  Harland Harris and Vincent went down to pass theholidays with Mrs. Ellison, at Brighton; and for the same purpose LordMusselburgh returned to the Bedford Hotel.  The four of them dinedtogether on Christmas evening. It was not a very boisterous party,considering that the pragmatical and pedantic voice of the man of wealthwas heard discoursing on such light and fanciful themes as the paymentof returning officers' expenses, the equalisation of the death duties,and the establishment of state-assisted intermediate schools; butMusselburgh threw in a little jest now and again, to mitigate theponderosity of the harangue.  Vincent was almost silent.  Since comingdown from London, he had not said a single word to any one of them aboutMr. Bethune or his granddaughter: no doubt they would have told himandperhaps rejoiced to tell himthat he had been betrayed.  But Mrs.Ellison, sitting there, and watching more than listening, was concernedabout the looks of her boy, as she called him; and before she left thetable, she took up her glass, and said"I am going to ask you two gentlemen to drink a toastand it is thehealth of the coming member for Mendover.  And I'm going to ask him topull himself together, and show some good spirits; for there's nothing aconstituency likes so much as a merry and good-humoured candidate."It was clear moonlight that night: Vin's room faced the sea.  Hour afterhour he sate at the window, looking on the wide, grey plain and thefaint blue-grey skies; and getting no good of either; for thefar-searching doves of his thoughts came back to him without a twig ofhope in their bill. The whole world seemed emptyand silent.  He beganto recall the time in which he used to thinkor to fearthat some day avast and solitary sea would come between Maisrie and himself; it wassomething he had dreamed or imagined; but this was altogether differentnowthis blank ignorance of where she might be was a far more terriblething. He went over the different places he had heard her mentionOmaha,Chicago, Boston, Toronto, Montreal, Quebec: they only seemed to make theworld the widerto remove her further away from him, and interpose aveil between.  She had vanished like a vision; and yet it was but theother day that he had found her clinging tight to his arm, her beautifulbrown hair blown wet about her face, her eyes with love shining throughher tears, her lipswhen he kissed themsalt with the flying spray. Andno longerafter that first and sudden outburst of indignant wrathdid heaccuse her of any faithlessness or treachery: rather it was himself whomhe reproached.  Had he not promised, at the very moment when she hadmade her maiden confession to him, and spoken to him as a girl speaksonce only in her life, had he not promised that always and always hewould say to himself 'Wherever Maisrie iswherever she may beshe lovesme, and is thinking of me?'  This was the Mizpah set up between thosetwo; and he had vowed his vow. What her going away might mean he couldnot tell; but at all events it was not permitted him to doubthe darednot doubther love.As for these repeated allegations that old George Bethune was nothingless than a mendicant impostor, what did that matter to him?  Even ifthese charges could be substantiated, how was that to affect Maisrie orhimself?  No association could sully that pure soul.  Perhaps it was thecase that Mr. Bethune was not over-scrupulous and careful about moneymatters; many otherwise excellent persons had been of like habit.  Theband of private inquiry agents had amongst them discovered that the oldman had allowed Vincent to pay the bill at the various restaurants theyfrequented.  Well, that was true.  Among the vague insinuations andassumptions that had been pieced together to form an indictment, herewas one bit of solid fact.  And what of it?  Of what importance werethose few trumpery shillings?  It was of little moment which paid: herewas an arrangement, become a habit, that had a certain convenience.  AndVincent was proud to set against that, or against any conclusions thatmight be drawn from that, the incident of old George Bethune's stoppingthe poor woman in Hyde Park, and handing over to her all hepossessedsovereigns, shillings, and penceso that he did not even leavehimself the wherewithal to buy a biscuit for his mid-day meal.  Perhapsthere were more sides to George Bethune's character than were likely tooccur to the imagination of Messrs. Harland Harris, Morris, and Company?The white moon sailed slowly over to the west; the house was still; thenight outside silent; but there was no peace for him at all.  If only hecould get to see Maisriefor the briefest momentthat he might demandthe reason of her sudden flight! Was it some over-strung sensitivenessof spirit? Did she fear that no one would understand this carelessnessof her grandfather about money-matters; and that she might be suspectedof complicity, of acquiescence, in certain doubtful ways? Was that thecause of her strange sadness, her resignation, her hopelessness?  Wasthat why she had spoken of her 'degradation'why she had declared shecould never be his wifewhy she had begged him piteously to go away, andleave this bygone friendship to be a memory and nothing more?  'Can younot understand, Vincent!' she had said to him, in heart-breakingaccents, as though she could not bring herself to the brutality ofplainer speech.  Well, he understood this at all events: that inwhatever circumstances Maisrie Bethune may have been placed, nocontamination had touched her; white as the white moonlight out therewas that pure soul; he had read her eyes.The next morning Lord Musselburgh was out walking in the King's Roadwith the fair young widow who hoped soon to be re-transformed into awife."That friend of yours down at Mendover," said she,"what is hisname?Gosford?well, he seems an unconscionable time dying.  I wish he'dhurry up with his Chiltern Hundreds and put an end to himself at once.That is what is wanted for Vinthe novelty and excitement of findinghimself in the House of Commons.  Supposing Mr. Gosford were to resignat once, how soon could Vin be returned?  There's some procedure, isn'tthere?the High Sheriff or somebody, issues a writ, or something?""I really cannot say," her companion answered blandly.  "I belong to asphere in which such violent convulsions are unknown.""At all events, Parliament will meet about the middle of February?" shedemanded."I presume so," was the careless answer."I wish the middle of February were here now, and Vin all securelyreturned," said she.  "I suppose that even in the case of a smallborough like Mendover, one's constituents can keep one pretty busy?They will watch how you vote, won't they?and remonstrate when you gowrong; and pass resolutions; and expect you to go down and becross-examined.  Then there are always public meetings to be addressed;and petitions to be presented; and people wanting admission to theSpeaker's Gallery""Why, really, Madge, there's a sort of furious activity about you thismorning," said he.  "You quite take one's breath away.  I shouldn't besurprised to see you on a platform yourself.""It's all for Vin's sake I am so anxious," she exclaimed.  "I can seehow miserable and sad the poor boy isthough he bears it sobravelynever a word to one of us, lest we should ask him if he believesin those people now.  I wonder if he can. I wonder if he was so blindedthat even now he will shut his eyes to their true character?""They are quite gone away, then?" her companion asked."Oh, yes," she made answer.  "I hope so. Indeed, I know they are.  Andon the whole it was opportune, just as this election was coming on; fornow, if ever, Vin will have a chance of throwing off an infatuation thatseemed likely to be his ruin, and of beginning that career of which weall hope such great things."She glanced round, cautiously; and lowered her voice."But, oh, my goodness, if ever he should find out the means we took topersuade them to go, there will be the very mischief to pay: he willtear us to pieces!  You know how impetuous and proud he is; and thenthose people have appealed to him in a curious waytheirlonelinesstheir povertyand their  Yes, I will admit itcertainpersonal qualities and characteristics.  I don't deny it; any more thanI would deny that the girl was extremely pretty, and the old manpicturesque, and even well-mannered and dignified in his way. All themore dangerousthe pair of them.  Well, now they are gone, I breathemore freely.  While they were here, no argument was of any avail.  Vinlooked into the girl's appealing faceand everything was refuted.  Andat all events we can say this to our own consciencethat we have donethem no harm.  We are not medival tyrants; we have not flung thevenerable patriot and the innocent maiden into a dungeon, to say nothingof breaking their bones on a rack.  The venerable patriot and theinnocent maiden, I have no doubt, consider themselves remarkably welloff.  And that reminds me that Harland Harris, although he is of opinionthat all property should be under social control""Not all property, my dear Madge," said Lord Musselburgh, politely.  "Hewould say that all property should be under social controlexcept hisproperty.""At all events, it seems to me that he occasionally finds it prettyconvenient to have plenty of money at his own individual command.  Why,for him to denounce the accumulation of capital," she continued, with apretty scorn, "when no one makes more ostentatious use of the power ofmoney!  Is there a single thing he denies himselfone single thing thatis only possible to him through his being a man of great wealth?  Ishouldn't wonder if, when he dies, he leaves instructions to have theelectric light turned on into his coffin, just in case he should wake upand want to press the knob.""Come, come, Madge," said Musselburgh.  "Be generous.  A man cannotalways practice what he preaches.  You must grant him the privilege ofsighing for an ideal.""Harland Harris sighing for an ideal," said Mrs. Ellison, with somethingof feminine spite, "would make a capital subject for an imaginativepicture by Wattsif my dear brother-in-law weren't rather stout, andwore a black frock-coat."Meanwhile, Vincent returned to London, and renewed his solitary search;it was the only thing he felt fit for; all other employments had nomeaning for him, were impossible.  But, as day by day passed, he becamemore and more convinced that they must have left London: he knew theirfamiliar haunts so well, and their habits, that he was certain he musthave encountered them somewhere if they were still within the greatcity.  And here was the New Year drawing nigh, when friends farseparated recalled themselves to each other's memory, with hopes andgood wishes for the coming time.  It seemed to him that he would nothave felt this loneliness so much, if only he had known that Maisrie wasin this or that definite placein Madridin Venicein Romeor even insome huge steamship ploughing its way across the wide Atlantic.But a startling surprise was at hand.  About half-past ten on the lastnight of the old year a note was brought upstairs to him by a servant.His face grew suddenly pale when he saw the handwriting, which heinstantly recognised."Who brought this?" he said, breathlessly."A man, sir.""Is he waiting?""No, sir; he said there was no answer.""What sort of man?" asked Vincent, with the same rapidityand not yetdaring to open the letter."Aa common sort of man, sir.""Very wellyou needn't wait."The moment that the servant had retired, Vincent tore open the envelope;and the first thing that he noticed, with a sudden sinking of the heart,was that there was no address at the head of the letter. It ran thusthehandwriting being a little tremulous here and there'DEAR VINCENT,When you receive this, we shall be far away; but I have arranged thatyou shall get it just before the New Year, and it brings my heart-feltwishes for your happiness, as well as the good-bye that I cannot say toyou personally now.  What I foresaw has come to pass; and it will bebetter for all of us, I think; though it is not with a very light heartthat I write these few lines to you. Sometimes I wish that we had nevermet each other; and then again I should never have known all yourkindness to me and to my grandfather, which will always be something tolook back upon; and also the companionship we had for a time, which wasso pleasantyou would understand how pleasant to me, if you had knownwhat had gone before, and what is now likely to come after.  But do notthink I repine: more has been done for me than ever I can repay; and asI am the only one to whom my grandfather can look now for help andsympathy, I should be ungrateful indeed if I grudged it.Forgive me, dear friend, if I speak so much of myself; my thoughts arefar more often concerned about you than with anything that can happen tome.  And I know that this step we are taking, though it may pain you fora little while, will be salutary in the end.  You have a great futurebefore you; your friends expect much of you; you owe it to yourself notto disappoint them.  And after a little while, you will be able to goback to the places where we used to go; and there will be nothing butfriendly recollections of pleasant evenings; and I am sure nothing needever come between us (as you feared) I mean in the way of having kindthoughts of each other, always and always; and when you marry no onewill more heartily wish you every happiness and blessing than I shall.This is to be my last letter to you; I have promised.  I wish I couldmake it convey to you all I think; but you will understand, dearVincent, that there is more in it than appears in these stiff and coldwords.  And another kindness I must beg of you, dear friend, beforesaying good-byeand farewellit is this, Would you try to forget alittle of what I said to you that morning on the pier?  If you thoughtanything I said was a little more than a girl should have confessed,would you try to forget it, dear Vincent?  I was rather miserableIforesaw we should have to say good-bye to each other, when you would notsee it, for you were always so full of courage and confidence; andperhaps I told you more than I should have doneand you will try toforgot that.  I don't want you to forget it all, dear Vincent; onlywhat you think was said too franklyor hurriedlyat such a moment.And now, dearest friend, this is good-bye; and it is good-bye for ever,as between you and me.  I will pray for your happiness always.MAISRIE.P.S.There was one thing I said to you that you promised you would notforget.M.'Was he likely to forget it, or any single word she had uttered, on thatwild, wind-tossed morning? But in the meantime the immediate questionwasHow and whence had this letter come?  For one thing, it had beenbrought by hand; so there was no post-mark.  Who, then, had been themessenger? How had he come to be employed?  What might he not know ofMaisrie's whereabouts?  Was there a chance of finding a clue to Maisrie,after all, and just as the glad New Year was coming in?It was barely eleven o'clock.  He went down into the hall, whipped onovercoat and hat, and the next moment was striding away towards Mayfair;he judged, and judged rightly, that a boon companion and poet was notlikely to be early abed on such a night.  When he reached thelodging-house in the little thoroughfare off Park-street, he could hearsinging going forward in the subterranean kitchen: nay, he could makeout the raucous chorusSays Wolseley, says he,To Arabi,You can fight other chaps, but you can't fight me.He rapped at the door; the landlady's daughter answered the summons; sheshowed him into a room, and then went below for her father.  PresentlyMr. Hobson appearedquite creditably sober, considering the occasion."Did you bring a note down to me to-night, Hobson?" was the young man'sfirst question."I did, sir."His heart leapt up joyously: his swift surmise had been correct."And has Miss Bethune been here recently?" he asked, with the greatesteagerness."No, no, sir," said Hobson, shaking his head. "That was giv me when theywas going away, and says she, 'Hobson,' says she, 'I can trust you; andthere's never a word to be said about this letternot to hany onewhatever; and the night afore New Year's Day you'll take it downyourself, and leave it for Mr. Harris.'  Which I did, sir; though notwaitin,' as I thought there wasn't a answer; and ope there's nothingwrong, sir."Vincent was standing in the middle of the roomnot listening."You have heard or seen nothing, then, of Mr. Bethune or of MissBethune, since they left?" he asked, absently."Nothing, sirhonly that I took notice of some advertisements, sir, inthe papers""I know about those," said Vincent.So once more, as on many and many a recent occasion, hisswiftly-blossoming hopes had been suddenly blighted; and there wasnothing for him but to wander idly and pensively away back to GrosvenorPlace.  The New Year found him in his own roomwith Maisrie's letterbefore him; while, with rather a careworn look on his face he studiedevery line and phrase of her last message to him.But the New Year had something else in store for him besides that.  Hewas returned, unopposed, for the borough of Mendover.  And about thefirst thing that his constituents heard, after the election, was thattheir new member proposed to pay a visit to the United States andCanada, and that at present no date had been fixed for his coming back.CHAPTER II.BEYOND SEAS.Out here on the deck of this great White Star Linerwith the yellowwaters of the Mersey lapping in the sunlight, and a brisk breezeblowing, and the curious excitement of departure thrilling through allthe heterogeneous crowd of passengershere something of hope came to himat last. This was better than haunting lonely restaurants, or walkingthrough solitary streets; he seemed to know that Maisrie was no longerin the land he was leaving; she had fled away across the oceangone backto the home, to some one of the various homes, of her childhood andgirlhood.  And although it appeared a mad thing that a young man shouldset out to explore so vast a continent in search of his lost love, itwas not at all the impossible task it looked.  He had made certaincalculations. Newspaper offices are excellent centres of intelligence;and Scotch-American newspaper offices would still further limit thesphere of his inquiries.  He had dreamed of a wide and sorrowful sealying between him and her; but instead of that imaginary and impassablesea, why, there was only the familiar Atlantic, that nowadays you cancross in less than a week.  And when he had found her, and seized hertwo hands fast, he would reproach heroh, yes, he would reproachherthough perhaps there might be more of gladness than of anger in histones....  'Ah, false lovetraitresscoward heartthat ran away!  WhatQuixotic self-sacrifice was it, then, that impelled you?what fear ofrelatives?what fire of wounded pride?  No matter now: you are caughtand held.  You gave yourself to me; you cannot take yourself away again;nor shall any other.  No more sudden disappearancesno more tremblingnotes of farewellwhile I have you by the hand!'The last good-byes had been called by the people crowded on the deck ofthe tender, the great ship was cautiously creeping down the stream, andthe passengers, having done with the waving of handkerchiefs (and hereand there a furtive drying of eyes) set about preparing for thevoyagesecuring their places at table, investigating their cabins, andgetting their things unpacked.  These occupations kept most of them intheir state-rooms until close on dinner-time, so that they had not muchchance of examining each other; but it is wonderful how rumour runs in ashipespecially if the Purser be a cheerful and communicative sort ofperson; and so it was that when all were assembled in the long andgorgeous saloon, two things had already become known; first, that thetall and handsome young Englishman who seemed to have no companion oracquaintance on board was the newly-elected member for Mendover; andsecond, that the extremely pretty woman who had the seat of honour atthe Captain's table was a Mrs. de Lara, a South American, as might havebeen guessed from her complexion, her eyes, and hair.  It appeared to bea foregone conclusion that Mrs. de Lara was to be the belle of the shipon this voyage; such things are very soon settled; perhaps one or two ofthe commercial gentlemen may have crossed with her before, and seen herexercise her sway.  As for Vin Harris, his unopposed return for such aninsignificant place as Mendover would not have secured much noticethroughout the country had it not been that, immediately after theelection, the great  had been kind enough to write to the new member acharming note of congratulation, which, of course, had to be published.It was a significant pat on the back, of which any young man might verywell have been proud; and Mrs. Ellison bought innumerable copies of thatmorning's newspapers, and cut the letter out, and sent it round to herfriends, lest they should not have seen it.  Mr. Ogden was also socondescending as to send a similar messagebut that was not published.Now during the first evening on board ship, strangers mostly remainstrangers to each other; but next morning things becomedifferentespecially if the weather be fine, and everyone is on deck.Small courtesies are tendered and accepted; people get introduced, orintroduce each other, on the smallest pretenceexcept the old stagers,the wary ones, who hang aloof, in order to pick and choose.  As forVincent, he was well content with his own society, varied by anoccasional chat with the Purser, when that ubiquitous official couldspare a few moments.  He was not anxious to make acquaintances.  Histhoughts were far ahead. He sawnot the thin, blue line of the Irishcoast that actually was visible on the horizonbut the shallow waters atSandy Hook, the broad bay, the long dusky belt of the city, with itsinnumerable spires jutting up into the white sky.  He was wondering howlong ago it was since Maisrie and her grandfather had crossed theNewfoundland Banks: it was a long start, but he would overtake them yet.Perhaps, when he was down in the big and busy town, making his inquiriesfrom one newspaper-office to another he might suddenly find himself faceto face with the splendid old man, and the beautiful, pensive-eyedgirl....  'Ah, Maisrie, you thought you would escape?but I have younownever to let you go again!  And if you would rather not return toEnglandif your pride has been woundedif you are indignant at what hasbeen said or suspected of you and your grandfatherwell, then, I willremain with you here!  My love is more to me than my home: we will fightthe world togetherthe three of us together: remaining here, if thatpleases you betteronly, no further thought of separation between youand me!'On this brisk and bracing morning he was leaning idly with his elbows onthe rail, and looking towards the distant line of the Irish coast thatwas slowly becoming more definite in form, when Mr. Purser Collins cameup to him."There's a very charming lady would like to make your acquaintance,"said the officer.  "Will you come with me, and I will introduce you?""Oh, very well," Vincent said, but with no great eagerness.  "Tell meher name now that I may make sure of it.""You are favouredMrs. de Lara.""Oh, really," he said, indifferently.  "She seems to me to have had halfthe men on the ship fetching and carrying for her all the morning."And indeed, when he followed the Purser in order to be introduced tothis lady, he found her pretty well surrounded by assiduous gentlemen;and 'if you pleaseif you please,' Mr. Collins had to keep repeating,before he could bring the new comer into the august presence.  Mrs. deLarawho, on closer inspection, turned out to be quite a young woman,with a pale, clear, olive complexion, softly-lustrous dark eyes thatcould say a good deal, a pretty smile and dimple, and magnificenthairreceived him very graciously; and at once, and completely, andwithout the slightest compunction, proceeded to ignore the bystanderswho had been so officiously kind to her.  Of course their conversationwas at first the usual nothings.  Wonderful weather. Might be midsummer,but for the cold wind. Captain been on the bridge ever since Liverpool,poor man; get some rest after leaving Queenstown. Was she a goodsailor?Some ladies remained in their berths all the way over.  Drychampagne, and plenty of it, the only safe-guard?  Crossed many times?And so forth.  But at length she said"Couldn't you find a chair, and bring it along?"Now the assiduous gentlemen had managed to find a very snug corner forMrs. de Lara, where there was just room for two deck chairsher own andthat of her companion and friend, Miss Martinez; and Vincent, beingrather shy, had no intention of jamming himself into this nook.  He madesome little excuseand remained standing with the others: whereupon Mrs.de Lara said to her companion"Isabel, will you go and see that the letters I left in my cabin are allproperly stamped and put in the post-bag for Queenstown.  Thank you,dear!"Then, the moment her faithful friend was gone, she said, with somethingof a French manner"Here is a seat for you: come, tell me what the news of the ship is!"Vincent could not very well refuse; though the result of her openpreference and selection was that her other obsequious admirers fellaway one by one, under some pretence of playing rope-quoits orshovel-board: so that, eventually, he and she were left alone together,for Miss Martinez did not return."Now," said the young grass-widow, whose very pretty chin was cushionedon abundant furs, "I am going to make you happy.  But first of all Imust tell youyou are in love.""Oh, really?" said Vincent."Ah, yes, yes, yes," she said, with a charming insistence.  "I havewatched you.  I know.  You keep apart; you look far away; you speak tono one.  And then I said to myself that I would make you happy.  How?By asking you to tell me all about her."Whereupon Vincent said to himself, 'You're a very impertinentwomanalthough you've got pretty eyes.'  And again he said, 'But afterall you are a woman; and perhaps from you I may learn something moreabout Maisrie.'  So he said aloud"The deck of a steamer is hardly the place for secrets.""Why not?" she protested.  "Besides, it is no secretto anyone witheyes.  Come, tell me all about herand be happy!  I wish to interestyou; I wish you to interest me; and so let us talk about the only thingthat is worth talking aboutthat is, love.  No, there are two things,perhapslove, and money; but love is so full of surprises; it is theperpetual miracle that no one can understand; it is such a wonderful,unexpected, desperate kind of thing, that it will always be the mostinteresting. Now!""Well," said hefor there was something catching in the mad audacity ofthis young matron"it must be secret for secret.  My story for yours!"She laughed long and heartilyuntil her merriment brought tears to hereyes."Why, I'm an old married woman!" she exclaimed.  "Ah, I see what yourbargain means. You only want to put me off.  You think the time andplace are not romantic enough; some nightout in mid-Atlanticwithperhaps a moonand you'll be more communicative, when you forsake thesmoking-room for half-an-hour, and send me a little message to meet you.Very well. Perhaps there are too many people tramping up and down.Shall we have a tramp too?  Sitting still so stiffens one.  Therecanyou pull off the rugs, do you think?  They've swathed me up like amummy.  Now give me your arm; and mind you don't let me go flyingI'mnever steady on my feet for the first day or two."Well, he found the grass-widow a most charming companionbright,loquacious, and happy, until, indeed, they steamed into the entrance toCork Harbour.  Here, as most of the passengers were going on board thetender, for a scamper ashore, while the ship waited for the mails toarrive, Mrs. de Lara began to look a little wistful.  All of a sudden itoccurred to him that he ought, if only in common gratitude for hermarked condescension, to ask her if she would care to go also."OhMrs. de Lara," said he, "wouldn't you like to go ashore, and have alook round Queenstown?"Her face lighted up in an instant; but there was a curious, amusedexpression in her eyes."I couldn't go alone with you, you know," said she."Why not?" said he.She did not answer that question."If you like to ask Miss Martinez as well as myself," she continued,"I'm sure we should be delightedand it would be very kind of you.""Of course I will!" he saidand at once he went off in search of theneedful companion.  A few minutes thereafter the three of them were onboard the tender, along with the rest of this crowd of eager, chatteringpassengers.And a very pleasant visit it was they paid to the picturesquewatering-place and its wide-stretching bay.  First of all he took histwo guests to a hotel, and gave them an excellent lunch, at which Mrs.de Lara made merry like an enfranchised schoolgirl; then he got an opencarriage, and they were driven all about the place; and he bought themsuch fruit and flowers as he could find, until they were quite laden bythe time they got back to the tender.  They were in plenty of time; themails were late.  When they eventually returned on board the steamer,Vincent was on the whole very well pleased with that little excursion;only he hoped that the new acquaintanceship that had been formed had notbeen too conspicuously displayed, for people are given to talking duringthe longueurs of an Atlantic voyage.And indeed it very soon appeared that after this little adventure ashoreMrs. de Lara meant to claim him as her own.  When she came on deck forthe usual promenade before dinner, she sent for him (though there wereplenty of gentlemen only too anxious to wait on her), and she took hisarm during that perfunctory march up and down.  Then she said to him"Would you think me very rude if I asked you to come and sit at ourtable?  The fact is, I want somebody to be good to me, and to look afterme; and the Captain, although he is a most delightful man when hehappens to be there, is nearly always away, on duty, no doubt.  I hatesitting next an empty chairthat throws me on to Miss Martinez and sheand I have exhausted all our subjects long ago.  You've no particularfriend, have you?  Come to our table!""But I couldn't think of turning anybody out!" he protested."Oh, that's all right!" she made answer, cheerfully enough.  "MissMartinez will get a place somewhere elseMr. Collins will arrange thatIdare say she will be rather pleased to be set free."And so it came to pass that at dinner Vincent found himself in the seatthat had been vacated by the useful Isabel; and perhaps his promotionprovoked a few underhand comments and significant glances at certain ofthe other tables, for very small trifles are noted on board ship.  Atall events he only knew that Mrs. de Lara was as engaging, andcomplaisant, and loquacious as ever; and that she talked away with verylittle regard as to who might overhear her.  Nor was she any longer themerry, rattle-pated creature of the Queenstown hotel.  Oh, no.  Herconversation now was of a quite superior order.  It was literary; andshe had caught up plenty of the phrases of the rococo school; she couldtalk as well as another of environments, conditions, the principal note,style charged with colour, and the like.  Nay, she adventured upon anepigram now and againor, at least, something that sounded like anepigram.  "England," she said, "was a shop; France a stage; Germany acamp; and the United States a caucus."  And again she said, "There arethree human beings whom I wish to meet with before I die: a prettyFrenchwoman, a modest American, and an honest Greek.  But I am losinghope."  And then there was a tirade against affectation in writing."Why should the man thrust himself upon me?" she demanded.  "I don'twant to know him at all.  I want him to report honestly and simply whathe has seen of the world and of human nature, and I am willing to betalked to, and I am willing to believe; but when he begins to postureand play tricks, then I become resentful. Why should he intrude his ownpersonality at all?he was never introduced to me; I have no wish forhis acquaintance.  So long as he expresses an honest opinion, good andwell; I am willing to listen; but when he begins to interpose his cleverlittle tricks and grimaces, then I say, 'Get away, mountebankand get ared-hot poker ready for pantaloon.'"  And in this way she went on,whimsical, petulant, didactic by turns, to the stolid astonishment of aplethoric and red-faced old lady opposite, who contributed nothing tothe conversation but an indigestion cough, and sate and stared, anddoubtless had formed the opinion that any one who could talk in thatfashion before a lot of strangers was no better than she should be.But it was not of literature that Mrs. de Lara discoursed when Vincentreturned that evening to the saloon, after having been in thesmoking-room for about an hour, watching the commercials playing pokerand getting up sweepstakes on the next day's run.  When she caught sightof him, she immediately rose and left the group of newly-formedacquaintances with whom she had been sittingin the neighbourhood of thepianoand deliberately came along and met him half-way."Let us remain here," said she; "and then if we talk we shan't interferewith the music."She lay back in her chair as if waiting for him to begin; he wasthinking how well her costume became herher dress of black silk touchedhere and there with yellow satinthe sharp scarlet stroke of her fanthesmall crescent of diamonds in her jet-black hair.  Then the softenedlamplight seemed to lend depth and lustre to her dark eyes; and gavesomething of warmth, too, to the pale and clear complexion.  She hadcrossed her feet; her fan lay idle in her lap; she regarded him fromunder those long, out-curving lashes."They cannot hear you," she saidperhaps thinking that he was silent outof politeness to the innocent young damsels who were doing their best atthe piano"and you cannot hear them, which is also fortunate.  Music iseither divineor intolerable; what they are doing is not divine; I havebeen listening.  But good musicah, well, it is not to be spoken of.Only this; isn't it strange that the two things that can preservelongest for you associations with some one you have been fond of aremusic and scent?  Not paintingnot any portrait; not poetrynot anythingyou have read, or may read: but music and scent.  You will discover thatsome day."He laughed."How curiously you talk!  I dare say I am older than youthough that isnot saying much.""But I have seen the world," said she, with a smile, almost of sadness."Not half of what I have seen of it, I'll answer for that.""Oh, but you," she continued, regarding him with much favour andkindliness, "you are an ingnuyou have the frank Englishcharacteryou would believe a good dealin any one you cared for, Imean.""I suppose I should," he said, simply enough. "I hope so.""But as I say," she resumed, "the two things that preserve associationsthe longestand are apt to spring on you suddenlyare music and scent.You may have forgotten in every other direction; oh, yes, forgetting isvery easy, as you will find out; for 'constancy lives in realms above,'and not here upon earth at all: well, when you have forgotten the oneyou were fond of, and cannot remember, and perhaps do not care toremember all that happened at that too blissful period of lifethen, onsome occasion or another there chances to come a fragment of a song, ora whiff of scent, and behold! all that bygone time is before you again,and you tremble, you are bewildered!  Oh, I assure you," she went on,with a very charming smile, "it is not at all a pleasant experience.You think you had buried all that past time, and hidden away the ghosts;you are beginning to feel pretty comfortable and content with allexisting circumstances; and thena few notes of a violina passing touchof perfumeand your heart jumps up as if it had been shot through with arifle-ball. What is your favourite scent?" she asked, somewhat abruptly."Sandal-wood," said he (for surely that was revealing no secret?)"Then she wore a string of sandal-wood beads," said Mrs. de Lara, with aquick look.He was silent."And perhaps she gave them to you as a keep-sake?" was the nextquestion.Here, indeed, he was startled; and she noticed it; and laughed a little."No, I am not a witch," she said.  "All that has happened before now: doyou think you are the first?  Why, I'm sure, now, you've worn thosebeads next your heart, in the daytime, and made yourself veryuncomfortable; yes, and you've tried wearing them at night, and couldn'tsleep because they hurt you.  Never mind, I will tell you what to do:get them made into a watch chain, with small gold links connecting thebeads; and when you wear it with evening dress, every woman willrecognise it as a love-giftevery one of them will say 'A girl gave himthat.'""Perhaps I might not wish to make a display of it," said Vincent."Then you're in the first stage of inconstancy," said she, promptly."If you're not madly anxious that the whole world should know you havewon her favour, then you've taken the first step on the downward road toindifference; you are regarding certain things as bygone, and your eyesare beginning to rove elsewhere.  Well, why not?  It's the way of theworld.  It's human nature.  At the same time I want to hear some moreabout the young lady of the sandal-wood necklace.""I have told you more than I intended," he answered her."You haven't told me anything: I guessed for myself.""Well, now, I am going to ask your advice," said hefor how could hetell but that this bright, alert, intrepid person, with her variedexperience of the world, might be able to help him?  She was fardifferent from Maisrie, to be sure; different as night from day; butstill she was a woman; and she might perhaps be able to interpret anature wholly alien from her own.So she sate mute and attentive, and watching every expression of hisface, while he put before her a set of imaginary circumstances.  It wasnot his own story; but just so much of it as might enable her to givehim counsel.  And he had hardly finished when she said"You don't know where to find her; and yet you have never thought of ameans of bringing her to you at once?""What means?" said he."Why, it is so simple!" she exclaimed.  "Have you no invention?  But Iwill tell you, then.  As soon as you land in New York, get yourselfknocked over by a tram-car.  The accident to the rich young Englishmanwho has just arrived in America will be in all the papers, and will losenothing in the telling. Your father's name is known; you have recentlybeen elected a member of Parliament; they will make the most of thestoryand of course you needn't say your life is not in danger.  Thenon the wings of love the fair one comes flying; flops down by the sideof your bed, in tears; perhaps she would even consent to a marriageifyou were looking dreadfully pale; then you could get well again indouble quick timeand live happy ever after."She was still watching him from under her long, indolent lashes; and ofa sudden she changed her tone."Are you vexed?  You find me not sympathetic? Perhaps I am not.  PerhapsI am a little incredulous.  You have told me very little; but I surmise;and when a young lady remains away from her lover, and does not wish itto be known where she is, then I confess I grow suspicious.  Instead of'Seek the woman,' it is 'Find the man'oh, I mean in most casesI meanin most casesnot in allyou must not misunderstand me!""In this case you are mistaken, then," said Vincent, briefly.Indeed the gay young grass-widow found that she could not get very farinto Vincent's confidence in this matter; and when she indulged in alittle pleasantry, he grew reserved and showed a disposition towithdraw; whereupon she thought it better to give up the subjectaltogether.  But she did not give him up; on the contrary, she tookpossession of him more completely than ever; and made no secret of thefavour she bestowed on him.  For example, there was an amateurphotographer on board; and one morning (everybody knew everybody else bythis time) he came up to Mrs. de Lara, who was seated in her deck-chair,with a little band of devoted slaves and admirers surrounding her."Mrs. de Lara," said he, "I've taken nearly everybody on board exceptyou.  Aren't you going to give me a chance?""Oh, yes," said she.  "Yes, certainly."  Then she looked round, andadded, in the most natural way in the world"But where is Mr. Harris?""He's in the saloon writing lettersI saw him there a minute ago," saidone of the bystanders."Won't somebody go and fetch him?" she continued. "We ought to be allinif Mr. Searle can manage it."Accordingly Vincent was summoned from below, and forthwith made hisappearance."You come and sit by me, Mr. Harris," said the young matron.  "It wouldlook absurd to have one sitting and all the others standing.""Oh, nothis will do," said Vincent, seating himself on a signal-cannonthat was close to the rail, while he steadied himself by putting a handon the shrouds."Not at all," she protested, with a certain imperious wilfulness."You're too far over; you'll be out of the picture altogether.  There isIsabel's chair over there: fetch that."And, of course, he had to do as he was bid; though it was rather aconspicuous position to assume. Then, when that negative was taken, shewould have the grouping altered; Vincent had to stand by her side, withhis arm on her chair; again he had to seat himself on the deck at herfeet; whatever suggestions were made by the artist, she managed somehowthat she and Vincent should be together. And when, next day, thebronze-brown proofs were handed about, they were very muchadmiredexcept, perhaps, by the lady-passengers, who could notunderstand why Mrs. de Lara should pose as the only woman on board thesteamer.But it was not Mrs. de Lara who was in his thoughts when, early onemorning, he found himself on the upper deck, just under the bridge, withhis eyes fixed on a far strip of land that lay along the westernhorizon.  Not a thin sharp line of blue, but a low-lying bulky mass ofpale neutral tint; and there were faint yellow mists hanging about it,and also covering the smooth, long-undulating surface of the sea.However, the sunrise was now declared; this almost impalpable fog wouldsoon be dispersed; and the great continent behind that out-lying coastwould gradually awaken to the splendour of the new day.  And in whatpart of its vast extent was Maisrie now awaiting him?no, not awaitinghim, but perhaps thinking of him, and little dreaming he was so near?They cautiously steamed over the shallow waters at Sandy Hook; theysailed up the wide bay; momentarily the long flat line of New York, withits towering buildings and steeples jutting up here and there, wasdrawing nigh.  Mrs. de Lara, rather wistfully, asked him whether she wasever likely to see him again; he answered that he did not know how soonhe might have to leave New York; but, if she would be so kind as to givehim her address, he would try to call before he went.  She handed himher card; said something about the pleasant voyage they had had; andthen went away to see that Isabel had not neglected anything in herpacking.They slowed into the wharf; the luggage was got ashore and examinedinthis universal scrimmage he lost sight of Mrs. de Lara and her faithfulcompanion: and by and by he was being jolted and pitched and flung aboutin the coach that was carrying him to the hotel he had chosen.  With aneager curiosity he kept watching the passers-by on the side-walk,searching for a face that was nowhere to be seen.  He had heard andknown of many strange coincidences: it would only be another oneif aglad and wonderful onewere he to find Maisrie on the very first day ofhis arrival in America.As soon as he had got established in his hotel, and seen that hisluggage had been brought up, he went out again and made away for theneighbourhood of Printing House Square.  It needs hardly be said thatthe Western Scotsman was not in possession of a vast white marblebuilding, with huge golden letters shining in the afternoon sun; all thesame he had little difficulty in finding the small and unpretentiousoffice; and his first inquiry was for Mr. Anstruther.  Mr. Anstrutherhad been there in the morning; but had gone away home, not feeling verywell.  Where did he live?over in Brooklyn.  But he would be at theoffice the next day?  Oh, yes; almost certainly; it was nothing but arather bad cold; and as they went to press on the following evening, hewould be pretty sure to be at the office in the morning.Then Vincent hesitated.  This clerk seemed a civil-spoken kind of youngfellow."Do you happen to know ifif a Mr. Bethune has called at this office oflate?""Bethune?not that I am aware of," was the answer."He is a friend of Mr. Anstruther's," Vincent went on, led by a vaguehope, "an old gentleman with white hair and bearda handsome old man.There would be a young lady with him most probably.""No, sir; I have not seen any one of that description," said the clerk."But he might have called on Mr. Anstruther at his home.""Oh, yes, certainlyvery likely," said Vincent. "Thank you.  I will comealong to-morrow morning, and hope to find Mr. Anstruther quite wellagain."So he left and went out into the gathering dusk of the afternoon; and ashe had nothing to do now, he walked all the way back to his hotel,looking at the various changes that had taken place since last he hadbeen in the busy city.  And then, when he reached the sumptuous andheavily-decorated apartment that served him at once as sitting-room andbed-room, he set to work to put his things in order, for they had beenrather hurriedly jammed into his portmanteau on board ship.He was thus engaged when there came a knock at the door."Entrez!" he called out, inadvertently (with some dim feeling that hewas in a foreign town.)The stranger needed no second invitation.  He presented himself.  He wasa small man, with a sallow and bloodless face, a black beard closelytrimmed, a moustache allowed to grow its natural length, and dark,opaque, impassive eyes.  He was rather showily dressed, and wore apince-nez.For a second he paused at the door to take out his card-case; then,without uttering a word, he stepped forward and placed his card on thetable. Vincent was rather surprised at this form of introduction; but ofcourse he took up the card.  He read thereon.  'Mr. Joseph de Lara.'"Oh, really," said he (but what passed through his mind was'Is thatconfounded woman going to persecute me on shore as well as at sea?')."How do you do?  Very glad to make your acquaintance.""Oh, indeed, are you?" the other said, with a peculiar accent, the likeof which Vincent had never heard before.  "Perhaps not, when you knowwhy I am here.  Ah, do not pretend!do not pretend!"Vincent stared at him, as if this were some escaped lunatic with whom hehad to deal."Sir, I am here to call you to account," said the little foreigner, inhis thick voice.  "It has been the scandal of the whole shipthe talk ofall the voyage overand it is an insult to meto methat my wife shouldbe spoken of.  Yes, you must make compensationI demand compensationandhow?  By the only way that is known to an Englishman.  An Englishmanfeels only in his pocket; if he does wrong, he must pay; I demand fromyou a sum that I expend in charity"Vincent who saw what all this meant in a moment, burst out laughingalittle scornfully."You've come to the wrong shop, my good friend!" said he."What do you mean?  What do you mean?" the little dark man exclaimed,with an affectation of rising wrath: "Look at thisI tell you, look atthis!"  He drew from his pocket one of the photographs which had beentaken on board the steamer, and smacked it with the back of his hand."Do you see that?the scandal of the whole voyage!  My wifecompromisedthe whole ship talkingyou think you are to get off fornothing? No!  No! you do not!  The only punishment that can reach you isthe punishment of the pocketyou must pay.""Oh, don't make a fool of yourself!" said Vincent, with angry contempt."I've met members of your profession before.  But this is too thin.""Ohtoo thin?  You shall find out!" the other said, vindictivelyand yetthe black and beady eyes behind the pince-nez were impassive andwatchful.  "There, on the other side of my card, is my address.  You canthink over it.  Perhaps I shall see you to-morrow.  If I do notif youdo not come there to give the compensation I demand, I will make thiscountry too hot to hold youyes, very much too hot, as you shalldiscover.  I will make you sorryI will make you sorryyou shall see"He went on vapouring in this fashion for some little time longer,affecting all the while to become more and more indignant; but at lengthVincent, growing tired, walked to the door and opened it."This is the way out," he said curtly.Mr. de Lara took the hint with a dignified equanimity."You have my address," he said, as he passed into the corridor; "I donot wish to do anything disagreeableunless I am compelled.  You willthink over it; and I shall see you to-morrow, I hope.  I wish to befriendlyit will be for your interest, too.  Good night!"Vincent shut the door and went and sate down, the better to consider.Not that he was in the least perturbed by this man's ridiculous threats;what puzzled himand frightened him almostwas the possible connectionof the charming and fascinating Mrs. de Lara with this barefaced attemptat blackmail.  But no; he could not, he would not, believe it!  Herecalled her pretty ways, her frankness, her engaging manner, her goodhumour, her clever, wayward talk, her kindness towards himself; and hecould not bring himself to think that all the time she had been planninga paltry and despicable conspiracy to extort money, or even that shewould lend herself to such a scheme at the instigation of her scapegracehusband.  However, his speculations on these points were now interruptedby the arrival of the dinner-hour; and he went below to the tabled'hte.During dinner he thought that a little later on in the evening he wouldgo along to Lexington Avenue, and call on a lawyer whose acquaintance hehad made on a former visit to New York.  He might by chance be at homeand disengaged; and an apology could be made for disturbing him at suchan unusual hour.  And this, accordingly, Vincent did; found that Mr.Griswold was in the house; was shown into the study; and presently thelawyera tall, thin man, with a cadaverous and deeply-lined face andcold grey eyescame in and received his unexpected visitor politelyenough."De Lara?" said he, when Vincent had told his story.  "Well, yes, I knowsomething of De Lara. And a very disagreeable fellow he is to have anydealings with.""But I don't want to have any dealings with him," Vincent protested,"and I don't see how there should be any necessity.  The whole thing isa preposterous attempt at extortion.  If only he were to put down onpaper what he said to me this evening, I would show him somethingor atleast I should do so if he and I were in England.""He is not so foolish," the lawyer said.  "Well, what do you propose todo?compromise for the sake of peace and quietness?""Certainly not," was the instant reply."He's a mischievous devil," said Mr. Griswold, doubtfully.  "And ofcourse you don't want to have things said about you in newspapers,however obscure.  Might get sent over to England.  Yes, he's amischievous devil when he turns ugly.  What do you say now?for the sakeof peace and quietnessa little matter of a couple of hundreddollarsand nobody need know anything about it""Give a couple of hundred dollars to that infernal scoundrel?I will seehim dd first!" said Vincent, with a decision that was unmistakeable."There's no reason why you should give him a centnot the slightest,"the lawyer went on.  "But some people do, to save trouble.  However, youwill not be remaining long in this city; I see it announced that you aregoing on a tour through the United States and Canada.""The fact is, Mr. Griswold," said Vincent, "I came alongat this unholyhour, for which I hope you will forgive menot to ask you what I shoulddo about that fellow's threatsI don't value them a pin's-pointbutmerely to see if you knew anything about those two""The De Lara's?""Yes, what does he do, to begin with?  What's his occupationhisbusiness?""Nominally," said Mr. Griswold, "he belongs to my own profession; but Ifancy he is more mixed up with some low-class newspapers.  I have heard,indeed, that one of his sources of income is levying black-mail onactresses.  The poor girls lose nerve, you understand: they won't fight;they would rather 'see' him, as the phrase is, than incur his enmity.""Well, then, what I want to know still more particularly," the young manproceeded, "is this: is Mrs. de Lara supposed to take part in thesepretty little plans for obtaining money?"The lawyer smiled."You ought to know her better than I do; in fact, I don't know her atall."Vincent was silent for a second."No; I should not have imagined it of her.  It seems incredible.  But ifyou don't know her personally, perhaps you know what is thought of her?What is her general reputation?""Her reputation?  I can hardly answer that question.  I should say," Mr.Griswold went on, in his slow and deliberate manner, "that there is akind ofa kind of impressionthat, so long as the money was forthcoming,Mrs. de Lara would not be too anxious to inquire where it came from.""She was at the Captain's table!" Vincent exclaimed."Ship captains don't know much about what is going on on shore," was thereply.  "Besides, if Mrs. de Lara wanted to sit at the Captain's table,it's at the Captain's table you would find her, and that without muchdelay!  In any case why are you so anxious to find out about Mrs. deLara's peculiaritiesapart from her being a very pretty woman?""Oh," said Vincent, as he rose to apologise once more for thisintrusion, and to say good-night, "one is always meeting with newexperiences.  Another lesson in the ways of the world, I suppose."But all the same, as he walked slowly and thoughtfully back to hishotel, he kept saying to himself that he would rather not believe thatMrs. de Lara had betrayed him and was an accomplice in this shamelessattempt to make money out of him.  Nay, he said to himself that he wouldrefuse to believe until he was forced to believe: though he did not go astep further, and proceed to ask himself the why and wherefore of thiscurious reluctance.CHAPTER III.WEST AND EAST.When Vincent went along the next morning to the office of the WesternScotsman, he was at once shown into the editorial room, and there hefound before him a short, thick-set man with a leonine profusion oflight chestnut hair thrown back from a lofty forehead, somewhatirregular features, and clear blue eyes that had at present something ofa cold scrutiny in them.  To any one else, the editor of the WesternScotsman might have appeared a somewhat commonplace-looking person; butto Vincent he was far from commonplace.  Here was one who had befriendedthe two world-wanderers; who had known them in the bygone years; perhapsMaisrie herself had sat, in this very room, patiently waiting, while thetwo men talked.  And yet when he asked for news of old George Bethuneand his granddaughter, Mr. Anstruther's manner was unaccountablyreserved."No," said he, "I know nothing of them, nothing whatever; but I can wellunderstand that George Bethune might be in New York, or might havepassed through New York, without calling on me.""Why?" said Vincent in surprise."Oh, well," said the Editor, with some touch of asperity and even ofindignation, "I should like to believe the best of an old friend; andcertainly George Bethune always seemed to me a loyal Scotproud of hiscountryproud of the name he bears, as well he might; but when you findhim trying to filch the idea of a bookfrom a fellow-countryman, tooandmaking use of the letter of introduction I gave him to Lord Musselburghto get money""But that can all be explained," said Vincent, eagerlyand he evenforgot his immediate disappointment in his desire to clear away thoseimputations from Maisrie's grandfather.  "The money was repaid to LordMusselburgh as soon as it was found that the American book was comingout; I know it wasI am certain of it; and when the volume did come out,no one was so anxious to welcome it, and give it a helping hand, as Mr.Bethune himself.  He wrote the review in the Edinburgh Chronicle""Oh, did he?" said the Editor, with some slight alteration in his tone."I am glad of that.  I could see it was written by some one with ampleknowledge: in fact, I quoted the article in the Scotsman, it seemed tome so well done.  Yes, I am glad of that," Mr. Anstruther repeated."And then," continued Vincent, "the old man may easily have persuadedhimself that, being familiar with the subject, he was entitled topublish a volume on the other side of the water.  But I know this, thatwhat he desired above all was that honour should be done to thoseScotchmen who had written about their affection for their native countrywhile living in other lands, and that the people at home should knowthose widely-scattered poets; and when he found that this work hadalready been undertaken, and was actually coming out, there was nojealousy in his mindnot the slightesthe was only anxious that the bookshould be known everywhere, but especially in Scotland.""I can assure you I am very glad to hear it," said Mr. Anstruther, whowas clearly much mollified by this vague but earnest vindication.  "AndI may say that when some one came here making inquiries about GeorgeBethune, I did not put matters in their worst light""Oh, some one has been here making inquiries?" said Vincent, quickly."About a month ago, or more.""Who was it?""I forget the name," the Editor replied.  "In fact, I was rather vexedat the time about my friend Ross's bookand Mr. Bethune getting moneyfrom Lord Musselburgh; and I did not say very much.  I am glad there issome explanation; one likes to think the best of a brother Scot.  Butyouyou are not a Scot?" he demanded with a swift glance of inquiry."No, I am not," said Vincent, "but I am very much interested in Mr.Bethune and his granddaughter; and as they quite suddenly disappearedfrom London, I thought it very likely they had returned to the UnitedStates; and also, if they had come to New York, I imagined you would besure to know.""One thing is pretty certain," said Mr. Anstruther.  "If George Bethuneis in this city, he will be heard of to-morrow evening.""To-morrow evening?" Vincent repeated, vaguely."The twenty-fifth!" exclaimed the Editor, with an astonished stare.And yet the young man seemed none the wiser."It is evident you are no Scotchman," Mr. Anstruther said at length, andwith good humour. "You don't remember that 'a blast o' Janwar win' blewhansel in on Robin'?  The twenty-fifth of Januarythe birthday of RobertBurns!""Oh, yesoh, certainly," said Vincent, with guilty haste."There will be a rare gathering of the clans to-morrow night," theEditor continued; "and if George Bethune is on this side the water,he'll either show up himself or somebody will have heard of him.""I think he must be over here," Vincent said. "At first I imagined hemight have gone to Scotland: he was thinking of a topographical andantiquarian book on the various places mentioned in the Scotch songsandhe had often spoken of making a pilgrimage through the country for thatpurpose.  So I went down to Scotland for a few days, but I could hearnothing of him.""What do you saythat you have been quite recently in Scotland?" Mr.Anstruther said, with a sudden accession of interest."About three weeks ago," was the answer."Well, well, well!" the Editor exclaimed, and he regarded the young manwith quite a kindly curiosity.  "Do ye tell me that!  In Scotlandnotmore than three weeks since!  And whereaboutswhereabouts?""I was in Edinburgh most of the time," Vincent said."In Edinburgh?did ye see the Corstorphine Hills?" was the next eagerquestion; and the man's eyes were no longer coldly scrutinising, butfull of a lively interest and friendliness.  "Ay, the CorstorphineHills: ye would see them if ye went up to the top of Nelson's Monument,and looked away across the townaway along Princes Streetthat wonderfulview!wonderful!when I think of it, I seem to see it all asilver-whiteand Scott's Monument towering high in the middle, like somesplendid fountain turned to stone.  Ay, ay, and ye were walking alongPrinces Street not more than three weeks ago; and I suppose ye werethinking of old Christopher, and the Ettrick Shepherd, and Sir Walter,and Jeffrey, and the rest of them? Dear me, it's a kind of strangething!  Did ye go out to Holyrood?  Did ye climb up Arthur's Seat?  Didye see Portobello, and Inch Keith, and the Berwick Law""'The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith,'" Vincent quoted, with a smile.The other's eyes flashed recognition; and he laughed aloud."Ay, ay, that was a great favourite with the old man.  Many's the timehe has announced himself coming up these very stairs with that.""Did Maisrie ever come with him?" Vincent askedwith his heart going abit quicker."His granddaughter?  Oh, yes, to be suresometimes. He was fond ofcoming down the night before we went to press, and looking over thecolumns of Scotch news, and having a chat.  You see we have to boil downthe smaller Scotch papers for local newsnews that the bigger papersdon't touch; and very often you notice a name that is familiar to you,or something of that kind.  Well, now, I wish the old man was here thisvery minute! I do indeedmost heartily.  We'd let bygones be bygonesnodoubt I was mistakenI'll back George Bethune for a true and loyal Scot.Ah say, man," continued Mr. Anstruther, pulling out his big silverwatchand now all his assumption of the reserved American manner wasgone, and he was talking with enthusiastic emphasis"There's acountryman of minea most worthy fellowclose by here, who would be gladto see any friend of old George Bethune's.  It's just about his lunchtime; and he'll no grudge ye a farl of oatcake and a bit of Dunlopcheese; in fact nothing pleases him better than keeping open house forhis cronies.  A man of sterling worth; and a man of substance, too:sooner or later, I expect, he'll be going away back to the old countryand buying a bit place for himself in his native county of Aberdeen.Well, well," said the Editor, as he locked his desk, and put on his hat,and opened the door for his visitor, "and to think it was but the otherday ye were walking along Princes Street in Edinburgh!  Did ye go out atnight, when the old town was lit up?a grand sight, wasn't itnothinglike it in the world!  Ye must tell honest JohnJohn MacVittie, thatisthat ye've just come straight from the 'land of brown heath andshaggy wood,' and ye'll no want for a welcome!"And indeed it was a very frank and friendly welcome he received whenthey at length reached Mr. MacVittie's place of business, and were showninto the merchant's private room.  Here they found himself and his twopartners (all Scotchmen) about to sit down at table; and places wereimmediately prepared for the new-comers.  The meal was a much morevaried affair than the Editor had foreshadowed: its remarkable featurebeing, as Vincent was informed, that nearly everything placed on theboard had been sent over from Scotland.  Mr. MacVittie made a littleapology."It's a kind of hobby of mine," said he; "and even with perishablethings it's not so difficult nowadays, the ice-houses of the bigsteamers being so convenient. What would you like to drink, sir?  I cangive ye a choice of Talisker, Glenlivet, Long John, and Lagavulin; butperhaps ye would prefer something lighter in the middle of the day.  Ihope you don't object to the smell of the peats; we Scotch folk arerather fond of it; I think our good friend here, Anstruther, wouldrather have a sniff of the peat than the smell of the best canvas-backduck that was ever carried through a kitchen.  I get those peats sentover from Islay: you see, I try to have Scotlandor some fragments ofitbrought to me, since I cannot go to it.""But why don't you go to Scotland, sir?" said Vincentknowing he wasspeaking to a man of wealth."At my time of life," Mr. MacVittie answered, "one falls into certainways and grooves, and it's an ill job getting out of them.  No, I do notthink I shall ever be in Scotland again, until I'm taken therein a box.I shall have to be like the lady in 'The Gay Goss-hawk''An asking, an asking, my father dear,An asking grant ye me!That if I die in merry England,In Scotland you'll bury me.'""Oh, nonsense, John!" one of his partners cried. "Nonsense, man!  We'llhave you building a castle up somewhere about Kincardine O'Neil; andevery autumn we'll go over and shoot your grouse and kill your salmonfor you.  That's liker it!"Now here were three sharp and shrewd business men met together in thevery heart of one of the great commercial cities of the world; and thefourth was a purveyor of news (Vincent did not count: he was sowonderstruck at meeting people who had known George Bethune and Maisriein former days, and so astonished and fascinated by any chance referenceto them that he did not care to propound any opinions of his own: he waswell content to listen) and it might naturally have been supposed thattheir talk would have been of the public topics of the hourpoliticshome and foreign, the fluctuations of trade, dealings with thatportentous surplus that is always getting in the way, and so forth.  Butit was nothing of the kind.  It was all about the dinner of the Burns'Society of New York, to be given at Sutherland's in Liberty-street thefollowing evening, in celebration of the birthday of the Scotch poet;and Tom MacVittiea huge man with a reddish-brown beard and a baldheadin the enthusiasm of the moment was declaring that again and again,on coming across a song, by some one of the minor Scotch poets, that wasparticularly fine, he wished he had the power to steal it and hand itover to the Ayrshire bardno doubt on the principle that, 'whosoeverhath, to him shall be given.'  Then there was a comparison of this gemand that; favourites were mentioned and extolled; the air was thick withWillie Laidlaw, Allan Cunningham, Nicol, Hogg, Motherwell, Tannahill,and the rest; while the big Tom MacVittie, returning to his originalthesis, maintained that it would be only fair punishment if John Maynewere mulcted of his 'Logan Braes,' because of his cruel maltreatment of'Helen of Kirkconnell.'"Yes, I will say," he continuedand his fist was ready to come down onthe table if needs were. "Robbie himself might well be proud of 'LoganBraes;' and John Mayne deserves to have something done to him for tryingto spoil so fine a thing as 'Helen of Kirkconnell.'  I cannot forgivethat. I cannot forgive that at all.  No excuse.  Do ye think the manthat wrote the 'Siller Gun' did not know he was making the fine oldballad into a fashionable rigmarole?  Confound him, I would take 'LoganBraes' from him in a minute, if I could, and hand it over to Robbie""Did you ever notice," interposed the editor of the Scotch paper, "theclever little trick of repetition in the middle of every alternateverse'By Logan's streams that rin so deep,Fu' aft wi' glee I've herded sheep;Herded sheep, or gathered slaes,Wi' my dear lad on Logan braes.But wae's my heart, thae days are gane,And I wi' grief may herd alane;While my dear lad maun face his faes,Far, far frae me and Logan braes.'I do not remember Burns using that device, though it was familiar inScotch songyou recollect 'Annie Laurie'-'her waist ye weel mightspan.'  And Landor used it in 'Rose Aylmer''Rose Aylmer, all were thine.Rose Aylmer, whom these wakeful eyes'""I would like now," continued Tom MacVittie, with a certain impatienceover the introduction of a glaiket Englisher, "to hand over to Robbie'There's nae luck about the house.'  The authorship is disputed anyhow;though I tell you that if William Julius Mickle ever wrote those versesI'll just eat my hatand coat, too!  It was Jean Adams wrote that song;I say it was none other than Jean Adams.  Mickleand his Portuguesestuff""God bless me, Tom, do you forget 'Cumnor Hall'?" his brother exclaimed."'Cumnor Hall?'  I do not forget 'Cumnor Hall?'" Tom MacVittie rejoined,with a certain disdain.  "'Cumnor Hall!'a wretched piece of fustian,that no one would have thought of twice, only that Walter Scott's earwas taken with the first verse.  Proud minionssimple nymphsPhilomel onyonder thorn: do ye mean that a man who wrote stuff like that couldwrite like this'Rise up and mak' a clean fireside,Put on the mickle pot;Gie little Kate her cotton gown,And Jock his Sunday's coat;And mak' their shoon as black as slaes,Their stockins' white as snaw;It's a' to pleasure our gudemanHe likes to see them braw.'That's human nature, man; there you've the good-wife, and the goodman,and the bairns; none o' your Philomels, and nymphs, and swains!  Thatbletherin' idiot, Dr. Beattie, wrote additional verseswell, he mightalmost be forgiven for the last couplet,'The present moment is our ain,The neist we never saw.'""That was a favourite quotation of old George Bethune's," said the elderMacVittie, with a smile, to Vincent.The young man was startled out of a reverie.  It was so strange for himto sit and hear conversation like this, and to imagine that GeorgeBethune had joined in it, and no doubt led it, in former days, and thatperhaps Maisrie had been permitted to listen."Yes," he made answer, modestly; "and no man ever carried the spirit ofit more completely into his daily life.""What makes ye think he is in New York, or in the United States, atleast?" was the next question."I can hardly say," said Vincent, "except that I knew he had manyfriends here.""If George Bethune is in New York," Tom MacVittie interposed, in hisdecisive way, "I'll wager he'll show up at Sutherland's to-morrownightI'll wager my coat and hat!"And then the Editor put in a word."If I thought that," said he, "I would go along to the Secretary, andsee if I could have a ticket reserved for him.  I'm going to ask Mr.Harris here to be my guest; for if he isn't a Scotchman, at least he hasbeen in Scotland since any of us were there.""And I hope you don't need to be a Scotchman in order to have anadmiration for Robert Burns," said Vincent; and with that appropriateremark the symposium broke up; for if MacVittie, MacVittie, and Hoggchose to enliven their brief mid-day meal with reminiscences of theirnative land and her poets, they were not in the habit of wasting muchtime or neglecting their business.A good part of the next day Vincent spent in the society of HughAnstruther; for in the stir and ferment then prevailing among the Scotchcircles in New York, it was possible that George Bethune might be heardof at any moment; and, indeed, they paid one or two visits toNassau-street, to ask of the Secretary of the Burns Society whether Mr.Bethune had not turned up in the company of some friend applying for anadditional ticket.  And in the meantime Vincent had frankly confessed tothis new acquaintance what had brought him over to the United States."Man, do ye think I could not guess that!" Hugh Anstruther exclaimed: hewas having luncheon with Vincent at the latter's hotel.  "Here are you,a fresh-elected member of Parliamentand I dare say as proud as Punch inconsequence; and within a measurable distance of your taking your placein the House, you leave England, and come away over to America to huntup an old man and a young girl.  Do I wonder?I do not wonder. A bonnierlassie, a gentler creature, does not step the ground anywhere; ay, andof good birth and blood, too; though there may be something in that toaccount for George Bethune's disappearance.  A proud old deevil, ye see;and wilful; and always with those wild dreams of his of getting a greatproperty""Well, but is there the slightest possibility of their ever getting thatproperty?" Vincent interposed."There is a possibility of my becoming the President of the UnitedStates of America," was the rather contemptuous (and in point of fact,inaccurate) answer.  "The courts have decided: you can't go and disturbpeople who have been in possession for generationsat least, I shouldthink not!  As for the chapter of accidents: no doubt the estates mightcome to them for want of a more direct heir; such things certainly dohappen; but how often? However, the old man is opinionated.""Not as much as he was," Vincent said.  "Not on that point, at least.He does not talk as much about it as he usedso Maisrie says.""Oh, Maisrie?  I was not sure.  A pretty name. Well, I congratulate you;and when, in the ordinary course of things, it falls upon you to provideher with a home, I hope she will lead a more settled, a happier life,than I fancy she could have led in that wandering way."Vincent was silent.  There were certain things about which he could nottalk to this new acquaintance, even though he now seemed so welldisposed towards old George Bethune and that solitary girl. There werematters about which he had given up questioning himself: mysteries thatappeared incapable of explanation.  In the meantime his hopes andspeculations were narrowed down to this one point: would Maisrie'sgrandfatherfrom whichsoever part of the world he might hailsuddenlymake his appearance at this celebration to-night? For in that case sheherself could not be far off.And wildly enthusiastic this gathering proved to be, even from theoutset.  Telegrams were flying this way and that (for in the old countrythe ceremonies had begun some hours previously); there was nodistinction between members and friends; and as Scot encountered Scot,each vied with the other in recalling the phrases and intonation oftheir younger years.  In the midst of this turmoil of arrival and joyousgreeting, Vincent's gaze was fixed on the door; at any moment theremight appear there a proud-featured old man, white-haired, keen-eyed, ofdistinguished bearinga striking figureand not more picturesque thanwelcome! For would not Maisrie, later on in the evening, be stillwaiting up for him?  And if, at the end of the proceedings, one were towalk home with the old man, and have a chance of saying five words toMaisrie herself, by way of good-night?  No, he would not reproach her!He would only take her hand, and say, 'To-morrowto-morrow, Maisrie, Iam coming to scold you!'Thin Scot, burly Scot, red-headed Scot, black-a-vised Scot, Lowlanderand Highlanderall came trooping in, eager, talkative, delighted to meetfriends and acquaintances; but there was no George Bethune.  And whenthey had settled down in their places, and when dinner had begun, HughAnstruther, who was 'Croupier' on this occasion, turned to his guest andsaid:"You must not be disappointed.  I hardly expected him; I could not hearof any one who had invited him.  But it is quite likely he may turn uplatter onvery likely, indeed, if he is anywhere within travellingdistance of New York. George Bethune is not the one to forget thetwenty-fifth of January; and of course he must know that many of hisfriends are assembled here."Then presently the Croupier turned to his guest and said in anundertone"There's a toast that's not down in the list; and I'm going to ask ye todrink it; we'll drink it between ourselves.  Fill your glass, manblessme, what's the use of water!see, here's some hockSutherland's famousfor his hockand now this is the toast.  'Here's to Scotch lassies,wherever they may be!'""Yes'wherever they may be,'" Vincent repeated, absently."Oh, don't be downhearted!" his lion-maned friend said, with cheerfulgood humour.  "If that self-willed old deevil has taken away the lassie,thinking to make some grand heiress of her, he'll find it's easier totalk about royal blood than to keep a comfortable house over her head;and some day he may be glad enough to bring her back and see her safelyprovided with a husband well-to-do and able to take care of her.  Royalblood?I'm not sure that I haven't heard him maintain that the Bethuneswere a more ancient race than the Stewarts.  I shouldn't wonder if heclaimed to be descended from Macbeth, King of Scotland.  Oh, he holdshis head high, the old scoundrel that has 'stole bonny Glenlyon away.'But you'll be even with him yet; you'll be even with him yet.  Why, ifhe comes in to-night, and finds ye sitting here, he'll be as astonishedas Maclean of Duart was at Inverary, when he looked up from the banquetand saw his wife at the door."So Vincent had perforce to wait in vague expectancy; but neverthelessthe proceedings of the evening interested him not a little, and all themore that he happened to know two of the principal speakers.  For to Mr.Tom MacVittie was entrusted the toast of the evening"The ImmortalMemory of Robert Burns"and very eloquently indeed did the big merchantdeal with that well-worn theme. What the subject lacked in novelty wasamply made up by the splendid enthusiasm of his audience: the mostfamiliar quotationsrolled out with MacVittie's breadth of accent andstrong north-country burrwere welcome as the songs of Zion sung in astrange land; this was the magic speech that could stir their hearts,and raise visions of their far-off and beloved native home.  Nor werethey at all laudatores temporis actithese perfervid and kindly Scots.When the Croupier rose to propose the toast that had been allotted tohim"The Living Bards of Scotland"cheer after cheer greeted names ofwhich Vincent, in his southern ignorance, had never even heard.  Indeed,to this stranger, it seemed as if the Scotland of our own day must besimply alive with poets; and not of the kind that proclaimed at Paisley"They sterve us while we're leevin, and raise moniments to us when we'redeed;" but of a quiet and modest character, their subjects chieflydomestic, occasionally humorous, more frequently exhibiting a sincereand effective pathos.  For, of course, the Croupier justified himselfwith numerous excerpts; and there was no stint to the applause of thiswarm-blooded audience; insomuch that Vincent's idle fancies wentwandering away to those (to him) little known minstrels in the old land,with a kind of wish that they could be made aware how they were regardedby their countrymen across the sea.  Nay, when the Croupier concludedhis speech, "coupling with this toast" a whole string of names, theyoung man, carried away by the prevailing ardour, said"Mr. Anstruther, surely nothing will do justice to this toast but a dropof whiskey!"and the Croupier, passing him the decanter, said in reply"Surelysurelyon an evening like this; and yet I'm bound to say that ifit had not been for the whiskey, my list of living Scotch poets wouldhave been longer."The evening passed; and Vincent's hopes, that had been too lightly andeasily raised, were slowly dwindling.  Had George Bethune been in NewYork, or within any reasonable distance of it, he would almost certainlyhave come to this celebration, at which several of his old friends wereassembled.  As Vincent walked home that night to his hotel, the worldseemed dark and wide; and he felt strangely alone.  He knew not whichway to turn now.  For one thing, he was not at all convinced, as HughAnstruther appeared to be, that it was Mr. Bethune who had taken hisgranddaughter away, and that, sooner or later, he would turn up at oneor other of those trans-Atlantic gatherings of his Scotch friends.Vincent could not forget Maisrie's last farewell; and if this separationwere of her planning and executing, then there was far less chance ofhis encountering them in any such haphazard fashion.  'It is good-byefor ever between you and me,' she had written.  And of what avail nowwere her wild words, 'Vincent, I love you!I love you!you are mydearest in all the world! You will remember, always and always, wheneveryou think of me, that that is so: you will not forget: remember that Ilove you always, and am thinking of you!'  Idle phrases, that the windshad blown away!  Of what use were they now?  Nay, why should he believethem, any more than the pretty professions that Mrs. de Lara had made onboard the steamer?  Were they not both women, those two?  And then hedrew back with scorn of himself; and rebuked the lying Satan that seemedto walk by his side.  Solitarinesswounded pridedisappointmentalmostdespairmight drive him to say or imagine mad things at the moment; butnevernever oncein his heart of hearts had he really doubted Maisrie'sfaith and honour.  All other things might be; not that.He resolved to leave New York and go out west; it was just possible thatMaisrie had taken some fancy for revisiting the place of her birth; heguessed they might have certain friends there also. Hugh Anstruther cameto the railway station to see him off."Yes," he said, "you may hear something about them in Omaha; but it ishardly probable; for those western cities grow at a prodigious pace, andthe traces of people who leave them get very soon obliterated.  Besides,the population is more or less shifting; there are ups and downs; andyou must remember it is a considerable time since Mr. Bethune and hisgranddaughter left Omaha. However, in case you don't learn anything ofthem there, I have brought you a letter of introduction to DanielThompson of Torontothe well-known bankeryou may have heard of himandhe is as likely as any one to know anything that can be known of GeorgeBethune.  They are old friends."Vincent was very grateful."And I suppose," he said, as he was getting his smaller belongings intothe car, "I shan't hear anything further of that fellow de Lara?""Not a bitnot a bit!" the good-natured Scotch Editor made answer.  "Youtook the right way with him at the beginning.  He'll probably call you ascoundrel and a blackguard in one or two obscure papers; but that won'tbreak bones.""I have a stout oak cudgel that can, though," said Vincent, "if thereshould be need."It was a long and a lonely journey; Vincent was in no mood for makingacquaintances; and doubtless his fellow-passengers considered him anexcellent specimen of the proud and taciturn travelling Englishman.  Butat last he came in sight of the wide valley of the Missouri, with itslong mud-banks and yellow water-channels; and beyond that again the flatplain of the city, dominated by the twin-spired High School perched on adistant height. And he could see how Omaha had grown even within theshort time that had elapsed since his last visit; where he couldremember one-storeyed tenements stuck at haphazard amongst trees andwaste bits of green there were now streets with tram-cars and importantpublic buildings; the city had extended in every direction; it was avast wilderness of houses that he beheld beyond the wide river. PerhapsMaisrie had been surprised tooon coming back to her old home?  Alas! itseemed so big a place in which to search for any one; and he knew of nokindly Scotch Editor who might help.And very soon he got to recognise that Hugh Anstruther's warnings hadbeen well founded.  Omaha seemed to have no past, nor any remembrance ofbygone things; the city was too busy pushing ahead to think of those whohad gone under, or left.  It is true that at the offices of the UnionPacific Railway, he managed to get some scant information about theyoung engineer with whom fortune had dealt so hardly; but these were notpersonal reminiscences; there were new men everywhere, and Maisrie'sfather had not been known to any of them.  As for the child-orphan andthe old man who had come to adopt her, who was likely to remember them?They were not important enough; Omaha had its 'manifest destiny' tothink of; besides, they were now gone some yearsand some years in awestern city is a century.This was not a wholesome life that Vincent was leadingso quite alonewas heand anxiousand despairing.  He could not sleep very well.  Atintervals during the night he would start up, making sure that he heardthe sound of a violin; and sometimes the distant and almost inaudiblenotes seemed to have a suggestion of Maisrie's voice in them'I daurnatryst wi' you, Willie ... I daurna tryst ye here ... But we'll hold ourtryst in heaven, Willie ... In the spring-time o' the year'and then hewould listen more and more intently, and convince himself it was onlythe moaning of the wind down the empty street.  He neglected his meals.When he took up a newspaper, the printed words conveyed no meaning tohim.  And then he would go away out wandering again, through thosethoroughfares that had hardly any interest for him now; while he wasbecoming more and more hopeless as the long hours went by, and feelinghimself baffled at every point.But before turning his face eastward again, he had written to Mr. DanielThompson of Toronto, mentioning that he had a letter of introductionfrom Hugh Anstruther, and stating what had brought him out here to thewest.  Then he went on:"Mr. Bethune was never very communicative about money-mattersat least,to me; indeed, he seemed to consider such things too trivial for talkingabout.  At the same time I understood from him that when his son, MissBethune's father, died, there was either some remnant of his shatteredfortunesor perhaps it was some fund subscribed by sympathisingfriendsI never could make out which, and was not curious enough toinquirethat produced a certain small annual income.  Now I thought thatif I could discover the trustees who paid over this income, they wouldcertainly know where Mr. Bethune and his granddaughter were now living;or, on the other hand, supposing the fund was derived from someinvestment, if I could find out the bank which held the securities, theyalso might be able to tell me.  But all my inquiries have been in vain.I am a stranger; people don't want to be bothered; sometimes I can seethey are suspicious.  However, it has occurred to me that you, as an oldfriend of Mr. Bethune, might chance to know who they are who have thisfund in trust; and if you could tell me, you would put me under alife-long debt of gratitude.  If you were aware of all thecircumstances, you would be convinced that no ill-use is likely to bemade of the information. When I first became acquainted with Mr. Bethuneand his granddaughter, they seemed to me to be living a very happy andsimple and contented life in London; and I am afraid I am in somemeasure responsible for their having suddenly resolved to leave thesequiet circumstances, and take to that wandering life of which MissBethune seemed so sadly tired.  If I can get no news of them here, Ipropose returning home by Toronto and Montreal, and I shall then givemyself the pleasure of calling upon you, when I may be able to assureyou that, if you should hear anything of Mr. Bethune and Miss Bethune,you would be doing no injury to them, or to any one, in letting meknow."Then came the answerfrom a cautious Scot."Dear Sir,As you rightly observe, my old friend George Bethune wasnever very communicative about money matters; and perhaps he was evenless so with me than with othersfearing that any such disclosures mightbe misconstrued into an appeal for help.  I was vaguely aware, likeyourself, that he had some small annual incomefor the maintenance ofhis granddaughter, as I understood; but from whence it was derived Ihad, and have, no knowledge whatever; so that I regret I cannot give youthe information you seek.  I shall be pleased to see you on your waythrough Toronto; and still further pleased to give you any assistancethat may lie in my power."There was not much encouragement in this letter; but after these wearyand lonely days in this hopeless city, he was glad to welcome anyfriendly hand held out to him.  And he grew to think that he would bemore likely to hear of Maisrie in Toronto or Montreal than in this bigtown on the banks of the Missouri.  Canada had been far longer her home.She used to talk of Toronto or Montrealmore rarely of Quebecas if shewere familiar with every feature of them; whereas she hardly evermentioned Omaha.  He remembered her telling him how she used to climb upto the top of the tower of Toronto College, to look away across the widelandscape to the lofty column of soft white smoke that rose from NiagaraFalls into the blue of the summer sky. He recalled her description ofthe small verandahed villa in which they lived, out amongst the sandyroads and trees and gardens of the suburbs.  Why, it was the TorontoGlobe or the Toronto Mail that old George Bethune was reading, whenfirst he had dared to address them in Hyde Park.  Then Montreal: herecollected so well her talking of the Grey Nunnery, of Notre Dame, ofBonsecours Market, of the ice palaces, and toboggan slides, and similaramusements of the hard northern winter. But a trivial little incidentthat befell him on his arrival in Toronto persuaded him, more than anyof these reminiscences, that in coming to Canada he was getting nearerto Maisriethat at any moment he might be within immediate touch of her.It was rather late in the evening when he reached his hotel; he wastired; and he thought he would go soon to bed.  His room looked out intoa side street that was pretty sure to be deserted at this hour; so that,just as he was turning off the light, he was a trifle surprised to heara slight and distant sound as of singing; and from idle curiosity hewent to the window.  There was a full moon; the opposite pavement andthe fronts of the houses were white in the cold and clear radiance;silence reigned save for this chance sound he had heard.  At the samemoment he descried the source of it.  There were two young girls comingalong the pavement oppositehurrying home, apparently, arm-in-armwhilethey amused themselves by singing a little in an underhand way, one ofthem even attempting a second from time to time.  And how could hemistake the air?it was the Claire Fontaine!  The girls were singingin no sad fashion; but idly and carelessly to amuse themselves on theirhomeward way; and indeed so quietly that even in this prevailing silencehe could only guess at the wordsJ'ai perdu ma matresseSans l'avoir mrit,Pour un bouquet de rosesQue je lui refusai.*      *      *      *      *Je voudrais que la roseFt encore au rosier,Et moi et ma matresseDans les mms amitis.And then the two slight, dark figures went by in the white moonlight;and eventually the sound ceased in the distance.  But he had beengreatly cheered and comforted.  This was a friendly and familiar air.He had reached Maisrie's home at last; la Claire Fontaine proclaimedit.  And if, when he neared the realms of sleep, his heart was full ofthe old refrainLui ya longtemps que je t'aime,Jamais je ne t'oublierai,there was something of hopefulness there as well: he had left thedespair of Omaha behind him.CHAPTER IV.ENLIGHTENMENT.Next morning he was up and out betimeswandering through this town thatsomehow seemed to be pervaded by Maisrie's presence, or, at least, byrecollections of her and associations with her.  He had hardly left hishotel when he heard a telegraph-boy whistling the air of 'Isabeau s'ypromne.'  He went from one street to another, recognising this and thatpublic building: the polished marble pillars shining in the cold, clearsunlight.  Then he walked away up College Avenue, and entered Queen'sPark; and there, after some little delay, he obtained permission toascend to the top of the University tower.  But in vain he sought alongthe southern horizon for the cloud of soft white smoke of which Maisriehad often spoken; the distant Niagara was frozen motionless and mute.When he returned to the more frequented thoroughfares, the business-lifeof the city was now in full flow; nevertheless he kept his eyes on thealert; even amid this hurrying crowd, the figure of George Bethune wouldnot readily escape recognition. But, indeed, he was only seeking to passthe time, for he thought he ought not to call on the banker beforemid-day.Mr. Daniel Thompson he found to be a tall, spare man, of well oversixty, with short white whiskers, a face otherwise clean shaven, andeyes that were shrewd and observant, but far from unkindly.  He listenedto the young man's tale with evident interest."And so you have come all the way across the Atlantic," said he, "tolook for my old friend George Bethune and little Maggie.""Maggie," repeated Vincent, somewhat startled. "Maisrie, you mean.""Maisrie!" the banker said, with a certain impatience.  "Does he stillkeep up that nonsense? The girl's name is Margaret; MargaretBethunesurely a good enough name for any Christian. But his head isjust full of old ballads and stuff of that kind; any fancy that strikeshim is just as real to him as fact; I dare say he could persuade himselfthat he was intimately acquainted with Sir Patrick Spens and the Scotslords who were drinking in Dunfermline town""But in any case," Vincent protested (for how could he surrender thename that was so deeply graven on his heart)?  "Maisrie is only a formof Margaretas Marjorie isa pet name""Maisrie!" said the banker, contemptuously. "Who ever heard of any humancreature being called Maisrieoutside of poetry-books and old ballads?I warned the little monkey, many and many a day ago, when I first gother to write to me, that she must sign her own name, or she would seewhat I would do to her.  Well, how is the little Omahussy?  What doesshe look like now?  A sly little wretch she used to bemaking peoplefond of her with her earnest eyes""I don't think you quite understand," said Vincent, who resented thisfamiliar tone, though in truth it only meant an affectionate kindliness."Miss Bethune is no longer the little girl you seem to imagine; she isquite a young lady nowand taller than most.""The little Omahussy grown up to be a tall young lady?" said he, in apleased fashion.  "Yes, yes, I suppose so.  No doubt.  And tall, yousay? Even when she was here last she was getting on; but the onlyphotograph I have of her was done long before thatwhen she was hardlymore than twelve; and then I'm an old bachelor, you see; I'm notaccustomed to watch children grow up; and somehow I remember her mostlyas when I first knew hera shy young thing, and yet something of alittle woman in her ways.  Grown up good-looking, too, I suppose?bothher father and mother were handsome.""If you saw her now," said Vincent, "I think you would say she wasbeautiful; though it might not be her beauty that would take yourattention the most."The elderly banker regarded this young man for a second or soand with afavouring glance: he was clearly well impressed."I hope you will not consider me intrusive or impertinent if I ask you aquestion," said he.  "I am an old friend of George Bethune'sperhaps theoldest alive now; and besides that I have always regarded myself as asort of second father to the little Margaretthough their wandering wayof life has taken her out of my care.  Nowdon't answer unless youliketell me to mind my own businessbut at the same time one wouldalmost infer, from your coming over here in search of them, that youhave some particular interest in the young lady""It is the chief interest of my life," said Vincent, with simplefrankness.  "And that is why I cannot rest until I find them.""Well, now, one question more," the banker continued.  "I don't wish topry into any young lady's secretsbutbut perhaps there may be someunderstanding between her and you?""I hope so," said Vincent."And the young wretch never wrote me a line to tell me of it!" Mr.Thompson exclaimedbut it was very obvious that this piece of news hadcaused him no chagrin.  "The little Omahussy grows up to be a fine andtall young lady; chooses her sweetheart for herself; thinks of gettingmarried and all the rest of it; and not a word to me! Here is filialgratitude for you!  Why, does she forget what I have promised to do forher?  Not that I ever said so to her; you don't fill a school-girl'shead full of wedding fancies; but her grandfather knew; her grandfathermust have told her when this affair was settled between you and her"But here Vincent had to interpose and explain that nothing was settled;that unhappily everything was unsettled; and further he went on to tellof all that had happened preceding the disappearance of Maisrie and hergrandfather.  For this man seemed of a kindly nature; he was an oldfriend of those two; then Vincent had been very much alone of latetherewas no one in Omaha in whom he could confide.  Mr. Thompson listenedwith close attention; and at last he said"I can see that you have been placed in a very peculiar position; andthat you have stood the test well.  The description of my old friendBethune that your father put before you could be made to look veryplausible; and I imagine that most young men would have been staggeredby it.  I can fancy that a good many young men would have been apt tosay 'Like grandfather, like granddaughter'and would have declined tohave anything more to do with either.  And yet I understand that,however doubtful or puzzled you may have been, at least you never hadany suspicion of Margaret?""Suspicion?" said Vincent.  "Of the girl whom I hope to make my wife?  Ineed not answer the question."Mr. Thompson give a bit of a laugh, in a quiet, triumphant manner."Evidently my little Omahussy had her eyes widely and wisely open whenshe made her choice," said he, apparently to himself."And what can I do now?" Vincent went on, in a half-despairing way."You say you are certain they are not in Canada or they would have cometo see you.  The Scotchmen in New York told me they were positive Mr.Bethune was not there, or he would have shown up at the BurnsAnniversary. Well, where can I go now?  I must find herI cannot restuntil I have found herto have everything explainedandand to find outher reason for going away""I wonder," said Mr. Thompson, slowly, "what old George had in his headthis time?  To him, as I say, fancies are just as real as facts, and Icannot but imagine that this has been his doing.  She would not ask himto break up all his arrangements and ways of living for her sake; shewas too submissive and dependent on him for that; it is she who hasconformed to some sudden whim of his. You had no quarrel with him?""A quarrel?  Nothing of the kindnot the shadow of a quarrel!" Vincentexclaimed."Did you mention to him those reports about himself?" was the nextquestion."Well, yes, I did, in a casual sort of way," the young man answeredhonestly.  "But it was merely to account for any possible opposition onthe part of my father; and, in fact, I wanted Mr. Bethune to consent toan immediate marriage between Maisrie and myself.""And what did Margaret say to that?" Mr. Thompson proceeded to ask; hewas clearly trying to puzzle out for himself the mystery of thissituation."You mean the last time I saw herthe very last time?" the young mananswered him.  "Well, she seemed greatly troubled: as I mentioned toyou, there was some wild talk about degradationfancy degradation havinganything to do with Maisrie Bethune!and she said it would be better forus to separate; and she made me promise certain things.  But I wouldn'tlisten to her; I was going down to Mendover; I made sure everythingwould come right as soon as I could get back.  And then, when I gotback, they were goneand not a trace of them left behind.""Had old George got any news about the Balloray estates?" the bankerasked, with a quick look."Not that I know of," Vincent answered.  "Besides, if there had been anynews of importance, it would have been in the papers; we should all haveseen it!""And you and Margaret parted on good terms?""Good terms?" said Vincent.  "That is hardly the phrase.  But beyondwhat I told you, I cannot say more.  There are some things that are formyself alone.""Quite rightquite right," said Mr. Thompson, hastily, "I quiteunderstand."At this moment a card was brought in."Tell the gentleman I will see him directly," was the reply.Vincent, of course, rose."I confess," said the banker, "that the whole affair perplexes me; and Ishould like a little time to think it over.  Have you any engagement forthis evening?""No," said Vincent; "I only arrived in Toronto last night: and I don'tsuppose I know any one in the town.""Come and dine with me at my club, then, this evening, will you?  Justour two selves: the  club, at seven.  I want to talk to you about thismatter; for I have a particular interest, as you may suppose, in thelittle Maggie; and I want to know what it all means.  I should like tolearn something more about you, too, in view of certain possibilities.And perhaps I can give you a few hints about my old friend George, foryou don't quite seem to understand, even with all the chances you havehad.  Yes, I can see a little doubt in your mind at times.  You wouldrather shut your eyesfor Margaret's sake, no doubt; but I want to showyou that there isn't much of that needed, if you only look the rightway.  However, more of that when we meet.  At seven, then.  Sorry toseem so rudebut this is an appointment"That proved to be a memorable evening.  To begin with small things:Vincent, after his late solitary wanderings in unfamiliar conditions oflife, now and suddenly found himself at home.  The quiet, old-fashionedunobtrusive comfort of this club; the air of staid respectability; themanner of the waiters; the very cooking, and the order in which thewines were handedall appeared to him to be so thoroughly English; andthe members, judging by little points here and there, seemed also to becuriously English in their habits and ways. He had received a similarimpression on his first visit to Toronto; but on this occasion it wasmore marked than ever; perhaps the good-humoured friendliness of thisScotch banker had something to do with it, and their being able to talkabout people in whom they had a common concern. However, it was afterdinner, in a snug corner of the smoking-room, that Mr. Thompsonproceeded to talk of his old friend in a fashion that considerablyastonished the young man who was his guest."Yes," he continued, after he had examined and cross-examined Vincentwith regard to certain occurrences, "there is no doubt at all thatGeorge Bethune is a rank old impostor; but the person on whom he hasmostly imposed, all his life through, has beenGeorge Bethune.  Isuppose, now, every one of us has in his nature a certain amount ofself-deception; it would be a pity if it weren't so.  But here is thisman who has been gifted with a quite unlimited faculty ofself-deception; and with a splendid imagination, toothe imagination ofa poet, without a poet's responsibilities; so that he lives in a worldentirely of his own creation, and sees things just as he wants to seethem.  As I say, he has the imagination of a poet, and the unworldlinessof a poet, without any one calling him to do anything to prove hispowers; he is too busy constructing his own fanciful universe forhimself; and all the common things of lifedebts, bills, undertakings,and so forththey have no existence for him.  Ah, well, well," Mr.Thompson went on, as he lay back in his chair, and watched the bluecurls of smoke from his cigar, "I don't know whether to call it a pityor not.  Sometimes one is inclined to envy him his happy temperament.  Idon't know any human creature who has a braver spirit, whose conscienceis clearer to himself, who can sleep with greater equanimity andcontent. Why should he mind what circumstances are around him when in asingle second he can transport himself to the Dowie Dens o' Yarrow or beoff on a raid with Kinmont Willie?  And there's nothing that he will notseize if he has a mind to ita sounding name, a tradition, a historicalincidentwhy, he laid hold of the Bonnie mill-dams o' Binnorie, carriedthem off bodily to Balloray, and I suppose wild horses wouldn't tearfrom him the admission that Balloray never had anything to do with thosemill-dams or the story of the two sisters""I know," said Vincent; "Maisrie told me about that.""Maisrie!" said Mr. Thompson, with a return of his former impatience."That is another of his fantasticalities.  I tell you her name isMargaret.""But she has been Maisrie to me, and Maisrie she will be to me always,"Vincent made answer stoutlyfor surely he had some right to speak onthis matter too.  "As I said this morning, it is only a pet name forMargaret; and if she chooses to use it, to please her grandfather, or toplease herself even""Stay a moment: I want to show you something."The banker put his hand into his breast-pocket; and pulled out anenvelope."Not the photograph?" said Vincent, rather breathlessly.Mr. Thompson smiled in his quiet, sagacious way."When I mentioned this portrait to you to-day," said he, "I sawsomething in your eyesthough you were too modest to put your requestinto words.  Well, I have brought it; here it is; and if you'll look atthe foot you'll see that the little Omahussy signs herself, as she oughtto sign herself, 'Margaret Bethune.'"And what a revelation was this, of what Maisrie had been in the yearsbefore he had known her! The quaint, prim, small miss!he could havelaughed, with a kind of delight: only that here were those calm, grave,earnest eyes, that seemed to know him, that seemed to speak to him.Full of wistfulness they were, and dreams: they said to him, 'I amlooking forward; I am waiting till I meet youmy friend; life has thatin storefor you and me.'"I thought you would be interested," said Mr. Thompson, blandly.  "And Iknow you would like me to give you that photograph: perhaps you thinkyou have some right to it, having won the young lady herself""Won her?" said Vincent, still contemplating this strange, quaintportrait that seemed to speak to him somehow.  "It hardly looks likeit.""Well, I cannot give you the photograph," the elderly Scotchmancontinued, in his friendly way, "but, if you like, I will have itcopiedperhaps even enlarged, if it will stand itand I will send youone""Will you?" said Vincent, with a flash of gratitude in his eyes.  "To meit would be simply a priceless treasure.""I just thought it would be," Mr. Thompson said, considerately.  "I'veseen something of the ways of young people in my time.  Yes; I'll sendyou a copy or two as soon as I can get them done."Vincent handed back the photographreluctantly, and keeping his eyes onit until it had disappeared."I brought it out to show you she could sign her name properly whenunder proper instruction," the banker continued.  "And now to return toher grandfather, who seems to have puzzled you a little, as well mightbe the case.  I can see how you have been trying to blind yourself tocertain things: no doubt you looked towards Margaret, and thought shewould make up for all.  But I surmise you have been a little unjust tomy old friend; notwithstanding your association with him, you have notquite understood him; and perhaps that is hardly to be wondered at.  Andcertainly you would never take him to be what I consider him to beavery great man who has been spoiled by a fatal inheritance.  I do trulyand honestly believe there were the makings of a great man in GeorgeBethunea man with his indomitable pluck and self-reliance, hisimagination, his restless energy, his splendid audacity and independenceof character. Even now I see something heroic in him: he seems to me aman of heroic buildof heroic attitude towards the rest of the world:people may say what they like about George Bethune; but I know himbetter than most, and I wholly admire him and love him.  If it hadn'tbeen for that miserable property!  I suppose, now, a large estate mayturn out a fortunate or unfortunate legacy accordingly as you use it;but if your legacy is only the knowledge that the estate ought to beyours, and isn't, that is a fine set of circumstances!  And I havelittle doubt it was to forget that wretched lawsuit, to escape from aceaseless and useless disappointment, that he took refuge in a world ofimagination, and built up delusions round about himjust as other peopletake refuge in gin or in opium.  At all events, his spirit has not beencrushed.  Did you ever hear him whine and complain?I should think not!He has kept a stout heart, has old George Bethune.  Perhaps, indeed, hispride has been excessive.  Here am I, for example: I'm getting well onin years, and I haven't a single near relative now living; I've scrapedtogether a few sixpences in my time; and nothing would give me greaterpleasure than if George Bethune were to come to me and ask me to sharemy purse with him.  And he knows it too.  But would he?  Not a bit!Rather than come to me and get some useful sum, he would go and get afew pounds out of some newspaper-office on account of one of his franticschemes to do something fine for poor old Scotland. No," the bankerproceeded, with rather an injured air, "I suppose I'm not distinguishedenough. Friend George has some very high and mighty notions about theclaims of long descentand noblesse obligeand all that.  It is acondescension on his part to accept help from any one; and it is theprivilege of those who have birth and lineage like himself to be allowedto come to his aid.  I'm only Thompson.  If I were descended fromRichard Coeur de Lion I suppose it would be different.  Has he everaccepted any money from you?""Never," said Vincentwho was not going to recall a few restaurant billsand cab fares."No," resumed the banker, "Your name is Harris.  But when it comes toLord Musselburgh, that is quite different, that is all right.  No doubtLord Musselburgh was quite proud to be allowed to subscribehow much wasit?towards a book that never came out.""Oh, but I ought to explain that that money was paid back," saidVincent, quickly."Paid back?" repeated the banker, staring. "That is a new feature,indeed!  The money paid back to Lord Musselburgh?  How did that comeabout?  How did friend George yield to a weakness of that kind?""The fact is," said Vincent, blushing like a school-boy, "I paid it.""Without letting the old gentleman know?""Yes.""Then excuse my saying so," Mr. Thomson observed, "but you threw awayyour money to very little purpose.  If George Bethune is willing to takea cheque from Lord Musselburghif he can do so without the slightestloss of self-respect or dignitywhy should not his lordship be allowedto help a brother Scot?  Why should you interfere?""It was for Maisrie's sake," said Vincent, looking down."Ah, yes, yes," the banker said, knitting his brows.  "That is where thetrouble comes in.  I shouldn't mind letting George Bethune go his ownway; he is all right; his self-sufficiency will carry him throughanything: but for a sensitive girl like that it must be terrible.  Iwonder how much she suspects," he went on.  "I wonder how much she sees.Or if it is possible he has blinded her as well as himself to theircircumstances?  For you must remember thisI am talking to you now, Mr.Harris, as one who may have a closer relationship with these twoyoumust remember this, that to himself George Bethune's conscience is asclear as that of a one-year-old child.  Do you think he sees anythingshady or unsatisfactory in these little transactions or forgetfulnessesof his?  He is careless of money because he despises it.  If he had any,and you wanted it, it would be yours.""I know that," said Vincent, eagerly; and he told the story of theirmeeting the poor woman in Hyde Park."Take that string of charges you spoke of," the banker resumed.  "I havenot the least doubt that from the point of view of the people whodiscovered those things their story was quite accurate.  Except,perhaps, about his calling himself Lord Bethune: I don't believe that,and never heard of it; that was more likely a bit of toadyism on thepart of some bar-loungers.  But, as I say, from a solicitor's point ofview, George Bethune would no doubt be regarded as a habitual impostor;whereas to himself he is no impostor at all, but a perfectly honourableperson, whose every act can challenge the light of day.  If there is anywrong or injury in the relations between him and the world, be sure heconsiders himself the wronged and injured one: though you must admit hedoes not complain.  The question isdoes Margaret see?  Or has hebrought her up in that world of imaginationcareless of the real factsof lifepersuading yourself of anything you wish to believethinkinglittle of rent or butchers' bills so long as you can escape into themerry green-wood and live with Burd Helens and May Colleans and thelike?  You see, when I knew her she was little more than a child; itwould never occur to her to question the conduct of her grandfather; butnow you say she is a womanshe may have begun to look at things forherself"Mr. Thompson paused, and eyed his companion curiously.  For a strangeexpression had come into Vincent's face."What then?" asked the banker."I am beginning to understand," the young man said, "andandperhapshere is the reason of Maisrie's going away.  Suppose she imagined that Isuspected her grandfathersuppose she thought I considered those reportstrue: then she might take that as a personal insult; she might be tooproud to offer any defence; she would go to her grandfather and say'Grandfather, if this is what he and his friends think of us, it is timewe should take definite steps to end this companionship.'  It has beenall my doing, then, since I was so blind?" Vincent continued, evidentlyin deep distress.  "I don't wonder that she was offended andinsultedandand she would be too proud to explain.  I have all alonghad a kind of notion that she had something to do, perhaps everything todo, with their going away. And yet"He was silent.  Mr. Thompson waited for a second or two, not wishing tointerrupt: then he said"Of course you know her better than I do; but that is not how I shouldread the situation.  It is far more probable that her own eyes have beengradually openingnot to what her grandfather is, but to what he mayappear to be in the eyes of the world; and when she has come more andmore to perceive the little likelihood of his being consideratelyjudged, she may have determined that you should be set free from allassociation with him and with her.  I think that is far more likely, inview of the things you have told me.  And I can imagine her doing that.A resolute young creature; ready to sacrifice herself; used towandering, tooher first solution of any difficulty would be to 'goaway.'  A touch of pride, perhaps, as well.  I dare say she hasdiscovered that if you look at George Bethune through blue spectacles,his way of life must look rather questionable; but if you look at himthrough pink spectacles, everything is pleasant, and fine, and evengrand.  But would she ask anyone to put on a pair of pink spectacles?No; for she has the stiff neck of the Bethunes.  I imagine she can holdher head as high as any one, now she is grown up. And of course she willnot ask for generous interpretation; she will rather 'go away.'"Vincent was still silent; but at length he saidas if speaking tohimself"I wonder what Maisrie must have thought of me."He had evidently been going over all that had happened in those bygonedaysby the light of this new knowledge."What do you mean?" the banker said."Why, if there were any generous interpretation needed or expected,surely it should have come first of all from me.  The outside worldmight be excused for thinking this or that of Mr. Bethune; but I wasconstantly with him; and then, look at the relations that existedbetween Maisrie and myself.  I thought I was doing enough in the way ofgenerosity when I tried to shut my eyes to certain things; whereas Ishould have tried to see more clearly.  I might have understoodif anyone.  I remember now Maisrie's saying to me on one occasionit was aboutthat book on the Scottish-American poetsshe said quite piteously:'Don't you understand?  Don't you understand that grandfather canpersuade himself of anything? If he has thought a thing over, heconsiders it done, and is ready for something else.'  And then there wasanother time""Come, come," said Mr. Thompson, good-naturedly, "I don't see you havemuch to reproach yourself with.  You must admit that that affairif hereally did see the proof-sheets in New Yorklooked pretty bad.  You sayyourself that Hugh Anstruther was staggered by it""Yes, he was," said Vincent, "until I explained that the money had beenrepaid to Lord Musselburgh, and also that I had no doubt Mr. Bethuneconsidered himself, from his knowledge of the subject, quite entitled topublish a volume on the other side of the water.  Mr. Ross's book waspublished only on this sideat least, that is my impression.""Did you tell Anstruther who repaid the money to Lord Musselburgh?" Mr.Thompson asked, with a shrewd glance."No," answered Vincent, looking rather shame-faced."Ah, well," the banker said, "a freak of generosity is very pardonablein a young man, especially where a young lady is concerned.  And you hadthe means besides.  Your father is a rich man, isn't he?""Oh, yes, pretty well.""And younow forgive my curiosityit only arises from my interest inMargaretI dare say you are allowed a sufficient income?""I have more money than I need," said Vincent, frankly, "but of coursethat would not be the case if I married Maisrie Bethune, for then Ishould have to depend on my own resources.  I should have to earn my ownliving.""Oh, earn your own living?  Well, that is very commendable, in any case.And how do you propose to earn your own living?""By writing for the newspapers.""Have you had any experience?" Maisrie's 'second father' continued."Yes, a little; and I have had fair encouragement. Besides, I know oneor two important people in the newspaper world.""And what about your seat in Parliament?""That would not interfere: there are several journalists in the House."The banker considered for a little while."Seems a little hazardous, doesn't it, to break away from a certainty ofincome?" he asked, at length.  "Are you quite convinced that if youmarried Margaret your relatives would prove so implacable?""It isn't what they would do that is the question," Vincent responded,with promptitude.  "It is what I should be inclined to do.  At presentthey regard Maisrie as nothing more nor less than a common adventuressand swindleror rather an uncommon onea remarkably clever one.  Now doyou think I am going to take her by the hand, and lead her up to them,and say, 'Dear Papa,' or 'Dear Aunt,' as the case may be, 'Here is theadventuress and swindler whom I have married, but she is not going to bewicked any more; she is going to reform; and I beg you to receive herinto the family, and forgive her all that she has been; and also I hopethat you will give me money to support her and myself.'  You see,"continued Vincent, "before I did that I think I would rather try to findout how much a week I could make by writing leading-articles.""Quite rightquite right," said Mr. Thompson, with a smile: for why thisdisdain?he had not counselled the young man to debase himself so."And then it isn't breaking away from any certainty of income," Vincentproceeded, "but quite the reverse.  The certainty is that as soon as Iannounce my intention of marrying Miss Bethune, my father will suggestthat I should shift for myself.  Very well.  I'm not afraid.  I can takemy chance, like another.  They say that poverty is a good test ofaffection: I am ready to face it, for one.""Oh, as for that," the banker interposed, "I wish you to understandthisthat your bride won't come to you empty-handed.  George Bethune mayhold aloof from me as long as he likes.  If he thinks it is moredignified for him to go cadging about with vague literary projectsallfor the honour and glory of Scotland, no doubtinstead of letting hisoldest friend share his purse with him, I have nothing to say.  Myname's only Thompson; noblesse oblige has nothing to do with me.  Butwhen my little Margaret walks into church to meet the man of her choice,it will be my business to see that she is suitably provided for.  I donot mean to boast, or make rash promises, or raise false expectations;but when her husband brings her away it will be no pauper he is takinghome with him.  And I want to add this, since we are talking inconfidence: I hope her husband will be none other than yourself.  I likeyou.  I like the way you have spoken of both grandfather andgranddaughter; and I like your independence.  By all means when you getback to the old country: by all means carry out that project of yours ofearning an income for yourself.  It can do you no harm, whateverhappens; it may be invaluable to you in certain circumstances.  And inthe meantime, if I may still further advise, give up this search ofyours for the present.  I dare say you are now convinced they are not onthis side the water; well, let that suffice for the time being.  Here isParliament coming together; you have your position to make; and thepersonal friend and protg of  should surely have a great chance inpublic life.  Of course, you will say it is easy to talk.  But don'tmisunderstand me.  What can you do except attend to these immediate andpractical affairs? If George Bethune and Margaret have decided, forreasons best known to themselves, to sever the association between youand them, mere advertising won't bring them back.  And searching thestreets of this or that town is a pretty hopeless business. No; if youhear of them, it will not be in that way: it will be through somecommunication with some common friend, and just as likely as not thatfriend will be myself."All this seemed very reasonableand hopeless. Vincent rose."I must not keep you up too late," said he, in am absent sort of way."I suppose you are rightI may as well go away back to England at once.But of course I will call to see you before I goto-morrow if I maytothank you for all your kindness.""Ah, but you must keep up your heart, you know," the banker said,regarding the young man in a favouring way.  "No despair.  Why, I amsure to hear from one or other of them; they cannot guess that you havebeen here; even if they wish to keep their whereabouts concealed fromyou they would have no such secret from me.  And be sure I will send youword the moment I hear anything. I presume the House of Commons will beyour simplest and surest address."As he walked away home that night Vincent had many things to ponderover; but the question of questions was as to whether Maisrie hadindignantly scorned him for his blindness in not perceiving more clearlyher grandfather's nature and circumstances, or for his supineness inwavering, and half-admitting that these charges might bring disquiet.For now the figure of old George Bethune seemed to stand out distinctlyenough: an amiable and innocent monomaniac; a romantic enthusiast; asublime egotist; a dreamer of dreams; a thaumaturgist surroundinghimself with delusions and not knowing them to be such.  And if DanielThompson's reading of the character of his old friend was accurateifGeorge Bethune had merely in splendid excess that faculty ofself-deception which in lesser measure was common to all mortalswho wasgoing to cast the first stone?CHAPTER V.MARRIAGE NOT A LA MODE.London had come to life again; the meeting of Parliament had summonedfathers of families from distant climes and citiesfrom Algiers andAthens, from Constantinople and Cairo; the light blazed at the summit ofthe Clock-tower; cabs and carriages rattled into Palace Yard.  And here,at a table in the Ladies' Dining-room of the House of Commons, sate Mrs.Ellison and her friend Louie Drexel, along with Lord Musselburgh andVincent Harris, the last-named playing the part of host.  This MissDrexel was rather an attractive-looking little person, brisk and trimand neat, with a healthy complexion, a pert nose, and the mostastonishingly clear blue eyes.  Very frank those eyes were; almostruthless in a way; about as ruthless as the young lady's tongue, whenshe was heaping contempt and ridicule on some conventionality or socialsuperstition.  "Seeva the Destroyer" Vincent used gloomily to call her,when he got a little bit tired of having her flung at his head by theindefatigable young widow.  Nevertheless she was a merry and vivaciouscompanion; with plenty of independence, too: if she was being flung atanybody's head it was with no consent of her own."You don't say!" she was observing to her companion.  "Fancy any onebeing in Canada in the winter and not going to see the night tobogganingat Rideau Hall!""I never was near Ottawa," said Vincent, in answer to her; "and,besides, I don't know the Viceroy.""A member of the British Parliamenttravelling in Canada: I don't thinkyou would have to wait long for an invitation," said she.  "Why, youmissed the loveliest thing in the worldjust the loveliest thing in thewhole world!the toboggan-slide all lit up with Chinese lanternstheblack pine woods all aroundthe clear stars overhead. Then they havegreat bonfires down in the hollowto keep the chaperons from freezing:poor things, it isn't much fun for them; I dare say they find out what agood thing hot coffee is on a cold night. And you were at Toronto?" sheadded."Yes, I was at Toronto," he answered, absently: indeed at this time hewas thinking much oftener of Toronto than this young lady could haveimaginedwondering when, or if ever, a message was coming to him fromthe friendly Scotch banker there.Mrs. Ellison was now up in town making preparations for her approachingmarriage; but so anxious was she that Louie Drexel and Vincent shouldget thrown together, that she crushed the natural desire of a woman'sheart for a fashionable wedding, and proposed that the ceremony shouldbe quite a quiet little affair, to take place at Brighton, with MissDrexel as her chief attendant and Vincent as best man.  And of coursethere were many consultations; and Mrs. Ellison and her young friendwere much together; and they seemed to think it pleasanter, in theircomings and goings, to have a man's escort, so that the Parliamentaryduties of the new member for Mendover were very considerably interferedwith."Look here, aunt," said he, at this little dinner, "do you think I wentinto the House of Commons simply to get you places in the Ladies'gallery and entertain you in the Ladies' Dining-room?""I consider that a very important part of your duties," said the youngwidow, promptly.  "And I tell you this: when we come back from theRiviera, for the London season, I hope to be kept informed of everythingthat is going onsurely, with a husband in one House and a nephew in theother!""But what I want to know is," said Lord Musselburgh on this sameoccasion, "what Vin is going to do about the taxation of ground rents.I think that is about the hardest luck I ever heard of. Here is a youngman, who no sooner gets into Parliament than he is challenged to saywhether he will support the taxation of ground rents; and lo and behold!every penny of his own fortune is invested in ground rents!  Isn't thathard?  Other things don't touch him.  Welsh Disestablishment willneither put a penny in his pocket nor take one out; while he can makepromises by the dozen about the abolition of the tea duty, extension ofFactory Acts, triennial Parliaments, and all the rest of it.  Besides,it isn't only a question of money. He knows he has no more right to taxground rents than to pillage a baker's shop; he knows he oughtn't togive the name of patriot to people who merely want to steal what doesn'tbelong to them; and I suppose he has his own ideas about contractsguaranteed by law, and the danger of introducing the legislation ofplunder.  But what is he going to do?  What are you going to do, MarcusCurtius? Jump in, and sacrifice yourself, money and principles and all?""You are not one of my constituents," said Vincent, "and I decline toanswer."Day after day went by, and week after week; but no tidings came of thetwo fugitives.  In such moments of interval as he could snatch from hisvarious pursuits (for he was writing for an evening paper now, and thatoccupied a good deal of his time) his imagination would go wanderingaway over the surface of the globe, endeavouring to picture them here orthere.  He had remembered Maisrie's injunction; he could not forgetthat; but of what avail was it now?  Busy as he was, he led a solitarykind of life; much thinking, especially during the long hours of thenight, was eating into his spirit; in vain did Mrs. Ellison scheme andplan all kinds of little festivities and engagements in order to get himinterested in Louie Drexel.  But he was grateful to the girl, in a sortof way; when they had to go two and two (which Mrs. Ellison endeavouredto manage whenever there was a chance) she did all the talking; she didnot seem to expect attention; she was light-hearted and amusing enough.He bought her music; sent her flowers; and so forth; and no doubt Mrs.Ellison thought that all was going well; but it is to be presumed thatMiss Drexel herself was under no misapprehension, for she was anobservant and shrewd-witted lass.  Once, indeed, as they were walking upRegent-street, she ventured to hint, in a sisterly sort of fashion, thathe might be a little more confidential with her; but he did not respondto this invitation; and she did not pursue the subject further.Then the momentous wedding-day drew near; and it was with curiousfeelings that Vincent found himself on the way to Brighton again.  Buthe was not alone.  The two Drexel girls and Lord Musselburgh were withhim, in this afternoon Pullman; and Miss Louie was chattering away liketwenty magpies.  Always, too, in an oddly personal way. Youthe personshe was addressingyou were responsible for everything that had happenedto her, or might happen to her, in this country; you were responsiblefor the vagaries of the weather, for the condition of the cab thatbrought her, for the delay in getting tickets."Why," she said to Vincent, "you know perfectly well that all that yourEnglish poets have written about your English spring is a pureimposture. Who would go a-Maying when you can't be sure of the weatherfor ten minutes at a time?  'Hail, smiling morn!'just you venture tosay that, on the finest day you ever saw in an English spring; thechances are your prayer will be answered, and the chances are that themorn does begin to hail, like the very mischief.  You know perfectlywell that Herrick is a fraud.  There never were such people as Corydonand Phylliswith ribbons at their knees and in their caps.  Thefarm-servants of Herrick's time were no better off than thefarm-servants of this present timestupid, ignorant louts, not thinkingof poetry at all, but living the most dull and miserable of lives, withan occasional guzzle.  But in this country, you believe anything that istold you.  One of your great men says that machine-made things are bad;and so you go and print your books on hand-made paperand worryyourselves to death before you can get the edges out.  I call the manwho multiplies either useful or pretty things by machinery a truephilanthropist; he is working for the mass of the people; and it's abouttime they were being considered.  In former days""Don't you want to hire a hall, Louie?" said her sister Anna."Oh, I've no patience with sham talk of that kind!" continued MissDrexel, not heeding the interruption.  "As I say, in former days no onewas supposed to have anything fine or beautiful in their house, exceptprinces and nobles.  The goldsmiths, and the lapidaries, and theportrait-paintersand the poor wretches who made Venetian lacethey allworked for the princes and nobles; and the common people were notsupposed to have anything to do with art or ornament; they could herdlike pigs.  Well, I'm for machinery.  I'm for chromolithography, when itcan give the labourer a very fair imitation of a Landseer or a Millaisto hang up in his cottage; I'm for the sewing-machine that can give the150-a-year people a very good substitute for Syrian embroidery to putin their drawing-room. You've been so long used to princes and nobleshaving everything and the poor people nothing""But we're learning the error of our ways," said Vincent, interposing."My father is a Socialist.""A Socialist," observed Lord Musselburgh, "who broke the moulds of adessert-service lest anybody else should have plates of the samepattern!""Who has been telling tales out of school?" Vincent asked; but thediscussion had to end here, for they were now slowing into the station.Nor did Mrs. Ellison's plans for throwing those two young peoplecontinuously and obviously together work any better in Brighton; forVincent had no sooner got down than he went away by himself, seeking outthe haunts he had known when Maisrie and her grandfather had been there.Wretchedness, loneliness, was destroying the nerve of this young man. Hehad black moods of despair; and not only of despair, but of remorse; hetortured himself with vain regrets, as one does when thinking of thedead. If only he could have all those opportunities over again, he wouldnot misunderstand or mistrust! If only he could have them both here!theresolute, brave-hearted old man who disregarded all mean and pettytroubles while he could march along, with head erect, repeating tohimself a verse of the Psalms of David, or perhaps in his carelessgaiety singing a farewell to Bonny Mary and the pier o' Leith.  AndMaisrie?but Maisrie had gone away, proud, and wounded, and indignant.She had found him unworthy of the love she had offered him.  He had notrisen to her height.  She would seek some other, no doubt, better fittedto win her maiden trust.  He thought of 'Urania''Yet show her once, ye heavenly Powers,One of some worthier race than ours!One for whose sake she once might proveHow deeply she who scorns can love.'And that other one, that worthier one, she would welcome'And she to him will reach her hand,And gazing in his eyes will stand,And know her friend, and weep for glee,And cry: Long, long I've looked for thee.'Then again his mood would change.  If Maisrie were only hereif but fora second or so he could look into her clear, pensive, true eyes, surelyhe could convince her of one thingthat even when his father had offeredhim chapter and verse to prove that she was nothing but the accompliceof a common swindler, his faith in her had never wavered, never for aninstant.  And would she not forgive his blindness in not understandingso complex a character as that of her grandfather? He had not told herof his half-suspicions; nay, he had treated those charges with an opencontempt.  And if her quick eyes had perceived that behind thoseprofessions there lingered some unconfessed doubt, would she not begenerous and willing to pardon?  It was in her nature to be generous.And he had borne some things for her sake that he had never revealed toany mortal.He ought to have been attending to his groomsman's duties, and acting asescort to the young ladies who had gone down; but instead of that hepaid a visit to German-place, to look at the house in which the twoBethunes had lodged; and he slowly passed up and down the Kemp-Townbreakwater, striving to picture to himself the look in Maisrie's eyeswhen her soul made confession; and he went to the end of the Chain Pier,to recall the tempestuous morning on which Maisrie, with her wet hairblown about by the winds, and her lips salt with the sea-spray, hadasked him to kiss her, as a last farewell.  And his promise?"Promiseme, Vincent, that you will never doubt that you are my dearest in allthe world; promise me that you will say to yourself always and always,'Wherever Maisrie is at this moment, she loves meshe is thinking ofme.'"  He had made light of her wild words; he could not believe in anyfarewell; and nownow all the wide, unknown world lay between him andher, and there was nothing for him but the memory of her broken accents,her sobs, her distracted, appealing eyes.Mrs. Ellison affected not to notice his remissness; nay, she went on theother tack."Don't you think it is a pity, Vin," she said on one occasion when shefound him aloneand there was a demure little smile on her very prettyand expressive face: "Don't you think it is a pity the two marriagescouldn't be on the same day?""What two marriages?" he demanded, with a stare."Oh, yes, we are so discreet!" she said, mockingly.  "We wouldn'tmention anything for worlds. But other people aren't quite blind, younggentleman. And I do think it would have been so nice if the four of uscould have gone off on this trip together; Louie despisesconventionsshe wouldn't mind.  Many's the time I've thought of it; fourmake such a nice number for driving along the Riviera; and four who allknow each other so well would be quite delightful.  If it came to that,I dare say it could be arranged yet: I'm sure I should be willing tohave our marriage postponed for a month, and I have no doubt I couldpersuade Hubert to agree: then the two weddings on the same day would bejolly""What are you talking about, aunt!" he exclaimed."Oh, well," she said, with a wise and amiable discretion, "I don't wantto hurry on anything, or even to interfere.  But of course we all expectthat the attentions you have been paying to Louie Drexel will lead tosomethingand it would have been very nice if the two weddings couldhave been together."He was still staring at her."Mind you," she went on, "I wish you distinctly to understand that Louiehas not spoken a single word to me on the subject""Well, I should hope not!" said Vincent, with quick indignation."Oh, don't be angry!  Do you think a girl doesn't interpret things?"continued Mrs. Ellison. "She has her own pride, of course; she wouldn'tspeak until she is spoken to.  But I can speak; and surely you knowthat it is only your interests I have at heart.  And that is why we havebeen so glad to see this affair coming along""Who have been glad to see it?" he asked again."Well, Hubert, for one.  And I should think your father.  Of course theymust see how admirable a wife she would make you, now you are reallyembarked in public life.  Clever, bright, amusing; of a good family;with a comfortable dowry, no doubtbut that would be of littleconsequence, so long as your father was pleased with the match: you willhave plenty.  And this is my offer, a very handsome one, I consider it:even now, at the last moment, I will try to get Hubert to postpone ourmarriage, if you and Louie will have your wedding on the same day withus.  I have thought of it again and again; but somehow I didn't like tospeak.  I was waiting for you to tell me that there was a definiteunderstanding between you and Louie Drexel""Well, there is not," he said calmly.  "Nor is there ever likely to be.""Oh, come, come," she said insidiously, "don't make any rash resolve,simply because I may have interfered a little too soon.  Consider thecircumstances.  Did you ever hear of any young man getting intoParliament with fairer prospects than you?  Your friendship with  isof itself enough to attract attention to you.  You have hardly openedyour mouth in the House yet; all the same I can see a disposition on thepart of the newspapers to pet you""What has that got to do with Louie Drexel?" Vincent asked bluntly."Everything," was the prompt reply.  "You must have social position.You must begin and entertainand make your own circle of friends andallies.  Then I shall want you to come to Musselburgh Houseyou and yourwifeso that my dinner parties shan't be smothered up with elderlypeople and political bores.  You can't begin too early to form your ownset; and not only that, but with a proper establishment and a wife atthe head of it, you can pay compliments to all kinds of people, evenamongst those who are not of your own set.  Why shouldn't you ask Mr.Ogden to dinner, for example?there's many a good turn he might do youin time to come.  Wait till you see how I mean to manage at MusselburghHouseif only Hubert would be a little more serious, and professpolitical beliefs even if he hasn't any.  For I want you to succeed,Vincent.  You are my boy.  And you don't know how a woman who can'therself do anything distinguished is proud to look on and admire one ofher own family distinguishing himself, and would like to have all theworld admiring him too. I tell you you are losing time; you are losingyour opportunities.  What is the usewhat on earth can be the use,"continued this zealous and surely disinterested councillor, "of yourwriting for newspapers?  If the articles were signed, then I couldunderstand their doing you some good; or if you were the editor of animportant journal, that would give you a position.  But here you areslaving awayfor what?  Is it the money they give you? It would be oddif the son of Harland Harris had to make that a consideration.  Whatotherwise, then?  Do you think half-a-dozen people know that you writein the  .""My dear aunt," he answered her, "all that you say is very wise and verykind; but you must not bother about me when your own affairs are so muchmore important.  If I have been too attentive to Miss DrexelI'm sure Iwasn't aware of it, but I may have beenI will alter that""Oh, Vin, don't be mean!" Mrs. Ellison cried. "Don't do anything shabby.You won't go and quarrel with the girl simply because I ventured to hopesomething from your manner towards heryou wouldn't do such a thing asthat""Certainly not," said he, in a half-amused way. "Miss Drexel and I areexcellent friends""And you will continue to be so!" said Mrs. Ellison, imploringly.  "Now,Vincent, promise me! You know there are crises in a woman's life whenshe expects a little considerationwhen she expects to be pettedandhave things a little her own way: well, promise me now you will be verykind to Louiekinder than everwhy, what an omen at a wedding it wouldbe if my chief attendant and the groomsman were to fall out""Oh, we shan't fall out, aunt, be sure of that," he said good-naturedly."Ah, but I want more," she persisted.  "I shall consider myself a horridmischief-maker if I don't see that you are more attentive and kind toLouie Drexel than ever.  It's your duty.  It's your place as groomsman.You'll have to propose their health at the wedding-breakfast; and ofcourse you'll say something nice about American girlscould you sayanything too nice, I wonder?and you'll have to say it with an air ofconviction.  For they'll expect you to speak well, of course: you, ayoung member of Parliament; and where could you find a more welcometoast, at a wedding-breakfast, than the toast of the unmarried youngladies?  Yes, yes; you'll have plenty of opportunity of lecturing asleepy House of Commons about Leasehold Enfranchisement and things ofthat kind; but this is quite another sort of chance; and I'm lookingforward to my nephew distinguishing himselfas he ought to do, when hewill have Louie and Anna Drexel listening."  And here this astute andinsidious adviser ceased, for her future husband came into the room, topay his last afternoon call.Whether Vincent spoke well or ill on that auspicious occasion does notconcern us here: it only needs to be said that the ceremony, and thequiet little festivities following, all passed off very satisfactorily;and that bride and bridegroom (the former being no novice) drove awayradiant and happy, amid the usual symbolic showers.  It was understoodthey were to break their journey southward at Paris for a few days; andVincentwho had meanwhile slipped along to his hotel to change hisattirewent up to the railway station to see them off.  He was surprisedto find both the Drexel girls there."Now, look here, Vin," said the charming, tall, pretty-eyed, and notinexperienced bride, "I want you to do me a favour.  If a woman isn't tobe humoured and petted on her wedding daywhen, then?  Well, Louie andAnna don't return to town till to-morrow morning; and what are they todo in that empty house with old Mrs. Smythe?  I want you to take them inhand for the afternoonto please me.  Leave that wretched House ofCommons for one more evening: in any case you couldn't go up now beforethe five o'clock express."And then she turned to the two young ladies. "Louie, Vincent haspromised to look after you two girls; and he'll see you safely into yourtrain to-morrow morning.  So you must do your best to entertain him inthe meanwhile; the afternoon will be the dullestyou must find somethingto amuse yourselves with"Miss Drexel seemed a little self-conscious, and also inclined to laugh."If he will trust himself entirely to us," said she, with covertly merryeyes fixed on the bride, "Anna and I will do our best.  But he must puthimself entirely in our charge.  He must be ruled and governed.  He mustdo everything we ask""Training him for a husband's duties," said Lord Musselburgh, withoutany evil intention whatever; for indeed he was more anxious aboutgetting a supply of foot-warmers into the carriage that had beenreserved for him.Then the kissing had to be gone through; there were final farewells andgood wishes; away went the train; there was a fluttering ofhandkerchiefs; and here was Vincent Harris, a captive in the hands ofthose two young American damselswho, at first, did not seem to knowwhat to do with him.But very soon their shyness wore off; and it must be freely concededthat they treated him well.  To begin with, they took him down into thetown, and led him to a little table at a confectioner's, and ordered twoices for themselves and for him a glass of sherry and a biscuit.  Whenthat fluid was placed before him, he made no remark: his face wasperfectly grave."What's the matter now?" Louie Drexel asked, looking at him."I said nothing," he answered."What are you thinking, then?""Nothingnothing.""But I insist on knowing.""Oh, very well," he said.  "But it isn't my fault. I promised to obey.If you ask me to drink a glass of confectioner's sherry I will dosothough it seems a pity to die so young.""What would you rather have thentea or an ice?"She got an ice for him; and duly paid for the threemuch to hisconsternation, but he had undertaken to be quite submissive.  Then theytook him for a walk and showed him the beauties of the place, makingbelieve to recognise the chief features and public buildings of NewYork.  Then they carried him with them to Mrs. Ellison's house, andascended into the drawing room there, chatting, laughing,nonsense-making, in a very frank and engaging manner.  Finally, towardssix o'clock, Miss Drexel rang the bell, and ordered the carriage."Oh, I say, don't do that," Vincent interposed, grown serious for amoment.  "People don't like tricks being played with their horses.  Youmay do anything else in a house but that.""And pray who asked you to interfere?" she retorted, in a very imperiousmanner; so there was nothing for it but acquiescence and resignation.And very soonin a few minutes, indeedthe carriage was beneath thewindows: coachman on the box, footman at the door, maidservantdescending the steps with rugs, all in order.  It did not occur toVincent to ask how those horses came to be harnessed in so miraculouslybrief a space of time; he accepted anything that might befall; he was asclay in the hands of the potter.  And really the two girls did theirbest to make things livelyas they drove away he knew not, and carednot, whither.  The younger sister was rather more subdued, perhaps; butthe elder fairly went daft, as the saying is; and her gaiety wascatching.  Not but that she could be dexterous in the midst of hermadness.  For example, she was making merry over the general inaptitudeof Englishmen for speech-making; and was describing scenes she hadherself witnessed in both Houses of Parliament, when she suddenlychecked herself."At all events," she said, "I will say this for your House of Commons,that there are a number of very good-looking men in it.  No one can denythat.  But the House of Lordswhew!  You know, my contention is that mypedigree is just as long as that of any of your lords; but I've got toadmit that, some of them more nearly resemble their ancestorsI meantheir quadrumanous ancestors""Louie!" said the sister, reprovingly.And she was going on to say some very nice things about the House ofCommons (as contrasted with the Upper Chamber) when Vincent happened tolook out into the now gathering dusk."Why," said he, "we're at Rottingdean; and we're at the foot of anawfully steep hill; I must get out and walk up.""No, no, no," said Miss Drexel, impatiently. "The horses have donenothing all day but hang about the church door.  You English are soabsurdly careful of your horses: more careful of them than ofyourselvesas I've noticed myself at country houses in wet weather.  Iwonder, when I get back home, if the people will believe me when I tellthem that I've actually seen horses in England with leather shoes overtheir feet to keep the poor things warm and comfortable.  Yes, in thisvery town of Brighton"But here Miss Louie had the laugh turned against her, when he hadgravely to inform her that horses in England wore over-shoes of leather,not to keep their feet warm, but to prevent their cutting the turf whenhauling a lawn-roller."But where are we going?" said he again."Oh, never mind," she answered, pertly."All rightall right," he said, and he proceeded to ensconce himselfstill more snugly in the back seat.  "Well, now, since you've told us ofall the absurd and ludicrous things you've seen in England, won't youtell us of some of the things you have admired?  We can't be insane onevery point, surely.""I know what you think I am," she said of a sudden.  "Acomparison-monger.""You were born in America," he observed."And you despise people who haven't the self-sufficiency, the stolidsatisfaction, of the English.""We don't like people who are too eager to assert themselveswho arealways beating drums and tom-tomsquiet folk would rather turn aside,and give them the highway.""But all the same, you know," Miss Drexel proceeded, "some of yourcountrymen have been very complimentary when they were over with us: ofcourse you've heard of the one who said that the biggest things he hadseen in America were the eyes of the women?""What else could he say?an Englishman prides himself on speaking thetruth," he made answer, very properly.By this time, however, he was beginning seriously to ask himself whitherthose two young minxes meant to take hima runaway expedition carriedout with somebody else's horses!  At all events they were going to havea fine night for it.  For by now it ought to have been quite dark; butit was not dark: the long-rolling downs, the wide strip of turf alongthe top of the cliffs, and the far plain of the sea were all spectrallyvisible in a sort of grey uncertainty; and he judged that the moon wasrising, or had risen in the east.  What did Charles and Thomas, seatedon the box, think of this pretty escapade?  In any case, his own partand lot in the matter had already been decided: unquestioning obediencewas what had been demanded of him.  It could not be that Gretna Greenwas the objective point?this was hardly the way.At last they descended from those grey moonlit solitudes, and got downinto a dusky valley, where there were scattered yellow lightslamplights and lights of windows.  "This is Newhaven," he thought tohimself; but he did not say anything; for Miss Drexel was telling of awild midnight frolic she and some of her friends had had on LakeChamplain. Presently the footfalls of the horses sounded hollow; theywere going over a wooden bridge.  Then they proceeded cautiously for aspace, and there was a jerk or two; they were crossing a railway line.And now Vincent seemed to understand what those mad young wretches wereafter.  They were going down to the Newhaven Pier Hotel.  To dine there?Very well; but he would insist on being host.  It was novel, and odd,and in a certain way fascinating, for him to sit in a restaurant andfind himself entertained by two young ladies-find them pressing anotherbiscuit on him, and then paying the bill; but, of course, the seriousbusiness of dinner demanded the intervention of a man.What followed speedily drove these considerations out of his head.  Theenterprising young damsels having told the coachman when to return withthe carriage, conducted their guest to the hotel, and asked for thecoffee-room.  A waiter opened the door for them.  The next thing thatVincent saw was that, right up at the end of the long room, LordMusselburgh and his bride were seated at a side table, and that theywere regarding the new comersespecially himselfwith some littleamusement.  They themselves were in no wise disconcerted, as they oughtto have been."Come along!" the bridegroom said, rather impatiently.  "You're nearlyhalf-an-hour late, and we're famishing.  Here, waiter, dinner at once,please!  Vin, my boy, you sit next Miss Drexelthat's all right!"At this side-table, covers were already laid for five.  As Vincent tookhis place, he said:"Well, this is better than being had up before a magistrate for stealinga carriage and a pair of horses!""Sure they didn't let on?" the bride demanded, with a glance at the twogirls."Not a word!" he protested.  "I had not the remotest idea where or whatwe were bound for. Looked more like Gretna Green than anything else.""The nearest way to Gretna Green," said she, regarding Vincent withsignificant eyes, "is through Paristo the British Embassy."Now although this remark (which Miss Drexel affected not to hearshe wasso busy taking off her gloves) seemed a quite haphazard and casualthing, it very soon appeared, during the progress of this exceedinglymerry dinner, that Lady Musselburgh, as she now was, had been wonderingwhether they might not carry the frolic a bit further; whether, inshort, this little party of five might not go on to Paris together bythe eleven o'clock boat that same night."Why, Louie, you despise conventionalities," she exclaimed.  "Well, nowis your chance!"Miss Louie pretended to be much frightened."Oh, but I couldn't do that!" she cried.  "Neither Nan nor I have anythings with us.""The idea of American girls talking of taking things with them toParis!" the bride said, with a laugh.  "That is the very reason youshould go to Paristo get the things.""Do you really mean to cross to-night?" Vincent asked, turning toMusselburgh."Oh, yes, certainly.  The fixed serviceeleven o'clockso there's nohurry, whatever you decide on."For he, too, seemed rather taken with this audacious project; said hethought it would be good fun; pleasant company, and all that; also hedarkly hintedperhaps for the benefit of the American young ladiesthatParis had been altogether too pallid of late, and wanted a littlecrimson added to its complexion.  And indeed as the little banquetproceeded, these intrepid schemes widened out, in a half-jocular way.Why should the runaway party stop at Paris?  Why should they not all goon to the Mediterranean together, to breathe the sweet airs blown infrom the sea, and watch the Spring emptying her lavish lap-full offlowers over the land?  Alas! it fell to Vincent's lot to demolish thesefairy-like dreams.  He said he would willingly wait to see the recruitedparty off by that night's steamer; and would send any telegrams forthem, or deliver any messages; but he had to return to London the nextmorning, without fail.  And then Miss Louie Drexel said it was a pity tospoil a pleasant evening by talking of impossibilities; and that theyhad already sufficiently outraged conventionalities by running away witha carriage and pair and breaking in upon a wedding tour.  So thecomplaisant young bride had for the moment to abandon her half-serious,half-whimsical designs; and perhaps she even hoped that Miss Drexel hadnot overheard her suggested comparison between the British Embassy atParis and Gretna Green.At nine o'clock the carriage came round, and at nine o'clock the youngerpeople, having got their good-byes said all over again, set out forhome."I suppose we ought to keep this little expedition a secret," saidVincent, as they were climbing up from the dusky valley to the moonlightabove, which was now very clear and white."Why?" said Miss Louie."Rather unusualisn't it?" he asked, doubtfully, for he knew little ofsuch matters."That's what made it so nice," she answered, promptly.  "Don't you thinkthey were charmed? Fancy their being quite alone in that big hotel,waiting for a steamer!  We had it all planned out days ago.  Didn't yoususpect in the leastwhen you knew they were going by Newhaven andDieppe, and that they would have to wait till eleven to-night?  I'm surethey would have been delighted if we had gone over to Paris with them,and down to the Mediterranean: but I suppose that would have been alittle too muchjust a little too much!"And if Miss Drexel was vivacious and talkative or her way out, she wasequally so on the way back; so that Vincent, in such cheerful company,had little reason to regret their having captured and run away with him.Then again the night was surpassingly beautifulthe moonlight grey onthe land and white on the sea; the heavens cloudless; the worldeverywhere apparently silent and asleep. Not that they were to get allthe way home without a little bit of an adventure, however.  When theyreached the top of the height just west of Rottingdean, Louie Drexelproposed that they should get out and walk along the cliff for a while,leaving the carriage to go slowly on by road.  This they accordinglydid; and very soon the carriage was out of sight; for at this point thehighway is formed by a deep cutting in the chalk.  It was pleasant to beby themselves on such a nighthigh up on this lofty cliff, overlookingthe wide, far-shimmering, silver sea.Presently there came into the stillness a sound of distant voices; andshortly afterwards, at the crest of the hill, a band of strayedrevellers appeared in sight, swaying much in their walk, and singingdiverse choruses with energy rather than with skill.  They were in highgood humour, all of them.  As they drew near, Vincent perceived that oneof them was a soldier; and he seemed the centre of attraction; this oneand that clung to his arm, until their legs, becoming involved, carriedthem wide away, when two other members of the group would occupy thetwin places of honour.  The soldier was drunk, too; but he had thehonour of the flag to maintain; and made some heroic effort to marchstraight.Now what with their insensate howling and staggering, they were almoston Vincent and his two companions before they were aware; but instantlythere was a profusion of offers of hospitality.  The gentleman mustdrink with them, at the Royal Oak. The gentleman declined to drink, andcivilly bade them good-night.  At the same moment another member of thejovial crew appeared to have discovered that there were also two youngladies here; most probably he had a dim suspicion there might only beone; however, it was this one, the one nearest, he insisted should alsogo down and have a glass at the Royal Oak.  It was all done in goodfellowship, with no harm meant; but when at the same time thisparticular roysterer declared he would have his sweetheart come along o'him, and caught Miss Louie by the arm, he had distinctly overstept thebounds of prudence."Hands off!" said Vincent; and he slung the fellow a clip on the earthat sent him staggering, until his legs got mixed up somehow, and awayhe went headlong on to the grass.Then he said in a rapid undertone to the two girls"Off you go to the carriagequick!"He turned to the now murmuring group."What do you want?" he said.  "I can't fight all of you: I'll fight thesoldiermake a ring, to see fair play"He glanced over his shoulder: the two girls had disappeared: now hebreathed freely."But, look here," said he in a most amicable tone, "you've had aglassany one can see thatand it's no use a man trying to fight if he'sa bit unsteady on his pins; you know that quite well. And I don't wantto fight any of you.  If you ask me in a friendly way, I'll go down tothe Royal Oak and have something with you; or I'll treat you, if youlike that better.  I call that fair."And they seemed to think it fair, too; so they picked up their companion(who looked drowsy) and helped him along.  But they hadn't gonehalf-a-dozen yards when two dark figures appeared at the top of thechalk cutting; and these, when they came quickly up, Vincent to hissurprise discovered to be the coachman and footman."Where are the young ladies?" he demanded, instantly and angrily."Miss Drexel is on the box, sirshe sent us to you," said thecoachmanstaring with amazement at the revellers, and no doubt wonderingwhen the fighting was about to begin."Oh, go away back!" said he.  "Get the ladies into the carriage anddrive them home!  I'm going to have a drink with these good fellowsI'llfollow on foot!""I'm quite sure, sir, Miss Drexel won't go," said the coachman.But here the soldier stepped forward.  He had arrived at some nebulousperception of the predicament; and he constituted himself spokesman ofthe party.  They had no wish to inconvenience the gentleman.  He hopedsome other nightproud to see such a gentlemanwouldn't interfere withladiesnot interfere with anybodyall gentlemen and good friendsno usein animosityno offence I meantno offence takenThis harangue might have gone on all night had not Vincent cut it shortby requesting to be allowed to hand his friends five shillings to drinkhis health withal; and away the jocund brethren went to obtain moreliquorif haply they could induce the landlord of the Royal Oak to servethem.And here, sure enough, was Miss Louie Drexel seated sedately on the box,whip and reins in hand; and there was Miss Anna, in the white moonlight,at the horses' heads.  When Vincent and his two companions were in thecarriage again, he said to the elder of them"Why didn't you drive away home?""Drive away home?" said she, with some touch of vibrant indignation inher voice.  "And leave you there?  I was just as near as possible goingback myself, with the whip in my hand.  Do you think I couldn't havelashed my way through those drunken fools?"CHAPTER VI.A SPLIT AT LAST.The renovation of Musselburgh House took more time than had been hoped;bride and bridegroom remained abroad, basking in the sweet airs andsunlight of the Mediterranean spring; and it was not until well on inthe month of May that they returned to London.  Immediately after theirarrival Vincent called on themone afternoon on his way down to St.Stephen's.  He stayed only a few minutes; and had little to say.  Butthe moment he had left Lady Musselburgh turned to her husband."Oh, Hubert, isn't it dreadful!  Did you ever see such a change in anyhuman being?  And no one to tell us of itnot even his own fathernor aword from Louie Drexel, though she wrote often enough about him and whathe was doing in the House""Yes, he does look ill," said Lord Musselburgh, with a seriousness notusual with him.  "Very ill, indeed.  Yet he doesn't seem to knowitdeclares there is nothing the matter with himshows a littleimpatience, even, when you begin to ask questions. I suppose he has beenworking too hard; too eager and anxious all the way round; tooambitiousnot like most young men.  He'd better give up thatnewspaper-nonsense, for one thing.""Oh, it isn't that, Hubert; it isn't that!" she exclaimed, in ratherpiteous accents; and she walked away to the window (this was the veryroom in which Vincent had first set eyes on Maisrie Bethune and hergrandfather).She stood there, alone, for a time.  Then her husband went and joinedher, and linked his arm within hers.  She was crying a little."I did it for the best, Hubert," she sobbed."Did what for the best?""Getting that girl away.  I never thought it would come to this.""Now, now, Madge," said he, in a very affectionate fashion, "don't youworry about nothingor rather, it isn't nothing, for Vin does lookpretty seedy; but you mustn't assume that you are in any wayresponsible.  People don't die nowadays of separation and a brokenheartnot nowadays.  He is fagged; he is not used to the late hours ofthe House of Commons; then there's that newspaper work""But his manner, Hubert, his manner!" she exclaimed.  "He seemed as ifhe no longer cared for anything in life; he hardly listened when I toldhim where we had been; he appeared to be thinking of something quitedifferentas if he were looking at ghosts.""And perhaps he was looking at ghosts," said her husband.  "For it wasby that table there he first saw those two people who have made all thistrouble.  But why should you consider yourself responsible, Madge?  Itwasn't your money that sent them out of the country.  It wasn't you whofound out what they really were."She passed her handkerchief across her eyes."I was quite sure," she went onnot heeding this consolation"that assoon as she was got awayas soon as he was removed from the fascinationof her actual presencehe would begin to see things in their true light.And then, thrown into the society of a charming and clever girl likeLouie Drexel, I hoped everything for him.  And is this all that has comeof it, that he looks as if he were at death's door?  It isn't the Houseof Commons, Hubert; and it isn't the newspaper-work: it is simply thathe still believes in that girl, and that he is eating his heart outabout her absence, and has no one to confide in.  For that is the worstof it all: it is all a sealed book now, as between him and us.  He wasfor leaving my house in Brightonoh, the rage he was in with me abouther!and it would have been for the last time too, I know; only that Ipromised never again to mention the subject to him, and on thatcondition we have got on fairly well since.  But how am I to keepsilence any longer? I cannot see my boy like that.  I must speak to him;I must ask him if he is still so mad as to believe in the honesty ofthose two people; and then, if I find that his infatuation still exists,even after all this time, then I must simply tell him that they tookmoney to go away.  How can he get over that?  How can he get over that,Hubert?"In her despair, this was almost a challenge as well as an appeal.  Buther husband was doubtful."When a man is in love with a woman," said he, "he can forgive a goodlotconfound it, he can forgive everything, or nearly everything, solong as she can persuade him she loves him in return""But not this, Hubert, not this!" the young wife exclaimed.  "Even if hecould forgive her being a thief and the accomplice of an old charlatanand swindlerand what an 'if!imagine that of Vincentof Vincent, who isas proud as Luciferimagine that of him!but even if he were willing toforgive all that, how could he forgive her being bought over, her takingmoney to remain away from him?  No, no, Hubert: surely there is a limit,even to a young man's folly!""Of course you know best," her husband said, in a dubious kind of way."I've seen some queer things in my time, with young men.  And Vin is anobstinate devil, and tenacious: he sticks to anything he takes up: lookat him and that wretched newspaper-work, for example.  If he haspersuaded himself of the innocence and honour of this girl, it may behard to move him.  And I remember there was something very winning andattractive about hersomething that bespoke favour""That was what made her so useful to that old impostor!" LadyMusselburgh said, vindictively."Of course," he admitted, "as you say, here is the undoubted fact oftheir taking the money.  If Vin is to be convinced at all, it ispossible that may convince him.""Very well, then," said she, with decision, "he must and shall beconvinced; and that no further off than to-morrow morning.  I'll tellHarland I'm coming along to lunch; so that he may be in the house, togive me any papers I may want.  And surely, surely, when Vincentperceives what these people are, and what an escape he has had, he willcease to mope and fret: at his time of life there ought to be otherthings to think of than a girl who has deceived him all the way through,and ended by taking money to leave the country!"But notwithstanding all this brave confidence, Lady Musselburgh feltvery nervous and anxious as she went down next morning to GrosvenorPlace. She was aloneher husband was coming along later, for lunch; andshe went on foot, to give her a little more time to arrange her plan ofprocedure. For this was her last bolt, and she knew it.  If his fatalobstinacy withstood this final assault, then there was no hope for him,or for her far-reaching schemes with regard to him.She went into the drawing-room; and he came as soon as he was sent for.These two were now alone."Do you know, Vin," she began at once, "Hubert and I have been muchconcerned about you; for though you won't admit there is anything thematter, the change in your appearance struck us yesterday the moment youcame in: indeed, it made me quite anxious; and after you were gone,Hubert and I talked a little about you and your affairsyou may be surewith only the one wish in our minds.  Hubert thinks you are over-fagged;that you are too close in your attendance at the House; and that youshould give up your newspaper-writing for a time.  I wish it were nomore than that.  But I suspect there is something else""Aunt," said he, interrupting herand yet with something of a tired air,"do you think there is any use in talking, and inquiring, andsuggesting? What has happened, has happened.  It is something you don'tunderstand; and something you couldn't put rightwith all your goodwishes.""Yes, yes," she said eagerly, for she was rejoiced to find that he tookher interference so amiably: "that is quite right; and mind you, I don'tforget the agreement we came to at Brighton, that a certain subjectshould never be referred to by either of us.  I quite remember that; andyou know I have never sought to return to it again in any way whatever.But your looks yesterday, Vin, frightened me; and at this momentwhy,you are not like my dear boy at all.  I wish in all seriousness you hadcome over to Paris with usyou and Louieand gone with us to theMediterranean; we should not have allowed you to fall into thiscondition""Oh, I'm well enough, aunt!" said he."You are not well!" she insisted.  "And why? Because your mind is ill atease""And very little comfort I have to hope for from you," said he,remembering former conversations: but there was no bitterness in histoneonly a sort of resigned hopelessness."Now, that is not fair, Vin!" she protested. "If I said things to youyou did not like, what motive had I but your happiness?  And now at thismoment, if I re-open that subject, it is not the kind of comfort youapparently hope for that I am prepared to bring you, but something quitedifferent. I should like to heal your mental ailment, once and for all,by convincing you of the truth.""Yes, I think we have heard something of that sort on previousoccasions," he said, rather scornfully.  "The truth as it is in GeorgeMorris!  Well, I will tell you what would be more useful, more to thepoint, and more becoming.  Before saying anything further about that oldman and his granddaughter, I think you ought to go and seek them out,and go down on your knees to them, and ask their pardon""For what?""For what you have already said of themand suspected.""Really you try my patience too much!" she exclaimed, with some show oftemper.  "What have I said or suspected of them that was not amplyjustified by the account of them that your father offered to show you?Of course you wouldn't look at it.  Certainly not!  Facts areinconvenient things, most uncomfortable things, where one'sprepossessions are involved.  But I had no objection to looking at it""I suppose not!" said he."And my eyes were not blinded: I could accept evidence when it was putbefore me.""Evidence!" he repeated.  "You forget that I have been across theAtlantic since that precious document was compiled.  I heard how thatevidence had been got: I could see how it could be perverted to suit themalignant theories of a pack of detectives. And if I came back with anysettled conviction, it was that you and one or two othersmyself, too,in a waycould do no better than go and humble ourselves before that oldman and that girl, and beg for their forgiveness, and theirforgetfulness of the wrongs and insults we have put upon them.""Oh, this is beyond anything!" she criedrather losing command ofherself.  "You drive me to speak plain.  Everything your father and Icould think of was tried to cure you of this mad infatuationthe mostpatient inquiryexpenditure of moneyrepresentations that would haveconvinced any sane person.  Nothing was of any use.  What was to be donenext?  Well, we could only buy up those honourable personswho were notadventurers in any kind of wayoh, certainly not!but all the same theywere willing to be bought; and so, on payment of a substantialconsideration, they agreed to pack up their traps and be off.  What doyou think of that?  What do you say to that?  Where was the oldgentleman's indomitable pride?where was the girl's pretended affectionfor you?when they consented to take a good round sum of money and beoff?  How can you explain that away?"She regarded him with a certain defiancefor she was moved to anger byhis obduracy.  But if she expected him to wince under this sudden stabshe was mistaken."How do I know that this is true?" he said, calmly."I am not in the habit of speaking untruths," she said, slightly drawingherself up."Oh, of course not," he answered.  "But all through this matter therehas been a good deal of twisting about and misrepresentation.  I shouldlike to know from whom Mr. Bethune got this moneyand in what form."Well, she was prepared."I suppose you would be convinced," said she, "if I showed you thereceipta receipt for 5,000which he signed and gave to George Morris?""Where is that receipt?" he asked."In this house.  I will go to your father, and get it.  Shall I ask himat the same time for those other documents which you would not read?Perhaps all taken together they might enable you to realise the truth atlast.""No, thank you," said he, coldly.  "I know how those other documentswere procured.  I shall be glad to see the receipt."She hurried away, anxious to strike while the iron was hot, and certainshe had already made a profound impression.  And so she had, in one way,all unknowing.  When she left the room, he remained standing, gazingblankly at the sides of the books on the table: outwardly impassive, butwith his brain working rapidly enough.  He made no manner of doubt thatshe could produce this receipt.  He took it for granted that GeorgeBethune had accepted the money.  Of course, Maisrie had nothing to dowith it; her grandfather kept her in ignorance of his pecuniary affairs;and it would be enough for him to say that she must go away with himfrom Englandshe was obedient in all things.  And no doubt the old manhad been cajoled and flattered into believing he was acting justly andin the best interests of every one concerned; there could have beenlittle difficulty about that; he was quick to persuade himself ofanything that happened to fall in with the needs of the moment.  Allthis Vincent understood at once. But when he came to consider that itwas his own relatives who had brought upon him all the long torture andsuffering of these bygone monthsand not only that: for what was he orhis hidden pain?but also that they had once more driven forth those twotired wanderersthe old man who had some wistful notion of ending hisdays in his own country, the young girl whose maiden eyes had just madeconfession of her love-secretthen his heart grew hot within him.  Itwas too cruel.  When Lady Musselburgh returned with the receipt in herhand, he took the paper, and merely glanced at it."And whose clever and original idea was this?" he demandedwith what shetook to be indifference."But Vincentare you convinced at last!" she exclaimed.  "Surely youmust see for yourself now.  You will give up thinking of themthinkingof that girl especially when you see what she is""Whose idea was it to get them sent away?" he repeated."Well, it was my idea," she said; "but your father paid the money."He was silent for a second or two, and then he said slowly"And you are my nearest relatives; and this is what you have done, notto me only, but to one who is dearer to me than life.  So be it.  Butyou cannot expect me to remain longer under this roof, or to sit down attable, anywhere, with my cruellest enemies"She turned very pale."Vincent!" she exclaimed."It is a question of taking sides," he went on, with perfect composure;"and I go over to the other side.  They most need help: they are poorand friendless.  I hope the mischief you have done is not irreparable; Icannot tell; but I dare say when you and I meet again time will haveshown."She was thunderstruck and stupefied; she did not even seek to detain himas he left the room. For there was a curious air of self-possession, ofresolution, about his manner: this was no pique of disappointed passion,nor any freak of temper. And she could not but ask herself, in abreathless sort of way, whether after all he might not be in the rightabout those people; and, in that case, what was this that she hadbrought about?  She was frightenedtoo frightened to reason withherself, perhaps: she only saw Vincent leaving his father's roofcuttinghimself off from his own familyand she had a dumb consciousness that itwas her work, through some fatal error of judgment. And she seemed toknow instinctively that this step that he had taken was irrevocableandthat she was in some dim way responsible for all that had occurred.When Lord Musselburgh arrived, he and Harland Harris came upstairstogether; and almost directly afterwards luncheon was announced.  Asthey were about to go down to the dining-room the greatCommunist-capitalist looked round with a little air of impatience andsaid"But where is Vin?""He was here a short time ago," said Lady Musselburgh: she dared not saymore.Mr. Harris, from below, sent a message to his son's room: theanswerwhich Lady Musselburgh heard in silencewas that they were not towait luncheon for him."Too busy with his reply to the Sentinel," Musselburgh suggested."Sharp cuts and thrusts going.  I wonder that celestial minds shouldgrow so acrid over such a subject as the nationalisation of tithe."There was some scuffle on the stairs outside, to which nobody (exceptLady Musselburgh, whose ears were painfully on the alert) paid anyattention; but when a hansom was called up to the front door, HarlandHarris happened to look out."What, is he going off somewhere?  I never knew any creature so carelessabout his meals.  I presume his indifference means a good digestion.""Oh, Vin's digestion is all right," Lord Musselburgh said.  "I hear hedines every night at the House of Commonsand yet he is alive""But there are his portmanteaus!" Mr. Harris exclaimed, and he even roseand went to the window for a second.  Well, he was just in time to seeVincent step into the cab, and drive off; and therewith he returned tohis place at table, and proceeded, in his usual bland and somewhatpatronising manner, to tell Lord Musselburgh of certain experiments hewas having made in copper-lustre.  He was not in the least concernedabout that departing cab; nor did he know that that was the last glimpseof his son he was to have for many and many a day.And meanwhile Lady Musselburgh sate there frightened, and guilty, andsilent.  And that without reason; for what she had done she had donewith the full concurrence and approval of her brother-in-law and herfianc (as he then was).  Yet somehow she seemed to feel herselfentirely answerable for all that had happenedfor the failure of all herschemesfor the catastrophe that had resulted. And the moment she gotoutside her brother-in-law's house, she began and confessed the wholetruth to her husband."But why didn't you tell Harris?" said he, pausing as if even now hewould go back."Oh, I couldn't, Hubert; I daren't!" she said, evidently in greatdistress.  "I was so confident everything would come rightI advisedhimI persuaded him to pay the 5,000""Oh, nonsense!" was the impatient reply.  "A man doesn't hand over5,000 unless he is himself convinced that it is worth while.  And hegot what he bargained for.  Those people have gone away; they don'tinterfere any more""Ah, but that is not all," Lady Musselburgh put in, rather sadly.  "Imade so sure that Vin would forgetthat as soon as the hallucination hadworn off a little, he would see what those people really were, and turnhis eyes elsewhere: yet apparently he believes in their honesty morefirmly than evertalks of my going and asking their pardonand the like;and now he has wholly broken away from usdeclares he will never beunder the same roof with us, or sit down at the same table with us.  Hehas gone over to the other side, he says, because they are poor andfriendless.  Poor and friendless!" she repeated, with a snap ofanger"living on the fat of the land through their thieving!  And yet"And here again she paused, as if recalling something to herself: "Do youknow, Hubert, I was startled and frightened by Vin's manner to-day; forI had suddenly to ask myself whether after all it was possible he mightbe in the right, and we altogether wrong.  In all other things he showshimself so clear-headed and able and shrewd; and then he has seen theworld; you would not take him to be one who could be easily deceived.Sometimes I hardly know what to think.  But at all events, this is whatyou must do now, Hubert: you must get hold of him, and persuade him togo back home, before Harland knows anything of what had been intended.He can invent some excuse about the portmanteaus.  You can go down tothe House to-night, and see him there; and if you persuade him to returnto Grosvenor Place, that will be so much of the mischief set straight.That is the first thing to be done; but afterwards"It was quite clear that she knew not what to think, for she went onagain, almost as if talking to herself"Of course, if the girl were a perfectly good and honest girl, and abovesuspicion of every kind, Vin's constancy and devotion to her would be avery fine and noble thing; and I for one should be proud of him for it.But as things are, it is a monomanianothing else than a monomania!  Hemust see that she is in league with that old man to get money on falsepretences.""He sees nothing of the kind," said her husband bluntly.  "She may orshe may not be; I know little or nothing about her; but if she is, Vindoesn't see it: you may make up your mind about that.""And yet he seems sharp-sighted in other things," said Lady Musselburghin a pensive sort of way; and then she added: "However, the first stepto be taken is to get him back to his own family; and none can do thatso well as you, Hubert; you are his old friend; and you stand betweenus, as it were.  And there's one thing about Vin: he can't disappear outof the way; you can always get hold of himat the House of Commons."Lord Musselburgh had not been long married; he did as he was bid.  Andvery eagerly did Vincent welcome this ambassador, when he encounteredhim in the Lobby."Come out on to the Terrace.  I was just going to write to you: I wantyou to do me the greatest service you can imagine!""Here I am, ready to do anybody any number of services," said LordMusselburgh, as they proceeded to stroll up and down this dark space,with the wide river flowing silently by, and the innumerable small beadsof gold showing where London lay in the dusk.  "Only too happy.  And Iam in the best position for being mediator, for I have nothing to gainfrom either sideexcept, of course that I should be extremely sorry tosee you quarrelling with your relations.  This is always a mistake, Vin,my boy: bad for you, bad for them.  And I hope you will let me go backwith the important part of my commission donethat is to say, I was topersuade you to return to Grosvenor Place, just as if nothing hadhappened.  My wife is awfully upset about itthinks it is entirely owingto her; whereas I don't see that it is at all.  She has been trying todo her best for everybodyfor your father as well as for yourself.  Andthe notion that you should cut yourself off from your family naturallyseems very dreadful to her; and if I can take her the assurance that youdon't mean anything of the kindvery well!""Oh, but look here, Musselburgh," said Vincent, "you entirely mistake.It was not about that I wished to see you: not at all: on that point itis useless saying anything.  You must assure Lady Musselburgh that thisis no piece of temper on my partnothing to be smoothed over, and hushedup. I have seen all along that it was inevitable.  From the moment thatmy aunt and my father took up that position againstagainst MaisrieBethune and her grandfatherI foresaw that sooner or later this mustcome.  I have tried to reason with them; I have assured them that theirsuspicions and their definite charges were as cruel as they were false;and all to no purpose.  And this last thing: this bribing of an old man,who can be too easily persuaded, to take his granddaughter away with himand subject her to the homeless life she had led for so manyyearsperhaps there are some other considerations I need notmentionthis is too much. But I knew that sooner or later a severancewould come between them and me; and I am not unprepared. You wondered atmy drudging away at that newspaper work, when my father was allowing mea handsome income.  Now do you see the use of it?  I am independent.  Ican do as I please.  I can't make a fortune; but I can earn enough toliveand something more.  Let them go their way, as I go mine: it hasnot been all my doing."Lord Musselburgh was disconcerted; but he was a dutiful husband; he wenton to argue.  He found he might as well attempt to argue with amilestone. Nothing could shake this young man's determination."I told Lady Musselburgh I had gone over to the other side, this timefor good," said he.  "We are in opposite camps now.  We have been so allalongbut not openly.  This piece of treachery has been too much for me:we are better apart: I could not sit down at table with people who hadacted like thatwhatever their motives were.  But you, Musselburgh, youwere not concerned in that wretched piece of scheming; and as I tellyou, you can do me the greatest possible service.  Will you do it?  Orwill you rather cast in your lot with them?""Oh, well," said Musselburgh, rather disappointedly, "I don't see why Ishould be compelled to take sides.  I want to do my best for everybodyconcerned.  I've just come into the family, as you might say; and itseems a pity there should be any quarrel or break up.  I had a kind ofnotion that we should all of usbut particularly my wife and myself andyou andandyour wifeI thought our little party of four might have avery pleasant time together, both at home and abroad.  My wife and Ihave often talked of it, and amused ourselves with sketching out plans.Seems such a pity""Yes," said Vincent, abruptly, "but there are other things in lifebesides going to Monte Carlo and staking five-franc pieces.""What is this that you want me to do?" his friend asked nextseeing thatthose inducements did not avail."Well," said Vincent, "I suppose you know that Lady Musselburgh showedme this morning the receipt Mr. Bethune gave George Morris for the5,000.  It was a simple receipt: nothing more. But everybody knowsGeorge Morris is not the man to part with money unconditionally; theremust have been arrangements and pledges; and I want to discover what Mr.Bethune undertook to do, where he undertook to go.  Morris won't tellme, that is certain enough: but he would probably tell you."Lord Musselburgh hesitated."Why," said he, "you know why that money was paid.  It was paid for theexpress purpose of getting them awayso that you should not know wherethey are""Precisely so," said Vincent.  "And you would therefore be undoing apart of the wrong that has been done them, by your wife and my father.""Oh, I don't call it doing a wrong to a man to give him 5,000," saidLord Musselburgh, with a touch of resentment.  "He needn't have takenthe money unless he liked.""Do you know what representations were made to him to induce him to takeit?" Vincent said."Well, I don't," was the reply.  "They settled all that amongstthemselves; and I was merely made acquainted with the results.  It wouldhardly have been my place to interfere, you see; it was before mymarriage, remember; in any case, I don't know that I should have wantedto have any say in the matter.  However, the actual outcome we all of usknow; and you must confess, Vin, whatever persuasions were used, itlooks a rather shady transaction.""Yeson the part of those who induced him to accept the bribe!" Vincentsaid, boldly."Oh, come, come," Lord Musselburgh interposed, rather testily, "don't beso bigoted.  It isn't only your considering that girl to be everythingthat is fine and wonderfulI can understand thatthe glamour of love cando anything; but you go too far in professing the greatest admirationand respect for this old man.  Leave us some chance of agreeing withyou, of believing you sane.  For you can't deny that he took the money:there is the plain and simple fact staring you in the face.  More thanthat, his taking it was the justification of those who offered it: itproved to them that he was not the kind of person with whom you shouldbe connected by marriage.  I say nothing about the young lady; I don'tknow her; perhaps her association all these years with this oldwell, Iwon't call him nameshas not affected her in any way; perhaps shebelieves in him as implicitly as you appear to do.  But as for him:well, take any unprejudiced outsider, like myself; what am I to thinkwhen I find him accepting this money from strangers?""Yes," said Vincent, a little absently, "I suppose, to an outsider, thatwould look bad.  But it is because you don't know him, Musselburgh; orthe story of his life; or his circumstances.  I confess that at one timethere were things that disquieted me; I rather shut my eyes to them; butnow that I understand what this man is, and what he has gone through,and how he bears himself, it isn't only pity I feel for him, it isrespect, and more than respect.  But it's a long story; and it wouldhave to be told to sympathetic ears; it would be little use telling itto my father or to my auntthey have the detectives' version beforethemthey have the detectives' reading of the case.""Well, tell me, at least," said his friend.  "I want to get at thetruth.  I have no prejudice or prepossession one way or the other.  Foranother thing, I like to hear the best of everybodyand to believe it,if I can; it makes life pleasanter; and I can't forget, either, that itwas through me you got to know George Bethune."It was a long story, as Vincent had said; and it was a difficult one toset in order and in a proper light: but it was chiefly based on what hadbeen told him by the Toronto banker; and Mr. Thompson's generousinterpretation of it ran through it all.  Lord Musselburgh listened withthe greatest interest and attention.  What seemed mostly to strike himwas the banker's phrase'Call George Bethune an impostor, if you like;but the man he has imposed on, his whole life through, has beenGeorgeBethune.'"Well, it's all very extraordinary," he said, when Vincent had finished."I wish I had taken the trouble to become a little better acquaintedwith him; one is so apt to judge by the outside; I thought he was merelya picturesque old fellow with a mad enthusiasm about Scotland.  And yetI don't know what to say even now.  All that you have told me soundsvery plausible and possibleif you take that way of looking at it; andthe whole thing seems so pitiable, especially for the girl: he has hisdelusions and self-confidenceshe has only her loneliness.  But at thesame time, Vin, you must admit that these little weaknesses of his mighteasily be misconstrued""Certainly," said Vincent, with promptitude. "It is just as Mr. Thompsonsaid: if you choose to look at George Bethune through blue spectacles,his way of life must appear very doubtful: if you choose to look at himthrough pink spectacles, there is something almost heroic about him.And I think, Musselburgh, if you knew the lion-hearted old man a littlebetter, you wouldn't shrink from acknowledging that there was somethingfine and even grand in his character.  As for Maisrieas for MissBethuneshe asks for no generous consideration, or forbearance, oranything of the kind; she asks for no leniency of judgment, and needsnone; she is beyond and above all that.  I know hernone better than I;and she has only to remain what she is'dass Gott sie erhalte, so schnund rein und hold'!"There was a break in his voice as he spoke.  Lord Musselburgh was silentfor a momenthe felt like an intruder upon something too sacred.  Andyet he had his mission; so presently he forced himself to resume:"Well, after all, Vin, I think you must grant that there is something tobe said for your relatives, even if they have been mistaken.  They couldnot know all that you knowall that you learned in Canada as well; theycould only judge from the outside; they could only believe what theyheard""Why did they interfere at all?" Vincent demanded, in his turn.  "Whyhad they Mr. Bethune's steps dogged by detectives?""You should be the last to protest.  It was entirely for your sake thatit was done.""Yes," said Vincent, with a certain scorn.  "It was for my sake theywere so ready to suspectit was for my sake they were so eager to regardeverything from the attorney's point of view! They would not take myword for anything; they would rather trust to their private enquiryoffices. I was supposed to be so easily blinded; the swindlers had sucha willing dupe; no reliance was to be placed but on the testimony ofspies.  What childish rubbish!  Why, I introduced my aunt to Mr. Bethuneand his granddaughter: she could not find a word to say against thembuther suspicions remained all the same!  And then apparently she went andconsulted with my father.  It was so dreadful that I was being cheatedby those two dangerous characters!  Couldn't the lawyers and theirprivate inquiry agentscouldn't they make out some story that wouldappal me?  Couldn't they make up some bogeystraw, and an old coatthatwould terrify me out of my wits?  And then when I wasn't appalled bytheir idle trash of storiesoh, for goodness sake, get those desperatecreatures smuggled away out of the country!  No safety unless they werehidden away somewhere! And then they went to the old man; and I canimagine how they persuaded him.  The greatest kindness to every oneconcerned if only he would fall in with their views; he would save hisgranddaughter from entering a family who had mistaken, but undoubted,prejudices against her; and of course they couldn't allow him to puthimself so much about without endeavouring to pay part of the cost. Itwas no solatium to the young ladyoh, no, certainly not!probably shewas destined for much higher things; and it was no gift to himself; itwas merely that the relatives of that hot-headed young man were desirousof pleasing themselves by showing how much they appreciated his, Mr.Bethune's, generosity in making this little sacrifice. Well, theysucceeded: but they little knewand they little knowwhat they havedone!"Perhaps there was something in the proud and withal disdainful tones ofthe young man's voice that was quite as convincing as his words; at allevents, his friend said"Well, I sympathise with you, Vin, I do really. But you see how I amsituated.  I am an emissaryan intermediaryI want peace""It is no use saying peace where there is no peace," Vincent broke in."Nor need there be war. Silence is best.  Let what has been done go; itcannot be undone now.""Vincentif you would only think how fond your aunt is of youif youwould think of her distress""It was she who ought to have considered first," was the rejoinder.  "Doyou imagine I have suffered nothing, before I went to America, and then,and since?  But that is of little account.  I could forgive whatever hashappened to myself.  It is when I think of some one elsesent adriftupon the world againbut it is better not to talk!""Well, yes," persisted Lord Musselburgh, who was in a sad quandary; forthe passionate indignation of this young man seemed so much strongerthan any persuasive argument that could be brought against it, "I canperfectly understand how you may consider yourself wronged and injured;and how much more you feel what you consider wrong and injury done toothers; but you ought to be a little generous, and take motives intoaccount. Supposing your father and your aunt were mistaken in acting asthey did, it was not through any selfishness on their part.  It was foryour welfare, as they thought.  Surely you must grant that to them.""I will grant anything to them, in the way of justification," saidVincent, "if they will only take the first step to make atonement forthe mischief they have wrought.  And that they can do through you.  Theycan tell you on what conditions Mr. Bethune was persuaded to take themoney; so that I may go to him, and bring him backand her.""But probably they don't know where he is!" his friend exclaimed, inperfect honesty.  "My impression was that Mr. Bethune agreed to leavethis country for a certain time; but of course no one would think ofbanishing him to any particular spot.""And so they themselves don't know where Mr. Bethune has gone?" saidVincent, slowly."I believe not.  I am almost certain they don't. But I will makeinquiries, if you like.  In the meantime," said Musselburgh, returningto his original prayer, "do consider, Vin, and be reasonable, and goback to your father's house to-night. Don't make a split in the family.Give them credit for wishing you well.  Let me take that message fromyou to my wifethat you will go home to Grosvenor Place to-night.""Oh, no," said Vincent, with an air of quiet resolve.  "No, no.  This isno quarrel.  This is no piece of temper.  It is far more serious thanthat; and, as I say, I have seen all along that it was inevitable.After what I have told you, you must recognise for yourself what thesituation is.  I have spoken to you very freely and frankly; because Iknow you wish to be friendly; and because I think you want to see thewhole case clearly and honestly. But how could I talk to them, or try toexplain? Do you think I would insult Miss Bethune by offering them oneword of excuse, either on her behalf or on that of her grandfather?  No,and it would be no use besides.  They are mad with prejudice.  No doubtthey say I am mad with prepossession.  Very well; let it stand so."Lord Musselburgh at length perceived that his task was absolutelyfutile.  His only chance now was to bring Vincent into a more placabledisposition by getting him the information he sought; but he had notmuch hope on that score; for people do not pay 5,000 and then at oncerender up all the advantages they fancy they have purchased.  So herewas a deadlockhe moodily said to himself, as he walked away home toPiccadilly.And as for Vincent?  Well, as it chanced, on the next morningit was aWednesday morningwhen he went across from the Westminster Palace Hotelto the House of Commons, and got his usual little bundle of letters, thevery first one that caught his eye bore the Toronto post-mark.  Howanxiously he had looked for it from day to daywondering why Mr.Thompson had heard no newsand becoming more and more heart-sick andhopeless as the weary time went by without a signand behold! here itwas at last.CHAPTER VII.NEW WAYS OF LIFE.But no sooner had he torn open the envelope than his heart seemed tostand stillwith a sort of fear and amazement.  For this was Maisrie'sown handwriting that he beheldas startling a thing as if she herselfhad suddenly appeared before him, after these long, voiceless months.Be sure the worthy banker's accompanying letter did not win much regard:it was this sheet of thin blue paper that he quickly unfolded, his eyecatching a sentence here and there, and eager to grasp all that she hadto say at once.  Alas! there was no need for any such haste: when hecame to read the message that she had sent to Toronto, it had little totell him of that which he most wanted to know.  And yet it was amarvellous thingto hear her speak, as it were!  There was no date norplace mentioned in the letter; but none the less had this actual thingcome all the way from her; her fingers had penned those lines; she hadfolded up this sheet of paper that now lay in his hands.  It appeared tohave been written on board ship: further than that all was uncertain andunknown.He went into the Library, and sought out a quiet corner; there wassomething in the strange reticence of this communication that he wishedto study with care.  And yet there was an apparent simplicity, too.  Shebegan by telling Mr. Thompson that her grandfather had asked her towrite to him, merely to recall both of them to his memory; and she wenton to say that they often talked of him, and thought of him, and ofbygone days in Toronto.  "Whether we shall ever surprise you by anunexpected visit in Yonge-street," she proceeded, "I cannot tell; forgrandfather's plans seem to be very vague at present, and, in fact, I donot think he likes to be questioned.  But as far as I can judge be doesnot enjoy travelling as much as he used; it appears to fatigue him morethan formerly; and from my heart I wish he would settle down in somequiet place, and let me care for him better than I can do in longvoyages and railway-journeys.  You know what a brave face he puts oneverythingand, indeed, becomes a little impatient if you show anxietyon his behalf; still, I can see he is not what he was; and I think heshould rest now. Why not in his own country?that has been his talk formany a day; but I suppose he considers me quite a child yet, and won'tconfide in me; so that when I try to persuade him that we should go toScotland, and settle down to a quiet life in some place familiar to him,he grows quite angry, and tells me I don't understand such things.  ButI know his own fancy goes that way.  The other morning I was reading tohim on deck, and somehow I got to think he was not listening; so Iraised my head; and I saw there were tears running down his cheekshedid not seem to know I was there at alland I heard him say tohimself'The beech-woods of Ballorayone look at thembefore I die!'And now I never read to him any of the Scotch songs that mentionplacessuch as Yarrow, or Craigieburn, or Logan Braeshe becomes sostrangely agitated; for some time afterwards he walks up and down, byhimself, repeating the name, as if he saw the place before him; and Iknow that he is constantly thinking about Scotland, but won'tacknowledge it to me or to any one."Then here is another piece of news, which is all the news one can sendfrom on board a ship; and it is that poor dear grandfather has grownvery peremptory!  Can you believe it?  Can you imagine him irritableand impatient?  You know how he has always scorned to be vexed abouttrifles; how he could always escape from everyday annoyances andexasperations into his own dream-world; but of late it has been quitedifferent; and as I am constantly with him, I am the chief sufferer.  Ofcourse I don't mind it, not in the least; if I minded it I wouldn'tmention it, you may be sure; I know what his heart really feels towardsme.  Indeed, it amuses me a little; it is as if I had grown a childagain, it is 'Do this' and 'Do that'and no reason given.  Ah, well,there is not much amusement for either of us two: it is something."  Andhere she went on to speak of certain common friends in Toronto, to whomshe wished to be remembered; finally winding up with a very prettymessage from "Yours affectionately, Margaret Bethune."Then Vincent bethought him of the banker; what comments had he to make?"Dear sir, I enclose you a letter, received to-day, from the perniciouslittle Omahussy, who says neither where she is nor where she is going,gives no date nor the name of the ship from which she writes, and isaltogether a vexatious young witch. But I imagine this may be the oldgentleman's doing; he may have been 'peremptory' in his instructions;otherwise I cannot understand why she should conceal anything from me.And why should he?  There also I am in the dark; unless, indeed(supposing him to have some wish to keep their whereabouts unknown toyou) he may have seen an announcement in the papers to the effect thatyou were going to the United States and Canada, in which case he mayhave guessed that you would probably call on one whose name they hadmentioned to you as a friend of theirs.  And not a bad guess either:George Bethune is long-headedwhen he comes down from the clouds; thoughwhy he should take such elaborate precautions to keep away from you, Icannot surmise."Vincent knew only too well!  The banker proceeded:"I confess I am disappointedfor the moment. I took it for granted youwould have no difficulty in discovering where they were; but, of course,if friend George is not going to give his address to anybody, for fearof their communicating with you, some time may elapse before you hearanything definite.  I forgot to mention that the postmark on theenvelope was Port Said"Port Said!  Had Maisrie been at Port Saidand not so long ago either?Instantly there sprang into the young man's mind a vision of the placeas he remembered ita poor enough place, no doubt, but now all lit up bythis new and vivid interest: he could see before him the rectangularstreets of pink and white shanties, the sandy roads and arid squares,the swarthy Arabs and yellow Greeks and Italians, the busy quays andrepairing-yards and docks, the green water and the swarming boats. Anddid Maisrie and her grandfatherwhile the great vessel was getting inher coals, and the air was being filled with an almost imperceptibleblack dustdid they escape down the gangway, and go ashore, and wanderabout, looking at the strange costumes, and the sun-blinds, and thehalf-burnt tropical vegetation?  Mr. Thompson went on to say that hehimself had never been to Port Said; but that he guessed it was more acalling-place for steamers than a pleasure or health resort; and nodoubt the Bethunes had merely posted their letters there en route.  Butwere they bound East or West? There was no answer to this questionforthey had not given the name of the ship.So the wild hopes that had arisen in Vincent's breast when he caughtsight of Maisrie's handwriting had all subsided again; and the world wasas vague and empty as before.  Sometimes he tried to imagine that thebig steamer which he pictured to himself as lying in the harbour at PortSaid was homeward-bound; and that, consequently, even now old GeorgeBethune and his granddaughter might have returned to their own country;and then again something told him that it was useless to search papersfor lists of passengersthat the unknown ship had gone away down the RedSea and out to Australia or New Zealand, or perhaps had struck northtowards Canton or Shanghai.  He could only wait and watchand he had asandal-wood necklace when he wished to dream.But the truth is he had very little time for dreaming; for Vin Harriswas now become one of the very busiest of the millions of busy creaturescrowding this London town.  He knew his best distraction lay that way;but there were other reasons urging him on.  As it chanced, the greatstatesman who had always been Vincent's especial friend and patron,finding that his private secretary wished to leave him, decided to putthe office in commission; that is to say, he proposed to have twoprivate secretaries, the one to look after his own immediate affairs andcorrespondence, the other to serve as his 'devil,' so to speak, inpolitical matters; and the latter post he offered to Vincent, he havingthe exceptional qualification of being a member of the House.  It is notto be supposed that the ex-Minister was influenced in his choice by thefact that the young man was now on the staff of two important papers,one a daily journal, the other a weekly; for such mundane considerationsdo not enter the sublime sphere of politics; nor, on the other hand, isit to be imagined that Vincent accepted the offer with all the morealacrity that his hold on those two papers might probably bestrengthened by his confidential relations with the great man.  Surmisesand conjectures in such a case are futilethe mere playthings of one'senemies.  It needs only to be stated that he accepted the office withevery expectation of hard work; and that he got it.  Such hunting up ofauthorities; such verification of quotations; such boiling-down ofblue-books; such constant attendance at the House of Commons: it was allhardly earned at a salary of 400 a year.  But very well he knew thatthere were many young men in this country who would have rejoiced toaccept that position at nothing a year; for it is quite wonderful howprivate secretaries of Parliamentary chiefs manage, subsequently, totumble in for good things.Then it is probable that his journalistic enterpriseswhich necessarilybecame somewhat more intermittent after his acceptance of thesecretaryshipbrought him in, on the average, another 400 a year.  Onthis income he set seriously to work to make himself a miser.  Histastes had always been simpleand excellent health may have been at oncethe cause and the effect of his abstemiousness; but now the meagre farehe allowed himself, and his rigidly economical habits in every way, hada very definite aim in view.  He was saving money; he was building up aminiature fortuneby half-crowns and pence.  Food and drink cost himnext to nothing; if he smoked at all, it was a pipe the last thing inthe morning before going to bed.  Omnibusses served his turn unless someurgent business on behalf of his chief demanded a hansom.  He could notgive up his club; for that was in a way a political institution; andoftentimes he had to rush up thither to find someone who was not in theprecincts of St. Stephen's; but then, on the other hand, in a good clubthings are much cheaper than in any restaurant or in the members'dining-room of the House of Commons.  It was remarkable how the littlefortune accumulated; and it was a kind of amusement in a fashion.  Hepinched himselfand laughed.  He debated moral questionsfor example asto whether it was lawful to use club-stationery in writing articles fornewspapers; but he knew something of the ways of Government offices, andperhaps his conscience was salved by evil example.  What the manager ofthe Westminster Palace Hotel thought of his manner of living can beimaginedif so august an official cared to enquire into such details.His solitary room, breakfast, and washing: no more: those were smallbills that he called for week by week.  And so his little hoard ofcapital gradually augmentedvery gradually, it is true, but surely, asthe rate of interest on deposits rose and fell.In the meanwhile Lord Musselburgh had not been very successful in hisendeavours to bring about a reconciliation between Vin Harris and hisfamily; nor had he been able to obtain the information that Vincentdemanded."You see, Vin," he said (they were again walking up and down thelamp-lit Terrace, by the side of the deep-flowing river), "my wife isawfully upset over this affair.  She thinks it is entirely owing to hermismanagement.  She would never have told you about the 5,000 if shehad not been certain that that would be conclusive proof to you of thecharacter of those two people; and now that she sees what has come ofher telling you so much, she is afraid to tell you any more.  Not that Isuppose there is much to tell.  Mr. Bethune and Miss Bethune are nolonger in this country; but I doubt whether any one can say preciselywhere they are""Nonsense!" Vincent broke in, impatiently. "They're humbugging you,Musselburgh. Consider this for a moment.  Do you imagine that GeorgeMorris handed over that 5,000, as a lump sum, without makingstipulations, and very definite stipulations?  Do you imagine he wouldbe content to take the word of a man whom he considered a thief?  It isabsurd to think so.  Do ut facias would be his motto; and he wouldtake precious good care to keep control over the money in case ofnon-fulfilment""But there is the receipt!" put in Lord Musselburgh."A receiptfor theatrical purposes!" said Vincent, with something ofcontempt.  "You may depend on it the money was not handed over in thatunconditional fashion: that is not the way in which George Morris woulddo business.  He has got some hold over Mr. Bethune; and he must knowwell enough where he is.  Supposing Mr. Bethune had that money in hispocket, what is to prevent his returning to this country to-morrow?Where would be the penalty for his breaking his covenant?  You don'ttrust a man whom you consider a swindler; you must have some guarantee;and the guarantee means that you must be able to get at him when youchoose.  It stands to reason!""Yes, I suppose soit would seem so," said Lord Musselburgh, ratherdoubtfully; "but at all events it isn't George Morris who is going toopen his mouth.  I've been to him; he declines; refers me to yourfamily.  And then, you see, Vin, I'm rather in an awkward position.  Idon't want to take sides; I don't want to be a partisan; I would ratheract as the friend of all of you; but the moment I try to do anything Iam met by a challengeand a particularly inconvenient challenge it is.Do I believe with them, or do I believe with you?  I told your aunt whatyou said about Mr. Bethunehow you described his character, and allthat; but I didn't do it as well as you; for she remains unconvinced.As you told the story, it seemed natural and plausible; but as I tolditand I was conscious of it at the timeit was less satisfactory. Andmind you, if you stick to hard facts, and don't allow for anyinterpretation""If you look through the blue spectacles, in short""Precisely.  Well, then, you are confronted with some extremely awkwardthings.  I don't wonder that your aunt asks pertinently why, if you areto begin and extend this liberal construction of conductthis allowingfor motivesthis convenient doctrine of forgiving everything toself-deceptionI don't wonder that she asks why anybody should be sentto prison at all.""Oh, as for that," said Vincent, frankly, "I don't say it would be goodfor the commonwealth if all of us were George Bethunes.  Far from it.  Ilook upon him as a sort of magnificent lusus natur; and I would nothave him other than he isnot in any one particular.  But a nation ofGeorge Bethunes?it would soon strike its head against the stars.""Very well, then," said his friend, "you are not contending for anygeneral principle.  I don't see why you and your family shouldn't beprepared to agree.  You may both of you be right.  You don't insist uponhaving the justifications you extend to Mr. Bethune extended to everyoneelse, or to any one else; you make him the exception; and you needn'tquarrel with those who take a more literal view of his character.""Literal?" said Vincent, with a certain coldness. "Blindnesswant ofconsiderationwant of understandingis that to be literal?  Perhaps itis.  But I thought you said something just now about Mr. Bethune and aprison: will you tell me of any one action of his that would suggestimprisonment?""Your aunt was merely talking of theories," said Musselburgh, ratheruneasily, for he had not intended to use the phrase.  "What I urge isthiswhy shouldn't both of you admit that there may be something in theother's view of Mr. Bethune, and agree to differ?  I stand between you:I can see how much can be advanced on both sides.""And so you would patch up a truce," said Vincent.  "How long would itlast?  Of course I do not know for what period of banishment my kindrelatives stipulated; 5,000 is a considerable sum to pay; I supposethey bargained that Mr. Bethune and his granddaughter should remain awayfrom England for some time.  But not for ever?  Even then, is it to beimagined that they cannot be found? Either in this country or abroad,Miss Bethune and I meet face to face again; and she becomes my wifeIhope.  It is what I live for.  And then?  Where will your patched-uptruce be then?  Besides, I don't want any sham friendships with peoplewho have acted as they have done""It was in your interest, Vin," his friend again urged.  "Why not givethem a little of the lenient judgment you so freely extend to thoseothers""To those others?" replied Vincent, firing up hotly.  "To whom?""To Mr. Bethune, then," was the pacific reply."I don't think Mr. Bethune ever consciously wronged any human being.But theywere they not aware what they were doing when they played thisunderhand trick?sending that girl out into the world again, through herdevotion to her grandfather?  I have told you before: there is no usecrying peace, peace, when there is no peace.  Let them undo some of themischief they have done, first: then we will see.  And look at thissilly affectation of secrecy!  They told me too much when they told methey had paid money to get George Bethune out of the country: then Iunderstood why Maisrie went: then I knew I must have patience until shecame backin the same mind as when she left, that I know well.  I waspuzzled before, and sometimes anxious; but now I understand; now I amcontent to wait.  And I have plenty to do in the meantime.  I have togain a proper footholdand make some provision for the future as well:already I am independent of anybody and everybody.  And perhaps, in timeto come, when it is all over, when all these things have been set right,I may be able to forgive; but I shall not be able to forget."This was all the message that Lord Musselburgh had to take home withhim, to his wife's profound distress.  For she was very fond of hernephew, and very proud of him, too, and of the position he had alreadywon for himself; and what she had done she had done with the bestintentions towards him. Once, indeed, she confessed to her husband thatin spite of herself she had a sort of sneaking admiration for Vincent'sobdurate consistency and faith; insomuch (she said) thatif only the oldman and all his chicaneries were out of the wayshe could almost find itin her heart to try to like the girl, for Vincent's sake."The real question," she continued, "the thing that concerns me most ofall to think of is this: can a girl who has been so dragged through themire have retained her purity of mind and her proper self-respect?Surely she must have known that her grandfather was wheedling people outof money right and leftand that he took her about with him to enlistsympathy?  Do you suppose she was not perfectly aware that Vincentinvariably paid the bills at those restaurants?  When tradespeople werepressing for money, do you fancy she was in ignorance all the time?Very well: what a life for any one to lead!  How could she hold up herhead amongst ordinarily honest and solvent people? Even supposing thatshe herself was all she ought to be, the humiliation must have sunkdeep.  And even if one were to try to like her, there would always bethat consciousness between her and you. You might be sorry for her, in akind of way; but you would be still sorrier for Vincent; and that wouldbe dreadful.""My dear Madge," her husband saidin his character of mediator andpeacemaker, "you are arguing on a series of assumptions and prejudices.If Vin does hold on to his faith in those twoand if he does in the endmarry Miss BethuneI shall comfort myself with the conviction that hewas likely to know more about them than anybody else. He and they havebeen on terms of closest intimacy, and for a long time; and you may bepretty sure that the girl Vin wants to marry is no tarnished kind of apersonin his eyes.""Ah, yesin his eyes!" said Lady Musselburgh, rather sadly."Well, his eyes are as clear as most folks'at least, I've generallyfound them so," her husband saidtrying what a little vague optimismwould do.One afternoon Vincent was walking along Piccadillyand walking rapidly,as was his wont, for the twin purposes of exercise and economywhen hesaw, some way ahead of him, Lady Musselburgh crossing the pavement toher carriage.  She saw him, too, and stoppedcolour mounting to herface. When he came up he merely lifted his hat, and would have kept onhis way but that she addressed him."Vincent!" she said, in an appealing, half-reproachful fashion.And then she said"I want you to come into the house for a few minutesI must speak withyou.""Is there any use?" he asked, rather coldly.However, she was very much embarrassed, as her heightened colour showed;and he could not keep her standing here in Piccadilly; he said 'Verywell,' and followed her up the steps and into the house.  When they hadgot into the drawing-room she shut the door behind them, and began atoncewith not a little piteous agitation in her manner."Vin, this is too dreadful!  Can nothing be done?  Why are you soimplacable?  I suppose you don't understand what you have been to me,always, and how I have looked to your future as something almostbelonging to me, something that I was to be proud of; and now that it isall likely to come true, you go and make a stranger of yourself!  When Isee your name in the papers, or hear you spoken of at a dinner-tableitis someone who is distant from me, as if I had no concern with him anylonger.  People come up to me and say 'Oh, I heard your nephew speak atthe Mansion House the other afternoon,' or 'I met your nephew at theForeign Office last night;' and I cannot say 'Don't you know; he hasgone and made himself a stranger to us?'""I wonder who it was who made a stranger of me!" he interposedbut quiteimpassively."I can only say, again and again, that it was done for the best, Vin!"she answered him.  "The mistake I made was in letting you know.  But Itook it for granted that as soon as you were told that those people hadaccepted money from us to go away""Those people?  What people?" he demanded, with a sterner air."Oh, I meant only Mr. Bethune himself," said she, hastily.  "Oh, yes,certainly, only him; there were no negotiations with any one else.""Negotiations!" he said, with a touch of scorn. "Well, perhaps you cantell me what those negotiations were?  How long did Mr. Bethuneundertake to remain out of this country?""Three years, Vin," said she, timidly regarding him."Three years?" he repeated, in an absent way."But there is no reason," she added quickly, "why he should not returnat any moment if he wishes: so I understand: of course, I did not makethe arrangementbut I believe that is so.""Return at any moment?" he said, slowly. "Do you mean to tell me thatyou put 5,000 into that old man's hands, on condition he should leavethe country for three years, and that all the same you left him free toreturn at any moment?""Of course he would forfeit the money," said she, rather nervously."But how could he forfeit the money if he already has it?  He has gotthe money: you showed me the receipt.  Come, aunt," said he, in quite adifferent tone, "Let us be a little more honest and above-board.  ShallI tell you how I read the whole situation?  You can contradict me if Iam wrong.  But that receipt you showed me: wasn't it produced for merelytheatrical purposes? Wasn't it meant to crush and overwhelm me as apiece of evidence?  The money wasn't handed over like that, was it?Supposing I were to conjecture that somebody representing you orrepresenting my father has still got control over that money; and thatit is to be paid in instalments as it is earnedby absence?  Well isn'tthat so?"He fixed his eyes on her; she hesitatedand was a little confused."I tell you, Vin," she said, "I had personally nothing to do with makingthe arrangement; all that was left in George Morris's hands; and ofcourse he would take whatever precautions he thought necessary.  And whyshould you talk about theatrical purposes?  I really did think that whenI could show you Mr. Bethune was ready to take money from strangers togo away from England you would change your opinion of him.  Butapparently, in your eyes, he can do no wrong.  He is not to be judged byordinary rules and standards. Everything is to be twisted about on hisbehalf, and forgiven, or even admired.  Nobody else is allowed suchlatitude of construction; and everything is granted to himbecause he isGeorge Bethune. But I don't think it is quite fair: or that you shouldtake sides against your own family."This was an adroit stroke, following upon a very clever attempt toextricate herself from an embarrassing position; but his thoughts wereotherwise occupied."I should like you to tell me," said he, "if you can, what moral wrongwas involved in Mr. Bethune consenting to accept that money.  Where wasthe harmor the ignominy?  Do you think I cannot guess at therepresentations and inducements put before him, to get him to stayabroad for three years?  Why, I could almost tell you, word for word,what was said to him!  Here was an arrangement that would be ofincalculable benefit to everybody concerned.  He would be healing upfamily dissensions.  He would be guarding his granddaughter from amarriage that could only bring her disappointment and humiliation.Three years of absence and forgetfulness would put an end to all thoseprojects.  And then, of course, you could not ask him to throw up hisliterary engagements and incur the expense of travel, without somecompensation. Here is a sum of 5,000, which will afford him some kindof security, in view of this disturbance of his engagements.  A receipt?oh, yes, a receipt, if necessary!  But then, again, on second thoughts,wouldn't it only be prudent to lodge this 5,000 with some third person,some man of position whom all could trust, and who would send it ininstalments, to avoid the risk of carrying so large a sum about withone?  There might be a little harmless condition or two attached,moreover.  You undertake, for example, that the young people shall nothave communication with each other; you say your granddaughter will doas you wish in all things.  Very well, take her away: disappear, both ofyou; you are doing us an immense kindness, and you are acting in thebest interests of all concerned. Never mind a little misery here orthere, or the risk of a broken heart; we can afford to pay for suchthings; we can afford to have the moulds of a dessert servicedestroyedand a little matter of 5,000 is not much, when we haveplans....  And so those two go out into the world again."  He paused fora second.  "Well, aunt, you've had your way; and there's no more to besaid, except this, perhaps, that you don't seem to realise the greatestof all the mistakes you have made.  Your three years, even if theyshould be three years of absence, will not be years of forgetfulness oneither Maisrie Bethune's part or mine.  Oh, no; nothing of the kind;don't cherish any illusions on that score. It happened curiously thatjust before they left Brighton she and I had a little talk over one ortwo things; and she asked me for a promise, which I gave her, and whichI mean to keep."Well, the handsome lad now standing before her had a great hold on heraffection; and she even admired, in a covert way, this very bigotry ofconstancy and unswerving faith of his, so that for an instant her headswam, and she was on the point of crying out 'VincentVincentgo andbring her to meand I will take her to my heartfor your sake!'  But thenext moment she had recovered from that mad impulse: she saw that whathad been done was not to be undone in that happy-go-lucky fashion, evenif it could be undone at all; and she was silent and embarrassed.  Itwas he who spoke."Well, you must excuse me, aunt; I've to be down at the House byquestion time.""You're not going like that, Vin!" she exclaimed."What do you want of me?" he asked in a coldly civil way."IIwant you to be as you once were, to all of us," she cried, ratherincoherently.  "I want you to go back to Grosvenor Place; and to acceptthe allowance your father has made you ever since you came of age; andto resume the old bygone relations with us.  Surely it might bepossible, with a little consideration on both sides.  What we have donewas done entirely out of thoughtfulness for you; and if we have made amistakewe are only human beings!  And remember, it is quite possiblethat you may be mistaken too, Vin; you may be mistaken just as much asweandand""What you propose, aunt," said he (for time was precious with him) "evenif it were practicable, would only be temporary.  I am looking forwardto marrying Maisrie Bethunein spite of your three years offorgetfulness!and when that happens, your patched-up state of affairswould all come to bits again.  So what is the use of professing a sortof sham reconciliation?  I have no wish to return to Grosvenor Place.  Ihave taken some rooms at the foot of Buckingham-street; and I have a keythat lets me through by the Embankment Gardens into Villiers-street; itwill be convenient for getting to the House.  And I can tide alongpretty well without any allowance from my father; in fact, I'm saving alittle money in a quiet way""But at what a cost, Vincentat what a cost!" she protested.  "I wishyou could see how worn and ill you are looking"Well, I've had some things to think of latelythanks to my kindrelatives!" said he.  "But really I must be off""Vincent," she said, making one last despairing effort to bring thingsback to their former footing, "when are you going to ask Louie Drexeland me to dine with you at the House?""I'm so busy, aunt, just now," said he, as he opened the door for her.Then he saw her into her carriage; and she drove awaya most perplexedand unhappy woman.These rooms that Vincent had taken at the foot of Buckingham-street wereright up at the top of the building; and commanded a spacious prospectof the river, the Embankment gardens, the bridges, the great dusky worldof London lying all around, and the dome of St. Paul's rising dim andphantasmal in the east.  They were bachelor chambers, that had doubtlessseen many tenants (the name of one, George Brand, was still over thedoor, and Vincent did not think it worth while to change it), but theyoung man had no sooner entered into possession than he began a seriesof alterations and improvements that bachelor chambers did not seem todemand.  Not in any hurry, however; nor perhaps with any fixed intent;it was a kind of amusement for this or that odd half-hour he couldsnatch from his multifarious duties.  To begin with, he had the woodworkpainted a deep Indian red, and the walls a pearly-blue grey: while theformer colour was repeated in the Japanese window-curtains, and thelatter by the great world outside, on the lambent moonlight nights, orsometimes in the awakening of the dawn, as he lay in a low easy-chair,and watched the vast, silent city coming out of its sleep.  Thistop-floor was a very still place, except for the early chattering of thetree-sparrows, into whose nests, swaying on the branches just beneathhim, he could have tossed a biscuit.  And then his peregrinationsthrough London, rapid though they were as a rule, occasionally broughthim face-to-face with a bric-a-brac shop; and from time to time hepicked up one thing or another, just as it happened to strike his fancy.Perhaps these modest purchases were just a trifle too elegant for abachelor's apartments; the sitting-room away up in that lofty situationcame to look rather like a boudoir; for example, there was a music-standin rosewood and ormulua tall stand it was, as if for a violinplayerwhich he himself never used. Pictures he could not afford; butbooks he could; and the volumes which were one by one added to thoseshelves were of a more graceful and literary stamp than you would haveexpected to find in the library of a young and busy member ofParliament. It was not a lordly palace of art, this humble suite ofapartments in the neighbourhood of the Strand; but there was aprevailing air of selection and good taste; perhaps, one ought to say,of expectancy, also, in the presence of things not yet in use.  Then thetwo large and low windows of the sitting-room were all surrounded withivy, of long training; but besides that, there were flower-boxes; and ata moment's notice, and at small expense, these could be filled withpotted geraniums, if one wished to be gay.  And always outside was thevaried panorama of the mighty city; the wide river and the bridges, thespires and the towers, the far masses of buildings becoming more andmore spectral as they receded into the grey and wavering mist.Sometimes the rose and saffron of the dawn were there, ascending with asoft suffusion behind the purple dome of St. Paul's; sometimes therewere blown and breezy days, with flying showers and watery gleams ofsunlight; and sometimes the night lay blue and still and clear, theSurrey side in black and mysterious shadow, the white moon high in thesouth.  These silent altitudes were a fine place for dreaming, after allthe toil and moil of the working-hours were over; and a fine place forlistening, too; sometimes, towards the morning, just as the leaves beganto stir, you could fancy the wind was bringing a message with ititseemed, coming from far away, to say something about Claire Fontaine.CHAPTER VIII.IN A NORTHERN VILLAGE.But there were to be no three years of absence, still less offorgetfulness.  One afternoon, on Vincent's going down to the House, hefound a telegram along with his letters.  He opened it mechanically,little thinking; but the next moment his eyes were staring withamazement.  For these were the words he saw before him:"Grandfathervery ill; would like to see you.  Maisrie Bethune, Crossmains, byCupar."  Then through his bewilderment there flashed the suddenthought: why, the lands of Balloray were up in that Fifeshireregion!had, then, the old man, tired of his world-wanderings, andfeeling this illness coming upon him, had he at length crept home todie, perhaps as a final protest?  And Maisrie was alone there, amongstrangers, with this weight of trouble fallen upon her.  Why could notthese intervening hours, and the long night, and the great distance, beat once annihilated?he saw Maisrie waiting for him, with piteous eyesand outstretched hands.He never could afterwards recall with any accuracy how he passed thosehours: it all seemed a dream.  And a dream it seemed next day, when hefound himself in a dogcart, driving through a placid and smilingcountry, with the sweet summer air blowing all around him.  He talked tothe driver, to free his mind from anxious and futile forecasts.Crossmains, he was informed, was a small place.  There was but the oneinn in itthe Balloray Arms.  Most likely, if two strangers were toarrive on a visit, they would put up at the inn; but very few people didgo throughperhaps an occasional commercial traveller."And where is Balloray Houseor Balloray Castle?" was the next question."Just in there, sir," said the man, with a jerk of his whip towards thewoods past which they were driving.And of course it was with a great interest and curiosity that Vincentlooked out for this place of which he had heard so much.  At presentnothing could be seen but the high stone wall that surrounds so manyScotch estates; and, branching over that, a magnificent row of beeches;but by and bye they came to a clearing in the "policies"; and all atonce the Castle appeared in sighta tall, rectangular building, with abattlemented parapet and corner turrets, perched on a spacious and loftyplateau.  It looked more modern than he had imagined to himself; butperhaps it had been recently renovated.  From the flag-staff overtoppingthe highest of the turrets a flag idly dropped and swung in the blue ofthe summer sky: no doubt the proprietor was at homein proud possession;while the old man who considered himself the rightful owner of the placewas lying, perhaps stricken unto death, in some adjacent cottage orvillage inn.  Then the woods closed round again; and the mansion ofBalloray was lost from view.Vincent was not in search of the picturesque, or he might have beendisappointed with this village of Crossmainswhich consisted of but onelong and wide thoroughfare, bordered on each hand with a row of bare andmean-looking cottages and insignificant houses.  When they drove up tothe inn, he did not notice that it was a small, two-storied, drab-huedbuilding of the most common-place appearance; that was not what he wasthinking of at all; his heart was beating high with emotionwhat wondermight not meet his eager gaze at any instant?  And indeed he had hardlyentered the little stone passage when Maisrie appeared before him; shehad heard the vehicle arrive, and had quickly come down-stairs; and nowshe stood quite speechlessher trembling, warm hands clasped in his, herface upturned to him, her beautiful sad eyes all dimmed with tears, andyet having a kind of joy in them, too, and pride.  She could not say asingle word: he would have to understand that she was grateful to himfor his instant response to her appeal.  And perhaps there was more thangratitude; she seemed to hunger to look at himfor she had not seen himfor so long a while: perhaps she had never thought to see him again."Have you any better news, Maisrie?" said he.She turned and led the way into a little parlour."Yes," said she (and the sound of her voice startled him: the Maisrie ofhis many dreams, sleeping and waking, had been all so silent!)."Grandfather is rather better.  I think he is asleep nowor almostasleep.  It is a fevera nervous feverand he has been so exhaustedandoften delirious; but he is quieter nowrest is everything""Maisrie," he said again (in his bewilderment) "it is a wonderful thingto hear you speak!  I can hardly believe it.  Where have you been allthis while?  Why did you go away from me?""I went because grandfather wished it," said she. "I will tell you someother time.  He is anxious to see you.  He has been fretting about somany things; and he will not confide in menot entirelyI can see thatthere is concealment.  And Vincent," she went on, with her appealingeyes fixed on him, "don't speak to him about Craig-Royston!and don'tlet him speak about it.  When he got ill in Cairo, it was morehome-sickness than anything else, as I think; and he said he wanted togo and die in his own country and among his own people; and so we beganto come to Scotland by slow stages.  And now that we are here, there isno one whom he knows; he is quite as much alone here as he was in Egypt;far more alone than we used to be in Canada.  I fancy he expects that amessage may come for me from Balloraythat I am to go there and bereceived; and of course that is quite impossible; I do not know them,they do not know me; I don't suppose they are even aware that we areliving in this place.  But if he is disappointed in that, it isCraig-Royston he will think of nexthe will want to go there to seek outrelatives on my account.  Well, Vincent, about Craig-Royston"She hesitated; and the pale and beautiful face became suffused with asort of piteous embarrassment."But I understand, Maisrie, quite well!" said he, boldly.  "Why shouldyou be troubled about that?  You have found out there is no suchplace?but I could have told you so long ago!  There was a districtso-named at one time; and that is quite enough for your grandfather; apicturesque name takes his fancy, and he brings it into his own life.Where is the harm of that?  There may have been Grants living there atone timeand they may have intermarried with the Bethunes: anyhow yourgrandfather has talked himself into believing there was such arelationship; and even if it is a delusion, what injury does it do toany human creature?  Why," he went on, quite cheerfully, to reassure herand give her comfort, "I am perfectly aware that no Scotch family everhad 'Stand Fast, Craig-Royston!' as its motto.  But if the phrase caughtyour grandfather's ear, why should not he choose it for his motto?Every motto has been chosen by some one at some one time.  And then, ifhe thereafter came to persuade himself that this motto had been worn byhis family, or by some branch of his family, what harm is there in that?It is only a fancyit is an innocent delusionit injures no one""Yes, but, Vincent," she saidfor these heroic excuses did not touch theimmediate point"grandfather is quite convinced about the Grants ofCraig-Royston; and he will be going away in search of them, so that Imay find relatives and shelter. And the disappointment will be terrible.For he has got into a habit of fretting that never was usual with him.He has fits of distrusting himself, too, and begins to worry abouthaving done this or done that; and you know how unlike that is to hisold courage, when he never doubted for a moment but that everything hehad done was done for the best.  And to think that he should vex himselfby imagining he had not acted well by mewhen he has given his wholelife to me, as long as I can remember""Maisrie," said he, "when your grandfather gets well, and able to leavethis place, where are you going?""How can I say?" she made answer, wistfully enough."For I do not mean to let you disappear again. No, no.  I shall not letyou out of my sight again. Do you know that I have a house waiting foryou, Maisrie?""For me?" she said, looking up surprised."For whom else, do you imagine?  And rather pretty the rooms are, Ithink.  I have got a stand for your music, Maisrie: that will be handierfor you than putting it on the table before you."She shook her head, sadly."My place is with my grandfather, Vincent," she said.  "And now I willgo and see how he is. He wished to know as soon as possible of yourarrival."She left the room and was absent only for a couple of minutes."Yes; will you come upstairs, Vincent?" she said on her return.  "I'mafraid you will find him much changed.  And sometimes he wanders alittle in his talking; you must try to keep him as quiet as may be."As they entered the room, an elderly Scotchwomanmost probably thelandladywho had been sitting there, rose and came out.  Vincent wentforward.  Despite Maisrie's warning he was startled to notice theravages the fever had wrought; but if the proud and fine features werepinched and worn, the eyes were singularly brightbright and furtive atthe same time.  And at sight of his visitor, old George Bethune made adesperate effort to assume his usual gallant air."Ha?" said hethough his laboured breathing made this affectation ofgaiety a somewhat pitiable thing"the young legislatorfresh from thesenatethe listening senate, the applause of multitudes"He turned his restless eyes on Maisrie; and said in quite an alteredtone"Go away, girl, go away!"Well, Maisrie's nerves were all unstrung by anxiety and watching; andhere was her lover just arrived, to listen to her being so cruelly andsharply rebuked; and so, after a moment of indecision, she lost herself-control, she flung herself on her knees by the side of the bed, andburst out crying."Don't speak to me like that, grandfather," she sobbed, "don't speak tome like that!""Well, well, well," said he, in an altered tone, "I did not mean to hurtyou.  No, no, Maisrie; you're a good lassa good lassnone better in thewhole kingdom of Scotland.  I was not thinkingI beg your pardon, mydearI beg your pardon."She rose, and kissed his hand, and left the room. Then old GeorgeBethune turned to his visitor, and began to talk to him in a curiouslyrapid wayrapid and disconnected and confusedwhile the brilliant eyeswere all the time fixed anxiously on the young man."Yes, I am glad you have comeI have been sorely perplexed," he said, inhis husky and hurried fashion; "perhaps, when one is ill, confidence inone's own judgment gives way a littleand it is notevery one whom youcan consult. But that is not the main thingnot the main thing at allaquestion of money is a minor thingbut yesterdayI think it wasyesterdaymy voice seemed to be going from meand I thoughtI wouldleave you a message.  The book therebring it"He looked towards a red volume that was lying on the window-sill.Vincent went and fetched it; though even as he did so, he thought itstrange that a man who was perhaps lying on his deathbed should botherabout a book of ballads.  But when, he might have asked himself, hadGeorge Bethune ever seemed to realise the relative importance of thethings around him?  To him a harebell brought from the Braes ofGleniffer was of more value than a king's crown."Open at the mark," said the sick man, eagerly. "See if youunderstandwithout much saidto her, I mean.  Poor lasspoor lassIcaught her crying once or twicewhile we were awayand I have beenasking myself whetherwhether it was all done for the best."  Then heseemed to pull himself together a little.  "Yes, yes, it was done forthe bestwhat appeared best for every one; but nowwell, now it may bejudged differentlyI am not what I wasI hope Ihave done no wrong."Vincent turned to the marked page; and there he found a verse of one ofthe ballads pencilled round, with the last line underscored.  This iswhat he read:He turned his face unto the wa',And death was with him dealing;"Adieu, adieu, my dear friends a'Be kind to Barbara Allen!"The old man was watching him anxiously and intently."Yes, I understand," Vincent said.  "And I think you may depend on me.""Then there is another thing," the old man continuedhis mind leapingfrom one point to another with marvellous quickness, though he himselfseemed so languid and frail.  "II wish to have all things left inorder.  If the summonscomesI must be able to meet itwith head upfearnever possessed me during life.  But who has not made mistakeswho hasnot made mistakes?not understood at the time.  And yet perhaps it wasnot a mistakeI am not the man I wasI have doubtsI thought I was doingwell by allbut nowI am uneasyquestions come to me in thenight-timeand I have not my old strengthI cannot cast them behind meas in better days."He glanced towards the door."Keep Maisrie out," said he.  "Poor lasspoor lassI thought I was doingwell for herbut when I found her crying  Take care she does not comeback for a minute or two""She won't come until you send for her," Vincent interposed."Then I must make hasteand you must listen. The moneythat I waspersuaded to take from your familythat must be paid backto the lastfarthing; and it will not be difficultoh, no, not difficultnot much ofit has been usedBevan and Morris will tell youBevan and Morris, PallMall, London.  And indeed I meant to do what I promisedwhen I wentawaybut when I got illI could not bear the idea of being buried out ofScotlandI was like the Swiss soldierin the trencheswho heard theAlphornsomething arose in my breastand Maisrie, she was always abiddable lassshe was just as willing to come away. But the moneywell,is there one who knows me who does not know how I have scorned thatthatdelight of the ignoble and base-born?and yet this is differentthismust be paid backfor Maisrie's sakeevery farthingto your family. Shemust be no beggarin their eyes.  And you must not tell her anythingItrust youif I can trust you to take care of her I can trust you insmaller thingsso take a pencil nowquickwhen I remember itand writedown his addressDaniel Thompson""Of Toronto?" said Vincent.  "I know him."At this moment George Bethune turned his head a little on one side, andwearily closed his eyes. Vincent, assuming that he now wished forrestthat perhaps he might even have sunk into sleep, which was theall-important thing for himthought it an opportune moment to retire;and on tiptoe made for the door.  But even that noiseless movement wassufficient to arouse those abnormally sensitive faculties; thoserestless eyes held him again."Nonodo not go," the old man said, in the same half-incoherent, eagerfashion.  "I must have all put in orderDanielThompsonbankerTorontohe will make all that straight with your family.For Maisrie's sakeand more than that he would do for herand be proudand glad to do it too.  He will be her friendand youwell, I leave herto youyou must provide a house for her.""It is ready," said Vincent."She will make a good wifeshe will stand firm by the man shemarriesshe has courageand a loyal heart.  Perhapsperhaps I shouldhave seen to it beforeperhaps you should have had your way atBrightonand shewell, she was so willing to gothat deceived me.  Andthere must be laughing now for herit is natural for a young lass to beglad and merrynot any more weepingshe is in her own land.  Why," saidhe, and his eyes burned still more brightly, and his speech became moreinconsecutive, though always hurried and panting.  "I remember a storyastory that a servant lass used to tell me when I was a childI used togo into the kitchenwhen she was making the breadit was a story about afine young man called Eaglehe had been carried away to an eagle's nestwhen he was an infantand his sweetheart was called Angel.  Well, I donot remember all the adventuresI have been thinking sometimes that theymust have been of Eastern originEastern originyesthe baker who triedto burn him in an oventhe Arabian Nightsbut no matterat the end hefound his sweetheartand there was a splendid wedding.  And just as theywere married, a white dove flew right down the middle of the church, andcalled aloud 'Kurroo, kurroo; Eagle has got his Angel now!'  I used toimagine I could see them at the altarand the white dove flying down thechurch"Don't you think you should try to get a little rest now?" Vincent said,persuasively.  "You have arranged everythingall is put in order.  Butwhat we want is for you to get rest and quiet, until this illness leavesyou, and you grow strong and well again.""Yes, yes," said the old man, quickly, "that is quite rightthat issofor I must pay off Thompson, you know, I must pay off Thompson.Thompson is a good fellowand an honest Scotbut he used to talk alittle.  Let him do thisfor Maisrie's sakeafterwardsafterwardswhen Iam well and strong againI will square up accounts with him. Oh, yes,very easily," he continued; and now he began to whisper in a mysteriousmanner.  "Listen, nowI have a little scheme in mindnot a word toanybodythere might be some one quick to snatch it up.  It is a volume Ihave in minda volume on the living poets of Scotlandthink of that,nowa splendid subject, surely!the voice of the peopleeveryday sorrowsand joysthe minstrelsy of a whole race.  There was the Americanbookbut something went wrongI did not blame any oneand I was glad itwas publishedCarmichael let me review ityes, yes, there may be achance for me yetI may do something yetfor auld Scotland's sake!  Ihave been looking into the domus exilis Plutoniathe doors have beenwide openbut still there may be a chancethere is some fire stillburning within.  But my memory is not what it was," he went on, in aconfused, perplexed way.  "I once had a good memoryan excellentmemorybut now things escape me. YesterdayI think it was yesterdayIcould not tell whether Bob Tennant was still with usand his verses toAllander Water have all gone from meall but a phrase'How sweet to roamby Allander''How sweet to roam by Allander'no, my head is not so clearas it ought to be""No, of course not," said Vincent, in a soothing sort of way.  "Howcould you expect it, with this illness?  But these things will all comeback.  And I'm going to help you as much as I can.  When I was in NewYork I heard your friend, Hugh Anstruther, deliver a speech about thoseliving Scotch poets, and he seemed to be well acquainted with them; Iwill write to him for any information you may want.  So nownow that isall settled; and I would try to rest for a while, if I were you: that isthe main thingthe immediate thing."But the old man went on without heeding him, muttering to himself, as itwere:"Chambers's Journalperhaps as far back as thirty years sincethere'sone verse has rung in my ears all this timebut the rest is allblankand the name of the writer forgotten, if it ever was published ...''Tis by Westray that she wanders ... 'Tis by Westray that she strays... O waft me, Heavens, to Westray ... in the spring of the young days!'... No, no, it cannot be WestrayWestray is too far northWestray?Yetit sounds right ... ''Tis by Westray that she wanders ... 'tis byWestray that she strays'"There was a tap at the door, and the doctor appeared: a little, old,white-haired man, of sharp and punctilious demeanour.  Behind him wasthe landlady, hanging back somewhat as if it were for furtherinstructions; so, she being there to help, Vincent thought he would godownstairs and seek out Maisrie.  He found her in the littleparlourawaiting him."What do you think, Vincent?" she said, quickly."I haven't spoken to the doctor yet," he made answer.  "Of course,everyone can see that your grandfather is very ill; but if courage willserve, who could have a better chance?  And I will tell you this,Maisrie, he is likely to have more peace of mind now.  He has beenvexing himself about many things, as you guessed; and although he waswandering a good deal while I was with himperhaps all the timeI couldnot quite make surestill, it is wonderful how he has argued thesematters out, and how clearly you can follow his meaning.  It was aboutyou and your future he was most troubledin the event of anythinghappening to him; and he has not been afraid to look all possibilitiesin the face; he told me the doors of the domus exilis Plutonia hadstood wide open before him, and I know he was not the one to be alarmed,for himself. But about you, Maisrie: do you know that he has given youover to meif the worst comes to the worst?  He asked me to provide ahome for you: I told him it was already there, awaiting you.  You see Ihave not forgotten what you said to me at Brighton; and I knew that someday you and I should find ourselves, as we now find ourselves, face tofaceperhaps in sad circumstances, but all the more dependent on eachother""Do you think he is so very ill, Vincent?" she said: she seemed to haveno thought of herselfonly of her grandfather."You must see he is very ill, Maisrievery," he answered her.  "But, asI say, if splendid courage will serve, then you may hope for the best.And he ought to be quieter in mind now.  We will hear what the doctorhas to say"But at this moment there was an unwonted sound without in the stilllittle villagethe sound of carriage-wheels on the stony street; andpresently some vehicle, itself unseen, was heard to stop in front of theinn.  In another second or so, a servant-girl opened the door of theparlour and timidly said to Maisrie"Miss Bethune, Miss.""Miss Bethune?" Maisrie repeated, wondering."From the Castle, Miss," the girl said, in awe-stricken tones.And it was curious that at such a crisis Maisrie's eyes should turninstinctively to Vincentas if to appeal for advice.  Of course hisdecision was taken on the instant."Ask Miss Bethune to step this way, then," he said to the girl.Maisrie rosepale a little, but absolutely self-possessed.  She did notknow who this might beperhaps the bearer of grave and harassing tidingsfor her grandfather; for she had grown to fear Balloray, and all itsassociations and belongings. As it turned out she had not much to fearfrom this emissary.  There came into the room a tall and elegant lady ofabout thirty, not very pretty, but very gentle-looking, with kind greyeyes.  For a brief second she seemed embarrassed on finding a thirdperson present; but that passed directly; she went up to Maisrie, andtook her hand and held it, and said, in a voice so sweet and winningthat it went straight to the heart"Dr. Lenzie has told me of your trouble.  I'm very, very sorry.  Willyou let me help you in any way that is possible?  May I send toEdinburgh for a trained nurse to give you assistance; and in themeantime, if you wished it, I could send along my maid to do anythingyou wanted"Maisrie pressed her to be seated, and tried, in rather uncertainaccents, to thank her for her exceeding kindness.  For this stranger,with the greatest tact, made no apology for her intrusion; it was nocase of the castle coming to the cottage, with acts of officiousbenevolence; it was simply one woman appealing to another woman to beallowed to help her in dire straits.  Whether she knew that the old manupstairs claimed to be the rightful owner of Balloray, whether she knewthat the beautiful pensive-eyed girl who was speaking to her hadindirectly suffered through that legal decision of generations ago,Vincent could not at the moment guess: what was obvious was merely thiswomanly act of sympathy and charity, for which Maisrie Bethune showedherself abundantly grateful.  When the doctor came down, this visitorwith the friendly eyes and the soft voice explained that, just in casethe patient should need brandy to keep up his strength, she had takenthe liberty of bringing some with herof good quality: the resources ofthe Balloray Arms being limited in that respect.  As she said this shehesitatingly blushed a little; and Vincent thought she looked reallybeautiful.  He recalled to himself his aunt, Lady Musselburgh; andwondered whether she, with all her fine presence and eloquent eyes,could look as nobly beautiful as this poor woman, who was rather plain.The doctor's report was on the whole encouraging; the temperature of thepatient was the least thing lower, and he was more equable in mind."He appears to have been greatly pleased by your visit, sir," the littledoctor said, in a strong east-country accent, to the young man.  "Verypleased indeed.  And it is just wonderful how he can reason and explain;though I'm not so sure he'll be able to remember all he's been saying.But now, he tells me, all his dispositions are made; he is content;there is nothing more on his mindexcept, as I gather, about some book.""I know all about that," said Maisrie.  "I can pacify him about that;and I'm going upstairs directly."Of course she had to wait and see Miss Bethune and the doctor leave;then she turned to Vincent."Will you go out for a walk, Vincent?  I have asked Mrs. MacGill to letyou have some dinner at seven.""Oh, don't you bother about me, Maisrie!" he said.  "Can't I be of anyuse to you upstairs?""Not unless grandfather asks for you againthen I will send for you,"she answered.She was going away when he interrupted her for a moment."I will come up whenever you want me," he said; and then he added:"Butbutyou know him so much better than I do, Maisrie.  Do you thinkwe should tell him of Miss Bethune having been here?""Oh, no, no, Vincent!" she said, in earnest remonstrance.  "Nothingwould excite him more terribly.  You know he has already been talking ofsome message coming from Balloray to meof the possibility of itandthis would set his brain working in a hundred different directions.  Hemight think they were coming to take me away from himperhaps to do mesome harmor he might imagine that I had humbled myself before them, tomake friends with them, and that would trouble him more than anythingelse: you cannot tell what wild fancies might not get into his head. Sothere must not be a word said about Miss Bethune, Vincent.""Of course you know best, Maisrie," said he. And still he did not lether go.  What was he to say next, to detain her?  It was so long sincehe had heard her voice!  "When you go upstairs, Maisrie, I wish youwould look at the book of ballads that is lying on the table.  There aresome lines markedyou will see a bit of paper to tell you the page.  Doyou know what that means? Your grandfather thought that he might nothave strength enough left to speak to me when I came; and so this was tobe a last message for me.  Isn't it strange that in the face of soserious an illness he should be thinking about a ballad; but you knowbetter than anyone that ballads are as real to your grandfather as theactual things around him.  And I want you to look at that message.  Ihave told your grandfather that he may depend on me."She went upstairs; he passed out into the golden glow of the afternoon.It was not a beautiful village, this: plain, unlovely, melancholy in thelast degree; moreover, his own mind was filled with dim and darkforebodings; so that a sort of gloom of death and separation seemed tohang over those houses.  Nor was there anything to look at, for thedistraction of thought.  An English village would have had a picturesqueold church and a pretty churchyard; here there was nothing but a smallmission-house of the most dull and forbidding exterior, while, justbeyond the last of the hovels, there was a cemeterya mound enclosed bya stone wall.  He went to the gate, and stood there a long time, withsome curious fancies and imaginings coming into his head.  He seemed tosee an open grave there, and a small knot of people, himself the chiefmourner.  And then, after the simple and solemn ceremony, he saw himselfleave the sad enclosure and go away back through the unlovely street,rather fearing what lay before him.  For how was he to attempt toconsole the solitary girl awaiting him there in her despair and hertears?  But behold now, if there were any charity and commiseration leftin the worldif one, hitherto obdurate, would but consent to bury herenmity in that open grave they had leftas well she might, for there wasno one to offend her nowand if she were to reach out a woman's hand tothis lonely girl, and take her with her, and shelter her, until the timeof her sorrow was over?  This was a bleak, plain, commonplace sort of aburial ground into which he was gazing: but none the less had humanhearts come away from it heavy and remorsefulremorseful when it was toolate.  And if some little atonement were to be offered in the way he hadimaginedif it were the only thing now left?  This girl, sitting alonethere in her desperate griefwithout kindredwithout friendswithout anyhome or habitation to turn her face to: surely her situation was of allthings possible most forlornsurely no woman's heart could resist thatmute appeal for sympathy and association?As he walked slowly and aimlessly back to the inn, he began to think hehad been a little too hard on those relatives of his.  Death, or eventhe menace of death, was a solvent of many things: it made allantagonisms, animosities, indignations appear so trivial and unworthy.He could not but remember that it was not through any selfishness thoserelatives of his had acted (unless some small trace of family ambitionwere a minor motive): what they had done they had done, as theyimagined, to serve him; there might have been errors of judgment, but noill-will on their part. And now, in this terrible crisis, if he were towrite to Lady Musselburghwrite in all conciliation and kindnessandtell her how Maisrie Bethune was situated, would she not allow her heartto answer? She was a woman; she professed to be a Christian. And if theworst befel, or even if the worst were threatened, surely she would comeat once to Scotland, and make what little amends were now within herpower?  How many homes had shein London, Brighton, Mendoverhow manyfriends, relations, well-wishersas compared with this tragically lonelygirl, who had nothing but the wide world around her, and no one offeringher a sympathetic hand?  He would write to his aunt a long and urgentletterappealing to her own better natureand asking to be allowed tosummon her, by telegram, if there were need.  He would even humble andabase himselffor Maisrie's sake.But when he got back to the inn, he found that all these sombreprognostications were, happily, not immediately called for.  On thecontrary, Maisrie came running down to say that her grandfather had beenasleep, or apparently asleep, and that, when he woke up, he seemed muchrefreshed, with his memory grown infinitely clearer.  He was especiallyproud that he could remember the verses about Allander Water.  He wantedVincent to go up to him at once."And you must please him, Vincent," she said, breathlessly, "bypromising to do everything to help him with the book.  Promise whateverhe wishes.  But be sure you don't mention that Miss Bethune washeredon't say a word about thator anything about Balloray."CHAPTER IX.A BABBLE O' GREEN FIELDS: THE END.There was a wonderful vitality, especially of the brain, in this oldman; after long periods of languor and exhaustion, with low moanings andmutterings quite unintelligible to the patient watchers, he would flameup into something like his former self, and his speech would becomeeager and voluble, and almost consecutive.  It was in those intervalsthat he showed himself proud of his recovered memory: again and againthey could hear him repeat the lines that for a time had baffled him'How sweet to roam by Allander, to breathe the balmy air,When cloudless are the summer skies, and woods and fields arefair;To see the skylark soaring high, and chanting on the wing,While in yon woods near Calder Kirk the wild birds sweetlysing.'He was busy with the new bookchoosing and arranging; and Maisrie, ashis amanuensis, jotted down memoranda as to the poets to be included,and the pieces most characteristic of them.  For he was not to bepacified into silence and acquiescencein these clearer moods.  Therewas hurry, he said. Some one else might step in.  And he cross-examinedVincent about the quotations that Hugh Anstruther had made at the Burns'Celebration in New York."I hardly remember," Vincent answered him. "There were a good many.  Butthere was one piece I thought rather patheticI don't recall the name ofitbut it was about a little pair of shoesthe mother thinking of herdead child.""What?what?" said the old man, quickly. "Not James Smith's?  Not 'TheWee Pair o' Shoon'?""Well, yes, I think that was the title," said Vincent.An anxious and troubled expression came into the sick man's eyes: he waslabouring with his memoryand Maisrie saw it."Never mind, grandfather: never mind just now: if you want it, I'llwrite to Mr. Anstruther for it. See, I will put it down in the list; andI'll send for it; and it will be back here in plenty of time.""But I know it quite well!" he said, fretfully, "The last verse anyway.'The eastlin wind blaws cauld, Jamiethe snaw's on hill and plain'"He repeated those two lines over and over again, with half-shut eyes;and then all at once he went on with the remainder"'The flowers that decked my lammie's graveAre faded noo, an' gane!O, dinna speak!  I ken she dwellsIn yon fair land aboon;But sair's the sicht that blin's my e'eThat wee, wee pair o' shoon.'"There was a kind of proud look in his face as he finished."Yes, yes; it's a fine thing to have a good memoryand I owe that to myfatherhe said there never was a minute in the day that need bewastedyou could always repeat to yourself a verse of the Psalms ofDavid.  I think the first word of approvalI ever got from himye see,Maisrie, we were brought up under strict government in those dayswaswhen I repeated the CXIX. Psalmthe whole twenty-two partswith hardly amistake. And what a talisman to carry about with yeon the deck of asteameron Lake Ontarioin the nightwith the stars overheadthen theXLVI. Psalm comes into your mindyou are back in Scotlandyou see thesmall church, and the boxed-in pewsthe men and women standing up tosingthe men all in blackI wonder if they have Ballerma in the Scotchchurches nowand Drumclogand New St. Ann's"He shut his eyesthose unnaturally brilliant eyesfor a second or so;but the next second they were open and alert again."The book, Maisriethe bookare you getting on?no delayno delayincase someone should interfere.  Ye've got Shairp in, haven't ye?theburn of Quairup yonderabove the Minch Moor'I heard the cushies croon,Through the gowden afternoon,And Quair burn singin' doon to the vale o' Tweed.'Well do I know the very spot where he must have written those verses.Yes, yes; well I remember it," he continued, more absently.  "But I havehad my last look.  I will see it no moreno more. You, Maisrie, you willgo thereyour young husband will take you there""Grandfather, we will all go there together!" said Maisrie, piteously."And both of you," the old man went on, paying no attention to her, forhe was apparently gazing at some distant thing, "both of you are young,and light of stepand light of heart, which is still betterwell, well,my lass, perhaps not so light of heart as might be at your yearsbut allthat will change for youand I think when you are up at the burn ofQuairyou will find itin your mindto cross the Minch Moor to YarrowWater.  Newark Castle you will seethen you will turn to go down theYarrow Valebut not with any sad heart, MaisrieI forbid ye thatit's abeautiful place, Yarrow, though it had its tragedies and sorrows in theolden timeand youyou are youngyou have life before youand I tell yeit is with a light and glad heart you must go down the Yarrow Vale. Why,lass, you'll come to Mount Bengeryou'll come to Dryhope Toweryou'llcome to Altriveand St. Mary's Lochand the Loch o' the LowsandChapel-hopebut mind ye nowif it's bad weatherye're not to comerunning away, and altogether mistaking the placeye'll just stopsomewhere in the neighbourhood until it clears." And then he added, in awistful kind of way: "I once had thoughtsof taking ye there myself,Maisrie.""And so you will, grandfather!" she pleaded."No moreno more," he said, as if not heeding her.  "And why should ayoung life be clouded?the two of themthey'll be fine company for eachotherwhen they're wanderingalong by the side of Yarrow Water."  Buthere he recalled himself; and would have Maisrie sit down again to thatlist; in order that the book might be pushed rapidly forward.It was on this same evening that Dr. Lenzie, on arriving to pay hisaccustomed visit, went into the little parlour and sent for Vincent.Vincent came downstairs."Do ye see that?" said he, holding out a book that was in his hand.Vincent took the volume from him and glanced at the titleRecent andLiving Scottish Poets, by A. G. Murdoch.  He was not in the leastastonishedbut he was angry and indignant."Very well," said he, "what of it?  Do you mean to say you are going tovex an old man, who may be on his death-bed, by bringing charges ofplagiarism against him?  I dare say Mr. Bethune never saw the book, or,if he has seen it, he has forgotten it.""I perceive ye do not understand," said the little doctor, withouttaking offence.  "When I came to know what undertaking it was that Mr.Bethune had on his mind, I made sure I had either seen or heard of somesuch collection; and I sent to Edinburgh; and here it is, just arrived.Now the one thing he seems anxious about, the one that troubles him, isgetting on with this work; and it occurred to me that if I could showhim there was a similar book already published, he might ceasefretting""Cease fretting!" Vincent exclaimed, with a stare of astonishment.  Andthen he hesitated. "Well, you are an older man than I, and you have moreexperience in these cases; but I should have said that a crueldisappointment such as this is sure to cause would distress his mindbeyond measure.  He must occupy himself with something; his brain isincessantly working; and so long as he is talking of getting out hisbook, he is at least looking forward with hope.  But if you show himthis volume, it will be a crushing blow; the very thing he seems to livefor will be taken from him; he will feel injured by being anticipated,and brood over it.  Of course I have no right to speak; I am not arelative; but ask his granddaughtershe knows him better than any one""Perhaps you are rightperhaps you are right," said the little doctor."It was merely an idea of minethinking it would quiet him.  But onreflection I will not risk it; it may be better not to risk it.""In that case," Vincent struck in, promptly, "will you let me tie up thebook in paper, and will you take it away with you when you go?  I mean,that I don't wish Miss Bethune to see it.  She has plenty to think of atpresent: don't worry her with a trifling matter like this.  It is of noconsequence to her, or to any human being, how many collections ofScotch poems may be publishedthe more the merrierso long as readerscan be found for them; but she is anxious and nervous and tired atpresentand it might surprise her, perhaps vex her, to find that thisvolume had been published.""Oh, certainly, certainly," the doctor said, taking the failure of hisingenuous little scheme with much equanimity.  "I will put the book intothat sideboard drawer until I come down; and then I can take it awaywith me without her or any one having seen it."The next day brought Vincent an unexpected and welcome surprise.  He hadbeen out-of-doors for a brief breathing-space, and was returning to theinn, when he saw in the distance, coming down the Cupar road, awaggonette and pair.  He seemed somehow to recognise the two figuresseated in the carriage; looked again; at last made certainthey wereLord and Lady Musselburgh.  Of course, in such circumstances, when theydrove up to the door of the inn, there was no great joyfulness ofgreeting; only a few customary questions, and professions of hope forthe best; but at the same time, Vincent, who was touched by thisfriendly act, could not help saying"Well, this is like you, aunt.""Oh, your letter was too much for me, Vin," she said, with frank goodnature.  "I did not wait for the telegramI trust there will be no needto telegraph for anybody.  But I don't want you to give me any credit.I want to appear as I am; and I've always told you I'm a selfishwomanthe generous creature is Hubert here, who insisted on coming allthis distance with me.  And now I want you to understand the full extentof my selfishness. You are doing no good hereof course.  You areprobably in the way.  But all your affairs in London will be compromisedif you remain here: 's private secretary cannot be absent at such atime""There's St. John!" Vincent exclaimed, referring to his colleague in theoffice that had been put in commission."He's not in the House," rejoined this practical and very charmingperson; "and the short and the long of it is that you must get back toLondon at once.  That is part of my scheme; the other is, that I shalltake your place.  I shall be of more use. You say there is no immediatedanger.  So much the better.  Go away back to your post.  If anythingshould happenI could be of more service than you.  What could you do?Miss Bethune could not return to London with youand go into lodgings ofyour choosing.  I will look after herif she will allow meif she willlet bygones be bygones.  I will ask her pardon, or do anything; but Idon't suppose she is thinking of that at present. You go back withHubert and leave me here.  I can shift for myself.""I think it is a sensible arrangement," her husband said, idly lookingaround at the rather shabby furniture."It is very kind of you, aunt," Vincent said"and very far from beingselfish.  But it is impossible.  I must remain here.  I have duties hereas well as elsewhereperhaps more important in my own sight.Butbutnow that you are here""Oh, yes, I'll stay," said she good-naturedly. "Well, Hubert, it is youwho are packed off: I suppose you can return to Edinburgh to-night. Ibrought a few things with me, Vincent, in case I should be wanted: willyou fetch them in from the waggonette?  Still, I wish I could persuadeyou to go back to London!"And in this manner it was that Lady Musselburgh became installed in theinn, making some little excuses to Maisrie.  She and her husband hadbeen in the neighbourhood.  They had heard of Mr. Bethune's seriousillness, and of Vincent's having come down from town.  Could she be ofany help? And so forth.  Maisrie thanked her, of course; but did nottake much notice of her; the girl just then having many things in hermind.  For her grandfather's delirium was at times more pronounced now;and in these paroxysms she alone could soothe him.Lady Musselburgh, indeed, rather hung back from entering the sick-room,without stating her reasons to anyone.  On every occasion that she sawMaisrie she was most kind and considerate, and solicitous about the girlherself; but she betrayed no great concern about the old man, furtherthan by making the usual enquiries. When Vincent suggested to her that,if she did not go into the room and see Mr. Bethune, his granddaughtermight think it strange, she said in reply"But he won't remember me, Vin.  We never met but at Henley.""He remembers everything that ever happened to him," was the answer."His memory is wonderful. And perhapsafterwardsyou may wish you hadsaid a civil word or two.""Oh, very well," she said.  "Whatever you think right.  Will you comewith me now?"She seemed a little apprehensiveshe did not say why.  They wentupstairs together.  The door of the sick-room was open.  Maisrie, whenshe perceived this visitor, rose from her seat by the bedside; but LadyMusselburgh motioned her to keep her place, while she remained standingin the middle of the room, waiting to see if Mr. Bethune would take anynotice of her.  But his eyes were turned away; and he was muttering tohimself almost inaudiblythey could only catch a word here andthereGalashielsTorwoodleeSelkirkJedburghno doubt he was going overin his own mind those scenes of his youth.  Then Maisrie said, verygently"Grandfather!"He turned his eyes, and they rested on the stranger for a second or so,with a curiously puzzled expression.  She went forward to the bedside."I'm afraid you don't remember me," said she, diffidently.  "It was atHenley we met""I remember you very well, madam, very well indeed," said he, receivingher with a sort of old-fashioned and ceremonious politenessas far asthe wasted frame and poor wandering wits would allow.  "I am sorrytohave to welcome youto so poor a housethese are altered conditionstruly"  He was still looking curiously at her. "Yes, yes, I rememberyou well, madamandand I will not fail to send you my monograph onthethe Beatons of the Western IslesI will not fail to send itbut ifye will forgive memy memory is so treacherouswill you forgive me,madam, if your name has escaped me for the moment""This is Lady Musselburgh, grandfather," Maisrie interposed, quietly."MusselburghMusselburgh," he said; and then he went on, amid the pausesof his laborious breathing: "Ah, yesyour husband, madam, is a fineyoung manand a good Scotaudacious, intrepid, and gallantperhaps alittle cynical in public affairsgreat measures want earnestconvictionsit may be that his lot has fallen in over-pleasantplacesand he has chosen the easier path. Well, why not?why not?  Thereare some whose fate it is toto fight a hard fight; while othersothersfind nothing but smoothness and peacelet them thank Heaven for itandenjoy it.  I hope he will hold on his way with a noblecheerfulnessdespising the envy of enemiesa noble cheerfulnessI hopeit may be his alwaysindeed, I know none deserving of better fortune."It was now abundantly clear to Lady Musselburgh that he did not in anyway associate her with the arrangement that had been effected by GeorgeMorris; and she was much relieved."I mustn't disturb you any longer," said she. "Indeed, I only came alongto see if I could be of any assistance to Miss Bethune.  I hear she hasbeen doing far too much.  Now that is very unwise; for when you aregetting better, and need constant care, then she will find herself quiteworn out.""Yes, yes, that is right," said he, "I wish ye would persuade hertakeher in handmake her look after herselfbut she has a will of her own,the creaturea slim bit of a lass, ye might thinkbut it's the spiritthat enduresshining clearclearer and clearer in dark times of trouble.And sheshe has had her own troublesand sufferingbut never a word ofcomplainingobedientwillingready at all times andseasonsloyaldutifuland brave.  What more could I say of her?whatmore?  Sometimes I have thought to myselfthere was thethe courage of aman in that slim bit creatureand the gentleness of all womankind aswell""Grandfather," said Maisrie, "you mustn't talk any more nowyou arekeeping Lady Musselburgh waiting.""But, madam," he continued, not heeding the girl at all, "you mustremember her descentshe comes of an inflexible raceshe is of purebloodit is the thoroughbred that holds on till its heart breaks in two.How could she help being proud-spirited, and silent in endurance, andbrave? Perhaps you may know that it was of one of her ancestorsas helay in his gravethat some one said'There lies one who never feared theface of man,'a noble inscription for a tombstone'who never feared theface of man'"Maisrie leant over and said to him, quite gently"Grandfather, you are forgetting; it was of John Knox that was said."He looked at her doubtfully; and then seemed to be puzzling with his ownmemory."Perhapsperhaps," he said; and then he added, quite humbly, "I beg yourpardon for misleading you, madamI did not intend itbut I forgetthingsand Maisrie is generally right. John Knox?perhapsperhapsIthought it was a Beaton or a Bethunebut I cannot remember which ofthemperhaps she is right"He closed his eyes, and turned away a little, as if to debate thisquestion with himselfor perhaps to seek some rest: seeing which LadyMusselburgh and Vincent quietly withdrew, and went downstairs. "Poor oldman!" said she, when they were in the small parlour.  "There is a greatchange in him, entirely apart from his illness.  Even in manner he isnot nearly soso grandiose as he used to be: sometimes he was quitehumble.  And as for hermy heart bleeds for her.  I will do anything youlike, Vinif she will accept.  What is more, I will confess to you nowthat, as far as she is concerned, I am convinced I was quite wrong. Youwere right: your eyes were wide open, after all. How can one judge ofany one by an afternoon and an evening at Henley?  That was my onlychance. Then perhaps there was a little excuse for prejudicethere wasthe association.  But we'll say no more about that.  I confess I waswrong; you were right.  That girl is as true as steel.  If she gives herhusband half the devotion she bestows on that old man, he'll do verywell."  She looked at her nephew.  Then she said suddenly: "Vin, youdon't say a word.  I believe you have never forgiven me one bit!""Oh, yes, I have, aunt," he made answer, uneasily. "But there are somethings that need never have happened."She regarded him again."Vin, you are too unforgiving!  But can I not make up?  See, now!  IfMiss Bethune is left aloneI should like to call her Maisrie, if shewill let me: indeed I should: but it is so difficult to get any nearerhershe is all wrapped up in her anxiety about her grandfather: well, ifshe is left alone, I will take her with me.  I will take her to London.She will stay with me; there will be a home for her there, at any rate;and we may become better friends. Oh, I know we shall; it is only thatat present she cares for nothing, and thinks of nothing, but her dutytowards her grandfather.  I intend to be very kind to herI intend towin her affection if I can""And I shall be very grateful to you, aunt," said he.  "But it is hardlytime yet to speak of such a thing: Mr. Bethune has always had awonderful constitution.""Did you notice how reticent the doctor was this morning?" sheasked,and he did not answer.But at least one thing that Lady Musselburgh had observed and mentionedwas true: much, if not all, of the old grandiose manner had gone awayfrom George Bethune.  If on rare occasions some flash of defiance flamedupas if he were still face to face with adversity and disappointment,and determined not to abate one jot of his pride and independencehe wasordinarily quite gentle and even humble, especially towards Maisrie.  Onthis same evening he said"Margaret" (as he sometimes called her now, forgetting) "will ye read tome the XLVI. Psalm?"She went and got the book and began"God is our refuge and our strength,In straits a present aid;Therefore, although the earth remove,We will not be afraid:Though hills amidst the sea be cast;Though waters roaring make,And troubled be; yea, though the hillsBy swelling seas do shake."A river is, whose streams do gladThe city of our God;The holy place, wherein the LordMost high hath his abode.God in the midst of her doth dwell;Nothing shall her remove:The Lord to her our helper will,And that right early, prove."But when she had got so far, he said"MargaretI hope ye will not take it illif I interrupt yeit is nounkindness I mean, my lassbut, ye see, ye've got the English speech, asis naturaland I was trying to think how my father used to read out thePsalm at family worshipand ye've not got the Scotch waynor the strongemphasishow could ye?how could ye?  Ye'll not take it ill," he wenton, with the most piteous concern visible in his face"ye'll not thinkit's any unkindness""No, no, no, grandfather!" she said.  "Of course not.  Shall I ask Mrs.MacGill to come up, to read to you in the Scotch way?""No, no one but you, Maisrieno one but youperhaps if you take theCXXVI. Psalm'When Sion's bondage God turned back, as men that dreamedwere we'I mind, they used to sing that to the tune of Kilmarnockandthe young women's voices sounded beautiful.  But you're not vexed,Maisrie!for I did not mean any unkindness to ye, my dear""No, no, grandfather," she said; and she turned to this other Psalm, andread it to him; and even after that it was some time before she couldassure him that she had not been in the least hurt.Two more of those long and anxious days went by; the fever waxing andwaning by turns; but all the time the strength of that once powerfulframe was slowly ebbing away.  For one thing, his mind was well content.He had no more anxiety about Maisrie; he appeared to regard her futureas well assured.  He lay quietly murmuring to himself; and they couldmake out, from chance sentences here and there, that he was going overhis boyhood's days againbird's-nesting in the spring woods, makingswaying seats out of the shelving branches of the beeches, guddling fortrout in the small hill burns.  An old refrain seemed to haunt him'Beyond thee, dearie, beyond thee, dearie,And O to be lying beyond thee:O sweetly, soundly, weel may he sleep,That's laid in the bed beyond thee.''Die Vgelein schweigen im Walde': that phrase also returned again andagain.  And then he would go back to his school-days, and tell Maisrieabout a little patch of garden that had been given all to himself; howhe had watched the yellow spears of the crocuses pierce the dry earth,and the green buds begin to show on the currant-bushes; how he hadplanted scarlet-runners, and stuck the wands in, and trained the youngshoots; how he had waited for the big red globes of the peonies tounroll; how he had white monkshood, and four distinct colours ofcolumbine.  Then his pets; his diversions; his terrible adventureshalfdrowned in a mill-damlost in a snowstorm on Laidlaw moorthe horrors ofa certain churchyard which he had sometimes to pass, alone, on the darkwinter evenings.  Maisrie did not seek to interrupt him.  There was noagitation in these wandering reminiscences.  Nay, they seemed to soothehim; and sometimes he sank into an altogether dozing state."Vincent," said Lady Musselburgh, when these two happened to findthemselves together, in the room below, "have you no authority over thatgirl? She is killing herself!""It is no use remonstrating," said he.  "She knows what the doctor hasnot dared to tell her. She sees that her grandfather is so weak he mayslip away at any moment, without a word or a sign."But on the evening of this second day, the old man, with such remnant ofhis former resolution and defiance as still clung to him, seemed to tryto shake off this fatal lethargyif only to say farewell.  And in thislast hour or so of his life, the spectacle that George Bethune presentedwas no unworthy one.  Death, or the approach of death, which ennobleseven the poorest and the meanest, was now dealing with this man; and allthe husks and histrionic integuments that had obscured or hidden histrue nature seemed to fall away from him.  He stood out himselfnopressure of poverty distorting his mindno hopeless regrets embitteringhis soul.  It was Scotland he thought of.  In those last minutes andmoments, the deepest passion of his heartan intense and proud love ofhis native landburned pure and strong and clear; and if he showed anyanxiety at all, it was merely that Maisrie, who was a kind of stranger,should form a liking for this country to which she, too, in a measure,belongedthat she should see it under advantageous conditionsthat sheshould think of all that had been said of those hills and vales, andendow them with that added charm."But I do not fear," he said (his eyes, with some brilliancy still leftin them, fixed on her, his voice low and panting).  "You have aninheritance, Maisrieit is in your blooda sympathyan insightScotlandclaims youas one of her own. I knew that whenwhenyou used to play theScotch airs for methe trembling string, that made the soul trembletoo'The sun shines bright in France''The Lowlands o' Holland, thattwined my love and me'it was Scotch blood that made them thrill.  Ye'llnot be disappointed, Margaretye'll understandwhen ye get to YarrowandEttrick Waterand the murmur of the Tweed.  I meantto have taken yemyselfbut it was not to beye'll have younger and happier guidanceasis but naturalII wish ye both well.  Andand I would like yeto go inthe spring-time, Maisrieandand if ye could find out WilliamMotherwell's graveI have forgotten where it ismy memory is not what itused to bebut if ye could find out Motherwell's graveye might put ahandful of primroses on itfor the sake ofof Jeanie Morrison."He relapsed into silence; his breathing grew more labouredand alsofeebler; it was evident to those standing by that the end was not faroff now. Maisrie sate holding his hand in hers; the fountain of hertears all dried up; her tragic grief seemed to have turned her to stone.Even those spring days of which he had spokenwhen she would have heryoung husband by her sidethey would want something.  Her grandfatherhad been kind to her; and they had been through many years together.He lay thus for nearly half-an-hour, the tide of life slowly receding.He made but one final effort to speaknay, for a second, it seemed as ifhe would raise his head to give effect to his last proud protestation."MaisrieMaisriethey never saw me cowednever once!  I metillfortuneor goodface to face ... I heldby the watchwordof ourhouseStandFastCraig-Royston! ..."It was his last breath.  And so, with a lie on his lips, but with nonein his heart, old George Bethune passed away: passed away from a worldthat had perhaps understood him but none too well.THE END.LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.*      *      *      *      *      *      *      *NOVELS BY WILLIAM BLACK.Crown 8vo.  6s. each.THE NEW PRINCE FORTUNATUS.IN FAR LOCHABER.THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A HOUSE-BOAT.A DAUGHTER OF HETH.KILMENY.THREE FEATHERS.LADY SILVERDALE'S SWEETHEART.IN SILK ATTIRE.SUNRISE.THE PENANCE OF JOHN LOGAN.SAMPSON LOW AND CO., LIMITED, LONDON.A PRINCESS OF THULE.THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A PHAETON.THE MAID OF KILLEENA.MADCAP VIOLET.GREEN PASTURES AND PICCADILLY.MACLEOD OF DARE.WHITE WINGS.THE BEAUTIFUL WRETCH.SHANDON BELLS.YOLANDE.JUDITH SHAKESPEARE.THE WISE WOMEN OF INVERNESS.WHITE HEATHER.SABINA ZEMBRA.MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON!(VOLUME III) ***