The Project Gutenberg EBook of Richelieu, v. 1/3, by G. P. R. JamesThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/licenseTitle: Richelieu, v. 1/3A Tale of FranceAuthor: G. P. R. JamesRelease Date: November 21, 2013 [EBook #44252]Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RICHELIEU, V. 1/3 ***Produced by sp1nd, Chuck Greif and the Online DistributedProofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file wasproduced from images generously made available by TheInternet Archive)RICHELIEU,A TALE OF FRANCE.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED BY S. AND R. BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.RICHELIEU,A TALE OF FRANCE.I advise you that you readThe Cardinal's malice and his potencyTogether: to consider further, thatWhat his high hatred would effect, wants notA minister in his power.SHAKSPEARE.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.1829.DEDICATION.TOMY DEAR SIR,YOUR name is too great a one to be trifled with, and therefore, I do notput it at the head of this page. Should your anticipations in favour ofthis work be realized, and its success be equal to my utmost hopes, Idedicate it to you in testimony both of my gratitude for your kindness,and my admiration for your genius; but should the hand of criticism cutit short hereafter, or the frost of neglect wither it in the bud, I takea humbler tone, and beg you only to accept my thanks for your goodwishes and kind encouragement. If it should succeed, you will, I amsure, receive the work with some pleasure on my account;--if it fail,you will still accept it as the only means I have of expressing myfeeling of obligation towards you; and, at all events, you willunderstand my motive for not prefixing your name to the Dedication of abook, the fate of which is yet doubtful.THE AUTHOR.PREFACE.DEARLY BELOVED READER,ALTHOUGH I call the following pages mine, and upon the strength ofthem write myself Author, yet I must in truth confess, that I have verylittle to do with them, and still less to do with the story they record;and therefore I am fain to treat the world with something of my ownexclusive composition, in the shape of a preface. The facts of the caseare as follow: I one day possessed myself of a bundle of manuscriptnotes--no matter when or how, so that they were honestly come by, forthat is all that you, or I, or Sir Richard Birnie, have to do with thematter. Now I say they were honestly come by, and the onus probandimust rest upon the other party. So no more of that.My dear Mr. Colburn, where was I? I quite forget--Oh, now I have it!Having one day possessed myself of a bundle of manuscriptnotes,--honestly come by,--I proceeded to read them, and although thehand was small and crooked, with all the k's shaped like Laocoons, andevery g like a pair of spectacles, yet there was something in the talethere written, that made me read it through before I rose off my chair,although I did not then know, what I have since discovered, that everyword of it was true. Now this is an advantage which you, my dear reader,have over me in perusing this history for the first time; forunquestionably even upon my pure ipse dixit, you will believe that thewhole of the three volumes which follow, is neither more nor less than aplain and simple narration of facts. Nevertheless, in case there shouldbe in the world any person so sceptical as to doubt the assertion, evenof a novelist, I will refer my reader to the well-known authorities ofthe day, and merely observe, that though there may be some discrepancyin the dates and some difference in the names, yet every individualcircumstance recorded in these pages, will be found to be collaterallyverified by contemporary writers of good repute, who, however, did notknow so much of the detail of the events in question as are disclosed inthe old manuscript alluded to, nor were they, like the writer of thatdocument, acquainted with the real causes of those movements which shookthe whole of France, and which, originating in the heart of the Court,could only be detected by one who was himself a resident there. To you,my dear reader, whose confidence in my word I know to be as unbounded asthe conscience of a tailor, or the stomach of an alderman, I have onlyto remark, that the Hero of my tale is by no means a fabulous person.My story opens with the latter years of the reign of Louis XIII. King ofFrance--a period memorable in English annals from the civil wars whichthen raged between Charles I. and his rebellious Parliament, and no lessmemorable in the history of France, as the most terrific portion ofRichelieu's bloody domination.At the death of Henry IV. the Regency of the kingdom during her son'sminority, was seized upon by Mary de Medicis, a woman of considerabletalent and of vast ambition, whose primary object seems to have been, soto secure the sovereign power to herself, that Louis during her lifeshould remain in a state of tutelage.In such projects, but still more in her obstinate partiality for thecelebrated Marechal d'Ancre and his wife, originated a thousandfactions and civil wars, which kept the country in a continual state oftumult during the King's minority. These factions, and the circumstanceswhich they engendered, necessarily gave rise to various rapid changes inthe Queen's ministry, and amidst these, for the first time, appeared onthe political stage Richelieu, then Bishop of Luon. His prospects yetdoubtful, and his ambition still in its infancy, Richelieu made mildnessand courtesy his first steps towards pre-eminence. He contented himselfwith an inferior station in the Council: his urbanity and his talentsproved equally agreeable and useful; and no one beheld in the calm andpolished Bishop of Luon, any promise of the aspiring and remorselessCardinal de Richelieu.A circumstance, however, occurred almost in the outset of his career,which had nearly thrown him for ever from the destined scene of hisaggrandizement. This was the fall of the Marechal d'Ancre, and thearrest of the Queen-mother.On the marriage of Louis XIII., the jealous eye of Mary de Medicis soonperceived her son's first affection towards his young wife, and, fearfulof an influence which might spring up to counteract her own, she foundmeans to destroy, without remorse, the domestic happiness of her child,in order to secure her own dominion over him. But while she fomentedevery disagreement between Louis and his wife, and watched the leastsymptom of reviving affection with the suspicious anxiety of uncertainpower, she blindly suffered near his person a favourite who combinedwith the genius to form great designs, the most consummate art toconceal them. Monsieur de Luynes, it appears, from the first moment ofhis intimacy with the King, projected his master's deliverance from thetyranny of Mary de Medicis; but lest he should be suspected of suchdesigns, he hid them beneath the mask of levity and thoughtlessness. Itwould be little appropriate here to enter more largely into the detailsof these proceedings. Suffice it that in the end the Queen's favouritewas shot as he entered the palace of the Louvre, and she herself wasinstantly arrested and exiled to Blois. Amongst others of her councilwho shared in the fall of the Queen, was Richelieu, and for some time heremained in exile at Avignon.The Queen's party, however, was still strong in France; and in hermisfortunes, the factious and discontented, who had formerly opposed hermeasures merely because she held the reins of government, now supportedher against the hand to which those reins had been transferred. A civilwar seemed inevitable, and in order to avert such an event, the King'sadvisers found themselves obliged to negociate with the Princess, whomthey had dispossessed; but Mary rejected all intercession, and it wasnot till the return of Richelieu that any compromise could be effected.That minister, however, with the deep diplomatic skill for which he wasconspicuous, instantly availed himself of the weak point in thecharacter of his mistress, and through the medium of her confessor, wonher to his purpose. A reconciliation was now speedily effected betweenMary and her son, and Richelieu having become the friend of the one andthe confident of the other, saw himself placed more surely than ever inthe road to political eminence. Many circumstances combined toaccelerate his progress. The death of the Duke de Luynes, the religiouswars still raging in the heart of the kingdom, and the reneweddifferences between the King and his mother,--all gave the risingminister the means of increasing his power, and the opportunity ofdisplaying the vast energies of his extraordinary mind. All was subduedbefore him; the Queen-mother was exiled; the Protestants were crushed;and the King himself became the slave of Richelieu.But power so acquired was only to be maintained at the expense of muchblood. Conspiracy after conspiracy was formed to cast off his dominion,and more than one insurrection burst forth in opposition to his tyranny;but each in turn was overthrown, and the blood of the conspirators onlyserved to cement the fabric of his greatness. Usurped power must stillhave some object for suspicion, and after having quelled all his morepowerful adversaries, the jealousy of Richelieu turned towards the youngQueen, persecuting her with such uncalled for virulence as to inducemany to believe that his hatred proceeded from some more private andpersonal cause than was apparent.In the mean time, Louis himself, seldom called upon, except as a statepuppet, to sign some ordonnance, or hold some council under thedirection of Richelieu, lingered on in inactivity, yielding oneprivilege after another to the grasping ambition of his minister,without the dignity of royalty or the peace of private life. It is truethat, on more than one occasion, he was roused by circumstances to putforth the native energies of his mind, but this was most frequently onsome trifling occurrence. And though the momentary flashes of a vigorousintellect would show that nature had been originally bountiful to him,yet he never evinced any steady determination of purpose. Richelieuspared no pains to secure the power he had acquired; and that he mightleave the King no means of extricating himself, plunged the kingdom inwars and negociations which he well knew that none but himself couldconduct with success. But here indeed his genius showed itselfresplendent. The government of a world seemed in his hands, and yet hemanaged the complicated machine steadily and firmly, with a clear,discerning eye, and a calm, unshrinking heart. Nevertheless, whether itwas that the multitude of his other avocations diverted his attentionfrom the minor regulations of the kingdom, or whether, as some believe,he encouraged a disorganized state of the interior for politicalpurposes, it must be acknowledged that all contemporary accountsrepresent the internal police of France during his administration, as ina strangely deranged condition--a condition little to have been expectedfrom the vigour of his government, and the severe exactitude of hisdisposition.But so it was. The partizans of the various factions which had long beenembodied as armies, were fain, after his measures had dispersed them asconsiderable bodies, to take refuge in the less cultivated parts of thecountry--the mountains, the forests, or the wastes; and as they hadbefore lived by anarchy, they now contrived to subsist by plunder. Thenobles being called from their strong holds to expensive cities, andcompelled by Richelieu's jealousy to show themselves continually at hisluxurious Court, could no longer maintain the host of retainers whichhad formerly revelled at their expense, and these also were obliged tojoin themselves to the various bands of freebooters that infested thecountry. Occasionally a merciless execution of some of these bandittiawed the rest for a time, but upon examining history, even to the end ofRichelieu's life, we find that while he governed the nobles with a rodof iron, saw every attempt at conspiracy with a prophet's foresight, andrepressed it with a giant's strength, he overlooked or forgave thosecrimes which did not affect his political situation.Such was the state of France at the opening of the following history:and now having attempted to prepare my reader's mind for what is tofollow, I have only farther to refer him to the notes at the end of thethird volume, in confirmation of my assertion, that this tale isentirely true. The manuscript from which it is rendered in its presentform, possessed that air of fact which from the first left very littledoubt on my mind that the narrative was authentic; but not content withthis, I examined the best authorities, and had the pleasure of findingthat every material circumstance was perfectly unquestionable, and fromthe acquaintance of the original writer with all the most minute points,I cannot now divest myself of the idea that he must have been, in somedegree, an actor in what he narrates.Be that as it may, I feel sure that whoever peruses it to the end willbe perfectly convinced of its truth; and in the hope that many will doso, I leave them to commence their journey, wishing them all a safe andhappy arrival at its conclusion.ERRATA.VOL. I.Page 49, line 5, for 'illuminated,' read 'illumined.'-- 115, -- 16, for 'shas hent,' read 'has sent.'-- 182, -- 15, for 'the side,' read 'your side.'VOL. II.Page 65, line 5, for 'end,' read 'beginning.'-- 185, -- 15, for 'whom,' read 'as.'VOL. III.Page 216, line 18, for 'wave,' read 'waive.'-- 342, -- 17, for 'laid,' read 'lain.'RICHELIEU.CHAPTER I.Which shows what a French forest was in the year of our Lord 1642,and by whom it was inhabited.The vast Sylva Lida, which in the days of Charlemagne stretched faralong the banks of the Seine, and formed a woody screen round the infantcity of Paris, has now dwindled to a few thousand acres in theneighbourhood of St. Germain en Laye. Not so in the time of Louis theThirteenth. It was then one of the most magnificent forests of France,and extending as far as the town of Mantes, took indifferently the nameof the Wood of Mantes, or the Forest of Laye. That portion to the Northof St. Germain has been long cut down: yet there were persons living,not many years since, who remembered some of the old trees stillstanding, bare, desolate, and alone, like parents who had seen thechildren of their hopes die around them in their prime.Although much improvement in all the arts of life, and much increase ofpopulation had taken place during the latter years of Henry the Fourth,and under the regency of Mary de Medicis; yet at the time of their sonLouis the Thirteenth, the country was still but thinly peopled, and fardifferent from the gay, thronged land, that it appears to-day. Forbesides that it was in earlier days, there had been many a bitter and aheavy war, not only of France against her enemies, but of France againsther children. Religious and political differences had caused disunionbetween man and man, had banished mutual confidence and socialintercourse, and raised up those feuds and hatreds, which destroydomestic peace, and retard public improvement. Amidst general distrustand civil wars, industry had received no encouragement; and where standat present many a full hamlet and busy village, where the vineyardyields its abundance, and the peasant gathers in peace the bounty ofNature, were then the green copses of the forest, the haunt of the wildboar and the deer. The savage tenants of the wood, however, did notenjoy its shelter undisturbed; for, in those days of suspicion, huntingwas a safer sport than conversation, and the boughs of the oak a moresecure covering than the gilded ceilings of the saloon.To our pampered countrymen, long nurtured in that peculiar species ofluxury called comfort, the roads of France even now must seem but rudeand barbarous constructions, when compared with the smooth, joltlesscauseways over which they are borne in their own land; but in the timeof Louis the Thirteenth, when all works of the kind were carried on bythe Seigneur through whose estates they passed, few but the principalroads between one great town and another were even passable for acarriage. Those, however, which traversing the wood of Mantes, served asmeans of access to the royal residence of St. Germain, were of asuperior kind, and would have been absolutely good, had the nature ofthe soil afforded a steady foundation: but this was not always to befound in the forest, and the engineer had shown no small ingenuity intaking advantage of all the most solid parts of the land, and inavoiding those places where the marshy or sandy quality of the groundoffered no secure basis. By these circumstances, however, he was obligedto deviate sadly from those principles of direct progression, so dear toall Frenchmen; and the road from St. Germain to Mantes, as well as thatwhich branched off from it to join the high-road to Chartres, instead ofbeing one interminable, monotonous, straight line, with a long row oftrees, like a file of grenadiers, on each side, went winding in and outwith a thousand turnings amongst the old oaks of the forest, that seemedto stand forward, and stretch their broad branches across it, as ifwilling to shelter it from the obtrusive rays of the sun. Sometimes,climbing the side of a hill, it would suddenly display a wide view overthe leafy ocean below, till the eye caught the towers and spires ofdistant cities breaking the far grey line of the horizon. Sometimes,descending into the depths of the forest, it would almost seem to loseitself amongst the wild groves and savannas, being itself the only traceof man's laborious hand amidst the wilderness around.In the heart of the wood, at that point where the two roads (which Ihave mentioned) divaricated from each other, stood the hut of a Woodman,and the abreuvoir where many a gay lord of the Court would stop whenhis hunting was over, and give his horse time to drink. There, too, manya traveller would pause to ask his way through the forest; so thatPhilip, the woodman, and his young family, were known to almost all whombusiness or pleasure brought through the wood of Mantes; and althoughduring the course of this true history, princes and heroes may becomethe subjects of discourse, it is with Philip that we must commence ourtale.It was at that season of the year, when the first leaves of summer beginto leave the branches from which they sprang, like the bright and tenderhopes of early years, that fade and fall before the autumn of life hasfully commenced. The sun had abated but little of his force, and thedays scarcely seemed to have contracted their span.The time of day, too, was like the period of the year, "falling gentlyinto the sear," so that it was only a scarce perceptible shadow,stealing over the landscape, which told that the great power of lightwas quitting that quarter of the globe, to bestow the equal blessing ofhis smile on other nations and on distant climes. That shadow had beenthe signal for Philip the woodman to return towards his home, and heissued forth from one of the forest paths, near his dwelling, singingas he came the old hunting-song of Le bon roi Dagobert.[A]"King Dagobert in days of yorePut on his hose wrong side before.Says St. Eloi, the king's old squire,'I would not offend, most gracious Sire,But may your slave be soundly switch'd,If your Majesty is not oddly breech'd,'For you've got the wrong side before.'Says the King, 'I do not care a groat;One's breeches are scarcely worth a thought;A beggar's a king when he's at his ease,So turn them about which way you please,And be quick, you s----"[A] This song of Le bon roi Dagobert is in the original very long,and contains a great deal of witty ribaldry, unfit to be inserted here.The above is a somewhat free translation of the first verse, whichstands thus in the French:"Le bon roy DagobertMettoit ses culottes  renvers.Le bon St. EloiLui dit, Oh mon Roy!Que votre MajestEst bien mal culott.Eh bien, dit ce bon Roy,Je consens qu'on les mte  l'endroit."Now St. Hubert, in all probability, is the only person who correctlyknows how it happened, that the very unmeaning and inapplicable ditty ofLe bon roi Dagobert, should have been appropriated exclusively to thenoble exercise of hunting, to which it has no reference whatever; but soit has been, and even to the present day where is the chasseur whocannot, as he returns from the chace, blow the notes, or sing the wordsof Le bon roi Dagobert?Philip, as woodman, had heard it echoed and re-echoed through the forestfrom his very infancy; and now, without even knowing that he did so, hesang it as a matter of habit, although his mind was occupied uponanother subject: as men are always naturally inclined to employ theircorporeal faculties on some indifferent object, when their mental onesare intensely engaged in things of deeper interest.Philip advanced slowly along the road, with his brow knit in such amanner as to evince that his light song had no part in his thoughts. Hewas a man perhaps nearly fifty, still hale and athletic, though a lifeof labour had changed the once dark locks of his hair to grey. Hisoccupation was at once denoted by his dress, which consisted simply of along-bodied blue coat of coarse cloth, covered over, except the arms,with what is called in Britanny, a Peau de bicque, or goat-skin: apair of leather breeches, cut off above the knee, with thick gaiters todefend his legs from the thorns, completed his dress below; and a roundbroad-brimmed hat was brought far over his eyes, to keep them from theglare of the declining sun. His apparel was girded round him by a broadbuff belt, in the left of which hung his woodman's knife; in the righthe had placed the huge axe, which he had been using in his morning'soccupation: and thus accoutred, Philip would have been no insignificantopponent, had he met with any of those lawless rovers, who occasionallyfrequented the forest.As he approached his dwelling, he suddenly stopped, broke off his song,and turning round, listened for a moment attentively; but the onlynoise to be heard was the discordant cry of the jay in the trees roundabout; and the only living things visible were a few wild birdsoverhead, slowly winging their flight from the distant fields andvineyards towards their forest home.Philip proceeded, but he sang no more; and opening the cottage door, hespoke without entering. "Charles," demanded he, "has the young gentlemanreturned, who passed by this morning to hunt?""No, father," answered the boy coming forward; "nobody has passed sinceyou went--I am sure no one has, for I sat on the old tree all themorning, carving you a sun-dial out of the willow branch you broughthome yesterday;" and he drew forth one of those ingenious littlemachines, by means of which the French shepherds tell the time."Thou art a good boy," said his father, laying his hand on his head,"thou art a good boy." But still, as the Woodman spoke, his mind seemedoccupied by some anxiety, for again he looked up the road and listened."There are strange faces in the forest," said Philip, not exactlysoliloquizing, for his son was present, but certainly speaking more tohimself than to the boy. "There are strange faces in the forest, and Ifear me some ill deed is to be done. But here they come, thank God!--No!what is this?"As he spoke, there appeared, just where the road turned into the wood, asort of procession, which would have puzzled any one of later days, morethan it did the Woodman. It consisted of four men on horseback, and fouron foot, escorting a vehicle, the most elegant and tasteful that the ageproduced. The people of that day had doubtless very enlarged notions,and certainly the carriage I speak of would have contained any three ofmodern construction (always excepting that in which his most graciousMajesty the King of England appears on state occasions, and also that ofthe Lord Mayor of London City.)Indeed the one in question was more like a state carriage than anyother; broad at the top, low in the axle, all covered over with paintingand gilding, with long wooden shafts for the horses, and green taffetacurtains to the windows: and in this guise it came on, swaying andswaggering about over the ruts in the road, not unlike the bloated Dutchpug of some over-indulgent dame, waddling slowly on, with its legs farapart, and its belly almost trailing on the ground.When the carriage arrived at the abreuvoir, by the side of whichPhilip had placed himself, the footmen took the bridles from the horses'mouths to give them drink, and a small white hand, from within, drewback the taffeta curtain, displaying to the Woodman one of the loveliestfaces he had ever beheld. The lady looked round for a moment at theforest scene, in the midst of whose wild ruggedness they stood, and thenraised her eyes towards the sky, letting them roam over the cleardeepening expanse of blue, as if to satisfy herself how much daylightstill remained for their journey."How far is it to St. Germain, good friend?" said she, addressing theWoodman, as she finished her contemplations; and her voice sounded toPhilip like the warble of a bird, notwithstanding a slight peculiarityof intonation, which more refined ears would instantly have decided asthe accent of Roussillon, or some adjacent province: the lengthening ofthe i, and the swelling roundness of the Spanish u, sounding verydifferently from the sharp precision peculiar to the Parisianpronunciation."I wish, Pauline, that you would get over that bad habit of softeningall your syllables," said an old lady who sat beside her in thecarriage. "Your French is scarcely comprehensible.""Dear Mamma!" replied the young lady playfully, "am not I descendedlineally from Clemence Isaure, the patroness of song and chivalry? And Ishould be sorry to speak aught but my own langue d'oc--the tongue ofthe first knights and first poets of France.---- But hark! what is thatnoise in the wood?""Now help, for the love of God!" cried the Woodman, snatching forth hisaxe, and turning to the horsemen who accompanied the carriage; "murderis doing in the forest. Help, for the love of God!"But as he spoke, the trampling of a horse's feet was heard, and in amoment after, a stout black charger came down the road like lightning;the dust springing up under his feet, and the foam dropping from hisbit.Half falling from the saddle, half supported by the reins, appeared theform of a gallant young Cavalier; his naked sword still clasped in hishand, but now fallen powerless and dragging by the side of the horse;his head uncovered and thrown back, as if consciousness had almost lefthim, and the blood flowing from a deep wound in his forehead, anddripping amongst the thick curls of his dark brown hair.The charger rushed furiously on; but the Woodman caught the bridle as hepassed, and with some difficulty reined him in; while one of thefootmen lifted the young gentleman to the ground, and placed him at thefoot of a tree.The two ladies had not beheld this scene unconcerned; and weredescending from the carriage, when four or five servants in huntinglivery were seen issuing from the wood at the turn of the road,contending with a very superior party of horsemen, whose rustyequipments and wild anomalous sort of apparel, bespoke them free of theforest by not the most honourable franchise."Ride on, ride on!" cried the young lady to those who had come with her:"Ride on and help them;" and she herself advanced to give aid to thewounded Cavalier, whose eyes seemed now closed for ever.He was as handsome a youth as one might look upon: one of those formswhich we are fond to bestow upon the knights and heroes that we read ofin our early days, when unchecked fancy is always ready to give herbright conceptions "a local habitation and a name." The young lady,whose heart had never been taught to regulate its beatings by thefrigid rules of society, or the sharp scourge of disappointment, nowtook the wounded man's head upon her knee, and gazed for an instant uponhis countenance, the deadly paleness of which appeared still moreghastly from the red streams that trickled over it from the wound in hisforehead. She then attempted to staunch the blood, but the trembling ofher hands defeated her purpose, and rendered her assistance of butlittle avail.The elder lady had hitherto been giving her directions to the footmen,who remained with the carriage, while those on horseback rode on towardsthe fray. "Stand to your arms, Michel!" cried she. "You take heed to thecoach. You three, draw up across the road, each with his arquebuse readyto fire. Let none but the true men pass.--Fie! Pauline; I thought youhad a firmer heart." She continued, approaching the young lady, "Give methe handkerchief.--That is a bad cut in his head, truly; but here is aworse stab in his side." And she proceeded to unloose the gold loops ofhis hunting-coat, that she might reach the wound. But that actionseemed to recall, in a degree, the senses of the wounded Cavalier."Never! never!" he exclaimed, clasping his hand upon his side, andthrusting her fingers away from him, with no very ceremoniouscourtesy,--"never, while I have life.""I wish to do you no harm, young Sir, but good," replied the oldlady;--"I seek but to stop the bleeding of your side, which is drainingyour heart dry."The wounded man looked faintly round, his senses still bewildered,either by weakness from loss of blood, or from the stunning effects ofthe blow on his forehead. He seemed, however, to have caught andcomprehended some of the words which the old lady addressed to him, andanswered them by a slight inclination of the head, but still kept hishand upon the breast of his coat, as if he had some cause for wishing itnot to be opened.The time which had thus elapsed more than sufficed to bring thehorsemen, who had accompanied the carriage, (and who, as before stated,had ridden on before) to the spot where the servants of the Cavalierappeared contending with a party, not only greater in number, butsuperior in arms.The reinforcement which thus arrived, gave a degree of equality to thetwo parties, though the freebooters might still have retained theadvantage, had not one of their companions commanded them, in rather aperemptory manner, to quit the conflict. This personage, we must remark,was very different, in point of costume, from the forest gentry withwhom he herded for the time. His dress was a rich livery suit of Isabeland silver; and indeed he might have been confounded with the otherparty, had not his active co-operation with the banditti (or whateverthey might be) placed the matter beyond a doubt.Their obedience, also, to his commands showed, that if he were not theinstigator of the violence we have described, at least his influenceover his lawless companions was singularly powerful; for at a word fromhim they drew off from a combat in which they were before engaged withall the hungry fury of wolves eager for their prey; and retreated ingood order up the road, till its windings concealed them from the viewof the servants to whom they had been opposed.These last did not attempt to follow, but turning their horses, togetherwith those who had brought them such timely aid, galloped up to the spotwhere their master lay. When they arrived, he had again fallen into astate of apparent insensibility, and they all flocked round him withlooks of eager anxiety, which seemed to speak more heartfelt interestthan generally existed between the murmuring vassal and his feudal lord.One sprightly boy, who appeared to be his page, sprang like lightningfrom the saddle, and kneeling by his side, gazed intently on his face,as if to seek some trace of animation. "They have killed him!" he criedat length, "I fear me they have killed him!""No, he is not dead," answered the old lady; "but I wish, Sir Page, thatyou would prevail on your master to open his coat, that we may staunchthat deep wound in his side.""No, no! that must not be," cried the boy quickly; "but I will tie myscarf round the wound." So saying, he unloosed the rich scarf of blueand gold, that passing over his right shoulder crossed his bosom till itnearly reached the hilt of his sword, where forming a large knot itcovered the bucklings of his belt. This he bound tightly over the spotin his master's side from whence the blood flowed; and then askedthoughtfully, without raising his eyes, "But how shall we carry him toSt. Germain?""In our carriage," said the young lady; "we are on our way thither, evennow."The sound of her voice made the Page start, for since his arrival on thespot, he had scarcely noticed any one but his master, whose dangeroussituation seemed to occupy all his thoughts: but now there was somethingin that sweet voice, with its soft Languedocian accent, which awakenedother ideas, and he turned his full sunny face towards the lady whospoke."Good heavens!" exclaimed she, as that glance showed her a countenancenot at all unfamiliar to her memory: "Is not this Henry de La Mothe, sonof our old farmer Louis?""No other indeed, Mademoiselle Pauline," replied the boy; "though,truly, I neither hoped nor expected to see you at such a moment asthis.""Then who"--demanded the young lady, clasping her hands with a look ofimpatient anxiety--"in the name of heaven, tell me who is this!"For an instant, and but for an instant, a look of arch meaning playedover the boy's countenance; but it was like a flash of lightning on adark cloud, lost as quickly as it appeared, leaving a deep gloom behindit, as his eye fell upon the inanimate form of his master. "That,Madam," said he, while something glistened brightly, but sadly, in hiseye, "that is Claude Count de Blenau."Pauline spoke not, but there was a deadly paleness come upon her face,which very plainly showed, how secondary a feeling is generalbenevolence, compared with personal interest."Is it possible?" exclaimed the elder lady, her brow darkeningthoughtfully. "Well, something must be done for him."The Page did not seem particularly well pleased with the tone in whichthe lady spoke, and, in truth, it had betrayed more pride thancompassion."The best thing that can be done for him, Madame la Marquise," answeredhe, "is to put him in the carriage and convey him to St. Germain as soonas possible, if you should not consider it too much trouble.""Trouble!" exclaimed Pauline; "trouble! Henry de La Mothe, do you thinkthat my mother or myself would find any thing a trouble, that couldserve Claude de Blenau, in such a situation?""Hush, Pauline!" said her mother. "Of course we shall be glad to servethe Count--Henry, help Michel and Regnard to place your master in thecarriage.--Michel, give me your arquebuse; I will hold it till you havedone.--Henry, support your master's head."But Pauline took that post upon herself, notwithstanding a look from theMarchioness, if not intended to forbid, at least to disapprove. Theyoung lady, however, was too much agitated with all that had occurred toremark her mother's looks, and following the first impulse of herfeelings, while the servants carried him slowly to the carriage, shesupported the head of the wounded Cavalier on her arm, though the bloodcontinued to flow from the wound in his forehead, and dripped amidst therich slashing of her Spanish sleeves, dabbling the satin with which itwas lined."Oh Mademoiselle!" said the Page, when their task was accomplished,"this has been a sad day's hunting. But if I might advise," hecontinued, turning to the Marchioness, "the drivers must be told to gowith all speed.""Saucy as a page!" said the old lady, "is a proverb, and a good one.Now, Monsieur La Mothe, I do not think the drivers must go with allspeed; for humbly deferring to your better opinion, it would shake yourmaster to death."The Page bit his lip, and his cheek grew somewhat red, in answer to thehigh dame's rebuke, but he replied calmly, "You have seen, Madam, whathas happened to-day, and depend on it, if we be not speedy in gettingout of this accursed forest, we shall have the same good gentry upon usagain, and perhaps in greater numbers. Though they have wounded theCount, they have not succeeded in their object; for he has still abouthim that which they would hazard all to gain.""You are in the right, boy," answered the lady: "I was over-hasty. Goin, Pauline. Henry, your master's horse must carry one of my footmen, ofwhom the other three can mount behind the carriage--thus we shall goquicker. You, with the Count's servants, mix with my horsemen, and keepclose round the coach; and now bid them, on, with all speed." Thussaying, she entered the vehicle; and the rest having disposedthemselves according to her orders, the whole cavalcade was soon inmotion on the road to St. Germain.CHAPTER II.In which new characters are brought upon the stage, and some darkhints given respecting them.The sun had long gone down, and the large clear autumn moon had risenhigh in his stead, throwing a paler, but a gentler light upon the woodof Laye, and the rich wild forest-scenery bordering the road from St.Germain to Mantes. The light, unable to pierce the deeper recesses ofthe wood, fell principally upon those old and majestic trees, thearistocracy of the forest, which, raising their heads high above theirbrethren of more recent growth, seemed to look upon the beam in whichthey shone, as the right of elder birth, and due alone to their aspiringheight. The deep shadows of their branches fell in long sombre shapesacross the inequalities of the road, leaving but glimpses every now andthen, to light the footsteps of whatever being might wander there atthat hour of silence.On one of those spots where the full beams fell, stood the cottage ofPhilip, the woodman: and the humble hut with its straw thatch, the openspace of ground before it, with a felled oak which had lain thereundisturbed till a coat of soft green moss had grown thick over itsrugged bark, the little stream dammed up to afford a sufficient supplyof water for the horses, and the large square block of stone to aid thetraveller in mounting, all were displayed in the clear moonlight asplainly as if the full day had shone upon them.Yet, however fair might be the night, there were very few who would havechosen the beams of the moon to light them across the wood of Mantes. Insooth, in those days sunshine was the best safeguard to travellers. ForFrance swarmed with those who gathered in their harvest at night, andwho (to use their own phrase) had turned their swords intoreaping-hooks.Two grand objects fully occupied the mind of that famous minister, theCardinal de Richelieu (who then governed the kingdom with almostdespotic sway): the prosecution of those mighty schemes of foreignpolicy, which at the time shook many a throne, and in after yearschanged more than one dynasty; and the establishment of his own power athome, which, threatened by factions, and attacked by continualconspiracies, was supported alone by the terror of his name, and thefavour of a weak and irresolute monarch. These more immediate calls uponhis attention gave him but little time to regulate the long-neglectedpolice of the country; and indeed it was whispered, that Richelieu notonly neglected, but knowingly tolerated many of the excesses of thetimes; the perpetrators of which were often called upon to do some ofthose good services which statesmen occasionally require of their lesscircumspect servants. It was said too, that scarce a forest in Francebut sheltered a band of these free rovers, who held themselves inreadiness to merit pardon for their other offences, by offending in theState's behalf whenever it should be demanded, and in the mean time tookvery sufficient care to do those things on their own account for whichthey might be pardoned hereafter.We may suppose then, it rarely happened that travellers chose that hourfor passing through the wood of Mantes, and that those who did so wereseldom of the best description. But on the night I speak of, twohorsemen wound slowly along the road towards the cottage of the Woodman,with a sort of sauntering, idle pace, as if thoughtless of danger, andentirely occupied in their own conversation.They were totally unattended also, although their dress bespoke a highstation in society, and by its richness might have tempted a robber toinquire farther into their circumstances. Both were well armed withpistol, sword, and dagger, and appeared as stout cavaliers as evermounted horse, having, withal, that air of easy confidence, which isgenerally the result of long familiarity with urgent and perilouscircumstances.Having come near the abreuvoir, one of the two gave his horse to drinkwithout dismounting, while the other alighted, and taking out the bit,let his beast satisfy its thirst at liberty. As he did so, his eyenaturally glanced over the ground at the foot of the tree. Somethingcaught his attention; and stooping down to examine more closely, "Hereis blood, Chavigni!" he exclaimed; "surely, they have never been stupidenough to do it here, within sight of this cottage.""I hope they have not done it at all, Lafemas," replied the other. "Ionly told them to tie him, and search him thoroughly; but not to givehim a scratch, if they could avoid it.""Methinks, thou hast grown mighty ceremonious of late, and somewhatmerciful, Master Chavigni," replied his companion; "I remember the time,when you were not so scrupulous. Would it not have been the wiser way,to have quieted this young plotter at once, when your men had him intheir hands?""Thou wert born in the Fauxbourg St. Antoine, I would swear, and servedapprenticeship to a butcher," replied Chavigni. "Why, thou art as fondof blood, Lafemas, as if thou hadst sucked it in thy cradle! Tell me,when thou wert an infant Hercules, didst thou not stick sheep, insteadof strangling serpents?""Not more than yourself, lying villain!" answered the other in a quickdeep voice, making his hand sound upon the hilt of his sword. "Chavigni,you have taunted me all along the road; you have cast in my teeth thingsthat you yourself caused me to do. Beware of yourself! Urge me not toofar, lest you leave your bones in the forest!""Pshaw, man! pshaw!" cried Chavigni, laughing: "Here's a cool-headedjudge! Here's the calm placid Lafemas! Here's the Cardinal's gentlehangman, who can condemn his dearest friends to the torture with thesame meek look that he puts on to say grace over a Beccafico, suddenlymetamorphosed into a bully and a bravo in the wood of Mantes.--But harkye, Sir Judge!" he added, in a prouder tone, tossing back the plumes ofhis hat, which before hung partly over his face, and fixing his fulldark eye upon his companion, who still stood scowling upon him withill-repressed passion--"Hark ye, Sir Judge! Use no such language towardsme, if you seek not to try that same sharp axe you have so often orderedfor others. Suffice it for you to know, in the present instance, that itwas not the Cardinal's wish that the young man should be injured. Wedo not desire blood, but when the necessity of the State requires it tobe shed. Besides, man," and he gradually fell into his former jeeringtone--"besides, in future, under your gentle guidance, and a touch ortwo of the peine forte et dure, this young nightingale may be taughtto sing, and, in short, be forced to tell us all he knows. Now do youunderstand?""I do, I do," replied Lafemas. "I thought that there was some deep,damnable wile that made you spare him; and as to the rest, I did notmean to offend you. But when a man condemns his own soul to serve you,you should not taunt him, for it is hard to bear.""Peace! peace!" cried Chavigni, in a sharp tone; "let me hear no more inthis strain. Who raised you to what you are? We use you as you deserve;we pay you for your services; we despise you for your meanness; and asto your soul," he added with a sneer, "if you have any fears on thathead--why you shall have absolution. Are you not our dog, who worriesthe game for us? We house and feed you, and you must take the lasheswhen it suits us to give them. Remember, Sir, that your life is in myhand! One word respecting the affair of Chalais mentioned to theCardinal, brings your head to the block! And now let us see what is thisblood you speak of?"So saying, he sprang from his horse, while Lafemas, as he had beendepicted by his companion, hung his head like a cowed hound, and insullen silence pointed out the blood, which had formed a little pool atthe foot of the tree, and stained the ground in several places roundabout.Chavigni gazed at it with evident symptoms of displeasure anduneasiness; for although, when he imagined that the necessities of theState required the severest infliction on any offender, no one was moreruthless than himself as to the punishment, no one more unhesitating asto the means--although, at those times, no bond of amity, no tie ofkindred, would have stayed his hand, or restrained him in what heerroneously considered his political duty; yet Chavigni was far fromnaturally cruel; and, as his after life showed, even too susceptible ofthe strongest and deepest affections of human nature.In his early youth, the Cardinal de Richelieu had remarked in him astrong and penetrating mind; but above all, an extraordinary power ofgoverning and even subduing the ardent passions by which he was at timesexcited. As son to the Count de Bouthilliers, one of the oldest membersof the Privy Council, the road to political preferment was open toChavigni; and Richelieu, ever fearful of aught that might diminish hispower, and careful to strengthen it by every means, resolved to bind theyoung Count to his cause by the sure ties of early habit and mutualinterest. With this view he took him entirely under his own protection,educated him in his own line of policy, instilled into him, asprinciples, the deep stern maxims of his own mighty and unshrinkingmind, and having thus moulded him to his wish, called him early to thecouncil-table, and intrusted him with a greater share of his power andconfidence than he would have yielded to any other man.Chavigni repaid the Cardinal with heartfelt gratitude, with firmadherence, and uncompromising service. In private life, he washonourable, generous, and kind; but it was his axiom, that all mustyield to State necessity, or (as he said) in other words, to the good ofhis country; and upon the strength of this maxim, which, in fact, wasthe cause of every stain that rests upon his memory, he fancied himselfa patriot!Between Chavigni and the Judge Lafemas, who was the Jeffreys of hiscountry, and had received the name of Le Bourreau du Cardinal, existeda sort of original antipathy; so that the Statesman, though oftenobliged to make use of the less scrupulous talents of the Judge, andeven occasionally to associate with him, could never refrain for anylength of time from breaking forth into those bitter taunts which oftenirritated Lafemas almost to frensy. The hatred of the Judge, on hispart, was not less strong, even at the times it did not show itself; andhe still brooded over the hope of exercising his ungentle functions uponhim who was at present, in a degree, his master.But to return, Chavigni gazed intently on the spot to which Lafemaspointed. "I believe it is blood, indeed," said he, after a moment'shesitation, as if the uncertainty of the light had made him doubt it atfirst: "they shall rue the day that they shed it contrary to mycommand. It is blood surely, Lafemas: is it not?""Without a doubt," said Lafemas; "and it has been shed since mid-day.""You are critical in these things, I know," replied the other with acool sneer; "but we must hear more of this, Sir Judge, and ascertainwhat news is stirring, before we go farther. Things might chance, whichwould render it necessary that one or both of us should return to theCardinal. We will knock at this cottage and inquire.--Our story mustrun, that we have lost our way in the wood, and need both rest anddirection."So saying, he struck several sharp blows with the hilt of his swordagainst the door, whose rickety and unsonorous nature returned agrumbling indistinct sound, as if it too had shared the sleep of thepeaceable inhabitants of the cottage, and loved not to be disturbed bysuch nocturnal visitations. "So ho!" cried Chavigni; "will no one hearus poor travellers, who have lost our way in this forest!"In a moment after, the head of Philip, the woodman, appeared at thelittle casement by the side of the door, examining the strangers, onwhose figures fell the full beams of the moon, with quite sufficientlight to display the courtly form and garnishing of their apparel, andto show that they were no dangerous guests. "What would ye, Messieurs?"demanded he, through the open window: "it is late for travellers.""We have lost our way in your wood," replied Chavigni, "and would fainhave a little rest, and some direction for our farther progress. We willpay thee well, good man, for thy hospitality.""There is no need of payment, Sir," said the Woodman, opening the door."Come in, I pray, Messieurs.--Charles!" he added, calling to his son,"get up and tend these gentlemen's horses. Get up, I say, Sir Sluggard!"The boy crept sleepily out of the room beyond, and went to give some ofthe forest-hay to the beasts which had borne the strangers thither, andwhich gave but little signs of needing either rest or refreshment. Inthe mean while, his father drew two large yew-tree seats to thefire-side, soon blew the white ashes on the hearth into a flame, andhaving invited his guests to sit, and lighted the old brazen lamp thathung above the chimney, he bowed low, asking how he could serve themfarther; but as he did so, his eye ran over their persons with ahalf-satisfied and inquiring glance, which made Lafemas turn away hishead. But Chavigni answered promptly to his offer of service: "Why now,good friend, if thou couldst give us a jug of wine, 'twould be well andkindly done, for we have ridden far.""This is no inn, Sir," replied Philip, "and you will find my wine butthin: nevertheless, such as it is, most welcomely shall you taste."From whatever motive it proceeded, Philip's hospitality was but lukewarmtowards the strangers; and the manner in which he rinsed out thetankard, drew the wine from a barrique standing in one corner of theroom, half covered with a wolf-skin, and placed it on a table by theside of Chavigni, bespoke more churlish rudeness than good-will. But theStatesman heeded little either the quality of his reception or of hiswine, provided he could obtain the information he desired; so, carryingthe tankard to his lips, he drank, or seemed to drink, as deep a draughtas if its contents had been the produce of the best vineyard in Medoc."It is excellent," said he, handing it to Lafemas, "or my thirst doeswonders. Now, good friend, if we had some venison-steaks to broil onyour clear ashes, our supper were complete.""Such I have not to offer, Sir," replied Philip, "or to that you shouldbe welcome too.""Why, I should have thought," said Chavigni, "the hunters who ran down astag at your door to-day, should have left you a part, as the woodman'sfee.""Do you know those hunters, Sir?" demanded Philip, with some degree ofemphasis."Not I, in truth," replied Chavigni; though the colour rose in hischeek, notwithstanding his long training to courtly wile and politicalintrigue, and he thanked his stars that the lamp gave but a faint andglimmering light: "Not I, in truth; but whoever ran him down got a goodbeast, for he bled like a stag of ten. I suppose they made the cureat your door?""Those hunters, Sir," replied Philip, "give no woodman's fees; and as tothe stag, he is as fine a one as ever brushed the forest dew, but he hasescaped them this time.""How! did he get off with his throat cut?" demanded Chavigni, "for thereis blood enough at the foot of yon old tree, to have drained thestoutest stag that ever was brought to bay.""Oh! but that is not stag's blood!" interrupted Charles, the woodman'sson, who had by this time not only tended the strangers' horses, butexamined every point of the quaint furniture with which it was thefashion of the day to adorn them. "That is not stag's blood; that is theblood of the young Cavalier, who was hurt by the robbers, and taken awayby--"At this moment the boy's eye caught the impatient expression of hisfather's countenance."The truth is, Messieurs," said Philip, taking up the discourse, "therewas a gentleman wounded in the forest this morning. I never saw himbefore, and he was taken away in a carriage by some ladies, whose faceswere equally strange to me.""You have been somewhat mysterious upon this business, Sir Woodman,"said Chavigni, his brow darkening as he spoke; "why were you so tardy ingiving us this forest news, which imports all strangers travellingthrough the wood to know?""I hold it as a rule," replied Philip boldly, "to mind my own business,and never to mention any thing I see; which in this affair I shall domore especially, as one of the robbers had furniture of Isabel andsilver;" and as he spoke he glanced his eye to the scarf of Chavigni,which was of that peculiar mixture of colours then called Isabel,bordered by a rich silver fringe."Fool!" muttered Chavigni between his teeth; "Fool! what need had he toshow himself?"Lafemas, who had hitherto been silent, now came to the relief of hiscompanion: taking up the conversation in a mild and easy tone, "Have youmany of these robbing fraternity in your wood?" said he; "if so, Isuppose we peril ourselves in crossing it alone." And, without waitingfor any answer, he proceeded, "Pray, who was the cavalier theyattacked?""He was a stranger from St. Germain," answered the Woodman; "and as tothe robbers, I doubt that they will show themselves again, for fear ofbeing taken.""They did not rob him then?" said the Judge. Now nothing that Philip hadsaid bore out this inference; but Lafemas possessed in a high degree thetalent of cross-examination, and was deeply versed in all the thousandarts of entangling a witness, or leading a prisoner to condemn himself.But there was a stern reserve about the Woodman which baffled theJudge's cunning: "I only saw the last part of the fray," replied Philip,"and therefore know not what went before.""Where was he hurt?" asked Lafemas; "for he lost much blood.""On the head and in the side," answered the Woodman."Poor youth!" cried the Judge in a pitiful tone. "And when you openedhis coat, was the wound a deep one?""I cannot judge," replied Philip, "being no surgeon."It was in vain that Lafemas tried all his wiles on the Woodman, and thatChavigni, who soon joined in the conversation, questioned him moreboldly. Philip was in no communicative mood, and yielded them but littleinformation respecting the events of the morning.At length, weary of this fruitless interrogation, Chavigni startedup--"Well, friend!" said he, "had there been danger in crossing theforest, we might have stayed with thee till daybreak; but, as thousayest there is none, we will hence upon our way." So saying he strodetowards the door, the flame-shaped mullets of his gilded spurs jinglingover the brick-floor of Philip's dwelling, and calling the Woodman'sattention to the knightly rank of his departing guest. In a few minutesall was prepared for their departure, and having mounted their horses,the Statesman drew forth a small silk purse tied with a loop of gold,and holding it forth to Philip, bade him accept it for his services. TheWoodman bowed, repeating that he required no payment."I am not accustomed to have my bounty refused," said Chavigni proudly;and dropping the purse to the ground, he spurred forward his horse."Now, Lafemas," said he, when they had proceeded so far as to be beyondthe reach of Philip's ears, "what think you of this?""Why, truly," replied the Judge, "I deem that we are mighty near as wiseas we were before.""Not so," said Chavigni. "It is clear enough these fellows have failed,and De Blenau has preserved the packet: I understand it all. HisEminence of Richelieu, against my advice, has permitted Madame deBeaumont and her daughter Pauline to return to the Queen, after anabsence of ten years. The fact is, that when the Cardinal banished themthe Court, and ordered the Marchioness to retire to Languedoc, his viewswere not so extended as they are now, and he had laid out in his ownmind a match between one of his nieces and this rich young Count deBlenau; which, out of the royal family, was one of the best alliances inFrance. The boy, however, had been promised, and even, I believe,affianced by his father, to this Pauline de Beaumont; and accordinglyhis Eminence sent away the girl and her mother, with the samesangfroid that a man drives a strange dog out of his court-yard; atthe same time he kept the youth at Court, forbidding all communicationwith Languedoc: but now that the Cardinal can match his niece to theDuke D'Enghien, De Blenau may look for a bride where he lists, and theMarquise and her daughter have been suffered to return. To my knowledge,they passed through Chartres yesterday morning on their way to St.Germain.""But what have these to do with the present affair?" demanded Lafemas."Why thus has it happened," continued Chavigni. "The youth has beenattacked. He has resisted, and been wounded. Just then, up come thesewomen, travelling through the forest with a troop of servants, who joinwith the Count, and drive our poor friends to cover. This is what I havedrawn from the discourse of yon surly Woodman.""You mean, from your own knowledge of the business," replied Lafemas,"for he would confess nothing.""Confess, man!" exclaimed Chavigni.--"Why he did not know that he wasbefore a confessor, and still less before a Judge, though thou wouldestfain have put him to the question. I saw your lip quivering with anxietyto order him the torture; rack, and thumb-screw, and oubliette werein your eye, every sullen answer he gave.""Were it not as well to get him out of the way?" demanded Lafemas. "Heremarked your livery, Chavigni, and may blab.""Short-sighted mole!" replied his companion. "The very sulkiness ofhumour which has called down on him thy rage, will shield him from myfears--which might be quite as dangerous. He that is so close in onething, depend upon it, will be close in another. Besides, unless hetells it to the trees, or the jays, or the wild boars, whom should hetell it to? I would bet a thousand crowns against the Prince de Conti'sbrains, or the Archbishop Coadjutor's religion, or Madame deChevreuse's--reputation, or against any thing else that is worthnothing, that this good Woodman sees no human shape for the next tenyears, and then all that passes between them will be, "Good day,Woodman!'--'Good day, Sir!'--and he mimicked the deep voice of him ofwhom they spoke. But, notwithstanding this appearance of gaiety,Chavigni was not easy; and even while he spoke, he rode on with no smallprecipitation, till, turning into a narrow forest path, the light of themoon, which had illuminated the greater part of the high road, was cutoff entirely by the trees, and the deep gloom obliged them to be morecautious in proceeding. At length, however, they came to a littlesavanna, surrounded by high oaks, where Chavigni entirely reined in hishorse, and blew a single note on his horn, which was soon answered by asimilar sound at some distance.CHAPTER III.Which shows what a French forest was at night, and who inhabitedit.Those whom either the love of sylvan sports, or that calm meditativecharm inherent to wood scenery, has tempted to explore the deeperrecesses of the forest, must be well aware that many particular gladesand coverts will often lie secret and undiscovered, amidst the mazes ofthe leafy labyrinth, even to the eyes of those long accustomed toinvestigate its most intricate windings. In those countries where foresthunting is a frequent sport, I have more than once found myself led oninto scenes completely new, when I had fancied that long experience hadmade me fully acquainted with every rood of the woodland round about,and have often met with no small trouble in retracing the spot, althoughI took all pains to observe the way thither, and fix its distinctivemarks in my memory.In the heart of the forest of St. Germain, at a considerable distancefrom any of the roads, or even by-paths of the wood, lay a deep dingleor dell, which probably had been a gravel-pit many centuries before, andmight have furnished forth sand to strew the halls of Charlemagne, foraught I know to the contrary. However, so many ages had elapsed since ithad been employed for such purpose, that many a stout oak had sprung,and flourished, and withered round about it, and had left the ruins oftheir once princely forms crumbling on its brink. At the time I speakof, a considerable part of the dell itself was filled up with tangledbrush-wood, which a long hot season had stripped and withered; and overthe edge hung a quantity of dry shrubs and stunted trees, forming athick screen over the wild recess below.One side, and one side only, was free of access, and this was by meansof a small sandy path winding down into the bottom of the dell, betweentwo deep banks, which assumed almost the appearance of cliffs as theroad descended. This little footway conducted, it is true, into the mostprofound part of the hollow, but then immediately lost itself in thethick underwood, through which none but a very practised eye would havediscovered the means of entering a deep lair of ground, sheltered by thesteep bank and its superincumbent trees on one side, and concealed by ascreen of wood on every other.On the night I have mentioned, this well concealed retreat was tenantedby a group of men, whose wild attire harmonized perfectly with therudeness of the scene around. The apparel of almost every class wasdiscernible among them, but each vesture plainly showed, that it hadlong passed that epoch generally termed "better days;" and indeed, themore costly had been their original nature, the greater was theirpresent state of degradation. So that what had once been the suit ofsome gay cavalier of the court, and which doubtless had shone as such inthe circles of the bright and the fair, having since passed through thehands of the page, who had perhaps used it to personate his master, andthe fripier, who had tried hard to restore it to a degree of lustre,and the poor petitioner who had bought it and borne it second-hand tocourt, and lost both his labour and his money--having passed throughthese, and perhaps a thousand other hands, it had gradually acquiredthat sort of undefinable tint, which ought properly to be called old-agecolour, and at present served, and only served, to keep its owner fromthe winds of heaven. At the same time the buff jerkin which covered thebroad shoulders of another hard by, though it had never boasted muchfinery, had escaped with only a few rusty stains from its formerintimacy with a steel cuirass, and a slight greasy gloss upon the leftside, which indicated its owner's habit of laying his hand upon hissword.Here, too, every sort of offensive weapon was to be met with. The longToledo blade with its basket hilt and black scabbard tipped with steel;the double-handed heavy sword, which during the wars of the League hadoften steaded well the troops of Henry the Fourth, when attacked by thesuperior cavalry of the Dukes of Guise and Mayenne, and which had beenbut little used since; the poniard, the stiletto, the heavy petronel, orhorse pistol, and the smaller girdle pistol, which had been but latelyintroduced, were all to be seen, either as accompaniments to the dressof some of the party, or scattered about on the ground, where they hadbeen placed for greater convenience.The accoutrements of these denizens of the forest were kept incountenance by every other accessory circumstance of appearance; and atorch stuck in the sand in the midst, glared upon features whichSalvator might have loved to trace. It was not alone the negligence ofpersonal appearance, shown in their long dishevelled hair and untrimmedbeards, which rendered them savagely picturesque, but many a furiouspassion had there written deep traces of its unbounded sway, and markedthem with that wild undefinable expression, which habitual vice andlawless licence are sure to leave behind in their course.At the moment I speak of, wine had been circulating very freely amongstthe robbers; for such indeed they were. Some were sleeping, either withtheir hands clasped over their knees and their heads drooping down tomeet them, or stretched more at their ease under the trees, snoring loudin answer to the wind, that whistled through the branches. Some satgazing with a wise sententious look on the empty gourds, many of which,fashioned into bottles, lay scattered about upon the ground: and two orthree, who had either drunk less of the potent liquor, or whose headswere better calculated to resist its effects than the rest, satclustered together singing and chatting by turns, arrived exactly atthat point of ebriety, where a man's real character shows itself,notwithstanding all his efforts to conceal it.The buff jerkin we have spoken of, covered the shoulders of one amongthis little knot of choice spirits, who still woke to revel after sleephad laid his leaden mace upon their companions; and it may be remarked,that a pair of broader shoulders are rarely to be seen than those socovered.Wouvermans is said to have been very much puzzled by a figure in one ofhis pictures, which, notwithstanding all his efforts, he could neverkeep down (as painters express it). Whatever he did, that one figurewas always salient, and more prominent than the artist intended; nor wasit till he had half blotted it out, that he discovered its originaldefect was being too large. Something like Wouvermans' figure, thefreebooter I speak of, stood conspicuous amongst the others, from theHerculean proportion of his limbs; but he had, in addition, otherqualities to distinguish him from the rest. His brow was broad, and ofthat peculiar form to which physiognomists have attached the idea of astrong determined spirit; at the same time, the clear sparkle of hisblue Norman eye bespoke an impetuous, but not a depraved mind.A deep scar was apparent on his left cheek; and the wound which had beenits progenitor, was most probably the cause of a sneering turn in thecorner of his mouth, which, with a bold expression of daring confidence,completed the mute history that his face afforded, of a life spent inarms, or well, or ill, as circumstances prompted,--an unshrinking heart,which dared every personal evil, and a bright but unprincipled mind,which followed no dictates but the passions of the moment.He was now in his gayest mood, and holding a horn in his hand, trolledforth an old French ditty, seeming confident of pleasing, or perhapscareless whether he pleased or not."Thou'rt an ass, Robin, thou'rt an ass,To think that great men beMore gay than I that lie on the grassUnder the greenwood tree.I tell thee no, I tell thee no,The Great are slaves to their gilded show.Now tell me, Robin, tell me,Are the ceilings of gay saloonsSo richly wrought as yon sky we see,Or their glitter so bright as the moon's?I tell thee no, I tell thee no,The Great are slaves to their gilded show.Say not nay, Robin, say not nay!There is never a heart so free,In the vest of gold, and the palace gay,As in buff 'neath the forest tree.I tell thee yea, I tell thee yea,The Great were made for the poor man's prey."So sang the owner of the buff jerkin, and his song met with more or lessapplause from his companions, according to the particular humour ofeach. One only amongst the freebooters seemed scarcely to participate inthe merriment. He had drunk as deeply as the rest, but he appearedneither gay, nor stupid, nor sleepy; and while the tall Norman sang, hecast, from time to time, a calm sneering glance upon the singer, whichshowed no especial love, either for the music, or musician."You sing about prey," said he, as the other concluded the last stanzaof his ditty--"You sing about prey, and yet you are no great falcon,after all; if we may judge from to-day.""And why not, Monsieur Pierrepont Le Blanc?" demanded the Norman,without displaying aught of ill-humour in his countenance: "though theyought to have called you Monsieur Le Noir--Mr. Black, not Mr.White.--Nay, do not frown, good comrade; I speak but of your beard, notof your heart. What, art thou still grumbling, because we did not cutthe young Count's throat outright?""Nay, not for that," answered the other, "but because we have lost thebest man amongst us, for want of his being well seconded.""You lie, Parbleu!" cried the Norman, drawing his sword, and fixing histhumb upon a stain, about three inches from the point. "Did not I lendthe youth so much of my iron toothpick? and would have sent it throughhim, if his horse had not carried him away. But I know you, MasterBuccaneer--You would have had me stab him behind, while Mortagne slashedhis head before. That would have been a fit task for a Normangentleman, and a soldier! I whose life he saved too!""Did you not swear, when you joined our troop," demanded the other, "toforget every thing that went before?"The Norman hesitated; he well remembered his oath, against which thebetter feelings of his heart were perhaps sometimes rebellious. He felt,too, confused at the direct appeal the other had made to it; and to passit by, he caught at the word forget, answering with a stave of thesong--"Forget! forget! let slaves forgetThe pangs and chains they bear;The brave remember every debtTo honour, and the fair.For these are bonds that bind us more,Yet leave us freer than before."Yes, let those that can do so, forget: but I very well remember, at thebattle at Perpignan, I had charged with the advance guard, when the fireof the enemy's musketeers, and a masked battery which began to enfiladeour line, soon threw our left flank into disorder, and a charge ofcavalry drove back De Coucy's troop. Mielleraye's standard was in thehands of the enemy, when I and five others rallied to rescue it. Agloomy old Spaniard fired his petronel and disabled my left arm, butstill I held the standard-pole with my right, keeping the standardbefore me; but my Don drew his long Toledo, and had got the point to mybreast, just going to run it through me and standard and all, as I'veoften spitted a duck's liver and a piece of bacon on a skewer; when,turning round my head, to see if no help was near, I perceived thisyoung Count de Blenau's banderol, coming like lightning over the field,and driving all before it; and blue and gold were then the best coloursthat ever I saw, for they gave me new heart, and wrenching thestandard-pole round--But hark, there is the horn!"As he spoke, the clear full note of a hunting-horn came swelling fromthe south-west; and in a moment after, another, much nearer to them,seemed to answer the first. Each, after giving breath to one solitarynote, relapsed into silence; and such of the robbers as were awake,having listened till the signal met with a reply, bestirred themselvesto rouse their sleeping companions, and to put some face of order uponthe disarray which their revels had left behind."Now, Sir Norman," cried he that they distinguished by the name of LeBlanc; "we shall see how Monseigneur rates your slackness in his cause.Will you tell him your long story of the siege of Perpignan?""Pardie!" cried the other, "I care no more for him, than I do for you.Every man that stands before me on forest ground is but a man, and Iwill treat him as such.""Ha! ha! ha!" exclaimed his companion; "it were good to see thee bully aprivy counsellor; why, thou darest as soon take a lion by the beard.""I dare pass my sword through his heart, were there need," answered theNorman; "but here they come,--stand you aside and let me deal with him."Approaching steps, and a rustling sound in the thick screen of woodalready mentioned, as the long boughs were forced back by the passageof some person along the narrow pathway, announced the arrival of thosefor whom the robbers had been waiting."Why, it is as dark as the pit of Acheron!" cried a deep voice amongstthe trees. "Are we never to reach the light I saw from above? Oh, hereit is.--Chauvelin, hold back that bough, it has caught my cloak." As thespeaker uttered the last words, an armed servant, in Isabel and silver,appeared at the entrance of the path, holding back the stray branches,while Chavigni himself advanced into the circle of robbers, who stoodgrouped around in strange picturesque attitudes, some advancing boldly,as if to confront the daring stranger that thus intruded on theirhaunts, some gazing with a kind of curiosity upon the being so differentfrom themselves, who had thus placed himself in sudden contact withthem, some lowering upon him with bended heads, like wolves when theyencounter a nobler beast of prey.The Statesman himself advanced in silence; and, with something of afrown upon his brow, glanced his eye firmly over every face around, norwas there an eye amongst them that did not sink before the sterncommanding fire of his, as it rested for a moment upon the countenanceof each, seeming calmly to construe the expression of the features, andread into the soul beneath, as we often see a student turn over thepages of some foreign book, and collect their meaning at a glance."Well, Sirs," said he at length, "my knave tells me, that ye have failedin executing my commands."The Norman we have somewhat minutely described heretofore, now began toexcuse himself and his fellows; and was proceeding to set forth thatthey had done all which came within their power and province to do, andwas also engaged in stating, that no man could do more, when Chavigniinterrupted him. "Silence!" cried he, with but little apparent respectfor these lords of the forest, "I blame ye not for not doing more thanye could do; but how dare ye, mongrel bloodhounds, to disobey my strictcommands? and when I bade ye abstain from injuring the youth, how is itye have mangled him like a stag torn by the wolves?"The Norman turned with a look of subdued triumph towards him who hadpreviously censured his forbearance. "Speak, speak, Le Blanc!" cried he;"answer Monseigneur.--Well," continued he, as the other drew back, "thetruth is this, Sir Count: we were divided in opinion with respect to thebest method of fulfilling your commands, so we called a council ofwar--""A council of war!" repeated Chavigni, his lip curling into an ineffablesneer. "Well, proceed, proceed! You are a Norman, I presume--andbraggart, I perceive.--Proceed, Sir, proceed!"Be it remarked, that by this time the influence of Chavigni's firstappearance had greatly worn away from the mind of the Norman. Thecommanding dignity of the Statesman, though it still, in a degree,overawed, had lost the effect of novelty; and the bold heart of thefreebooter began to reproach him for truckling to a being who wasinferior to himself, according to his estimate of human dignities--anestimate formed not alone on personal courage, but also on personalstrength.However, as we have said, he was, in some measure, overawed; and thoughhe would have done much to prove his daring in the sight of hiscompanions, his mind was not yet sufficiently wrought up to shake offall respect, and he answered boldly, but calmly, "Well, Sir Count, giveme your patience, and you shall hear. But my story must be told my ownway, or not at all. We called a council of war, then, where every mangave his opinion, and my voice was for shooting Monsieur de Blenau'shorse as he rode by, and then taking advantage of the confusion amonghis lackeys, to seize upon his person, and carrying him into St.Herman's brake, which lies between Le Croix de bois and the river--Youknow where I mean, Monseigneur?""No, truly," answered the Statesman; "but, as I guess, some deep part ofthe forest, where you could have searched him at your ease--The planwas a good one. Why went it not forward?""You shall hear in good time," answered the freebooter, growing somewhatmore familiar in his tone. "As you say, St. Herman's brake is deepenough in the forest--and if we had once housed him there, we might havesearched him from top to toe for the packet--ay, and looked in hismouth, if we found it no where else. But the first objection was, thatan arquebuse, though a very pretty weapon, and pleasant serviceablecompanion in broad brawl and battle, talks too loud for secret service,and the noise thereof might put the Count's people on their guard beforewe secured his person. However, they say 'a Norman cow can always getover a stile,' so I offered to do the business with yon arbalete;" andhe pointed to a steel cross-bow lying near, of that peculiar shape whichseems to unite the properties of the cross-bow and gun, propelling theball or bolt by means of the stiff arched spring and cord, by whichlittle noise is made, while the aim is rendered more certain by a longtube similar to the barrel of a musket, through which the shot passes."When was I ever known to miss my aim?" continued the Norman. "Why, Ialways shoot my stags in the eye, for fear of hurting the skin. However,Mortagne--your old friend, Monsieur de Chavigni--who was a sort of bandcaptain amongst us, loved blood, as you know, like an unreclaimedfalcon; besides, he had some old grudge against the Count, who turnedhim out of the Queen's anteroom, when he was Ancient in the Cardinal'sguard. He it was who over-ruled my proposal. He would have shot himwillingly enough, but your gentleman would not hear of that; so weattacked the Count's train, at the turn of the road--boldly, and in theface. Mortagne was lucky enough to get a fair cut at his head, whichslashed through his beaver, and laid his skull bare, but went nofarther, only serving to make the youth as savage as a hurt boar; for Ihad only time to see his hand laid upon his sword, when its cross wasknocking against Mortagne's ribs before, and the point shining outbetween his blade-bones behind. It was done in the twinkling of an eye.""He is a gallant youth," said Chavigni; "he always was from a boy; butwhere is your wounded companion?""Wounded!" cried the Norman. "Odds life! he's dead. It was enough tohave killed the Devil. There he lies, poor fellow, wrapped in his cloak.Will you please to look upon him, Sir Counsellor?" and snatching up oneof the torches, he approached the spot where the dead man lay, under abank covered with withered brush-wood and stunted trees.Chavigni followed with a slow step and gloomy brow, the robbers drawingback at his approach; for though they held high birth in but littlerespect, the redoubted name and fearless bearing of the Statesman hadpower over even their ungoverned spirits. He, however, who had beencalled Pierrepont Le Blanc by the tall Norman, twitched his companion bythe sleeve as he lighted Chavigni on. "A cowed hound, Norman!"whispered he--"thou hast felt the lash--a cowed hound!"The Norman glanced on him a look of fire, but passing on in silence, hedisengaged the mantle from the corpse, and displayed the face of hisdead companion, whose calm closed eyes and unruffled features might havebeen supposed to picture quiet sleep, had not the ashy paleness of hischeek, and the drop of the under-jaw, told that the soul no longertenanted its earthly dwelling. The bosom of the unfortunate man remainedopen, in the state in which his comrades had left it, after anineffectual attempt to give him aid; and in the left side appeared asmall wound, where the weapon of his opponent had found entrance, sotrifling in appearance, that it seemed a marvel how so little a thingcould overthrow the prodigious strength which those limbs announced, androb them of that hardy spirit which animated them some few hours before.Chavigni gazed upon him, with his arms crossed upon his breast, and fora moment his mind wandered far into those paths, to which such a sightnaturally directs the course of our ideas, till, his thoughts losingthemselves in the uncertainty of the void before them, by a suddeneffort he recalled them to the business in which he was immediatelyengaged."Well, he has bitterly expiated the disobedience of my commands; buttell me," he said, turning to the Norman, who still continued to holdthe torch over the dead man, "how is it ye have dared to force myservant to show himself, and my liveries, in this attack, contrary to myspecial order?""That is easily told," answered the Norman, assuming a tone equally boldand peremptory with that of the Statesman. "Thus it stands, Sir Count:you men of quality often employ us nobility of the forest to do what youeither cannot, or dare not do for yourselves; then, if all goes well,you pay us scantily for our pains; if it goes ill, you hang us for yourown doings. But we will have none of that. If we are to be falcons foryour game, we will risk the stroke of the heron's bill, but we will nothave our necks wrung after we have struck the prey. When your lackey waspresent, it was your deed. Mark ye that, Sir Counsellor?""Villain, thou art insolent!" cried Chavigni, forgetting, in the heightof passion, the fearful odds against him, in case of quarrel at such amoment. "How dare you, slave, to--""Villain! and slave!" cried the Norman, interrupting him, and laying hishand on his sword. "Know, proud Sir, that I dare any thing. You are nowin the green forest, not at council-board, to prate of daring."Chavigni's dignity, like his prudence, became lost in his anger."Boasting Norman coward!" cried he, "who had not even courage, when hesaw his leader slain before his face--"The Norman threw the torch from his hand, and drew his weapon; butChavigni's sword sprang in a moment from the scabbard. He was, perhaps,the best swordsman of his day; and before his servant (who advanced,calling loudly to Lafemas to come forth from the wood where he hadremained from the first) could approach, or the robbers could show anysigns of taking part in the fray, the blades of the statesman and thefreebooter had crossed, and, maugre the Norman's vast strength, hisweapon was instantly wrenched from his hand, and, flying over the headsof his companions, struck against the bank above.Chavigni drew back, as if to pass his sword through the body of hisopponent; but the one moment he had been thus engaged, gave time forreflection on the imprudence of his conduct, and calmly returning hissword to its sheath, "Thou art no coward, after all," said he,addressing the Norman in a softened tone of voice; "but trust me,friend, that boasting graces but little a brave man. As for the rest, itis no disgrace to have measured swords with Chavigni."The Norman was one of those men so totally unaccustomed to command theirpassions, that, like slaves who have thrown off their chains, eachstruggles for the mastery, obtains it for a moment, and is againdeprived of power by some one more violent still.The dignity of the Statesman's manner, the apparent generosity of hisconduct, and the degree of gentleness with which he spoke, acted uponthe feelings of the Norman, like the waves of the sea when they meet thewaters of the Dordogne, driving them back even to their very source withirresistible violence. An unwonted tear trembled in his eye."Monseigneur, I have done foul wrong," said he, "in thus urging you,when you trusted yourself amongst us. But you have punished me more byyour forbearance, than if you had passed your sword through my body.""Ha! such thoughts in a freebooter!" cried Chavigni. "Friend, this isnot thy right trade. But what means all this smoke that gathers roundus?--Surely those bushes are on fire;--see the sparks how they rise!"His remark called the eyes of all upon that part of the dingle, intowhich the Norman had incautiously thrown his torch, on drawing hissword upon the Statesman. Continued sparks, mingled with a thick cloudof smoke, were rising quickly from it, showing plainly that the fire hadcaught some of the dry bushes thereabout; and in a moment after a brightflame burst forth, speedily communicating itself to the old witheredoaks round the spot, and threatening to spread destruction into theheart of the forest.In an instant all the robbers were engaged in the most strenuousendeavours to extinguish the fire; but the distance, to which the vaststrength of the Norman had hurled the torch among the bushes, renderedall access extremely difficult. No water was to be procured, and themeans they employed, that of cutting down the smaller trees and busheswith their swords and axes, instead of opposing any obstacle to theflames, seemed rather to accelerate their progress. From bush to bush,from tree to tree, the impetuous element spread on, till, findingthemselves almost girt in by the fire, the heat and smoke of which werebecoming too intense for endurance, the robbers abandoned their uselessefforts to extinguish it, and hurried to gather up their scattered armsand garments, before the flames reached the spot of their late revels.The Norman, however, together with Chavigni and his servant, stillcontinued their exertions; and even Lafemas, who had come forth from hishiding-place, gave some awkward assistance; when suddenly the Normanstopped, put his hand to his ear, to aid his hearing amidst the crackingof the wood and the roaring of the flames, and exclaimed, "I hear horseupon the hill--follow me, Monseigneur. St. Patrice guide us! this is abad business:--follow me!" So saying, three steps brought him to theflat below, where his companions were still engaged in gatheringtogether all they had left on the ground."Messieurs!" he cried to the robbers, "leave all useless lumber; I hearhorses coming down the hill. It must be a lieutenant of the forest, andthe gardes champtres, alarmed by the fire--Seek your horses,quick!--each his own way. We meet at St. Herman's brake--You,Monseigneur, follow me, I will be your guide; but dally not, Sir, if,as I guess, you would rather be deemed in the Rue St. Honor, than inthe Forest of St. Germain."So saying, he drew aside the boughs, disclosing a path somewhat to theright of that by which Chavigni had entered their retreat, and whichapparently led to the high sand-cliff which flanked it on the north. TheStatesman, with his servant and Lafemas, followed quickly upon hissteps, only lighted by the occasional gleam of the flames, as theyflashed and flickered through the foliage of the trees.Having to struggle every moment with the low branches of the hazel andthe tangled briars that shot across the path, it was some time ere theyreached the bank, and there the footway they had hitherto followedseemed to end. "Here are steps," said the Norman, in a low voice; "holdby the boughs, Monseigneur, lest your footing fail. Here is the firststep."The ascent was not difficult, and in a few minutes they had lost sightof the dingle and the flames by which it was surrounded; only every nowand then, where the branches opened, a broad red light fell upon theirpath, telling that the fire still raged with unabated fury. A moment ortwo after, they could perceive that the track entered upon a smallsavanna, on which the moon was still shining, her beams showing with astrange sickly light, mingled as they were with the fitful gleams of theflames and the red reflection of the sky. The whole of this small plain,however, was quite sufficiently illuminated to allow Chavigni and hiscompanion to distinguish two horses fastened by their bridles to a treehard by; and a momentary glance convinced the Statesman, that the spotwhere he and Lafemas had left their beasts, was again before him,although he had arrived there by another and much shorter path than thatby which he had been conducted to the rendezvous."We have left all danger behind us, Monseigneur," said the robber, afterhaving carefully examined the savanna, to ascertain that no spy lurkedamongst the trees around. "The flies are all swarming round the flames.There stand your horses--mount, and good speed attend you! Your servantmust go with me, for our beasts are not so nigh."Chavigni whispered a word in the robber's ear, who in return bowed low,with an air of profound respect. "I will attend your Lordship--" repliedhe, "--and without fear.""You may do so in safety," said the Statesman, and mounting his horse,after waiting a moment for the Judge, he took his way once more towardsthe high road to St. Germain.CHAPTER IV.In which the learned reader will discover that it is easy to raisesuspicions without any cause, and that royalty is not patentagainst superstition.We must now return to the principal personage of our history, andaccompany him on his way towards St. Germain, whither he was wendingwhen last we left him.There are some authors fond of holding their readers in suspense, ofbringing them into unexpected situations, and surprising them intoapplause. All such things are extremely appropriate in a novel orromance; but as this is a true and authentic history, and as eke Idetest what theatrical folks call "claptrap," I shall proceed to recordthe facts in the order in which they took place, as nearly as it ispossible to do so, and will, like our old friend Othello, "a roundunvarnished tale deliver."The distance to St. Germain was considerable, and naturally appearedstill longer than it really was, to persons unacquainted with one stepof the road before them, and apprehensive of a thousand occurrences bothlikely and unlikely. Nothing, however, happened to interrupt them on theway; and their journey passed over, not only in peace, but pretty muchin silence also. Both the ladies who occupied the inside of thecarriage, seemed to be very sufficiently taken up with their ownthoughts, and no way disposed to loquacity, so that the only break tothe melancholy stillness which hung over them, was now and then ahalf-formed sentence, proceeding from what was rapidly passing in themind of each, or the complaining creak of the heavy wheels, as theyground their unwilling way through the less practicable parts of theforest road.At times, too, a groan from the lips of their wounded companioninterrupted the silence, as the roughness of the way jolted theponderous vehicle in which he was carried, and re-awakened him to asense of pain.Long ere they had reached St. Germain, night had fallen over their road,and nothing could be distinguished by those within the carriage, but thefigures of the two horsemen who kept close to the windows. The interiorwas still darker, and it was only a kind of inarticulate sob from theother side, which made the Marchioness inquire, "Pauline! you are notweeping?"The young lady did not positively say whether she was so or not, butreplied in a voice which showed her mother's conjecture to be wellfounded."It was not thus, Mamma," she said, "that I had hoped to arrive atSt-Germain.""Fie, fie! Pauline," replied the old lady; "I have long tried to makeyou feel like a woman, and you are still a child, a weak child. Theseaccidents, and worse than these, occur to every one in the course oflife, and they must be met with fortitude. Have you flattered yourselfthat you would be exempt from the common sorrows of humanity?""But if he should die?" said Pauline, with the tone of one who longs tobe soothed out of their fears. The old lady, however, applied no suchunction to the wound in her daughter's heart. Madame de Beaumont hadherself been reared in the school of adversity; and while her mind andprinciples had been thus strengthened and confirmed, her feelings hadnot been rendered more acute. In the present instance, whether she spokeit heedlessly, or whether she intended to destroy one passion byexciting another, to cure Pauline's grief by rousing her anger, heranswer afforded but little consolation. "If he dies," said she dryly,"why I suppose the fair lady, whose picture he has in his bosom, wouldweep, and you----"A deep groan from their wounded companion broke in upon her speech, andsuggested to the Marchioness that he might not be quite so insensibleas he seemed. Such an answer, too, was not so palatable to Pauline as toinduce her to urge the conversation any farther; so that Silence againresumed her empire over the party, remaining undisturbed till the oldlady, drawing back the curtain, announced that they were entering St.Germain.A few minutes more brought them to the lodging of the Count de Blenau;and here the Marchioness descending, gave all the necessary directionsin order that the young gentleman might be carried to hissleeping-chamber in the easiest and most convenient method, whilePauline, without proffering any aid, sat back in a dark corner of thecarriage. Nor would any thing have shown that she was interested in whatpassed around her, but when the light of a torch glared into thevehicle, discovering a handkerchief pressed over her eyes to hide thetears she could not restrain.As soon as the Count was safely lodged in his own dwelling, the carriageproceeded towards the palace, which showed but little appearance ofregal state. However the mind of Pauline might have been accustomed topicture a court in all the gay and splendid colouring which youthfulimagination lends to anticipated pleasure, her thoughts were now far toofully occupied, to admit of her noticing the lonely and desertedappearance of the scene. But to Madame de Beaumont it was different.She, who remembered St. Germain in other days, looked in vain for thelights flashing from every window of the palace; for the servantshurrying along the different avenues, the sentinels parading beforeevery entrance, and the gay groups of courtiers and ladies, in all thebrilliant costume of the time, which used to crowd the terrace andgardens to enjoy the cool of the evening after the sun had gone down.All that she remembered had had its day; and nothing remained butsilence and solitude. A single sentry, at the principal gate, was allthat indicated the dwelling of a king; and it was not till the carriagehad passed under the archway, that even an attendant presented himselfto inquire who were the comers at that late hour.The principal domestic of Madame de Beaumont, who had already descendedfrom his horse, gave the name of his lady with all ceremony, and alsotendered a card (as he had been instructed by the Marchioness), on whichher style and title were fully displayed. The royal servant bowed low,saying that the Queen, his mistress, had expected the Marchionessbefore; and seizing the rope of a great bell, which hung above thestaircase, he rang such a peal that the empty galleries of the palacereturned a kind of groaning echo to the rude clang which seemed to mocktheir loneliness.Two or three more servants appeared, in answer to the bell's noisysummons; yet such was still the paucity of attendants, that Madame deBeaumont, even while she descended from her carriage, and began toascend the "grand escalier," had need to look, from time to time, at thesplendid fresco paintings which decorated the walls, and the crowns andfleurs-de-lis with which all the cornices were ornamented, before shecould satisfy herself that she really was in the royal chateau of St.Germain.Pauline's eyes, fixed on the floor, wandered little to any of theobjects round, yet, perhaps, the vast spaciousness of the palace,contrasted with the scarcity of its inhabitants, might cast even anadditional degree of gloom over her mind, saddened, as it already was,by the occurrences of the day. Doubtless, in the remote parts ofLanguedoc, where Pauline de Beaumont had hitherto dwelt, gay visions ofa court had come floating upon imagination like the lamps which theHindoos commit to the waters of the Ganges, casting a wild and uncertainlight upon the distant prospect; and it is probable, that even if St.Germain had possessed all its former splendour, Pauline would still havebeen disappointed, for youthful imagination always outrivals plainreality; and besides, there is an unpleasing feeling of solitudecommunicated by the aspect of a strange place, which detracts greatlyfrom the first pleasure of novelty. Thus there were a thousand reasonswhy Mademoiselle de Beaumont, as she followed the attendant through thelong empty galleries and vacant chambers of the palace, towards theapartments prepared for her mother and herself, felt none of those happysensations which she had anticipated from her arrival at court; nor wasit till, on entering the antechamber of their suite of rooms, she beheldthe gay smiling face of her Lyonaise waiting-maid, that she felt therewas any thing akin to old recollections within those cold and pompouswalls, which seemed to look upon her as a stranger.The soubrette had been sent forward the day before with a part of theMarchioness de Beaumont's equipage; and now, having endured a wholeday's comparative silence with the patience and fortitude of a martyr,she advanced to the two ladies with loquacity in her countenance, as ifresolved to make up, as speedily as possible, for the restraint underwhich her tongue had laboured during her short sojourn in the palace;but the deep gravity of Madame de Beaumont, and the melancholy air ofher daughter, checked Louise in full career; so that, having kissed hermistress on both cheeks, she paused, while her lip, like an overfilledreservoir whose waters are trembling on the very brink, seemed ready topour forth the torrent of words which she had so long suppressed.Pauline, as she passed through the anteroom, wiped the last tears fromher eyes, and on entering the saloon, advanced towards a mirror whichhung between the windows, as if to ascertain what traces they had leftbehind. The soubrette did not fail to advance, in order to adjust heryoung lady's dress, and finding herself once more in the exercise of herfunctions, the right of chattering seemed equally restored; for shecommenced immediately, beginning in a low and respectful voice, butgradually increasing as the thought of her mistress was swallowed up inthe more comprehensive idea of herself."Oh, dear Mademoiselle," said she, "I am so glad you are come at last.This place is so sad and so dull! Who would think it was a court? Why,I expected to see it all filled with lords and ladies, and instead ofthat, I have seen nothing but dismal-looking men, who go gliding aboutin silence, seeming afraid to open their lips, as if that cruel oldCardinal, whom they all tremble at, could hear every word they say. Idid see one fine-looking gentleman this morning, to be sure, with hisservants all in beautiful liveries of blue and gold, and horses as ifthere were fire coming out of their very eyes; but he rode away to hunt,after he had been half an hour with the Queen and Mademoiselle deHauteford, as they call her.""Mademoiselle who?" exclaimed Pauline, quickly, as if startled from herreverie by something curious in the name. "Who did you say, Louise?""Oh, such a pretty young lady!" replied the waiting-woman. "Mademoisellede Hauteford is her name. I saw her this morning as she went to theQueen's levee. She has eyes as blue as the sky, and teeth like pearlsthemselves; but withal she looks as cold and as proud as if she werethe Queen's own self."While the soubrette spoke, Pauline raised her large dark eyes to thetall Venetian mirror which stood before her, and which had neverreflected any thing lovelier than herself, as hastily she passed herfair small hand across her brow, brushing back the glossy ringlets thathung clustering over her forehead. But she was tired and pale withfatigue and anxiety; her eyes, too, bore the traces of tears, and with asigh and look of dissatisfaction, she turned away from the mirror,which, like every other invention of human vanity, often procures usdisappointment as well as gratification.Madame de Beaumont's eyes had been fixed upon Pauline; and translatingher daughter's looks with the instinctive acuteness of a mother, sheapproached with more gentleness than was her wont. "You are beautifulenough, my Pauline," said she, pressing a kiss upon her cheek; "you arebeautiful enough. Do not fear.""Nay, Mamma," replied Pauline, "I have nothing to fear, either frompossessing or from wanting beauty.""Thou art a silly girl, Pauline," continued her mother, "and take thesetrifles far too much to heart. Perhaps I was wrong concerning this samepicture. It was but a random guess. Besides, even were it true, wherewere the mighty harm? These men are all alike, Pauline--Likebutterflies, they rest on a thousand flowers before they settle on anyone. We all fancy that our own lover is different from his fellows; but,believe me, my child, the best happiness a woman can boast, is that ofbeing most carefully deceived.""Then no such butterfly love for me, Mamma," replied Pauline, her cheekslightly colouring as she spoke. "I would rather not know this sweetpoison--love. My heart is still free, though my fancy may have--have--""May have what, Pauline?" demanded her mother, with a doubtful smile."My dear child, thy heart, and thy fancy, I trow, have not been soseparate as thou thinkest.""Nay, Mamma," answered Pauline, "my fancy, like an insect, may have beencaught in the web of a spider; but the enemy has not yet seized me, andI will break through while I can.""But, first, let us be sure that we are right," said Madame de Beaumont."For as every rule has its exception, there be some men, whose heartsare even worthy the acceptance of a squeamish girl, who, knowing nothingof the world, expects to meet with purity like her own. At all events,love, De Blenau is the soul of honour, and will not stoop to deceit. Injustice, you must not judge without hearing him.""But," said Pauline, not at all displeased with the refutation of herown ideas, and even wishing, perhaps, to afford her mother occasion tocombat them anew,--"but--"The sentence, however, was never destined to be concluded; for, as shespoke, the door of the apartment opened, and a form glided in, theappearance of which instantly arrested the words on Pauline's lips, andmade her draw back with an instinctive feeling of respect.The lady who entered had passed that earlier period of existence whenbeauties and graces succeed each other without pause, like the flowersof spring, that go blooming on from the violet to the rose. She was inthe summer of life, but it was the early summer, untouched by autumn;and her form, though it possessed no longer the airy lightness of youth,had acquired in dignity a degree of beauty which compensated for thesofter loveliness that years had stolen away. Her brown hair fell in aprofusion of large curls round a face, which, if not strictly handsome,was highly pleasing: and even many sorrows and reverses, by mingling anexpression of patient melancholy with the gentle majesty of hercountenance, produced a greater degree of interest than the featurescould have originally excited.Those even who sought for mere beauty of feature, would have perceivedthat her eyes were quick and fine; that her skin was of the mostdelicate whiteness, except where it was disfigured by the use of rouge;and that her small mouth might have served as model to a statuary,especially while her lips arched with a warm smile of pleasure andaffection, as advancing into the apartment, she pressed Madame deBeaumont to her bosom, who on her part, bending low, received theembrace of Anne of Austria with the humble deference of a respectfulsubject towards the condescension of their sovereign."Once more restored to me, my dear Madame de Beaumont!" said the Queen."His Eminence of Richelieu does indeed give me back one of the best ofmy friends--And this is your Pauline."--She added, turning toMademoiselle de Beaumont, "You were but young, my fair Demoiselle, whenlast I saw you. You have grown up a lovely flower from a noble root; buttruly you will never be spoiled by splendour at our court."As she spoke, her mind seemed naturally to return to other days, and hereye fixed intently on the ground, as if engaged in tracing out the planof her past existence, running over all the lines of sorrow, danger anddisappointed hope, till the task became too bitter, and she turned tothe Marchioness with one of those long deep sighs, that almost alwaysfollow a review of the days gone by, forming a sort of epitaph to thedreams, the wishes, and the joys, that once were dear, and are now nomore."When you met me, De Beaumont," said the Queen, "with the proud Duke ofGuise on the banks of the Bidasoa--quitting the kingdom of my father,and entering the kingdom of my husband--with an army for my escort, andprinces kneeling at my feet--little, little did ever you or I think,that Anne of Austria, the wife of a great king, and daughter of a longline of monarchs, would, in after years, be forced to dwell at St.Germain, without guards, without court, without attendants, but such asthe Cardinal de Richelieu chooses to allow her.--The Cardinal deRichelieu!" she proceeded thoughtfully; "the servant of myhusband!--but no less the master of his master, and the king of hisking.""I can assure your Majesty," replied Madame de Beaumont, with a deeptone of feeling which had no hypocrisy in it, for her whole heart wasbound by habit, principle, and inclination, to her royal mistress--"Ican assure your Majesty, that many a tear have I shed over the sorrowsof my Queen; and when his Eminence drove me from the court, I regrettednot the splendour of a palace, I regretted not the honour of serving mysovereign, I regretted not the friends I left behind, or the hopes Ilost, but I regretted that I could not be the sharer of my mistress'smisfortunes.--But your Majesty has now received a blessing from Heaven,"she continued, willing to turn the conversation from the troubled courseof memory to the more agreeable channels of hope--"a blessing which wescarcely dreamed of, a consolation under all present sorrows, and abright prospect for the years to come."Oh, yes, my little Louis, you would say," replied the Queen, her facelightening with all a mother's joy as she spoke of her son. "He isindeed a cherub; and sure am I, that if God sends him years, he willredress his mother's wrongs by proving the greatest of his race."She spoke of the famous Louis the Fourteenth, and some might havethought she prophesied. But it was only the fervour of a mother's hope,an ebullition of that pure feeling, which alone, of all the affectionsof the heart, the most sordid poverty cannot destroy, and the proudestrank can hardly check."He is indeed a cherub," continued the Queen; "and such was your Paulineto you, De Beaumont, when the Cardinal drove you from my side: aconsolation not only in your exile, but also in your mourning for yournoble lord. Come near, young lady; let me see if thou art like thyfather."Pauline approached; and the Queen laying her hand gently upon her arm,ran her eye rapidly over her face and figure, every now and then pausingfor a moment, and seeming to call memory to her aid, in the comparisonshe was making between the dead and the living. But suddenly shestarted back, "Sainte Vierge!" cried she, crossing herself, "yourdress is all dabbled with blood. What bad omen is this?""May it please your Majesty," said the Marchioness, half smiling at theQueen's superstition, for her own strong mind rejected many of theerrors of the day, "that blood is only an omen of Pauline's charitabledisposition; for in the forest hard by, we came up with a woundedcavalier, and, like a true demoiselle errante, Pauline rendered himpersonal aid, even at the expense of her robe.""Nay, nay, De Beaumont," said the Queen, "it matters not how it came; itis a bad omen: some misfortune is about to happen. I remember the daybefore my father died, the Conde de Saldaa came to court with a spot ofblood upon the lace of his cardinal; and on that fatal day which----"The door of the apartment at this moment opened, and Anne of Austria,filled with her own peculiar superstition, stopped in the midst of herspeech and turned her eye anxiously towards it, as if she expected thecoming of some ghastly apparition. The figure that entered, however,though it possessed a dignity scarcely earthly, and a calm stillgrace--an almost inanimate composure, rarely seen in beings agitated byhuman passions, was, nevertheless, no form calculated to inspire alarm."Oh, Mademoiselle de Hauteford!" cried the Queen, her face brighteningas she spoke, "De Beaumont, you will love her, for that she is one of myfirmest friends."At the name of De Hauteford, Pauline drew up her slight elegant figureto its full height, with a wild start, like a deer suddenly frightenedby some distant sound, and drawing her hand across her forehead, brushedback the two or three dark curls which had again fallen over her clearfair brow."De Hauteford!" cried Anne of Austria as the young lady advanced, "whathas happened? You look pale--some evil is abroad.""I would not have intruded on your Majesty, or on these ladies," saidMademoiselle de Hauteford with a graceful but cold inclination of thehead towards the strangers, "had it not been that Monsieur Seguin, yourMajesty's Surgeon, requests the favour of an audience immediately. Nordoes he wish to be seen by the common attendants; in truth, he hasfollowed me to the antechamber, where he waits your Majesty's pleasure.""Admit him, admit him!" cried the Queen. "What can he want at thishour?"The surgeon was instantly brought into the presence of the Queen byMademoiselle de Hauteford; but, after approaching his royal mistresswith a profound bow, he remained in silence glancing his eye towards thestrangers who stood in the apartment, in such a manner as to intimatethat his communication required to be made in private."Speak, speak, Seguin!" cried the Queen, translating his look andanswering it at once; "these are all friends, old and dear friends.""If such be your Majesty's pleasure," replied the Surgeon, with thatsort of short dry voice, which generally denotes a man of few words. "Imust inform you at once, that young Count de Blenau has been thismorning attacked by robbers, while hunting in the forest, and isseverely hurt."While Seguin communicated this intelligence, Pauline (she scarce knewwhy) fixed her eye upon Mademoiselle de Hauteford, whose clear palecheek, ever almost of the hue of alabaster, showed that it could becomestill paler. The Queen too, though the rouge she wore concealed anychange of complexion, appeared manifestly agitated. "I told you so, DeBeaumont," she exclaimed--"that blood foreboded evil: I never knew thesign to fail. This is bad news truly, Seguin," she continued. "Poor DeBlenau! surely he will not die.""I hope not, Madam," replied the Surgeon; "I see every chance of hisrecovery.""But speak more freely," said the Queen. "Have you learnt any thing fromhim? These are all friends, I tell you.""The Count is very weak, Madam," answered Seguin, "both from loss ofblood and a stunning blow on the head; but he desired me to tell yourMajesty, that though the wound is in his side, his heart is uninjured!""Oh, I understand, I understand," exclaimed the Queen. "De Blenau is oneout of a thousand; I must write him a note; follow me, Seguin. Goodnight, dear Madame de Beaumont. Farewell, Pauline!--Come to my leveeto-morrow, and we will talk over old stories and new hopes.--But have acare, Pauline--No more blood upon your robe. It is a bad sign in thehouse of Austria."The moment the Queen was gone, Pauline pleaded fatigue, and retired toher chamber, followed by her maid Louise, who, be it remarked, hadremained in the room during the Royal visit."This is a strange place, this St. Germain," said the waiting-woman, asshe undressed her mistress."It is indeed!" replied Pauline. "I wish I had never seen it. But ofone thing let me warn you, Louise, before it is too late. Never repeatany thing you may see or hear, while you are at the court; for if youdo, your life may answer for it.""My life! Mademoiselle Pauline," exclaimed the soubrette, as if shedoubted her ears."Yes indeed, your life!" replied the young lady: "So beware.""Then I wish I had never seen the place either," rejoined the maid; "forwhat is the use of seeing and hearing things, if one may not talk aboutthem?--and who can be always watching one's tongue?"CHAPTER V.A Chapter of mighty import, which may be read or not, as the Readerthinks fit, the Book being quite as well without it.With the happy irregularity of all true stories, we must return, for amoment, to a very insignificant person,--the Woodman of Mantes. Indeed,I have to beg my reader's pardon for saying so much about any one underthe rank of a Chevalier at least; but all through this most untractableof all histories, I have been pestered with a set of shabby fellows invery indifferent circumstances. Woodcutters, robbers, gentlemen'sservants, and the like, who make themselves so abominably useful, thatthough we wish them at the Devil all the time, we can no way do withoutthem. Let the sin not be attributed to me; for I declare, upon myconscience, that when first I undertook to record this tale, I attempteda thorough reform; I superseded a great number of subordinatecharacters, put others upon the retired list, and dismissed a great manyas useless sinecurists; but when I had done, all was in confusion; andthen, after considering matters for half an hour, and turning over apage or two in the book of Nature, I found, that the most brilliantactions and the greatest events were generally brought about from themeanest motives and most petty causes: I perceived, that women andvalets de-chambre govern the world: I found that saur-kraut haddisagreed with Sarah Duchess of Marlborough, made her insolent to QueenAnne, made Queen Anne threaten to box her ears, made England resign heradvantages over France--placed the Bourbon dynasty on the throne ofSpain, and changed the face of Europe even to the present day. So, ifsaur-kraut did all this, surely I may return to Philip, the woodman ofMantes.Chavigni, as we have seen, cast his purse upon the ground, and rodeaway from the cottage of the Woodman, little heeding what soinsignificant an agent might do or say. Yet Philip's first thought wasone which would have procured him speedy admission to the Bastille, hadChavigni been able to divine its nature. "The young Count shall know allabout it," said Philip to himself. "That's a great rogue in Isabel andsilver, for all his fine clothes, or I'm much mistaken."His next object of attention was the purse; and after various pros andcons, Inclination, the best logician in the world, reasoned him intotaking it. "For," said Philip, "dirty fingers soil no gold;" and havingcarefully put it into his pouch, the Woodman laid his finger upon theside of his nose, and plunged headlong into a deep meditation concerningthe best and least suspicious method of informing the young Count deBlenau of all he had seen, heard, or suspected. We will not follow thecourse of this cogitation, which, as it doubtless took place in theFrench tongue, must necessarily suffer by translation, but taking ashort cut straight through all the zig-zags of Philip's mind, arrivedirectly at the conclusion, or rather at the consequences, which werethese. In the first place, he commanded his son Charles to load the mulewith wood, notwithstanding the boy's observation, that no one would buywood at that time of the morning, or rather the night; for, to make useof Shakspeare's language, the Morn, far from being yet clad in anyrusset mantle, was snugly wrapped up in the blanket of the dark, andsnoring away, fast asleep, like her betters.Precisely in the same situation as Aurora, that is to say, soundlysleeping, till her ordinary hour of rising, was Joan, the Woodman'swife. Philip, however, by sundry efforts, contrived to awaken her to asense of external things; and perceiving that, after various yawns andstretches, her mind had arrived at the point of comprehending a simpleproposition, "Get up, Joan, get up!" cried he. "I want you to write aletter for me; writing being a gift that, by the blessing of God, I donot possess."The wife readily obeyed; for Philip, though as kind as the air ofspring, had a high notion of marital privileges, and did not oftensuffer his commands to be disputed within his little sphere of dominion.However, it seemed a sort of tenure by which his sway was held, thatJoan, his wife, should share in all his secrets; and accordingly, in thepresent instance, the good Woodman related in somewhat prolix style, notonly all that had passed between Chavigni and Lafemas in the house, butmuch of what they had said before they even knocked at his door."For you must know, Joan," said he, "that I could not sleep for thinkingof all this day's bad work; and, as I lay awake, I heard horses stop atthe water, and people speaking, and very soon what they said made mewish to hear more, which I did, as I have told you. And now, Joan, Ithink it right, as a Christian and a man, to let this young cavalierknow what they are plotting against him. So sit thee down; here is a penand ink, and a plain sheet out of the boy's holy catechism,--Godforgive me! But it could not go to a better use."It matters not much to tell all the various considerations which wereweighed and discussed by Philip and his wife in the construction of thisepistle. Suffice it to say, that like two unskilful players atbattledoor and shuttlecock, they bandied backwards and forwards the sameobjections a thousand times between them, for ever letting them drop,and taking them up again anew, till such time as day was well risenbefore they finished. Neither would it much edify the world, in allprobability, to know the exact style and tenor of the composition whenit was complete, although Philip heard his wife read it over with nosmall satisfaction, and doubtless thought it as pretty a piece oforatory as ever was penned.It is now unfortunately lost to the public, and all that can besatisfactorily vouched upon the subject is, that it was calculated toconvey to the Count de Blenau all the information which the Woodcutterpossessed, although that information might be clothed in homelylanguage, without much perfection, either in writing or orthography.When it had been read, and re-read, and twisted up according to the bestconceit of the good couple, it was intrusted to Charles, the Woodman'sboy, with many a charge and direction concerning its delivery, For hispart, glad of a day's sport, he readily undertook the task, and drivingthe laden mule before him, set out, whistling on his way to St.Germain's. He had not, however, proceeded far, when he was overtaken byPhilip with new directions; the principal one being to say, if any oneshould actually see him deliver the note, and make inquiries, that itcame from a lady. "For," said Philip,--and he thought the observationwas a shrewd one,--"so handsome a youth as the young Count must havemany ladies who write to him."Charles did not very well comprehend what it was all about, but he waswell enough contented to serve the young Count, who had given him manya kind word and a piece of silver, when the hunting-parties of the courthad stopped to water their horses at the abreuvoir. The boy wasdiligent and active, and soon reached St. Germain. His next task was tofind out the lodging of the Count de Blenau: and, after looking aboutfor some time, he addressed himself, for information, to a stout,jovial-looking servant, who was sauntering down the street, gazing aboutat the various hotels, with a look of easy nonchalance, as if idlenesswas his employment."Why do you ask, my boy?" demanded the man, without answering hisquestion."I want to sell my wood," replied the Woodman's son, remembering thathis errand was to be private. "Where does he lodge, good Sir?""Why, the Count does not buy wood in this hot weather," rejoined theother."I should suppose the Count does not buy wood, himself, at all," repliedthe boy, putting the question aside with all the shrewdness of a Frenchpeasant; "but, perhaps, his cook will.""Suppose I buy your wood, my man," said the servant."Why, you are very welcome, Sir," answered Charles; "but if you do notwant it, I pray you, in honesty, show me which is the Count de Blenau'shotel.""Well, I will show thee," said the servant; "I am e'en going thithermyself, on the part of the Marquise de Beaumont, to ask after the youngCount's health.""Oh, then, you are one of those who were with the carriage yesterday,when he was wounded in the wood," exclaimed the boy. "Now I rememberyour colours. Were you not one of those on horseback?""Even so," answered the man; "and if I forget not, thou art theWoodman's boy. But come, prithee, tell us what is thy real errand withthe Count. We are all his friends, you know; and selling him the wood isall a tale."Charles thought for a moment, to determine whether he should tell theman all he knew or not; but remembering the answer his father hadfurnished him with, he replied, "The truth then is, I carry him a notefrom a lady.""Oh, ho! my little Mercury!" cried the servant; "so you are as closewith your secrets as if you were an older politician. This is the wayyou sell wood, is it?""I do not know what you mean by Mercury," rejoined the boy."Why he was a great man in his day," replied the servant, "and, as Itake it, used to come and go between the gods and goddesses;notwithstanding which, Monsieur Rubens, who is the greatest painter thatever lived, has painted this same Mercury as one of the late Queen's[A]council, but nevertheless he was a carrier of messages, and so forth."[A] Alluding, no doubt, to the picture of the reconciliation of Mary deMedicis and her son Louis XIII. in which Mercury seems hand in glovewith the cardinals and statesmen of the day."Why, then, thou art more Mercury than I, for thou carriest a message,and I a letter," answered Charles, as they approached the hotel of theCount, towards which they had been bending their steps during thisconversation. Their proximity to his dwelling, in all probability, savedCharles from an angry answer; for his companion did not seem at allpleased with having the name of Mercury retorted upon himself; andintending strongly to impress upon the Woodman's boy that he was aperson of far too great consequence to be jested with, he assumed a toneof double pomposity towards the servant who appeared on the steps of thehotel. "Tell Henry de La Mothe, the Count's page," said the servant,"that the Marquise de Beaumont has sent to inquire after his master'shealth."The servant retired with the message, and in a moment after Henry de LaMothe himself appeared, and informed the messenger that his master wasgreatly better. He had slept well, he said, during the night; and hissurgeons assured him that the wounds which he had received were likelyto produce no farther harm than the weakness naturally consequent uponso great a loss of blood as that which he had sustained. Having giventhis message on his master's account, Henry, on his own, began toquestion the servant concerning many little particulars of his ownfamily; his father being, as already said, Fermier to Madame deBeaumont.Charles, the Woodman's son, perceiving that the conversation had turnedto a subject too interesting soon to be discussed, glided past theMarchioness's servant, placed the note he carried in the hand of theCount's Page, pressed his finger on his lip, in sign that it was to begiven privately, and detaching himself from them, without waiting to bequestioned, drove back his mule through the least known parts of theforest, and rendered an account to his father of the success of hisexpedition."Who can that note be from?" said the Marchioness de Beaumont's servantto Henry de La Mothe. "The boy told me, it came from a lady.""From Mademoiselle de Hauteford, probably," replied the Page,thoughtfully. "I must give it to my master without delay, if he bestrong enough to read it. We will talk more another day, goodfriend;"--and he left him."From Mademoiselle de Hauteford!" said the man. "Oh, ho!"--and he wenthome to tell all he knew to Louise, the soubrette.CHAPTER VI.The Marquis de Cinq Mars, the Count de Fontrailles, and King Louisthe Thirteenth, all making fools of themselves in their own way.There are some spots on the earth which seem marked out as the scene ofextraordinary events, and which, without any peculiar beauty, or otherintrinsic quality to recommend them, acquire a transcendent interest, asthe theatre of great actions. Such is Chantilly, the history of whosewalls might furnish many a lay to the poet, and many a moral to thesage; and even now, by its magnificence and its decay, it offers a newcomment on the vanity of splendour, and proves, by the forgottengreatness of its lords, how the waves of time are the true waters ofoblivion.Be that as it may, Montmorency, Conde, are names so woven in the web ofhistory, that nothing can tear them out, and these were the lords ofChantilly. But amongst all that its roof has sheltered, no one, perhaps,is more worthy of notice than Louis the Thirteenth: the son of Henry theFourth and Mary de Medicis, born to an inheritance of high talents andhigh fortune, with the inspiring incitement of a father's glory, and thepowerful support of a people's love.It is sad that circumstance--that stumbling block of great minds--thatconfounder of deep-laid schemes--that little, mighty, unseen controllerof all man's actions, should find pleasure in bending to its will, thatwhich Nature originally seemed to place above its sway. Endued with allthe qualities a throne requires, brave, wise, clear-sighted, andgenerous; with his mother's talents and his father's courage, the eventsof his early life quelled every effort of Louis's mind, and left him butthe slave of an ambitious minister! a monarch but in name! the shadowof a King! How it was so, matters not to this history--it is recorded ona more eloquent page. But at the time of my tale, the brighter part oflife had passed away from King Louis; and now that it had fallen intothe sear, he seemed to have given it up as unworthy a farther effort. Hestruggled not even for that appearance of Royal state which his proudMinister was unwilling to allow him; and, retired at Chantilly, passedhis time in a thousand weak amusements, which but served to hurry by themoments of a void and weary existence.It was at this time, that the first news of the Cardinal de Richelieu'sillness began to be noised abroad. His health had long been declining;but so feared was that redoubtable Minister, that though many remarkedthe increased hollowness of his dark eye, and the deepening lines uponhis pale cheek, no one dared to whisper what many hoped--that the tyrantof both King and people was falling under the sway of a still strongerhand.The morning was yet in its prime. The grey mist had hardly rolled awayfrom the old towers and battlements of the Chateau of Chantilly, which,unlike the elegant building afterwards erected on the same spot, offeredthen little but strong fortified walls and turrets.--The heavy night-dewlay still sparkling upon the long grass in the avenues of the Park, whentwo gentlemen were observed walking near the Palace, turning up and downthe alley, then called the Avenue de Luzarches, with that kind ofsauntering pace which indicated their conversation to be of no veryinteresting description.Perhaps, in all that vast variety of shapes which Nature has bestowedupon mankind, and in all those innate differences by which she hasdistinguished man's soul, no two figures or two minds could have beenfound more opposite than those of the two men thus keeping a willingcompanionship--the Count de Fontrailles, and the Marquis de Cinq Mars,Grand Ecuyer, or, as it may be best translated, Master of the Horse.Cinq Mars, though considerably above the common height of men, wasformed in the most finished and elegant proportion, and possessed anative dignity of demeanour, which characterized even those wildgesticulations in which the excess of a bright and enthusiastic mindoften led him to indulge.On the other hand, Fontrailles, short in stature, and mean inappearance, was in countenance equally unprepossessing. He had but oneredeeming feature, in the quick grey eye, that, with the clear keennessof its light, seemed to penetrate the deepest thoughts of those uponwhom it was turned.Such is the description that history yields of these two celebrated men;and I will own that my hankering after physiognomy has induced me totranscribe it here, inasmuch as the mind of each was like his person.In the heart of Cinq Mars dwelt a proud nobility of spirit, which,however he might be carried away by the fiery passions of his nature,ever dignified his actions with something of great and generous. But thesoul of Fontrailles, ambitious, yet mean, wanted all the wild ardour ofhis companion, but wanted also all his better qualities; possessingalone that clear, piercing discernment, which, more like instinct thanjudgment, showed him always the exact moment of danger, and pointed outthe means of safety.And yet, though not friends, they were often (as I have said)companions; for Cinq Mars was too noble to suspect, and Fontrailles toowary to be known--besides, in the present instance, he had a point tocarry, and therefore was doubly disguised."You have heard the news, doubtless, Cinq Mars," said Fontrailles,leading the way from the great Avenue de Luzarches into one of thesmaller alleys, where they were less liable to be watched; for he wellknew that the conversation he thus broached would lead to those wildstarts and gestures in his companion, which might call upon them somesuspicion, if observed. Cinq Mars made no reply, and he proceeded. "TheCardinal is ill!" and he fixed his eye upon the Master of the Horse, asif he would search his soul. But Cinq Mars still was silent, and,apparently deeply busied with other thoughts, continued beating theshrubs on each side of the path with his sheathed sword, without even aglance towards his companion. After a moment or two, however, he raisedhis head with an air of careless abstraction: "What a desert this placehas become!" said he; "look how all these have grown up, between thetrees. One might really be as well in a forest as a royal parknow-a-days.""But you have made me no answer," rejoined Fontrailles, returningperseveringly to the point on which his companion seemed unwilling totouch: "I said, the Cardinal is ill.""Well, well! I hear," answered Cinq Mars, with a peevish start, like arestive horse forced forward on a road he is unwilling to take. "What isit you would have me say?--That I am sorry for it? Well, be it so--I amsorry for it--sorry that a trifling sickness, which will pass away in amoon, should give France hopes of that liberation, which is yet faroff.""But, nevertheless, you would be sorry were this great man to die," saidFontrailles, putting it half as a question, half as an undoubtedproposition, and looking in the face of the Marquis, with an appearanceof hesitating uncertainty.Cinq Mars could contain himself no more. "What!" cried he vehemently,"sorry for the peace of the world!--sorry for the weal of mycountry!--sorry for the liberty of my King! Why, I tell thee,Fontrailles, should the Cardinal de Richelieu die, the people of Francewould join in pulling down the scaffolds and the gibbets, to makebonfires of them!""Who ever dreamed of hearing you say so?" said his companion. "AllFrance agrees with you, no doubt; but we all thought that the Marquis deCinq Mars either loved the Cardinal, or feared him, too much to see hiscrimes.""Fear him!" exclaimed Cinq Mars, the blood mounting to his cheek, as ifthe very name of fear wounded his sense of honour. He then paused,looked into his real feelings, shook his head mournfully, and after amoment's interval of bitter silence added, "True! true! Who is therethat does not fear him? Nevertheless, it is impossible to see one'scountry bleeding for the merciless cruelty of one man, the prisonsfilled with the best and bravest of the land to quiet his suspicions,and the King held in worse bondage than a slave to gratify the daringambition of this insatiate churchman, and not to wish that Heaven hadsent it otherwise.""It is not Heaven's fault, Sir," replied Fontrailles; "it is our own,that we do suffer it. Had we one man in France who, with sufficientcourage, talent, and influence, had the true spirit of a patriot, ourunhappy country might soon be freed from the bondage under which shegroans.""But where shall we find such a man?" asked the Master of the Horse,either really not understanding the aim of Fontrailles, or wishing toforce him to a clearer explanation of his purpose. "Such an undertakingas you hint at," he continued, "must be well considered, and wellsupported, to have any effect. It must be strengthened by wit--bycourage--and by illustrious names.--It must have the power of wealth,and the power of reputation.--It must be the rousing of the lion withall his force, to shake off the toils by which he is encompassed.""But still there must be some one to rouse him," said Fontrailles,fixing his eyes on Cinq Mars with a peculiar expression, as if to denotethat he was the man alluded to. "Suppose this were France," heproceeded, unbuckling his sword from the belt, and drawing a few lineson the ground with the point of the sheath: "show me a province or acircle that will not rise at an hour's notice to cast off the yoke ofthis hated Cardinal. Here is Normandy, almost in a state ofrevolt;--here is Guienne, little better;--here is Sedan, our own;--hereare the Mountains of Auvergne, filled with those whom his tyranny hasdriven into their solitude for protection; and here is Paris and itsinsulted Parliament, waiting but for opportunity.""And here," said Cinq Mars, with a melancholy smile, following theexample of his companion, and pointing out with his sword, as if on amap, the supposed situations of the various places to which hereferred--"And here is Peronne, and Rouen, and Havre, and Lyons, andTours, and Brest, and Bordeaux, and every town or fortress in France,filled with his troops and governed by his creatures; and here isFlanders, with Chaunes and Mielleray, and fifteen thousand men, at hisdisposal; and here is Italy, with Bouillon, and as many more, ready tomarch at his command!""But suppose I could show," said Fontrailles, laying his hand on hiscompanion's arm, and detaining him as he was about to walk on--"butsuppose I could show, that Mielleray would not march,--that Bouillonwould declare for us,--that England would aid us with money, and Spainwould put five thousand men at our command,--that the King's ownbrother--"Cinq Mars waved his hand: "No! no! no!" said he, in a firm, bitter tone:"Gaston of Orleans has led too many to the scaffold already. The weak,wavering Duke is ever the executioner of his friends. Remember poorMontmorency!""Let me proceed," said Fontrailles; "hear me to an end, and then judge.I say, suppose that the King's own brother should give us his name andinfluence, and the King himself should yield us his consent.""Ha!" exclaimed Cinq Mars, pausing abruptly.--The idea of gaining theKing had never occurred to him; and now it came like a ray of sunshinethrough a cloud, brightening the prospect which had been before inshadow. "Think you the King would consent?""Assuredly!" replied his companion. "Does he not hate the Cardinal asmuch as any one? Does not his blood boil under the bonds he cannotbreak? And would he not bless the man who gave him freedom? Think, CinqMars!" he continued, endeavouring to throw much energy into his manner,for he knew that the ardent mind of his companion wanted but the sparkof enthusiasm to inflame--"think, what a glorious object! to free alikethe people and their sovereign, and to rescue the many victims even nowdestined to prove the tyrant's cruelty!--Think, think of the gloriousreward, the thanks of a King, the gratitude of a nation, and theblessings of thousands saved from dungeons and from death!"It worked as he could have wished. The enthusiasm of his words had theirfull effect on the mind of his companion. As the other went on, the eyeof Cinq Mars lightened with all the wild ardour of his nature; andstriking his hand upon the hilt of his sword, as if longing to draw itin the inspiring cause of his Country's liberty, "Glorious indeed!" heexclaimed,--"glorious indeed!"But immediately after, fixing his glance upon the ground, he fell intomeditation of the many circumstances of the times; and as his mind'seye ran over the difficulties and dangers which surrounded theenterprise, the enthusiasm which had beamed in his eye, like the lastflash of an expiring fire, died away, and he replied with a sigh, "Whatyou have described, Sir, is indeed a glorious form--But it is dead--itwants a soul. The King, though every thing great and noble, has been toolong governed now to act for himself. The Duke of Orleans is weak andundecided as a child. Bouillon is far away--""And where is Cinq Mars?" demanded Fontrailles,--"where is the man whomthe King really loves? If Cinq Mars has forgot his own powers, so hasnot France; and she now tells him--though by so weak a voice asmine--that he is destined to be the soul of this great body to animatethis goodly frame, to lead this conspiracy, if that can be so calledwhich has a King at its head, and Princes for its support."In these peaceable days, when we are taught to pray against privyconspiracy, both as a crime and misfortune, the very name is startlingto all orthodox ears; but at the time I speak of, it had no such effect.Indeed, from the commencement of the wars between Henri Quatre and theLeague, little else had existed but a succession of conspiracies, whichone after another had involved every distinguished person in thecountry, and brought more than one noble head to the block. Men's mindshad become so accustomed to the sound, that the explosion of a new plotscarcely furnished matter for a day's wonder, as the burghers of abesieged city at length hardly hear the roaring of the cannon againsttheir walls; and so common had become the name of conspirator, thatthere were very few men in the realm who had not acquired a just titleto such an appellation.The word "conspiracy," therefore, carried nothing harsh or disagreeableto the mind of Cinq Mars. What Fontrailles proposed to him, bore aplausible aspect. It appeared likely to succeed; and, if it did so,offered him that reward for which, of all others, his heartbeat--Glory! But there was one point on which he paused: "You forget,"said he,--"you forget that I owe all to Richelieu,--you forget that,however he may have wronged this country, he has not wronged me; andthough I may wish that such a being did not exist, it is not for me toinjure him.""True, most true!" replied his wily companion, who knew that theappearance of frank sincerity would win more from Cinq Mars than aughtelse: "if he has done as you say, be still his friend. Forget yourcountry in your gratitude--though in the days of ancient virtuepatriotism was held paramount. We must not hope for such things now--sono more of that. But if I can show that this proud Minister has neverserved you; if I can prove that every honour which of late has fallenupon you, far from being a bounty of the Cardinal, has proceeded solelyfrom the favour of the King, and has been wrung from the hard Churchmanas a mere concession to the Monarch's whim; if it can be made clear thatthe Marquis Cinq Mars would now have been a Duke and Constable ofFrance, had not his kind friend the Cardinal whispered he was unfit forsuch an office:--then will you have no longer the excuse of friendship,and your Country's call must and shall be heard.""I can scarce credit your words, Fontrailles," replied Cinq Mars. "Youspeak boldly,--but do you speak truly?""Most truly, on my life!" replied Fontrailles. "Think you, Cinq Mars, ifI did not well know that I could prove each word I have said, that thusI would have placed my most hidden thoughts in the power of a man whoavows himself the friend of Richelieu?""Prove to me,--but prove to me, that I am not bound to him ingratitude," cried Cinq Mars vehemently,--"take from me the bonds bywhich he has chained my honour, and I will hurl him from his height ofpower, or die in the attempt.""Hush!" exclaimed Fontrailles, laying his finger on his lip as theyturned into another alley, "we are no longer alone. Govern yourself,Cinq Mars, and I will prove every tittle of what I have advanced ere webe two hours older."This was uttered in a low tone of voice; for there was indeed anothergroup in the same avenue with themselves. The party, which was rapidlyapproaching, consisted of three persons, of whom one was a step inadvance, and, though in no degree superior to the others in point ofdress, was distinguished from them by that indescribable something whichconstitutes the idea of dignity. He was habited in a plain suit of blacksilk with buttons of jet, and every part of his dress, even to thesheath and hilt of his couteau de chasse, corresponding. On his righthand he wore a thick glove, of the particular kind generally used by thesportsmen of the period, but more particularly by those who employedthemselves in the then fashionable sport of bird-catching; and the netsand snares of various kinds carried by the other two, seemed to evincethat such had been the morning's amusement of the whole party.The King, for such was the person who approached, was rather above themiddle height, and of a spare habit. His complexion was very pale; andhis hair, which had one time been of the richest brown, was now mingledthroughout with grey. But still there was much to interest, both in hisfigure and countenance. There was a certain air of easy self-possessionin all his movements; and even when occupied with the most trivialemployment, which was often the case, there was still a degree ofdignity in his manner, that seemed to show his innate feeling of theiremptiness, and his own consciousness of how inferior they were, both tohis situation and his talents. His features at all times appearedhandsome, but more especially when any sudden excitement called up thelatent animation of his dark-brown eye, recalling to the minds of thosewho remembered the days gone before, that young and fiery Prince whocould not brook the usurped sway even of his own highly talented mother,but who had now become the slave of her slave. The consciousness of hisfallen situation, and of his inability to call up sufficient energy ofmind to disengage himself, generally cast upon him an appearance ofprofound sadness: occasionally, however, flashes of angry irritabilitywould break across the cloud of melancholy which hung over him, and showthe full expression of his countenance, which at other times displayednothing but the traces of deep and bitter thought, or a momentarysparkle of weak, unthinking merriment. So frequent, however, were thechanges to be observed in the depressed Monarch, that some persons evendoubted whether they were not assumed to cover deeper intentions. Itmight be so, or it might not; but at all events, between the intervalsof these natural or acquired appearances, would often shine out stronggleams of his mother's unyielding spirit, or his father's generousheart.The rapid pace with which he always proceeded, soon brought the Kingclose to Cinq Mars and Fontrailles. "Good-morrow, Monsieur deFontrailles," said he, as the Count bowed low at his approach. "Do notremain uncovered. 'Tis a fine day for forest sports, but not for bareheads; though I have heard say, that if you were in the thickest mist ofall Holland, you would see your way through it.--What! mon GrandEcuyer," he continued, turning to Cinq Mars; "as sad as if thou hadstbeen plotting, and wert dreaming even now of the block and axe?" Andwith a kind and familiar air, he laid his hand upon his favourite's arm:who on his part started, as if the Monarch had read his thoughts andforetold his doom.A single word has sometimes lost or won an empire. Even less than asingle word, if we may believe the history of Darius's horse, who, beinga less loquacious animal than Balaam's ass, served his master withoutspeaking. However, Fontrailles fixed his eye on Cinq Mars, and seeingplainly the effect of Louis's speech, he hastened to wipe it away. "Tocalculate petty dangers in a great undertaking," said he, "were as weakas to think over all the falls one may meet with in the chase, beforewe get on horseback."Both Cinq Mars and the King were passionately fond of the noble forestsport, so that the simile of Fontrailles went directly home, moreespecially to the King, who, following the idea thus called up, made apersonal application of it to him who introduced it. "Jesu, that werefolly indeed!" he exclaimed, in answer to the Count's observation. "Butyou are not fond of the chase either, Monsieur de Fontrailles, if Ithink right; I never saw you follow boar or stag, that I can call tomind.""More my misfortune than my fault, Sire," replied Fontrailles. "Had Iever been favoured with an invitation to follow the royal hounds, yourMajesty would have found me as keen of the sport as even St. Hubert issaid to have been of yore.""Blessed be his memory!" cried the King. "But we will hunt to-day; wewill see you ride, Monsieur de Fontrailles. What say you, Cinq Mars?The parties who went out to turn a stag last night (I remember now)presented this morning, that in the bosquet at the end of the forest,near Argenin, is quartered a fat stag of ten, and another by Boisjardin;but that by Argenin will be the best, for he has but one refuite bythe long alley.--Come, gentlemen, seek your boots,--seek your boots; andas our Grand Veneur is not at Chantilly, you, Cinq Mars, shallsuperintend the chase. Order the Maitre valet de chiens to assemblethe old pack and the relais at the Carrefour d'Argenin, and then wewill quickly to horse." So saying, he turned away to prepare for hisfavourite sport; but scarcely had gone many paces ere he slackened hispace, and allowed the two gentlemen to rejoin him. "What think you,friend?" said he, addressing Cinq Mars; "they tell me, the Cardinal issick. Have you heard of it?""I have heard a vague report of the kind," replied Cinq Mars, watchinghis master's countenance, "but as yet nothing certain. May I crave whatinformation your Majesty possesses?""Why, he is sick, very sick," replied Louis, "and perchance may die. Mayhis soul find mercy! Perchance he may die, and then--" And the King fellinto deep thought.It is possible that at that moment his mind was engaged in calculatingall that such an event as the death of Richelieu would produce; for,gradually, as if he dreamed of ruling for himself, and as hope spreadout before him many a future year of power and greatness, his air becamemore dignified, his eye flashed with its long repressed fire, and hisstep acquired a new degree of firmness and majesty.Fontrailles watched the alteration of the King's countenance, and,skilful at reading the mind's workings by the face, he added, as iffinishing the sentence which Louis had left unconcluded,--but takingcare to blend what he said with an air of raillery towards the Master ofthe Horse, lest he should offend the irritable Monarch--"And then," saidhe, "Cinq Mars shall be a Duke. Is it not so, Sire?"Louis started. His thoughts had been engaged in far greater schemes;and yet rewarding his friends and favourites, always formed a great partof the pleasure he anticipated in power, and he replied, without anger,"Most likely it will be so--Indeed," he added, "had my wishes, as a man,been followed,"--and he turned kindly towards the Master of theHorse,--"it should have been so long ago, Cinq Mars. But Kings, youknow, are obliged to yield their private inclinations to what the Staterequires."Fontrailles glanced his eye towards the Grand Ecuyer, as if desiring himto remark the King's words. Cinq Mars bent his head, in token that hecomprehended, and replied to the King: "I understand your Majesty; but,believe me, Sire, no honour or distinction could more bind Cinq Mars tohis King, than duty, gratitude, and affection do at this moment.""I believe thee, friend,--I believe thee, from my soul," said Louis."God forgive us that we should desire the death of any man! and surelydo not I that of the Cardinal, for he is a good Minister, and a man ofpowerful mind. But, withal, we may wish that he was more gentle andforgiving. Nevertheless, he is a great man. See how he thwarts and ruleshalf the Kings in Europe--See how he presses the Emperor, and our goodbrother-in-law, Philip of Spain; while the great Gustavus, this northernhero, is little better than his general.""He is assuredly a great man, Sire," replied Cinq Mars. "But permit meto remark, that a great bad man is worse than one of less talents, forhe has the extended capability of doing harm; and perhaps, Sire, if thisMinister contented himself with thwarting Kings abroad, he would dobetter than by opposing the will of his own Sovereign at home."The time, however, was not yet come for Louis to make even an attempttoward liberating himself from the trammels to which he had been so longaccustomed. Habit in this had far more power over his mind than even thevast and aspiring talents of Richelieu. No man in France, perhaps, morecontemned or hated the Cardinal than the royal slave whom he had solong subjugated to his burdensome sway. Yet Louis, amidst all his dreamsfor the future, looked with dread upon losing the support of a man whomhe detested, but upon whose counsels and abilities he had beenaccustomed to rely with confidence and security.Cinq Mars saw plainly the state of his master's mind; and as he enteredthe Palace, he again began to doubt whether he should at all lendhimself to the bold and dangerous measures which Fontrailles hadsuggested.CHAPTER VII.In which is shown how a great King hunted a great beast, and whatcame of the hunting.While the King's mind, as he returned to the Chateau de Chantilly, wasagitated by vague hopes and fears, which, like the forms that we tracein the clouds, rolled into a thousand strange and almost palpable shapesbefore his mind's eye, and yet were but a vapour after all; and whilethe thoughts of Cinq Mars ran over all the difficulties and dangers ofthe future prospect, reverted to the obligations Richelieu had onceconferred upon him, or scanned the faults and crimes of the Minister,till the struggle of patriotism and gratitude left nothing but doubtbehind: the imagination of Fontrailles was very differently occupied.It was not that he pondered the means of engaging more firmly thewavering mind of Cinq Mars. No, for he had marked him for his own; and,from that morning's conversation, felt as sure of his companion as theant-lion does of the insect he sees tremble on the edge of his pit.Neither did he revolve the probable issue of the dangerous schemes inwhich he was engaging both himself and others; for he was confident inhis powers of disentangling himself, when it should become necessary tohis own safety so to do, and he was not a man to distress himself forthe danger of his friends. The occupation of his mind as they approachedthe Castle, was of a more personal nature. The truth is, that so farfrom discomposing himself upon the score of distant evils, the soletrouble of his thoughts was the hunting-party into which he hadentrapped himself. Being by no means a good horseman, and caring not onesous for a pastime which involved far too much trouble and risk toaccord in any degree with his idea of pleasure, Fontrailles hadprofessed himself fond of hunting, merely to please the King, withoutever dreaming that he should be called upon to give farther proof of hisveneration for the Royal sport.He saw plainly, however, that his case admitted of no remedy. Go hemust; and, having enough philosophy in his nature to meet inevitableevils with an unshrinking mind, he prepared to encounter all the horrorsof the chase, as if they were his principal delight.He accordingly got into his boots with as much alacrity as their naturepermitted, for, each weighing fully eight pounds, they were somewhatponderous and unmanageable. He then hastily loaded his pistols, stuckhis couteau de chasse in his belt, and throwing the feather from hishat, was the first ready to mount in the court-yard."Why, how is this, Monsieur de Fontrailles?" said the King, who in a fewminutes joined him in the area where the horses were assembled. "Thefirst at your post! You are, indeed, keen for the sport. Some one, seefor Cinq Mars.--Oh! here he comes: Mount, gentlemen, mount! OurOrdinaries of the chase, and Lieutenants, await us at the Carrefourd'Argenin,--Mount, gentlemen, mount! Ha! have you calculated your fallsfor to-day, Monsieur de Fontrailles, as you spoke of this morning?" Andthe King's eyes glistened with almost childish eagerness for hisfavourite pastime.In the mean while, Cinq Mars had approached with a slow step and agloomy countenance, showing none of the alacrity of Fontrailles, or theenthusiastic ardour of the King. "There are other dangers than falls tobe met with in chase, my liege," said the Master of the Horse, with abitter expression of displeasure in his manner; "and that Claude deBlenau could inform your Majesty.""I know not what you mean, Cinq Mars," answered the King. "De Blenau isa gallant cavalier; as staunch to his game as a beagle of the best; andthough he shows more service to our Queen than to ourself, he is noless valued for that.""He is one cavalier out of ten thousand--" replied Cinq Mars, warmly:"my dearest companion and friend; and whilst Cinq Mars has a sword towield, De Blenau shall never want one to second his quarrel.""Why, what ails thee, Cinq Mars?" demanded the King with some surprise."Thou art angry,--what is it now?""It is, Sire," replied the Master of the Horse, "that I have just had acourier from St. Germain, who bears me word, that, three days sincepast, the Count, as your Majesty and I have often done, was hunting inthe neighbourhood of Mantes, and was there most treacherously attackedby an armed band, in which adventure he suffered two wounds that nearlydrained his good heart of blood. Shall this be tolerated, Sire?""No, indeed! no, indeed!" replied the King with much warmth. "This shallbe looked to. Our kingdom must not be overrun with robbers andbrigands.""Robbers!" exclaimed Cinq Mars, indignantly. "I know not--they may havebeen robbers; but my letters say, that one of them wore colours ofIsabel and silver.""Those are the colours of Chavigni's livery," replied the King, who knewthe most minute difference in the bearing of every family in thekingdom, with wonderful precision. "This must be looked to, and itshall, or I am not deserving of my name. But now mount, gentlemen,mount! we are waited for at the rendezvous."The Carrefour d'Argenin, at which the King and his attendants soonarrived, was a large open space in the forest, where four roads crossed.Each of these, but one, cut into a long straight avenue through thewood, opened a view of the country beyond, forming a separate landscape,as it were, framed, or to use the French term, encadr, by thesurrounding trees. The sun had not yet risen sufficiently to shine uponany of these forest roads; but the sweeping hills and dales beyond, wereto be seen through the apertures, richly lighted up by the clear beamsof the morning; though occasionally a soft wreath of mist, lingering inthe bosom of some of the hollows, would roll a transient shadow over theprospect. Louis had chosen this spot for the rendezvous, perhaps as muchon account of its picturesque beauty, as for any other reason. Deprived,as he was, of courtly splendour and observance, his mind, unperverted bythe giddy show and tinsel pomp that generally surrounds a royal station,regarded with a degree of enthusiasm the real loveliness of Nature; andnow it was some time before even the preparations for his favouritesport could call his attention from the picturesque beauty of the spot.The policy of Richelieu, which had led him to deprive the King of manyof the external marks of sovereignty, as well as of the real power,taught him also to encourage all those sports which might at once occupyLouis's mind, and place him at a distance from the scene of government.Thus, the hunting equipage of the King was maintained in almost morethan royal luxury.The first objects that presented themselves, in the Carrefourd'Argenin, were a multitude of dogs and horses, grouped together withthe lieutenants of the forest, and the various officers of the hunt,under those trees which would best afford them shade as the sun got up.Various piqueurs and valets were seen about the ground, some holdingthe horses, some laying out the table for the royal dejen, and somebusily engaged in cutting long straight wands from the more pliable sortof trees, and peeling off the bark for a certain distance, so as toleave a sort of handle or hilt still covered, while the rest of thestick, about three feet in length, remained bare. These, called "batonsde chasse," were first presented to the King, who, having chosen one,directed the rest to be distributed among his friends and attendants,for the purpose of guarding their heads from the boughs, which in therapidity of the chase, while it continued in the forest, often inflictedserious injuries.The Matre valet de chiens, and his ordinaries, each armed with aportentous-looking horn, through the circles of which were passed avariety of dog couples, were busily occupied in distributing the houndsinto their different relays, and the grooms and other attendants wereseen trying the girths of the heavy hunting saddles, loading thepistols, or placing them in the holsters, and endeavouring todistinguish themselves fully as much by their bustle as by theiractivity.However, it was an animated scene, and those who saw it could not wonderthat Louis preferred the gay excitement of such sports, to the sombremonotony of a palace without a court, and royalty without its splendour.After examining the preparations with a critical eye, and inquiring intothe height, age, size, and other distinctive signs of the stag which wasto be hunted, Louis placed himself at the breakfast-table which hadbeen prepared in the midst of the green, and motioning Cinq Mars andFontrailles to be seated, entered into a lively discussion concerningthe proper spots for placing the relays of horses and dogs. At length itwas determined that six hounds and four hunters should be stationed atabout two leagues and a half on the high road; that twelve dogs and fourpiqueurs, with an ordinary of the chase, should take up a positionupon the side of a hill under which the stag was likely to pass; andthat another relay should remain at a spot called Le Croix de bois,within sight of which the hunt would be obliged to come, if the animal,avoiding the open country, made for the other extremity of the forest.It fell upon Cinq Mars to communicate these directions to the officersof the hunt, which he did in that sort of jargon, which the sports ofthe field had made common in those days, but which would now be hardlyintelligible. He was engaged in giving general orders, that the horsesshould be kept in the shade and ready to be mounted at a moment'snotice, in case the King, or any of his suite should require them, andthat the ordinary should by no means let slip any of the dogs of therelay upon the stag, even if it passed his station, without especialorders from the piqueurs of the principal hunt--when suddenly hestopped, and pointing with his hand, a man was discovered standing inone of the avenues, apparently watching the Royal party.The circumstance would have passed without notice, had it not been forthe extraordinary stature of the intruder, who appeared fully as tall asCinq Mars himself. Attention was farther excited by his disappearing assoon as he was observed; and some grooms were sent to bring him beforethe King, but their search was in vain, and the matter was soonforgotten.The minute relation of a Royal hunt in France, anno 1642, would affordvery little general interest. Enough has been said to show how differentwere the proceedings of that time from our method of conducting suchthings in the present day; and those who want farther information onthe subject may find it in a very erudite treatise, "De la Chasse, &c."by Le Mercier, in the year fifty-six of the same century. We must,however, in a more general manner, follow the King over the field,though without attempting to describe all the minute occurrences of theday, or the particulars of etiquette usual on such occasions.The stag, poor silly beast, who had been dozing away his time in athicket at about half a mile distance, was soon roused by the veryunwished appearance of the huntsmen, and taking his path down theprincipal avenue, bounded away towards the open country, calculating,more wisely than the beast recorded by our old friend sop, that theboughs might encumber his head gear. The horns sounded loud, the coupleswere unloosed, the dogs slipped, and away went man and beast in thepursuit. For a moment or two, the forest was filled with clang, and cry,and tumult:--as the hunt swept away, it grew fainter and fainter, tillthe sound, almost lost in the indistinct distance, left the deep gladesof the wood to resume their original silence.They did not, however, long appear solitary, for in a few minutes afterthe hunt had quitted the forest, the same tall figure, whose apparitionhad interrupted Cinq Mars in his oratory concerning the relays, emergedfrom one of the narrower paths, leading a strong black horse, whosetrappings were thickly covered with a variety of different figures inbrass, representing the signs of the zodiac, together with sundrytriangles, crescents, and other shapes, such as formed part of theastrological quackery of that day. The appearance of the master was notless singular in point of dress than that of the horse. He wore a longblack robe, somewhat in the shape of that borne by the order of BlackFriars, but sprinkled with silver signs. This, which made him look trulygigantic, was bound round his waist by a broad girdle of white leather,traced all over with strange characters, that might have been calledhieroglyphics, had they signified any thing; but which were, probably,as unmeaning as the science they were intended to dignify.To say the truth, the wearer did not seem particularly at his ease inhis habiliments; for when, after having looked cautiously around, heattempted to mount his horse, the long drapery of his gown got entangledround his feet at every effort, and it was not till he had ventedseveral very ungodly execrations, and effected a long rent in the backof his robe, that he accomplished the ascent into the saddle. Oncethere, however, the dexterity of his horsemanship, and his bearingaltogether, made him appear much more like the captain of a band ofheavy cavalry than an astrologer, notwithstanding the long snowy beardwhich hung down to his girdle, and the profusion of white locks that,escaping from his fur cap, floated wildly over his face, and concealedthe greater part of its features.The horseman paused for a moment, seemingly immersed in thought, whilehis horse, being a less considerate beast than himself, kept pawing theground, eager to set off. "Let me see," said the horseman; "the stagwill soon be turned on the high road by the carriers for Clermont, andmust come round under the hill, and then I would take the world to achapon de Maine, that that fool Andrieu lets slip his relay, anddrives the beast to water. If so, I have them at the Croix de bois. Atall events, one must try." And thus speaking, he struck his horse hardwith a thick kind of truncheon he held in his hand, and soon was out ofthe forest.In the mean while the King and his suite followed close upon the hounds;the Monarch and Cinq Mars, animated by the love of the chase, andFontrailles risking to break his neck rather than be behind. The roadfor some way was perfectly unobstructed, and as long as it remained so,the stag followed it without deviation; but at length a train ofcarriers' waggons appeared, wending their way towards Clermont. Thejingling of the bells on the yokes of the oxen, and the flaunting of thered and white ribbons on their horns, instantly startled the stag, who,stopping short in his flight, stood at gaze for a moment, and thendarting across the country, entered a narrow track of that unproductivesandy kind of soil, called in France landes, which bordered theforest. It so happened,--unfortunately, I was going to say, butdoubtless the stag thought otherwise--that a large herd of his hornedkindred were lying out in this very track, enjoying the morningsunshine, and regaling themselves upon the first fruits that fell fromsome chesnut-trees, which in that place skirted the forest.Now the stag, remembering an old saying, which signalizes the solace of"company in distress," proceeded straight into the midst of the herd;who being fat burghers of the wood, and like many other fat burgherssomewhat selfish withal, far from compassionating his case, received himwith scanty courtesy, and, in short, wished him at the devil. However,no time was to be lost; the dogs were close upon his steps; "sauve quipeut!" was the word among the stags, and away they all went, flying inevery direction.The hunters had as little cause to be pleased with this manoeuvre asthe stags; for the hounds being young, were deceived by a strong familylikeness between one of the herd and the one they had so long followed,and all of the dogs but four, yielding up the real object of pursuit,gave chase to the strange stag, who, darting off to the left, took hisway towards the river. Cinq Mars and most of the piqueurs, misled byseeing the young hounds have so great a majority, followed also. It wasin vain the King called to him to come back, that he was hunting thewrong beast, and was as great a fool as a young hound; he neither heedednor heard, and soon was out of sight."Sa christi!" cried Louis, "there they go, just like the world,quitting the true pursuit to follow the first fool that runs, andpriding themselves on being in the right, when they are most in error;but come, Monsieur de Fontrailles, we will follow the true stag of thehunt."But Fontrailles too was gone. The separation of the hounds had affordedan opportunity of quitting the sport not to be neglected, and he hadslunk away towards the Palace by the nearest road, which, leadingthrough a narrow dell, skirted the side of the hill opposite to thatover which the King's stag had taken his course. However, he still heardfrom time to time the dogs give tongue, and the hunting cry of the King;who, without considering that no one followed, gave the exact number ofmots on his horn, followed by the haloo, and the "Il dit vrai! il ditvrai!" which the piqueurs ordinarily give out, to announce that thedog who cried was upon the right scent. Still Fontrailles pursued hisway, when suddenly he perceived the stag, who, having distanced theKing, was brought to bay under the bank over which his road lay.At that season of the year, the stag is peculiarly dangerous, butFontrailles did not want personal courage, and, dismounting from hishorse, he sprang to the bottom of the bank; where, drawing his couteaude chasse, he prepared to run in upon the beast; but remembering at themoment that the King could not be far distant, he paused, and waitingtill Louis came up, held the stirrup and offered his weapon to theMonarch, who instantly running in, presented the knife with all thedexterity of an experienced sportsman, and in a moment laid the stagdead at his feet.It was now the task of Fontrailles to keep off the hounds, while theKing, anxious to have all the honours of the day to himself, began whatis called in France the "section" and "cure aux chiens" withoutwaiting for piqueurs or ordinaries. Nevertheless, he had only time tomake the longitudinal division of the skin, and one of the transversesections from the breast to the knee, when the sound of a horse's feetmade him raise his head from his somewhat unkingly occupation, thinkingthat some of the other hunters must be now come up."Que Diable!" cried the King, viewing the strange figure of theAstrologer we have already noticed in this profound chapter. "Je veuxdire, Vive Dieu! What do you want? and who are you?""A friend to the son of Henri Quatre," replied the stranger, advancinghis horse closer to the King, who stood gazing on him with no smalldegree of awe--for be it remembered, that the superstitious belief inall sorts of necromancy was at its height both in England and France."A friend to the son of Henri Quatre! and one who comes to warn him ofnear-approaching dangers.""What are they, friend?" demanded the King, with a look of creduloussurprise: "Let me know whence they arise and how they may be avoided,and your reward is sure.""I seek no reward," replied the stranger, scornfully. "Can all the goldof France change the star of my destiny? No! Monarch, I come uncalled,and I will go unrewarded. The planets are still doubtful over yourhouse, and therefore I forewarn you ere it be too late--A Spaniard isseeking your overthrow, and a woman is plotting your ruin--A Prince isscheming your destruction, and a Queen is betraying your trust."How!" exclaimed Louis. "Am I to believe--""Ask me no questions," cried the stranger, who heard the trampling ofhorses' feet approaching the scene of conference. "In this roll iswritten the word of fate. Read it, O King! and timely guard against theevil that menaces." So saying, he threw a scroll of parchment before theKing, and spurred on his horse to depart; but at that moment, the figureof Cinq Mars, who by this time had run down the stag he had followed,presented itself in his way, "What mumming is this?" cried the Master ofthe Horse, regarding the stranger."Stop him! Cinq Mars," cried Fontrailles, who foresaw that thestranger's predictions might derange all his schemes. "He is animpostor: do not let him pass!" And at the same time he laid his handupon the Astrologer's bridle. But in a moment, the stranger spurring onhis charger, overturned Fontrailles, shivered the hunting sword, whichCinq Mars had drawn against him, to atoms with one blow of histruncheon, and scattering the grooms and huntsmen like a flock of sheep,was soon out of reach of pursuit."What means all this?" exclaimed Cinq Mars;--"explain Fontrailles! Sire,shall we follow yon impostor?"But Louis's eyes were fixed with a strained gaze upon the scroll, whichhe held in his hand, and which seemed to absorb every faculty of hissoul. At length he raised them, mounted his horse in silence, and stillholding the parchment tight in his hand, rode on, exclaiming, "ToChantilly."CHAPTER VIII.Showing how the green-eyed monster got hold of a young lady'sheart, and what he did with it.Who is there that has not dreamed and had their dream broken? Who isthere that has not sighed to see spring flowers blighted, or summersunshine yield to wintry clouds; or bright hopes change to dark sorrows,and gay joys pass away like sudden meteors, that blaze for one splendidmoment, and then drop powerless into the dark bosom of the night?If memory, instead of softening all the traces, gave us back theoriginal lines of life in their native harshness, who could live on toold age? for the catalogue of broken hopes, and disappointed wishes,and pleasures snatched from us never to return, would be more than anyhuman mind could bear. It would harden the heart to marble, or break itin its youth. It is happy too, that in early years our mind has greaterpower of resistance, for the novelty of sorrow gives it a double sting.The fatigues of her journey had long worn off, and left Pauline deBeaumont all the glow of wild youthful beauty, which had adorned her inher native hills. Her cheek had recovered its fine soft blush in all itswarmth, and her eyes all their dark brilliancy. But the cheerful gaietywhich had distinguished her, the light buoyancy of spirit, that seemeddestined to rise above all the sorrows of the world, had not come backwith the rose of her cheek, or the lustre of her eye. She loved to bealone, and instead of regretting the gloom and stillness which prevailedin the court of Anne of Austria, she often seemed to find its gaiety toomuch for her, and would retire to the suite of apartments appropriatedto her mother and herself, to enjoy the solitude of her own thoughts.At first, Madame de Beaumont fancied that the melancholy of her daughterwas caused by the sudden change from many loved scenes, endeared by allthe remembrances of infancy, to others in which, as yet, she hadacquired no interest. But as a second week followed the first, aftertheir arrival at St. Germain's, and the same depression of spirits stillcontinued, the Marchioness began to fear that Pauline had some moreserious cause of sorrow; and her mind reverted to the suspicions of DeBlenau's constancy, which she had been the first to excite in herdaughter's bosom.The coming time is filled with things that we know not, and chance callsforth so many unexpected events, that the only way in life is to waitfor Fate, and seize the circumstances of the day; by the errors of thepast to correct our actions at present, and to leave the future to awiser judgment and a stronger hand. Madame de Beaumont took no notice ofher daughter's melancholy, resolving to be guided in her conduct byapproaching circumstances; for clouds were gathering thickly on thepolitical horizon of France, which, like a thunder-storm depending onthe fickle breath of the wind, might break in tempests over their head,or be wafted afar, and leave them still in peace.It was one of those still evenings, when the world, as if melancholy atthe sun's decline, seems to watch in silence the departure of his latestbeams. All had sunk into repose, not a cloud passed over the clearexpanse of sky, not a noise was stirring upon earth; and Pauline felt asensation of quiet, pensive melancholy steal over all her thoughts,harmonizing them with the calmness of the scene, as it lay tranquillybefore her, extending far away to the glowing verge of heaven,unawakened by a sound, unruffled by a breath of air.The window at which she sat looked towards St. Denis, where lay thebones of many a race of Kings, who had, in turn, worn that oftencontested diadem, which to the winner had generally proved a crown ofthorns. But her thoughts were not of them. The loss of early hopes, theblight of only love, was the theme on which her mind brooded, like amother over the tomb of her child. The scene before her--its vastextent--the dying splendour of the sun--the deep pureness of the eveningsky--the sublimity of the silence--all wrought upon her mind; and whileshe thought of all the fairy hopes she had nourished from her youth,while she dreamed, over again, all the dreams she had indulged of one onwhose fame, on whose honour, on whose truth, she had fondly, rashly,raised every wish of her future life; and while new-born fears anddoubts came sweeping away the whole,--the tears rose glistening in hereyes, and rolled, drop after drop, down her cheeks."Pauline!" said a voice close behind her. She started, turned towardsthe speaker, and with an impulse stronger than volition, held out herhand to Claude de Blenau. "Pauline," said he, printing a warm kiss onthe soft white hand that he held in his, "dear, beautiful Pauline, wehave met at last."From the moment he had spoken, Pauline resolved to believe him asimmaculate as any human being ever was since the first meeting of Adamand Eve; but still she wanted him to tell her so. It was not coquetry;but she was afraid that after what she had seen, and what she had heard,she ought not to be satisfied. Common propriety, she thought, requiredthat she should be jealous till such time as he proved to her that shehad no right to be so. She turned pale, and red, and drew back her handwithout reply.De Blenau gazed on her for a moment in silent astonishment; for, young,and ardent, and strongly tinged with that romantic spirit of gallantrywhich Anne of Austria had introduced from Spain into the court ofFrance, the whole enthusiasm of his heart had been turned towardsPauline de Beaumont; and he had thought of her the more, perhaps,because forbid to think of her. Nor had the romance he had worked up inhis own mind admitted a particle of the cold ceremonies of courtlyetiquette; he had loved to figure it as something apart from the world.A life with her he loved, of ardour, and passion, and sunshiny hours,unclouded by a regret, unchilled by a reserve, but all boundlessconfidence, and unrestrained affection--Such had been the purport of hisletters to Pauline de Beaumont, and such had been the colouring of herreplies to him. And who is there that has not dreamed so once?De Blenau gazed on her for a moment in silence. "Do you not speak to me,Pauline?" said he at length. "Or is it that you do not know me? True,true! years work a great change at our time of life. But I hadfancied--perhaps foolishly fancied--that Pauline de Beaumont would knowClaude de Blenau wheresoever they met, as well as De Blenau would knowher."While he spoke, Pauline knew not well what to do with her eyes; so sheturned them towards the terrace, and they fell upon Mademoiselle deHauteford, who was walking slowly along before the Palace. Less thingsthan that have caused greater events in this world than a renewal of allPauline's doubts. Doubts did I call them? Before Mademoiselle deHauteford, with all the graceful dignity for which she was conspicuous,had taken three steps along the terrace, Pauline's doubts had becomealmost certainties; and turning round, with what she fancied to be greatcomposure, she replied, "I have the pleasure of knowing you perfectly,Monsieur de Blenau; I hope you have recovered entirely from your latewounds.""Monsieur de Blenau!--The pleasure of knowing me!" exclaimed the Count."Good God, is this my reception? Not three months have gone, since yourletters flattered me with the title of 'Dear Claude.'--My wounds arebetter, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, but you seem inclined to inflictothers of a more painful nature."Pauline strove to be composed, and strove to reply, but it was all invain; Nature would have way, and she burst into tears and sobbed aloud."Pauline, dearest Pauline!" cried De Blenau, catching her to his bosomunrepulsed: "This must be some mistake--calm yourself, dear girl, and,in the name of Heaven, tell me, what means this conduct to one who lovesyou as I do?""One who loves me, Claude!" replied Pauline, wiping the tears from hereyes; "Oh no, no--But what right had I to think that you would love me?None, none, I will allow. Separated from each other so long, I had notitle to suppose that you would ever think of the child to whom you werebetrothed, but of whom you were afterwards commanded not to entertain aremembrance--would think of her, after those engagements were broken bya power you could not choose but obey. But still, De Blenau, you shouldnot have written those letters filled with professions of regard, andvows to retain the engagements your father had formed for you,notwithstanding the new obstacles which had arisen. You should not,indeed, unless you had been very sure of your own heart; for it wascruelly trifling with mine," and she gently disengaged herself from hisarms.--"I only blame you," she added, "for ever trying to gain myaffection, and not for now being wanting in love to a person you havenever seen since she was a child.""Never seen you!" replied De Blenau with a smile: "Pauline, you are asmistaken in that, as in any doubt you have of me. A year has not passedsince last we met. Remember that summer sunset on the banks of theRhone: remember the masked Cavalier who gave you the ring now on yourfinger: remember the warm hills of Languedoc, glowing with a blush onlyequalled by your cheek, when he told you that that token was sent by onewho loved you dearly, and would love you ever--that it came from Claudede Blenau, who had bid him place the ring on your finger, and a kiss onyour hand, and renew the vow that he had long before pledged toyou.--Pauline, Pauline, it was himself.""But why, dear Claude," demanded Pauline eagerly, forgetting coldness,and pride, and suspicion, in the memory his words called up, "why didyou not tell me? why did you not let me know that it was you?""Because if I had been discovered," answered the Count, "it might havecost me my life, years of imprisonment in the Bastille, or worse--thedestruction of her I loved? The slightest cry of surprise from you mighthave betrayed me.""But how did you escape, without your journey being known?" demandedPauline; "they say in Languedoc, that the Cardinal has bribed the evilspirits of the air to be his spies on men's actions.""It is difficult indeed to say how he acquires his information," repliedDe Blenau; "but, however, I passed undiscovered. It was thus ithappened: I had gone as a volunteer to the siege of Perpignan, orrather, as one of the Arrire-ban of Languedoc, which was led by theyoung and gallant Duc d'Enghien, to whom, after a long resistance, thatcity delivered its keys. As soon as the place had surrendered, I askedpermission to absent myself for a few days. His Highness granted itimmediately, and I set out.--For what think you, Pauline? what, but tovisit that spot, round which all the hopes of my heart, all the dreamsof my imagination, had hovered for many a year.--But to proceed, takingthe two first stages of my journey towards Paris, I suddenly changed mycourse, and embarking on the Rhone, descended as far as the Chateau deBeaumont. You remember, that my page, Henry La Mothe, is the son of yourmother's fermier, old La Mothe, and doubtless know full well his houseamong the oaks, on the borders of the great wood. It was here I took upmy abode, and formed a thousand plans of seeing you undiscovered. Atlength, fortune favoured me. Oh! how my heart beat as, standing by oneof the trees in the long avenue, Henry first pointed out to me twofigures coming slowly down the path from the Chateau--yourself and yourmother,--and as, approaching towards me, they gradually grew more andmore distinct, my impatience almost overpowered me, and I believe Ishould have started forward to meet you, had not Henry reminded me ofthe danger. You passed close by.--O Pauline! I had indulged many awaking dream. I had let fancy deck you in a thousand imaginarycharms--but at that moment, I found all I had imagined, or dreamed, athousand times excelled. I found the beautiful girl, that had been tornfrom me so many years before, grown into woman's most surpassingloveliness; and the charms which fancy and memory had scattered fromtheir united stores, faded away before the reality, like stars on therising of the sun. But this was not enough. I watched my opportunity. Isaw you, as you walked alone on the terrace, by the side of theglittering Rhone,--I spoke to you,--I heard the tones of a voice to beremembered for many an after hour, and placing the pledge of myaffection on your hand, I tore myself away."De Blenau paused. Insensibly, whilst he was speaking, Pauline hadsuffered his arm again to glide round her waist. Her hand somehow becameclasped in his, and as he told the tale of his affection, the tears ofmany a mingled emotion rolled over the dark lashes of her eye, andchasing one another down her cheek, fell upon the lip of her lover, ashe pressed a kiss upon the warm sunny spot which those drops bedewed.De Blenau saw that those tears were not tears of sorrow, and had lovebeen with him an art, he probably would have sought no farther; for inthe whole economy of life, but more especially in that soft passionLove, holds good the homely maxim, to let well alone. But De Blenauwas not satisfied; and like a foolish youth, he teased Pauline to knowwhy she had at first received him coldly. In good truth, she had by thistime forgotten all about it; but as she was obliged to answer, she soonagain conjured up all her doubts and suspicions. She hesitated, drew herhand from that of the Count, blushed deeper and deeper, and twice beganto speak without ending her sentence."I know not what to think," said she at length, "De Blenau: I would fainbelieve you to be all you seem,--I would fain reject every doubt of whatyou say."Her coldness, her hesitation, her embarrassment, alarmed De Blenau'sfears, and he too began to be suspicious."On what can you rest a doubt?" demanded he, with a look of bittermortification; and perceiving that she still paused, he added sadly, butcoldly, "Mademoiselle de Beaumont, you are unkind. Can it be that youare attached to another? Say, am I so unhappy?""No, De Blenau, no!" replied Pauline, struggling for firmness: "butanswer me one question, explain to me but this one thing, and I amsatisfied.""Ask me any question, propose to me any doubts," answered the Count,"and I will reply truly, upon my honour.""Then tell me," said Pauline,---- But just as she was about to proceed,she felt some difficulty in proposing her doubts. She had a thousandtimes before convinced herself they were very serious and well founded;but all jealous suspicions look so very foolish in black and white, orwhat is quite as good, in plain language, though they may seem veryrespectable when seen through the twilight of passion, that Pauline knewnot very well how to give utterance to hers. "Then tell me," saidPauline, with no small hesitation--"then tell me, what was the reasonyou would suffer no one to open your hunting coat, when you were woundedin the forest--no, not even to staunch the bleeding of the side?""There was a reason, certainly," replied De Blenau, not very wellperceiving the connexion between his hunting-coat and Pauline'scoldness; "there was a reason certainly; but how in the name of Heavendoes that affect you, Pauline?""You shall see by my next question," answered she. "Have you or have younot received a letter, privately conveyed to you from a lady? and hasnot Mademoiselle de Hauteford visited you secretly during your illness?"It was now De Blenau's turn to become embarrassed; he faltered, andlooked confused, and for a moment his cheek, which had hitherto beenpale with the loss of blood, became of the deepest crimson, while hereplied, "I did not know that I was so watched.""It is enough, Monsieur de Blenau," said Pauline rising, her doubtsalmost aggravated to certainties. "To justify myself, Sir, I will tellyou that you have not been watched. Pauline de Beaumont would considerthat man unworthy of her affection, whose conduct would requirewatching. What I know, has come to my ears by mere accident. In fact,"and her voice trembled the more, perhaps, that she strove to preserveits steadiness--"in fact, I have become acquainted with a painful truththrough my too great kindness for you, in sending my own servant toinquire after your health, and not to watch you, Monsieur de Blenau.""Stop, stop, Pauline! in pity, stop," cried De Blenau, seeing her aboutto depart. "Your questions place me in the most embarrassing ofsituations. But, on my soul, I have never suffered a thought to strayfrom you, and you yourself will one day do me justice. But at present,on this point, I am bound by every principle of duty and honour, not toattempt an exculpation.""None is necessary, Monsieur de Blenau," replied Pauline. "It is muchbetter to understand each other at once. I have no right to any controlover you. You are of course free, and at liberty to follow the bent ofyour own inclinations. Adieu! I shall always wish your welfare." And shewas quitting the apartment, but De Blenau still detained her, though shegently strove to withdraw her hand."Yet one moment, Pauline," said he. "You were once kind, you were oncegenerous, you have more than once assured me of your affection. Now,tell me, did you bestow that affection on a man destitute of honour? ona man who would sully his fame by pledging his faith to what wasfalse?" Pauline's hand remained in his without an effort, and he wenton. "I now pledge you my faith, and give you my honour, however strangeit may appear that a lady should visit me in private, I have never lovedor sought any but yourself. Pauline, do you doubt me now?"Her eyes were fixed upon the ground, and she did not reply, but therewas a slight motion in the hand he held, as if it would fain havereturned his pressure had she dared. "I could," he continued, "within anhour obtain permission to explain it all. But oh, Pauline, how muchhappier would it make me to find, that you trust alone to my word, thatyou put full confidence in a heart that loves you!""I do! I do!" exclaimed Pauline, with all her own wild energy, at thesame time placing her other hand also on his, and raising her eyes tohis face: "Say no more, De Blenau. I believe I have been wrong; at allevents, I cannot, I will not doubt, what makes me so happy to believe."And her eyes, which again filled with tears, were hidden on his bosom.De Blenau pressed her to his heart, and again and again thanked the lipsthat had spoken such kind words, in the way that such lips may best bethanked.--"Dearest Pauline," said De Blenau, after enjoying a moment ortwo of that peculiar happiness which shines but once or twice even inthe brightest existence, giving a momentary taste of heaven, and thenlosing itself, either in human cares, or less vivid joys.--The heart isa garden, and youth is its spring, and hope is its sunshine, and love isa thorny plant, that grows up and bears one bright flower, which hasnothing like it in all the earth--"Dearest Pauline," said De Blenau, "I leave you for a time, that I mayreturn and satisfy every doubt. Within one hour all shall be explained."As he spoke, the door of the apartment opened, and one of the servantsof the Palace entered, with a face of some alarm. "Monsieur de Blenau,"said he, "I beg a thousand pardons for intruding, but there have been,but now, at the Palace gate, two men of the Cardinal's guard inquiringfor you: so I told them that you were most likely at the other side ofthe Park, for--for--" and after hesitating a moment, he added, "They arethe same who arrested Monsieur de Vitry."De Blenau started. "Fly, fly, Claude!" exclaimed Pauline, catching himeagerly by the arm--"Oh fly, dear Claude, while there is yet time. I amsure they seek some evil towards you.""You have done well," said De Blenau to the attendant. "I will speak toyou as I come down.--Dearest Pauline," he continued when the man wasgone--"I must see what these gentlemen want. Nay, do not lookfrightened; you are mistaken about their errand. I have nothing to fear,believe me. Some trifling business, no doubt. In the mean time, I shallnot neglect my original object. In half an hour all your doubts shall besatisfied.""I have none, Claude," replied Pauline; "indeed I have none, but aboutthese men."De Blenau endeavoured to calm her, and assured her again and again thatthere was no danger. But Pauline was not easy, and the Count himself hadmore suspicions concerning their object than he would suffer to appear.CHAPTER IX.Containing a great deal that would not have been said had it notbeen necessary.In front of the Palace of St. Germain's, but concealed from the park andterrace by an angle of the building, stood the Count de Chavigni,apparently engaged in the very undignified occupation of making love toa pretty-looking soubrette, no other than Louise, the waiting-maid ofMademoiselle de Beaumont. But, notwithstanding the careless nonchalancewith which he affected to address her, it was evident that he had somedeeper object in view than the trifling of an idle hour."Well, ma belle," said he, after a few words of a more tender nature,"you are sure the Surgeon said, though the wound is in his side, hisheart is uninjured?""Yes, exactly," said Louise, "word for word; and the Queen answered, 'Iunderstand you.' But I cannot think why you are so curious about it.""Because I take an interest in the young Count," replied Chavigni. "But,his heart must be very hard if it can resist such eyes as yours.""He never saw them," said Louise, "for I was not with my Lady when theypicked him up wounded in the forest.""So much the better," replied Chavigni, "for that is he turning thatangle of the Palace: I must speak to him; so farewell, belle Louise,and remember the signal.--Go through that door, and he will not seeyou."Speaking thus, Chavigni left her, and a few steps brought him up to DeBlenau, who at that moment traversed the angle in which he had beenstanding with Louise, and was hurrying on with a rapid pace in search ofthe Queen."Good morrow, Monsieur de Blenau," said Chavigni: "you seem in haste.""And am so, Sir," replied De Blenau proudly; and added, after a moment'spause, "Have you any commands for me?" for Chavigni stood directly inhis way."None in particular," answered the other with perfect composure--"onlyif you are seeking the Queen, I will go with you to her Majesty; and aswe go, I will tell you a piece of news you may perhaps like to hear.""Sir Count de Chavigni, I beg you would mark me," replied De Blenau."You are one of the King's Council--a gentleman of good repute, and soforth; but there is not that love between us that we should be seentaking our evening's walk together, unless, indeed, it were for thepurpose of using our weapons more than our tongues.""Indeed, Monsieur de Blenau," rejoined Chavigni, his lip curling into asmile which partook more of good humour than scorn, though, perhaps,mingled somewhat of each--"indeed you do not do me justice; I love youbetter than you know, and may have an opportunity of doing you a goodturn some day, whether you will or not. So with your leave I walk withyou, for we both seek the Queen."De Blenau was provoked. "Must I tell you, Sir," exclaimed he, "that yourcompany is disagreeable to me?--that I do not like the society of menwho herd with robbers and assassins?""Psha!" exclaimed Chavigni, somewhat peevishly. "Captious boy, you'llget yourself into the Bastille some day, where you would have been longago, had it not been for me.""When you tell me, Sir, how such obligations have been incurred,"answered the Count, "I shall be happy to acknowledge them.""Why, twenty times, Monsieur de Blenau, you have nearly been put there,"replied Chavigni, with that air of candour which it is very difficult toaffect when it is not genuine. "Your hot and boiling spirit, Sir, isalways running you into danger. Notwithstanding all your late wounds, alittle bleeding, even now, would not do you any harm. Here the firstthing you do is to quarrel with a man who has served you, is disposed toserve you, and of whose service you may stand in need within fiveminutes."But to give you proof at once that what I advance is more than a merejest--Do you think that your romantic expedition to Languedoc escapedme? Monsieur de Blenau, you start, as if you dreamed that in such acountry as this, and under such an administration, any thing could takeplace without being known to some member of the government. No, no, Sir!there are many people in France, even now, who think they are acting inperfect security, because no notice is apparently taken of the plansthey are forming, or the intrigues they are carrying on; while, inreality, the hundred eyes of Policy are upon their every action, and thesword is only suspended over their heads, that it may eventually fallwith more severity.""You surprise me, I own," replied De Blenau, "by showing me that youare acquainted with an adventure, which I thought buried in my ownbosom, or only confided to one equally faithful to me.""You mean your Page," said Chavigni, with the same easy tone in which hehad spoken all along. "You have no cause to doubt him. He has neverbetrayed you (at least to my knowledge). But these things come aboutvery simply, without treachery on any part. The stag never flies sofast, nor the hare doubles so often, but they leave a scent behind themfor the dogs to follow,--and so it is with the actions of man; concealthem as he will, there is always some trace by which they may bediscovered; and it is no secret to any one, now-a-days, that there arepeople in every situation of life, in every town of France, paid to giveinformation of all that happens; so that the schemes must be wellconcealed indeed, which some circumstance does not discover. I see, youshake your head, as if you disapproved of the principle."De Blenau, you and I are engaged in different parties. You act firmlyconvinced of the rectitude of your own cause--Do me the justice tobelieve that I do the same. You hate the Minister--I admire him, andfeel fully certain that all he does is for the good of the State. On theother hand, I applaud your courage, your devotion to the cause you haveespoused, and your proud unbending spirit--and I would bring you to thescaffold to-morrow, if I thought it would really serve the party towhich I am attached."The interesting nature of his conversation, and the bold candour itdisplayed, had made De Blenau tolerate Chavigni's society longer than hehad intended, and even his dislike to the Statesman had in a degree wornaway before the easy dignity and frankness of his manner. But still, hedid not like to be seen holding any kind of companionship with one ofthe Queen's professed enemies; and taking advantage of the first pause,he replied--"You are frank, Monsieur de Chavigni, but my head is well where it is.And now may I ask to what does all this tend?""You need not hurry the conversation to a conclusion," replied Chavigni."You see that we are in direct progress towards that part of the Parkwhere her Majesty is most likely to be found." But seeing that De Blenauseemed impatient of such reply, he proceeded: "However, as you wish toknow to what my conversation tends, I will tell you. If you please, ittends to your own good. The Cardinal wishes to see you----"He paused, and glanced his eye over the countenance of his companion,from which, however, he could gather no reply, a slight frown being allthe emotion that was visible.Chavigni then proceeded. "The Cardinal wishes to see you. He entertainssome suspicion of you. If you will take my advice, you will set out forParis immediately, wait upon his Eminence, and be frank with him--Nay,do not start! I do not wish you to betray any one's secrets, or violateyour own honour. But be wise, set out instantly.""I suspected something of this," replied De Blenau, "when I heard thatthere were strangers inquiring for me. But whatever I do, I must firstsee the Queen:" and observing that Chavigni was about to offer someopposition, he added decidedly, "It is absolutely necessary--on businessof importance.""May I ask," said Chavigni, "is it of importance to her Majesty oryourself?""I have no objection to answer that at once," replied De Blenau: "itconcerns myself alone.""Stop a moment," cried Chavigni, laying his hand on the Count's arm, andpausing in the middle of the avenue, at the farther extremity of which agroup of three or four persons was seen approaching. "No business can beof more importance than that on which I advise you to go.--Monsieur deBlenau, I would save you pain. Let me, once more, press you to set outwithout having any farther conversation with her Majesty than the mereetiquette of taking leave for a day."De Blenau well knew the danger which he incurred, but still he could notresolve to go, without clearing the doubts of Pauline, which fiveminutes' conversation with the Queen would enable him to do. "It isimpossible," replied he, thoughtfully; "besides, let the Cardinal sendfor me. I do not see why I should walk with my eyes open into the den ofa lion.""Well then, Sir," answered Chavigni, with somewhat more of coldness inhis manner, "I must tell you, his Eminence has sent for you, and that,perhaps, in a way which may not suit the pride of your disposition. Doyou see those three men that are coming down the avenue? they are nothere without an object.--Come, once more, what say you, Monsieur leComte? Go with me, to take leave of the Queen, for I must suffer noprivate conversation. Let us then mount our horses, and ride as friendsto Paris. There, pay your respects to the Cardinal, and take Chavigni'sword, that, unless you suffer the heat of your temper to betray you intoany thing unbecoming, you shall return safe to St. Germain's beforeto-morrow evening. If not, things must take their course.""You offer me fair, Sir," replied the Count, "if I understand yourightly, that the Cardinal has sent to arrest me; and of course, Icannot hesitate to accept your proposal. I have no particular partialityfor the Bastille, I can assure you.""Then you consent?" said Chavigni. De Blenau bowed his head. "Well then,I will speak to these gentlemen," he added, "and they will give us theirroom."By this time the three persons, who had continued to advance down theavenue, had approached within the distance of a few paces of Chavigniand the Count. Two of them were dressed in the uniform of the Cardinal'sguard; one as a simple trooper, the other being the Lieutenant who borethe lettre de cachet for the arrest of De Blenau. The third, we havehad some occasion to notice in the wood of Mantes, being no other thanthe tall Norman, who on that occasion was found in a rusty buff jerkin,consorting with the banditti. His appearance, however, was now very muchchanged for the better. The neat trimming of his beard and mustaches,the smart turn of his broad beaver, the flush newness of hislong-waisted blue silk vest, and even the hanging of his sword, whichinstead of offering its hilt on the left hip, ever ready for the hand,now swung far behind, with the tip of the scabbard striking against theright calf,--all denoted a change of trade and circumstances, from thepoor bravo who won his daily meal at the sword's point, to the well-paidbully, who fattened at his lord's second table, on the merit of servicesmore real than apparent.De Blenau's eye fixed full upon the Norman, certain that he had seen himsomewhere before, but the change of dress and circumstances embarrassedhis recollection.In the mean while, Chavigni advanced to the Cardinal's officer."Monsieur Chauville," said he, "favour me by preceding me to hisEminence of Richelieu. Offer him my salutation, and inform him, thatMonsieur le Comte de Blenau and myself intend to wait upon him thisafternoon."Chauville bowed, and passed on, while the Norman, uncovering his head toChavigni, instantly brought back to the mind of De Blenau thecircumstances under which he had first seen him."You have returned, I see," said Chavigni. "Have you found an occasionof fulfilling my orders?""To your heart's content, Monseigneur," replied the Norman; "never wassuch an Astrologer, since the days of Intrim of Blois.""Hush!" said Chavigni, for the other spoke aloud. "If you have done it,that is enough. But for a time, keep yourself to Paris, and avoid theCourt, as some one may recognise you, even in these fine new feathers.""Oh, I defy them," replied the Norman, in a lower tone than he hadformerly spoken, but still so loud that De Blenau could not avoidhearing the greater part of what he said--"I defy them; for I was sowrapped up in my black robes and my white beard, that the Devil himselfwould not know me for the same mortal in the two costumes. But I hope,Monsieur le Comte, that my reward may be equal to the risk I have run,for they sought to stop me, and had I not been too good a necromancerfor them, I suppose I should have been roasting at a stake by this time.But one wave of my magic wand sent the sword of Monsieur de Cinq Marsout of his hand, and opened me a passage to the wood; otherwise I shouldhave fared but badly amongst them.""You must not exact too much, Monsieur Marteville," replied Chavigni."But we will speak of this to-night. I shall be in Paris in a few hours;at present, you see, I am occupied;" and leaving the Norman, he rejoinedDe Blenau, and proceeded in search of the Queen."If my memory serves me right, Monsieur de Chavigni," said De Blenau, ina tone of some bitterness, "I have seen that gentleman before, and withhis sword shining at my breast.""It is very possible," answered Chavigni, with the most indifferentcalmness. "I have seen him in the same situation with respect tomyself.""Indeed!" rejoined De Blenau, with some surprise; "but probably not withthe same intention," he added."I do not know," replied the Statesman, with a smile. "His intentions inmy favour were to run me through the body.""And is it possible, then," exclaimed De Blenau, "that with such aknowledge of his character and habits, you can employ and patronizehim?""Certainly," answered Chavigni, "I wanted a bold villain. Such men arevery necessary in a State. Now, I could not have better proof that thisman had the qualities required, than his attempting to cut my throat.But you do him some injustice; he is better than you suppose--is notwithout feeling--and has his own ideas of honour."De Blenau checked the bitter reply which was rising to his lips, andletting the conversation drop, they proceeded, in silence, in search ofthe Queen. They had not gone much farther, when they perceived herleaning familiarly on the arm of Madame de Beaumont, and seeminglyoccupied in some conversation of deep interest. However, her eye fellupon the Count and Chavigni as they came up, and, surprised to see themtogether, she abruptly paused in what she was saying."Look there, De Beaumont," said she: "something is not right. I haveseen more than one of these creatures of the Cardinal hanging about thePark to-day. I fear for poor De Blenau. He has been too faithful to hisQueen to escape long.""I salute your Majesty," said Chavigni, as soon as they had come withina short distance of the Queen, and not giving De Blenau the time toaddress her: "I have been the bearer of a message from his Eminence ofRichelieu to Monsieur de Blenau, your Majesty's Chamberlain, requestingthe pleasure of entertaining him for a day in Paris. The Count haskindly accepted the invitation; and I have promised that the Cardinalshall not press his stay beyond to-morrow. We only now want yourMajesty's permission and good leave, which in his Eminence's name Ihumbly crave for Monsieur de Blenau.""His Eminence is too condescending," replied the Queen. "He knows thathis will is law; and we, humble Kings and Queens, as in duty, do himreverence. I doubt not that his intentions towards our Chamberlain areas mild and amiable, as his general conduct towards our self.""The truth is, your Majesty," said De Blenau, "the Cardinal has sent forme, and (however Monsieur de Chavigni's politeness may colour it) in away that compels my attendance.""I thought so," exclaimed the Queen, dropping the tone of irony whichshe had assumed towards Chavigni, and looking with mingled grief andkindness upon the young Cavalier, whose destruction she deemedinevitable from the moment that Richelieu had fixed the serpent eyes ofhis policy upon him--"I thought so. Alas, my poor De Blenau! all thatattach themselves to me seem devoted to persecution.""Not so, your Majesty," said Chavigni, with some degree of feeling; "Ican assure you, Monsieur de Blenau goes at perfect liberty. He is underno arrest; and, unless he stays by his own wish, will return to yourMajesty's court to-morrow night. The Cardinal is far from wishing togive unnecessary pain.""Talk not to me, Sir Counsellor," replied the Queen, angrily: "Do I notknow him? I, who of all the world have best cause to estimate hisbaseness? Have I not under his own hand, the proof of his criminalambition? but no more of that--" And breaking off into Spanish, as wasfrequently her custom when angry, she continued, "No s si es la mismavanidad, la sobervia,  la arrogancia. Que todo esto, segun creo es elCardenal.""It is useless, Madam," said De Blenau, as soon as the Queen paused inher angry vituperation of the Minister, "to distress you farther withthis conversation. I know not what the Cardinal wants, but he may restassured that De Blenau's heart is firm, and that no human means shallinduce him to swerve from his duty; and thus I humbly take my leave.""Go then, De Blenau," said the Queen: "Go, and whether we ever meetagain or not, your faithful services and zealous friendship shall everhave my warmest gratitude; and Anne of Austria has no other reward tobestow." Thus saying, she held out her hand to him. De Blenau in silencebent his head respectfully over it, and turned away. Chavigni bowed low,and followed the Count, to whose hotel they proceeded, in order toprepare for their departure.In the orders which De Blenau gave on their arrival, he merely commandedthe attendance of his Page."Pardon me, Monsieur de Blenau, if I observe upon your arrangements,"said Chavigni, when he heard this order. "But let me remind you, oncemore, that you are not going to a prison, and that it might be better ifyour general train attended you, as a gentleman of high station about tovisit the Prime Minister of his Sovereign. They will find plenty ofaccommodation in the Hotel de Bouthiliers.""Be it so, then," replied De Blenau, scarcely able to assume even theappearance of civility towards his companion. "Henry de La Mothe," heproceeded, "order a dozen of my best men to attend me, bearing my fullcolours in their sword-knots and scarfs. Trick out my horses gaily, asif I were going to a wedding, for Claude de Blenau is about to visit theCardinal; and remember," he continued, his anger at the forced journeyhe was taking overcoming his prudence, "that there be saddled for myown use the good black barb that carried me so stoutly when I wasattacked by assassins in the wood of Mantes;" and as he spoke, his eyeglanced towards the Statesman, who sitting in the window seat, had takenup the Poems of Rotrou, and apparently inattentive to all that waspassing, read on with as careless and easy an air, as if no moreimportant interest occupied his thoughts, and no contending passionsstruggled in his breast.CHAPTER X.Shows how the Count de Blenau supped in a place that he littleexpected.Though the attendants of the Count de Blenau did not expend much time inpreparing to accompany their master, the evening was nevertheless toofar spent, before they could proceed, to permit the hope of reachingParis ere the night should have set in. It was still quite light enough,however, to show all the preparations for the Count's departure to theboys of St. Germain's, who had not beheld for many a good day such a gaycavalcade enliven the streets of that almost deserted town.Chavigni and De Blenau mounted their horses together; and the four orfive servants which the Statesman had brought with him from Paris,mingling with those of De Blenau, followed the two gentlemen as theyrode from the gate. Having the privilege of the Park, Chavigni took hisway immediately under the windows of the Palace, thereby avoiding aconsiderable circuit, which would have occupied more time than theycould well spare at that late hour of the evening.The moment Pauline de Beaumont had seen her lover depart, the tears,which she had struggled to repress in his presence, flowed rapidly downher cheeks. The noble, candid manner of De Blenau had nearly quelled allsuspicion in her mind. The graces of his person, the tone of his voice,the glance of his eye, had realized the day-dreams which she hadnourished from her youth.Fame had long before told her that he was brave, high-spirited,chivalrous; and his picture, as well as memory, had shown him asstrikingly handsome; but still it did not speak, it did not move; andthough Pauline had often sat with it in her hand, and imagined theexpressions of his various letters as coming from those lips, or triedin fancy to animate the motionless eyes of the portrait, still the heroof her romance, like the figure of Prometheus ere he had robbed the Sunof light to kindle it into active being, wanted the energy of real life.But at length they had met, and whether it was so in truth, or whethershe imagined it, matters not, but every bright dream of her fancy seemedfulfilled in De Blenau; and now that she had cause to fear for hissafety, she upbraided herself for having entertained a suspicion.She wept then--but her tears were from a very different cause to thatwhich had occasioned them to flow before. However, her eyes were stillfull, when a servant entered to inform her that the Queen desired hersociety with the other ladies of her scanty Court. Pauline endeavouredto efface the marks which her weeping had left, and slowly obeyed thesummons, which being usual at that hour, she knew was on no business ofimport; but on entering the closet, she perceived that tears had alsobeen in the bright eyes of Anne of Austria.The circle, which consisted of Madame de Beaumont, Mademoiselle deHauteford, and another Lady of honour, had drawn round the window atwhich her Majesty sat, and which, thrown fully open, admitted the breezefrom the Park."Come hither, Pauline," said the Queen as she saw her enter, "What! haveyou been weeping too? Nay, do not blush, sweet girl; for surely asubject need not be ashamed of doing once what a Queen is obliged todo every day. Why, it is the only resource that we women have. But comehere: there seems a gay cavalcade entering the Park gates. These are thetoys with which we are taught to amuse ourselves. Who are they, Iwonder? Come near, Pauline, and see if your young eyes can tell."Pauline approached the window, and took her station by the side of theQueen, who, rising from her seat, placed her arm kindly through that ofMademoiselle de Beaumont, and leaning gently upon her, prevented thepossibility of her retiring from the spot where she stood.In the mean while the cavalcade approached. The gay trappings of thehorses, and the rich suits of their riders, with their silk scarfs andsword-knots of blue and gold, soon showed to the keen eyes of theQueen's ladies that the young Count de Blenau was one of the party;while every now and then a horseman in Isabel and silver appearingamongst the rest, told them, to their no small surprise, that he wasaccompanied by the Count de Chavigni, the sworn friend of Richelieu, andone of the principal leaders of the Cardinal's party. The Queen,however, evinced no astonishment, and her attendants of course did notattempt to express the wonder they felt at such a companionship.The rapid pace at which the two gentlemen proceeded, soon brought themnear the Palace; and Chavigni, from whose observant eye nothing passedwithout notice, instantly perceived the Queen and her party at thewindow, and marked his salutation with a profound inclination, lowalmost to servility, while De Blenau raised his high-plumed hat andbowed, with the dignity of one conscious that he had deserved well ofall who saw him.Chavigni led the way to Marly, and thence to Ruel, where night began tocome heavily upon the twilight; and long before they entered Paris, allobjects were lost in darkness. "You must be my guest for to-night,Monsieur de Blenau," said Chavigni, as they rode on down the Rue St.Honor, "for it will be too late to visit the Cardinal this evening."However, as they passed the Palais Royal (then called the PalaisCardinal), the blaze of light, which proceeded from every window of theedifice, told that on that night the superb Minister entertained theCourt;--a Court, of which he had deprived his King, and which he hadappropriated to himself. De Blenau drew a deep sigh as he gazed upon themagnificent edifice, and compared the pomp and luxury which every thingappertaining to it displayed, with the silent, desolate melancholy whichreigned in the royal palaces of France.Passing on down the Rue St. Honor, and crossing the Rue St. Martin,they soon reached the Place Royale, in which Chavigni had fixed hisresidence. Two of De Blenau's servants immediately placed themselves atthe head of his horse, and held the bridle short, while Henry de LaMothe sprang to the stirrup. But at that moment a gentleman who seemedto have been waiting the arrival of the travellers, issued from theHotel de Bouthiliers, and prevented them from dismounting."Do not alight, gentlemen," exclaimed he; "his Eminence the Cardinal deRichelieu has sent me to request that Messieurs De Blenau and Chavigniwill partake a small collation at the Palais Cardinal, without theceremony of changing their dress."De Blenau would fain have excused himself, alleging that the habit whichhe wore was but suited to the morning, and also was soiled with thedust of their long ride. But the Cardinal's officer overbore allopposition, declaring that his Eminence would regard it as a highercompliment, if the Count would refrain from setting foot to the groundtill he entered the gates of his Palace."Then we must go back," said Chavigni. "We are honoured by theCardinal's invitation. Monsieur de Blenau, pardon me for having broughtyou so far wrong. Go in, Chatenay," he added, turning to one of his owndomestics, "and order flambeaux."In a few moments all was ready; and preceded by half a dozentorch-bearers on foot, they once more turned towards the dwelling of theMinister. As they did so, De Blenau's feelings were not of the mostagreeable nature, but he acquiesced in silence, for to have refused hispresence would have been worse than useless.The Palais Royal, which, as we have said, was then called the PalaisCardinal, was a very different building when occupied by the haughtyMinister of Louis the Thirteenth, from that which we have seen it in ourdays. The unbounded resources within his power gave to Richelieu themeans of lavishing on the mansion which he erected for himself, all thatart could produce of elegant, and all that wealth could supply ofmagnificent. For seven years the famous Le Mercier laboured to perfectit as a building; and during his long administration, the Cardinalhimself never ceased to decorate it with every thing rare or luxurious.The large space which it occupied was divided into an outer and an innercourt, round which, on every side, the superb range of buildings,forming the Palace, was placed in exact and beautiful proportion,presenting every way an external and internal front, decorated with allthe splendour of architectural ornament.The principal faade lay towards the Rue St. Honor, and another ofsimpler, but perhaps more correct design, towards the gardens, whichlast were themselves one of the wonders of Paris at the time. Extendingover the space now occupied by the Rue de Richelieu, the Rue de Valois,and several other streets, they contained, within themselves, many acresof ground, and were filled with every plant and flower that Europe thenpossessed, scattered about amongst the trees, which, being planted longbefore the formality of the Dutch taste was introduced in France, had ingeneral been allowed to fall into natural groups, unperverted into thelong avenues and straight alleys which disfigure so many of the royalparks and gardens on the Continent.The right wing of the first court was principally occupied by thatbeautiful Theatre, so strongly connected with every classic remembranceof the French stage, in which the first tragedies of Rotrou andCorneille were produced,--in which many of the inimitable comedies ofMolire were first given to the world, and in which he himself actedtill his death.In the wing immediately opposite, was the Chapel, built in the Ionicorder, and ornamented in that pure and simple manner which none knewbetter how to value than the Cardinal de Richelieu.The two courts were divided from each other by a massive pile ofbuilding, containing the grand saloon, the audience-chamber, and thecabinet of the high council. On the ground-floor was the banqueting-roomand its antechamber; and a great part of the building fronting thegardens was occupied by the famous gallery of portraits, which Richelieuhad taken care should comprise the best pictures that could be procuredof all the greatest characters in French history.The rest of the Palace was filled with various suites of apartments,generally decorated and furnished in the most sumptuous manner. Greatpart of these the Cardinal reserved either for public entertainments, orfor his own private use; but what remained was nevertheless fully largeenough to contain that host of officers and attendants by which he wasusually surrounded.On the evening in question almost every part of that immense buildingwas thrown open to receive the multitude that interest and fear gatheredround the powerful and vindictive Minister. Almost all that was gay,almost all that was beautiful, had been assembled there. All to whomwealth gave something to secure--all to whom rank gave something tomaintain--all whom wit rendered anxious for distinction--all whom talentprompted to ambition. Equally those that Richelieu feared or loved,hated or admired, were brought there by some means, and for some reason.The scene which met the eyes of De Blenau and Chavigni, as they ascendedthe grand staircase and entered the saloon, can only be qualified by theword princely. The blaze of jewels, the glare of innumerable lights, thesplendid dresses of the guests, and the magnificent decorations of theapartments themselves, all harmonized together, and formed acoup-d'oeil of surpassing brilliancy.The rooms were full, but not crowded; for there were attendantsstationed in various parts for the purpose of requesting the visitorsto proceed, whenever they observed too many collected in one spot. Yetcare was taken that those who were thus treated with scant ceremonyshould be of the inferior class admitted to the Cardinal's fte. Eachofficer of the Minister's household was well instructed to know the justvalue of every guest, and how far he was to be courted, either for hismind or influence.To render to all the highest respect, was the general order, but somewere to be distinguished. Care was also taken that none should beneglected, and an infinite number of servants were seen gliding throughthe apartments, offering the most costly and delicate refreshments toevery individual of the mixed assembly.De Blenau followed Chavigni through the grand saloon, where many an eyewas turned upon the elegant and manly figure of him, who on that nightof splendour and finery, presumed to show himself in a suit, rich indeedand well-fashioned, but evidently intended more for the sports of themorning than for the gay evening circle in which he then stood. Yet itwas remarked, that none of the ladies drew back as the Cavalier passedthem, notwithstanding his riding-dress and his dusty boots; and one fairdemoiselle, whose rank would have sanctioned it, had it been done onpurpose, was unfortunate enough to entangle her train on his spurs. TheCount de Coligni stepped forward to disengage it, but De Blenau himselfhad already bent one knee to the ground, and easily freeing the spurfrom the robe of Mademoiselle de Bourbon, he remained for a moment inthe same attitude. "It is but just," said he, "that I should kneel, atonce to repair my awkwardness, and sue for pardon.""It was my sister's own fault, De Blenau," said the Duke d'Enghien,approaching them, and embracing the young Count. "We have not met, dearfriend, since the rendering of Perpignan. But what makes you here? Doesyour proud spirit bend at last to ask a grace of my Lord UncleCardinal?""No, your Highness," replied De Blenau; "no farther grace have I toask, than leave to return to St. Germain's as soon as I may.""What!" said the Duke, in the abrupt heedless manner in which he alwaysspoke, "does he threaten you too with that cursed bugbear of a Bastille?a bugbear, that makes one man fly his country, and another betray it;that makes one man run his sword into his heart, and anothermarry;"--alluding without ceremony to his own compelled espousal of theCardinal's niece. "But there stands Chavigni," he continued, "waitingfor you, I suppose. Go on, go on; there is no stopping when once youhave got within the Cardinal's magic circle--Go on, and God speed yoursuit; for the sooner you are out of that same circle the better."Quitting the young hero, who had already, on more than one occasion,displayed that valour and conduct which in after-years procured for himthe immortal name of the Great Cond, the Count de Blenau passed anothergroup, consisting of the beautiful Madame de Montbazon and her avowedlover, the Duke of Longueville, who soon after, notwithstanding hisunconcealed passion for another, became the husband of Mademoiselle deBourbon. For be it remarked, in those days a bitter quarrel existedbetween Love and Marriage, and they were seldom seen together in thesame society. It is said indeed, that in France, a coolness remainsbetween them to this day. Here also was the Duke of Guise, whoafterwards played so conspicuous a part in the revolution of Naples, andby his singular adventures, his gallantry and chivalrous courage,acquired the name of l'Hero de la Fable, as Cond had been calledl'Hero de l'Histoire. Still passing on, De Blenau rejoined Chavigni,who waited for him at the entrance of the next chamber.It was the great hall of audience, and at the farther extremity stoodthe Cardinal de Richelieu himself, leaning for support against a giltrailing, which defended from any injurious touch the beautiful pictureof Raphael, so well known by the title of "La Belle Jardiniere." He wasdressed in the long purple robes of his order, and wore the peculiarhat of a Cardinal; the bright colour of which made the deadly hue of hiscomplexion look still more ghastly. But the paleness of his countenance,and a certain attenuation of feature, was all that could be discerned ofthe illness from which he suffered. The powerful mind within seemed toconquer the feebleness of the body. His form was erect and dignified,his eye beaming with that piercing sagacity and haughty confidence inhis own powers, which so distinguished his policy; and his voice clear,deep, and firm, but of that peculiar quality of sound, that it seemed tospread all round, and to come no one knew from whence, like the windechoing through an empty cavern.It was long since De Blenau had seen the Cardinal; and on entering theaudience-chamber, the sound of that voice made him start. Its clearhollow tone seemed close to him, though Richelieu was conversing withsome of his immediate friends at the farther end of the room.As the two cavaliers advanced, De Blenau had an opportunity ofobserving the manner in which the Minister treated those around him: butfar from telling aught of dungeons and of death, his conversation seemedcheerful, and his demeanour mild and placid. "And can this be the man,"thought the Count, "the fabric of whose power is cemented by blood andtorture?"They had now approached within a few paces of the spot where theCardinal stood; and the figure of Chavigni catching his eye, he advanceda step, and received him with unaffected kindness. Towards De Blenau,his manner was full of elegant politeness. He did not embrace him as hehad done Chavigni; but he held him by the hand for a moment, gazing onhim with a dignified approving smile. Those who did not well know theheart of the subtle Minister, would have called that smile benevolent,especially when it was accompanied by many kind inquiries respecting theyoung nobleman's views and pursuits. De Blenau had been taught to judgeby actions, not professions; and the Cardinal had taken care to imprinthis deeds too deeply in the minds of men to be wiped out with softwords. To dissemble was not De Blenau's forte; and yet he knew, that toshow a deceiver he cannot deceive, is to make him an open enemy forever. He replied, therefore, calmly and politely; neither repulsed theCardinal's advances, nor courted his regard; and after a few moremoments of desultory conversation, prepared to pursue his way throughthe various apartments."There are some men, Monsieur le Comte," said the Cardinal, seeing himabout to pass on, "whom I might have scrupled to invite to such a sceneas this, in their riding-dress. But the Count de Blenau is not to bemistaken.""I felt no scruple," answered De Blenau, "in presenting myself thus,when your Eminence desired it; for the dress in which the Cardinal deRichelieu thought fit to receive me, could not be objected to by any ofhis circle."The Cardinal bowed; and De Blenau adding, that he would not intrudefarther at that moment, took his way through the suite of apartments toRichelieu's left hand. Chavigni was about to follow, but a sign from theCardinal stopped him, and the young Count passed on alone.Each of the various rooms he entered was thronged with its own peculiargroups. In one, was an assembly of famous artists and sculptors; inanother, a close convocation of philosophers, discussing a thousandabsurd theories of the day; and in the last he came to, was a buzzinghive of poets and beaux esprits; each trying to distinguish himself,each jealous of the other, and all equally vain and full of themselves.In one corner was Scuderi, haranguing upon the nature of tragedy, ofwhich he knew nothing. In another place, Voiture, throwing off littleempty couplets and bon-mots, like a child blowing bubbles from atobacco-pipe; and farther on was Rotrou, surrounded by a select partymore silent than the rest, to whom he recited some of his unpublishedpoems, marking strongly the verse, and laying great emphasis upon therhyme. De Blenau stopped for a moment to listen while the poetproceeded:--"L'aube desia se lve, et le mignard Zephire,Parfumant l'horizon du doux air qu'il respire,Va d'un son agrable esveiller les oiseauxPour saluer le jour qui paroist sur les eaux."But though the verses he recited were highly poetic, the extravagantaffectation of his manner soon neutralized their effect upon De Blenau;and passing on down a broad flight of steps, De Blenau found himself inthe gardens of the Palace. These, as well as the whole front of thebuilding, were illuminated in every direction. Bands of musicians weredispersed in the different walks, and a multitude of servants werebusily engaged in laying out tables for supper with all the choicestviands of the season, and in trimming the various lamps and tapers whichhung from the branches of the trees or were displayed on fanciful framesof wood, so placed as to give the fullest light to the banquets whichwere situated near them.Scattered about in various parts of the garden, but more especially nearthe Palace, were different groups of gentlemen, all speaking of plays,assemblies, or ftes, and all taking care to make their conversationperfectly audible, lest the jealous suspicion ever attendant on usurpedpower, should attribute to them schemes which, it is probable, fearalone prevented them from attempting.Nevertheless, the gardens, as we have said, containing several acres ofground, there were many parts comparatively deserted. It was towardsthese more secluded spots that De Blenau directed his steps, wishinghimself many a league away from the Palais Cardinal and all itssplendour. Just as he had reached a part where few persons were to beseen, some one struck him slightly on the arm, and turning round, heperceived a man who concealed the lower part of his face with his cloak,and tendered him what seemed to be a billet.At the first glance De Blenau thought he recognised the Count deColigni, a reputed lover of Mademoiselle de Bourbon, and imagined thatthe little piece of gallantry he had shown that lady on his firstentrance, might have called upon him the wrath of the jealous Coligni.But no sooner had he taken the piece of paper, than the other dartedaway amongst the trees, giving him no time to observe more, either ofhis person or his dress.Approaching a spot where the number of lamps gave him sufficient lightto read, De Blenau opened the note, which contained merely these words."Beware of Chavigni;--they will seek to draw something from you whichmay criminate you hereafter."As he read, De Blenau heard a light step advancing, and hastilyconcealing the note, turned to see who approached. The only person nearwas a lady, who had thrown a thick veil over her head, which not onlycovered her face, but the upper part of her figure. She passed close byhim, but without turning her head, or by any other motion seeming tonotice him; but as she did so, De Blenau heard a low voice from underthe veil, desiring him to follow. Gliding on, without pausing for amoment, the lady led the way to the very extreme of the garden. DeBlenau followed quick upon her steps, and as he did so, endeavoured tocall to mind where he had seen that graceful and dignified figurebefore. At length the lady stopped, looked round for a moment, andraising her veil, discovered the lovely countenance of Mademoiselle deBourbon."Monsieur de Blenau," said the Princess, "I have but one moment to tellyou, that the Cardinal and Chavigni are plotting the ruin of the Queen;and they wish to force or persuade you to betray her. After you had leftthe Cardinal, by chance I heard it proposed to arrest you even to-night;but Chavigni said, that he had given his word that you should return toSt. Germain's to-morrow. Take care, therefore, of your conduct whilehere, and if you have any cause to fear, escape the moment you are atliberty. Fly to Flanders, and place yourself under the protection of DonFrancisco de Mello.""I have to return your Highness a thousand thanks," replied De Blenau;"but as far as innocence can give security, I have no reason to fear.""Innocence is nothing here," rejoined the lady. "But you are the bestjudge, Monsieur de Blenau. I sent Coligni to warn you, and taking anopportunity of escaping from the supper-table, came to request that youwill offer my humble duty to the Queen, and assure her that Marie deBourbon is ever hers. But here is some one coming--Good God, it isChavigni!"As she spoke, Chavigni came rapidly upon them. Mademoiselle de Bourbondrew down her veil, and De Blenau placed himself between her and theStatesman, who, affecting an excess of gaiety, totally foreign to hisnatural character, began to rally the Count upon what he termed hisgallantry. "So, Monsieur de Blenau," cried he, "already paying yourdevoirs to our Parisian dames. Nay, I must offer my compliments to yourfair lady on her conquest;" and he endeavoured to pass the Count towardsMademoiselle de Bourbon.De Blenau drew his sword. "Stand off, Sir," exclaimed he, "or by Heavenyou are a dead man!" And the point came flashing so near Chavigni'sbreast, that he was fain to start back a step or two. The lady seizedthe opportunity to pass him, for the palisade of the garden hadprevented her escaping the other way. Chavigni attempted to follow, butDe Blenau caught his arm, and held him with a grasp of iron."Not one step, Sir!" cried he. "Monsieur de Chavigni, you have strangelyforgot yourself. How is it you presume, Sir, to interrupt myconversation with any one? And let me ask, what affair it is of yours,if a lady chose to give me five minutes of her company even here! Youhave slackened your gallantry not a little.""But was the Cardinal's garden a place fitted for such love stories?"demanded Chavigni, feeling, at the same time, very sure that theconversation he had interrupted had not been of love; for in those dayspolitics and faction divided the heart of a Frenchwoman with gallantry,and, instead of quarrelling for the empire of her breast, theseapparently opposite passions went hand in hand together; and exempt fromthe more serious dangers incurred by the other sex in similarenterprises, women were often the most active agents and zealouspartisans in the factions and conspiracies of the times.It had been Chavigni's determination, on accompanying De Blenau to thePalais Cardinal, not to lose sight of his companion for a moment, inorder that no communication might take place between him and any of theQueen's party till such time as the Cardinal had personally interrogatedhim concerning the correspondence which they supposed that Anne ofAustria carried on with her brother, Philip of Spain. Chavigni, however,had been stopped, as we have seen, by the Cardinal himself, and detainedfor some time in conversation, the principal object of which was, theCount de Blenau himself, and the means of either persuading him byfavour, or of driving him by fear, not only to abandon, but to betraythe party he had espoused. The Cardinal thought ambition would do all;Chavigni said that it would not move De Blenau; and thus the discussionwas considerably prolonged.As soon as Chavigni could liberate himself, he had hastened after theCount, and found him as we have described. To have ascertained who washis companion, Chavigni would have risked his life; but now that she hadescaped him, the matter was past recall; and willing again to throw DeBlenau off his guard, he made some excuses for his intrusion, saying hehad thought that the lady was not unknown to him."Well, well, let it drop," replied De Blenau, fully more desirous ofavoiding farther inquiries than Chavigni was of relinquishing them. "Butthe next time you come across me on such an occasion, beware of yourheart's blood, Monsieur de Chavigni." And thus saying, he thrust backhis sword into the scabbard.Chavigni, however, was resolved not to lose sight of him again, andpassing his arm through that of the Count, "You are still too hot,Monsieur de Blenau," said he; "but nevertheless let us be friendsagain.""As far as we ever were friends, Sir," replied De Blenau. "The opendifference of our principles in every respect, must always prevent ourgreatly assimilating."Chavigni, however, kept to his purpose, and did not withdraw his armfrom that of De Blenau, nor quit him again during the whole evening.Whether the Statesman suspected Mademoiselle de Bourbon or not, matterslittle; but on entering the banquet-room, where the principal guestswere preparing to take their seats, they passed that lady with herbrother and the Count de Coligni, and the eye of Chavigni glanced fromthe countenance of De Blenau to hers. But they were both upon theirguard, and not a look betrayed that they had met since De Blenau's spurhad been entangled in her train.At that moment the Master of the ceremonies exclaimed with a loud voice,"Place au Comte de Blenau," and was conducting him to a seat higher thanhis rank entitled him to take, when his eye fell upon the old Marquis deBrion; and with the deference due not only to his station but to hishigh military renown, De Blenau drew back to give him precedence."Go on, go on, mon cher De Blenau," said the old soldier; and loweringhis voice to a whisper, he added, "honest men like you and I are all outof place here; so go on, and never mind. If it were in the field, wewould strive which should be first; but here there is no knowing whichend of the table is most honourable.""Wherever it were, I should always be happy to follow Monsieur deBrion," replied De Blenau; "but as you will have it, so let it be." Andfollowing the Master of the ceremonies, he was soon placed amongst themost distinguished guests, and within four or five seats of theCardinal. Like the spot before a heathen altar, it was always the placeeither of honour or sacrifice; and De Blenau scarcely knew which was tobe his fate. At all events, the distinction which he met with, was by nomeans pleasing to him, and he remained in silence during greater part ofthe banquet.Every thing in the vast hall where they sat was magnificent beyonddescription. It was like one of those scenes in fairy romance, wheresupernatural powers lend their aid to dignify some human festival. Allthe apartment was as fully illuminated as if the broad sun had shoneinto it in his fullest splendour; yet not a single light was to be seen.Soft sounds of music also occasionally floated through the air, butnever so loud as to interrupt the conversation.At the table all was glitter, and splendour, and luxury; and from thehigher end at which De Blenau sat, the long perspective of the hall,decked out with all a mighty kingdom's wealth and crowded with the gay,the bright, and the fair, offered an interminable view of beauty andmagnificence.I might describe the passing of the banquet, and the bright smiles thatwere given, and the bright things that were said. I might enlarge uponthe crowd of domestics, the activity of the seneschals and officers, andtell of the splendour of the decorations. I might even introduce thefamous court fool, L'Angeli, who stood behind the chair of his younglord the Duke d'Enghien. But no--a master's hand has given to the worldso many splendid pictures of such scenes, that mine would seem but afeeble imitation. Let such things rest with Scott, whose magic wand hashad power to call up the spirit of the past with as much truth, as if itwere again substantially in being.To pursue our theme, however. The Cardinal de Richelieu, who held in hishand the fate of all who sat around him, yielded to his guests the mostmarked attention, treating them with the profound humility of greatpride; trying to quell the fire of his eye, till it should becomenothing but affability; and to soften the deep tones of his voice, fromthe accent of command to an expression of gentle courtesy; butnotwithstanding all his efforts, a degree of that haughtiness with whichthe long habit of despotic rule had tinged his manners, wouldoccasionally appear, and still show that it was the lord entertaininghis vassals. His demeanour towards De Blenau, however, was all suavityand kindness. He addressed him several times in the most marked mannerduring the course of the banquet, and listened to his reply with one ofthose approving smiles, so sweet upon the lips of power.De Blenau was not to be deceived, it is true. Yet though he knew thatkindness to be assumed on purpose to betray, and the smile to be asfalse as Hell, there was a fascination in the distinction shown him,against which he could not wholly guard his heart. His brow unbent ofits frown, and he entered into the gay conversation which was going onaround; but at that moment he observed the Cardinal glance his eyetowards Chavigni with a meaning smile.De Blenau marked it. "So," thought he, "my Lord Cardinal, you deem meyour own." And as the guests rose, De Blenau took his leave, andreturned with Chavigni to the Place Royale.CHAPTER XI.Containing a Conference, which ends much as it began.The music of the Cardinal's fte rang in De Blenau's ears all night, andthe lights danced in his eyes, and the various guests flitted before hisimagination, like the figures in some great phantasmagoria. One time heseemed wandering in the gardens with Pauline de Beaumont, and offeringup all the dearest treasures of his heart, when suddenly the lady raisedher veil, and it was Mademoiselle de Bourbon. Then again he was seatedon the Cardinal's right hand, who poured out for him a cup of wine: heraised it to his lips, and was about to drink, when some one dashed itfrom his hand, exclaiming, "It is poison!" then, turning round to seewho had thus interposed, he beheld a figure without a head, and theoverthrown cup poured forth a stream of blood. The next moment it wasall the Cardinal's funeral, and the fool L'Angeli appeared as chiefmourner. At length, however, towards the approach of morning, the uneasyvisions died away, and left him in deep sleep, from which he roserefreshed, and prepared to encounter the events of a new day.Alas! that man should still rise to sorrow and to danger, and that thekindest gift of Heaven should be the temporary forgetfulness ofexistence. Sorrow! how is it that thy coarse thread is so intimatelymingled with the web of life, that he who would tear thee out must rendthe whole fabric? Oh life, thou long sad dream! when shall we rise fromall thy phantom agonies to that bright waking which we fondly hope?De Blenau prepared his mind, as a man arming for a battle; and sent tonotify to Chavigni, that he was about to visit the Cardinal. In a fewminutes after, the Statesman himself appeared, and courteously conductedthe young Count to his horse, but did not offer to accompany him to theMinister. "Monsieur de Blenau," said he, "it is better you should goalone. After your audience, you will doubtless be in haste to return toSt. Germain's; but if you will remain to take your noon meal at my poortable, I shall esteem myself honoured."De Blenau thanked him for his courtesy, but declined, stating that hewas anxious to return home before night, if he were permitted to do soat all. "My word is passed for your safety," replied Chavigni; "so haveno doubt on that head. But take my counsel, Monsieur le Comte: moderateyour proud bearing towards the Cardinal. Those who play with a lion,must take good care not to irritate him."On arriving at the Palais Cardinal, De Blenau left his attendants in theouter court, and following an officer of the household, proceededthrough a long suite of apartments to a large saloon, where he foundseveral others waiting the leisure of the Minister, who was at thatmoment engaged in conference with the Ambassador from Sweden.De Blenau's own feelings were not of the most comfortable nature; but onlooking round the room, he guessed, from the faces of all those withwhom it was tenanted, that such sensations were but too common there.One had placed himself at a window, and gazed upon the stones of thecourt-yard with as much earnestness as if they had inspired him with thedeepest interest. Another walked up and down his own corner withirregular steps and downcast look. Another leaned back in his seat, withhis chin resting on his breast, and regarded intently a door in theother side of the saloon. And another sat bending his hat into so manyshapes, that he left it, in the end, of no shape at all. But all weremarked, by the knitted brow and anxious eye, for men whose fate washanging on the breath of another.There was nothing consolatory in their looks, and De Blenau turned tothe portraits which covered the walls of the saloon. The first that hiseye fell upon was that of the famous Montmorency. He was represented asarmed in steel, with the head uncovered; and from his apparent age itseemed that the picture had not been painted long before the unfortunateconspiracy, which, by its failure, brought him to the scaffold. Therewas also an expression of grave sadness in the countenance, as if he hadpresaged his approaching fate. De Blenau turned to another; but it sohappened that each picture in the room represented some one of the manywhom Richelieu's unsparing vengeance had overtaken. Whether they wereplaced in that waiting-room in order to overawe those whom the Ministerwished to intimidate; or whether it was that the famous gallery, whichthe Cardinal had filled with portraits of all the principal historicalcharacters of France, would contain no more, and that in consequence thepictures of the later dates had been placed in this saloon, without anydeeper intent, matters not; but at all events they offered no verypleasant subject of contemplation.De Blenau, however, was not long kept in suspense; for, in a fewminutes, the door on the other side of the room opened, and the SwedishAmbassador passed out. The door shut behind him, but in a moment afteran attendant entered, and although several others had been waitingbefore him, De Blenau was the first summoned to the presence of theCardinal.He could not help feeling as if he wronged those he left still in doubtas to their fate: but following the officer through an ante-room, heentered the audience closet, and immediately perceived Richelieu seatedat a table, over which were strewed a multitude of papers of differentdimensions, some of which he was busily engaged in examining;--readingthem he was not, for his eye glanced so rapidly over their contents,that his knowledge of each could be but general. He paused for a momentas De Blenau entered, bowed his head, pointed to a seat, and resumed hisemployment. When he had done, he signed the papers, and gave them to adull-looking personage, in a black silk pourpoint, who stood behind hischair."Take these three death-warrants," said he, "to Monsieur Lafemas, andthen these others to Poterie at the Bastille. But no--stop," hecontinued after a moment's thought; "you had better go to the Bastillefirst, for Poterie can put Caply to the torture, while you are gone toLafemas; and you can bring me back his confession as you return."De Blenau shuddered at the sang froid with which the Ministercommanded those things that make one's blood curdle even to imagine. Butthe attendant was practised in such commissions; and taking the packets,as a mere matter of course, he bowed in silence, and disappearing by adoor on the other side, left De Blenau alone with the Cardinal."Well, Monsieur de Blenau," said Richelieu, looking up with a franksmile, "your pardon for having detained you. There are many things uponwhich I have long wished to speak to you, and this caused me to desireyour company. But I have no doubt that we shall part perfectly satisfiedwith each other."The Cardinal paused, as if for a reply. "I hope so too, my Lord," saidDe Blenau. "I can, of course, have no cause to be dissatisfied with yourEminence; and for my own part, I feel my bosom to be clear.""I doubt it not, Monsieur le Comte," replied the Minister, with agracious inclination of the head--"I doubt it not; I know your spirit tobe too frank and noble to mingle in petty faction and treasonable cabal.No one more admires your brave and independent bearing than myself. Youmust remember that I have marked you from your youth. You have beeneducated, as it were, under my own eye; and were it now necessary totrust the welfare of the State to the honour of any one man, I wouldconfide it to the honour of De Blenau.""To what, in the name of Heaven, can this lead?" thought De Blenau; buthe bowed without reply, and the Cardinal proceeded."I have, for some time past," he continued, "been thinking of placingyou in one of those high stations, to which your rank and considerationentitle you to aspire. At present, none are vacant; but as a forerunnerto such advancement, I propose to call you to the Council, and to giveyou the government of Poitou."De Blenau was now, indeed, astonished. The Cardinal was not a man tojest: and yet what he proposed, as a mere preliminary, was an offer thatthe first noble in France might have accepted with gladness. The Countwas about to speak. But Richelieu paused only for a moment, to observethe effect of what he said upon his auditor; and perhaps over-rating theambition of De Blenau, he proceeded more boldly."I do not pretend to say, notwithstanding my sense of your high merit,and my almost parental feelings towards you, that I am wholly moved tothis by my individual regard; but the truth is, that the State requires,at this moment, the services of one, who joins to high talents athorough knowledge of the affairs of Spain.""So!" thought De Blenau, "I have it now. The government of Poitou, and aseat at the Council, provided I betray the Queen and sell my ownhonour." Richelieu seemed to wait an answer, and De Blenau replied: "Ifyour Eminence means to attribute such knowledge to me, some one musthave greatly misled you. I possess no information on the affairs ofSpain whatever, except from the common reports and journals of thetime."This reply did not seem to affect Richelieu's intentions. "Well, well,Monsieur de Blenau," said he, with a smile, "you will take your seat atthe Council, and will, of course, as a good subject and an honourableman, communicate to us whatever information you possess, on those pointswhich concern the good of the State. We do not expect all at once; andevery thing shall be done to smooth your way, and facilitate your views.Then, perhaps, if Richelieu live to execute the plans he has formed,you, Monsieur de Blenau, following his path, and sharing his confidence,may be ready to take his place, when death shall at length call himfrom it."The Cardinal counted somewhat too much on De Blenau's ambition, and notsufficiently on his knowledge of the world; and imagining that he had,the evening before, discovered the weak point in the character of theyoung Count, he thought to lead him to any thing, by holding out to himextravagant prospects of future greatness. The dish, however, wassomewhat too highly flavoured; and De Blenau replied, with a smile,--"Your Eminence is exceeding good to think at all of me, in the vast andmore important projects which occupy your mind. But, alas! my Lord, DeBlenau would prove but a poor successor to Richelieu.--No, my LordCardinal," he continued, "I have no ambition; that is a passion whichshould be reserved for such great and comprehensive minds as yours. I amcontented as I am. High stations are always stations of danger.""I had heard that the Count de Blenau was no way fearful," saidRichelieu, fixing on him a keen and almost scornful glance. "Was thereport a mistake? or is it lately he has become afraid of danger?"De Blenau was piqued, and lost temper. "Of personal danger, my Lord, Iam never afraid," replied he. "But when along with risk to myself isinvolved danger to my friends, danger to my country, danger to myhonour, and danger to my soul," and he returned the Cardinal's glancefull as proudly as it had been given, "then, my Lord Cardinal, I wouldsay, it were no cowardice, but true courage to fly from suchperil--unless," he added, remembering the folly of opposing theirritable and unscrupulous Minister, and thinking that his words had,perhaps, been already too warm--"unless, indeed, one felt within one'sbreast the mind of a Richelieu."While De Blenau spoke, the Cardinal's brow knitted into a frown. A flushtoo came over his cheek; and untying the ribbon which served as afastening, he took off the velvet cap he generally wore, as if to givehimself air. He heard him, however, to the end, and then answered drily,"You speak well, Monsieur de Blenau, and, I doubt not, feel what yousay. But am I to understand you, that you refuse to aid us at theCouncil with your information and advice?""So far, your Eminence is right," replied the Count, who saw that thestorm was now about to break upon his head; "I must, indeed, decline thehonours which you offer with so bountiful a hand. But do not supposethat I do so from unwillingness to yield you any information; for,truly, I have none to give. I have never meddled with politics. I havenever turned my attention to State affairs; and therefore still lesscould I yield you any advice. Your Eminence would be woefullydisappointed, when you expected to find a man well acquainted with thearts of government, and deep read in the designs of foreign states, tomeet with one, whose best knowledge is to range a battalion, or topierce a boar; a soldier, and not a diplomatist; a hunter, and not astatesman. And as to the government of Poitou, my Lord, its only goodwould be the emolument, and already my revenues are far more thanadequate to my wants.""You refuse my kindness, Sir," replied the Cardinal, with an air of deepdetermined haughtiness, very different from the urbanity with which hehad at first received De Blenau; "I must now speak to you in anothertone. And let me warn you to beware of what you say; for be assured,that I already possess sufficient information to confound you if youshould prevaricate.""My Lord Cardinal," replied De Blenau, somewhat hastily, "I am notaccustomed to prevaricate. Ask any questions you please, and, so long asmy honour and my duty go with them, I will answer you.""Then there are questions," said the Cardinal, "that you would thinkagainst your duty to answer?""I said not so, your Eminence," replied De Blenau. "In the examinationI find I am to undergo, give my words their full meaning, if you please,but no more than their meaning.""Well then, Sir, answer me as a man of honour and a French noble," saidthe Cardinal--"Are you not aware of a correspondence that has been, andis now, carried on between Anne of Austria and Don Francisco de Mello,Governor of the Low Countries?""I know not whom you mean, Sir, by Anne of Austria," replied De Blenau."If it be her Majesty, your Queen and mine, that you so designate, Ireply at once that I know of no such correspondence, nor do I believethat it exists.""Do you mean to say, Monsieur de Blenau," demanded the Cardinal, fixinghis keen sunken eyes upon the young Count with that basilisk glance forwhich he was famous--"Do you mean to say, that you yourself have notforwarded letters from the Queen to Madame de Chevreuse, and DonFrancisco de Mello, by a private channel?--Pause, Monsieur de Blenau,before you answer, and be well assured that I am acquainted with everyparticular of your conduct.""Your Eminence is, no doubt, acquainted with much more intricatesubjects than any of my actions," replied the Count. "With regard toMadame de Chevreuse, her Majesty has no need to conceal a correspondencewith her, which has been fully permitted and sanctioned, both by yourEminence and the still higher authority of the King; and I may add, thatto my certain knowledge, letters have gone to that lady by your owncourier. On the other point, I have answered already; and have only tosay once more, that I know of no such correspondence, nor would I,assuredly, lend myself to any such measures, which I should conceive tobe treasonable.""I have always hitherto supposed you to be a man of honour," said theCardinal coolly; "but what must I conceive now, Monsieur le Comte, whenI tell you that I have those very letters in my possession?""You may conceive what you please, Sir," replied De Blenau, giving wayto his indignation; "but I will dare any man to lay before me a letterfrom her Majesty to the person you mention, which has passed through thehands of De Blenau."The Cardinal did not reply, but opening an ebony cabinet, which stood onhis right hand, he took from one of the compartments a small bundle ofpapers, from which he selected one, and laid it on the table before theCount, who had hitherto looked on with no small wonder and expectation."Do you know that writing, Sir?" demanded the Cardinal, still keepinghis hand upon the paper, in such a manner as to allow only a word or twoto be visible.De Blenau examined the line which the Cardinal suffered to appear, andreplied--"From what little I can see, I should imagine it to be thehand-writing of her Majesty. But that does not show that I have anything to do with it.""But there is that in it which does," answered Richelieu, folding downa line or two of the letter, and pointing out to the Count a sentencewhich said, "This will be conveyed to you by the Count de Blenau, whoyou know never fails.""Now, Sir!" continued the Cardinal, "once more let me advise you to giveme all you possess upon this subject. From a feeling of personal regard,I have had too much patience with you already.""All I can reply to your Eminence," answered the Count, not a littleembarrassed, "is, that no letter whatever has been conveyed by me,knowingly, to the Governor of the Low Countries."De Blenau's eyes naturally fixed on the paper, which still lay on thetable, and from which the Cardinal had by this time withdrawn his hand;and feeling that both life and honour depended upon that document, heresolved to ascertain its authenticity, of which he entertained somedoubt."Stop," said he hastily, "let me look at the superscription," andbefore Richelieu could reply, he had raised it from the table and turnedto the address. One glance was enough to satisfy him, and he returned itto the Cardinal with a cool and meaning smile, repeating the words--"ToMadame de Chevreuse."At first the Cardinal had instinctively stretched out his hand to stopDe Blenau in his purpose, but he instantly recovered himself, nor didhis countenance betray the least change of feeling. "Well, Sir," repliedhe, "you said that you would dare any one to lay before you a letterfrom the Queen to the person I mentioned. Did I not mention Madame deChevreuse, and is not there the letter?""Your Eminence has mistaken me," replied De Blenau, bowing his head, andsmiling at the Minister's art; "I meant, Don Francisco de Mello. I hadanswered what you said in regard to Madame de Chevreuse, before.""I did mistake you then, Sir," said the Cardinal; "but it was from theambiguity of your own words. However, passing over your boldness, inraising that letter without my permission; I will show you that I knowmore of your proceedings than you suspect. I will tell you the veryterms of the message you sent to the Queen, after you were wounded inthe wood of Mantes, conveying to her, that you had not lost the packetwith which you were charged. Did not Seguin tell her, on your part, thatthough the wound was in your side, your heart was not injured?""I dare say he did, my Lord," replied De Blenau, coolly; "and the eventhas proved that he was quite right, for your Eminence must perceive thatI am quite recovered, which, of course, could not have been the case,had any vital part been hurt. But I hope, your Eminence, that there isno offence, in your eyes, either in having sent the Queen, my mistress,an account of my health, or in having escaped the attack of assassins."A slight flush passed over Richelieu's cheek. "You may chance to fallinto less scrupulous hands than even their's," replied he. "I amcertainly informed, Sir, that you, on the part of the Queen, have beencarrying on a treasonable intercourse with Spain--a country at war withFrance, to whose crown you are a born subject and vassal; and I have totell you, that the punishment of such a crime is death. Yes, Sir, youmay knit your brow. But no consideration shall stay me from visiting,with the full severity of the law, such as do so offend; and though theinformation I want be but small, depend upon it, I shall not hesitate toemploy the most powerful means to wring it from you."De Blenau had no difficulty in comprehending the nature of those means,to which the Cardinal alluded; but his mind was made up to suffer theworst. "My Lord Cardinal," replied he, "what your intentions are, I knownot; but be sure, that to whatever extremes you may go, you can wringnothing from me but what you have already heard. I once more assure you,that I know of no treasonable correspondence whatsoever; and firm in myown innocence, I equally despise all attempts to bribe or to intimidateme.""Sir, you are insolent!" replied the Cardinal rising: "Use no suchlanguage to me!--Are you not an insect I can sweep from my path in aninstant? Ho, a guard there without! We shall soon see, whether you knowaught of Philip of Spain."Had the Cardinal's glance been directed towards De Blenau, he would haveseen, that at the name of Philip of Spain, a degree of paleness cameover his cheek; but another object had caught Richelieu's eye, and hedid not observe it. It was the entrance of the attendant whom he haddespatched with the death-warrants, which now drew his notice; and wellpleased to show De Blenau the dreadful means he so unscrupulouslyemployed to extort confession from those he suspected, he eagerlydemanded, "What news?""May it please your Eminence," said the attendant, "Caply died under thetorture. In truth, it was soon over with him, for he did not bear itabove ten minutes.""But the confession, the confession!" exclaimed Richelieu. "Where is theprocs verbal?""He made no confession, Sir," replied the man. "He protested, to thelast, his innocence, and that he knew nothing.""Pshaw!" said Richelieu; "they let him die too soon; they should havegiven him wine to keep him up. Foolish idiot," he continued, as ifmeditating over the death of his victim; "had he but told what he wascommanded, he would have saved himself from a death of horror. Such isthe meed of obstinacy.""Such," thought De Blenau, "is, unhappily, often the reward of firmnessand integrity. But such a death is honourable in itself."No one could better read in the face what was passing in the mind thanRichelieu, and it is probable that he easily saw in the countenance ofDe Blenau, the feelings excited by what had just passed. He rememberedalso the promise given by Chavigni; and if, when he called the Guard,he had ever seriously proposed to arrest De Blenau, he abandoned hisintention for the moment. Not that the high tone of the young Count'slanguage was either unfelt, or forgiven, for Richelieu never pardoned;but it was as easy to arrest De Blenau at St. Germain's as in Paris; andthe wily Minister calculated, that by giving him a little liberty, andthrowing him off his guard, he might be tempted to do those things whichwould put him more completely in the power of the government, and givethe means of punishing him for his pride and obstinacy, as it wasinternally termed by a man long unaccustomed to any opposition.De Blenau was principally obnoxious to the Cardinal, as the confidant ofthe Queen, and from being the chief of her adherents both by his rank,wealth, and reputation. Anne of Austria having now become the onlyapparent object which could cloud the sky of Richelieu's politicalpower, he had resolved either to destroy her, by driving her to somecriminal act, or so to entangle her in his snares, as to reduce her tobecome a mere instrument in his hands and for his purposes. To arrest DeBlenau would put the Queen upon her guard; and therefore, the Minister,without hesitation, resolved to dissemble his resentment, and allow theCount to depart in peace; reserving for another time the vengeance hehad determined should overtake him at last. Nor was his dissembling ofthat weak nature which those employ, who have all the will to deceive,without the art of deceiving.Richelieu walked rapidly up and down the closet for a moment, as ifstriving to repress some strong emotion, then stopped, and turning to DeBlenau with some frankness of manner, "Monsieur le Comte," said he, "Iwill own that you have heated me,--perhaps I have given way to it toomuch. But you ought to be more careful of your words, Sir, and rememberthat with men whose power you cannot resist, it is sometimes dangerouseven to be in the right, much more to make them feel it rudely.However, it is all past, and I will now detain you no longer; trustingto your word, that the information which I have received, is withoutfoundation. Let me only add, that you might have raised yourself thisday to a height which few men in France would not struggle to attain.But that is past also, and may, perhaps, never return.""I am most grateful, believe me," replied De Blenau, "for all thefavours your Eminence intended me; and I have no doubt, that you willsoon find some other person, on whom to bestow them, much more worthy ofthem than myself."Richelieu bowed low, and fixed his eyes upon the Count without reply--asignal that the audience was over, which was not lost upon De Blenau,who very gladly took his leave of the Minister, hoping most devoutlynever to see his face again. The ambiguity of his last sentence,however, had not escaped the Cardinal."So, Monsieur de Blenau!" said he, as soon as the Count had left him,"you can make speeches with a double meaning also! Can you so? You mayrue it though, for I will find means to bend your proud spirit, or tobreak it; and that before three days be over. Is every thing preparedfor my passage to Chantilly?" he continued, turning to the attendant."All is prepared, please your Eminence," replied the man; "and as Ipassed, I saw Monsieur de Chavigni getting into his chaise to set out.""We will let him be an hour or two in advance," said the Cardinal. "Sendin the Marquis de Goumont;" and he again applied himself to otheraffairs.CHAPTER XII."An entire new comedy, with new scenery, dresses, and decorations."The little village of Mesnil St. Loup, all insignificant as it is, wasat the time of my tale a place of even less consequence than it appearsnow-a-days, when nine people out of ten have scarcely ever heard of itsexistence.It was, nevertheless, a pretty-looking place; and had its littleauberge, on the same scale and in the same style as the village towhich it belonged,--small, neat, and picturesque, with its high polebefore the door, crowned with a gay garland of flowers, which servedboth for sign and inscription to the inn; being fully as comprehensiblean intimation to the peasantry of the day, that "Bon vin et bonnechre" were to be obtained within, as the most artful flourish of amodern sign-painter.True it is, that the little cabaret of Mesnil St. Loup was seldomtroubled with the presence of a traveller; but there the country peoplewould congregate after the labours of the day, and enjoy their simplesports with a relish that luxury knows not. The high road from Paris toTroyes passed quite in another direction; and a stranger in Mesnil St.Loup was a far greater stranger than he could possibly have beenanywhere else, except perhaps in newly discovered America. For there wasnothing to excite either interest or curiosity; except it were thelittle church, which had seen many a century pass over its primitivewalls, remaining still unaltered, while five or six old trees, which hadbeen its companions for time out of mind, began to show strong signs ofdecay, in their rifted bark and falling branches, but still formed apicturesque group, with a great stone cross and fountain underneaththem, and a seat for the weary traveller to rest himself in their shade.Thus, Mesnil St. Loup was little known to strangers, for its simplicityhad no attractions for the many. Nevertheless, on one fine evening,somewhere about the beginning of September, the phenomenon of a new faceshowed itself at Mesnil St. Loup. The personage to whom it appertained,was a horseman of small mean appearance, who, having passed by thechurch, rode through the village to the auberge, and having raised hiseyes to the garland over the door, he divined from it, that he himselfwould find there good Champagne wine, and his horse would meet withentertainment equally adapted to his peculiar taste. Thereupon, thestranger alighted and entered the place of public reception, withoutmaking any of that bustle about himself, which the landlord seemed wellinclined to do for him; but on the contrary sat himself down in the mostshady corner, ordered his bottle of wine, and inquired what means thehouse afforded of satisfying his hunger, in a low quiet tone of voice,which reached no farther than the person he addressed."As for wine," the host replied, "Monsieur should have such wine thatthe first merchant of Epernay might prick his ears at it; and in regardto eatables, what could be better than stewed eels, out of the riverhard by, and a civet de lievre?--Monsieur need not be afraid," headded; "it was a real hare he had snared that morning himself, in theforest under the hill. Some dishonourable innkeepers," heobserved--"innkeepers unworthy of the name, would dress up cats andrats, and such animals, in the form of hares and rabbits; even as theDevil had been known to assume the appearance of an Angel of light; buthe scorned such practices, and could not only show his hare's skin, buthis hare in the skin. Farther, he would give Monsieur an ortolan in avine leaf, and a dish of stewed sorrel."The stranger underwent the innkeeper's oration with most exemplarypatience, signified his approbation of the proposed dinner, withoutattacking the hare's reputation; and when at length it was placed beforehim, he ate his meal and drank his wine, in profound silence, without aword of praise or blame to either one or the other. The landlord, withall his sturdy loquacity, failed in more than one attempt to draw himinto conversation; and the hostess, though none of the oldest orugliest, could scarce win a syllable from his lips, even by asking if hewere pleased with his fare. The taciturn stranger merely bowed his head,and seemed little inclined to exert his oratorical powers, more than bythe simple demand of what he wanted; so that both mine host and hostessgave him up in despair--the one concluding that he was "an odd one," andthe other declaring that he was as stupid as he was ugly.This lasted some time, till one villager after another, having exhaustedevery excuse for staying to hear whether the stranger would open hislips, dropped away in his turn, and left the apartment vacant. It wasthen, and not till then, that mine host was somewhat surprised, byhearing the silent traveller pronounce in a most audible and imperativemanner, "Gaultier, come here." The first cause of astonishment was tohear him speak at all; and the next to find his own proper name ofGaultier so familiar to the stranger, forgetting that it had beenvociferated at least one hundred times that night in his presence.However, Gaultier obeyed the summons with all speed, and approaching thestranger with a low reverence, begged to know his good will andpleasure."Your wine is good, Gaultier," said the stranger, raising his clear greyeyes to the rosy round of Gaultier's physiognomy. Even an innkeeper issusceptible of flattery; and Gaultier bent his head down towards theground, as if he were going to do kou-tou."Gaultier, bring me another bottle," said the stranger. This phrase wasbetter than the former; that sort of substantial flattery that goesstraight to an innkeeper's heart. Truly, it is a pity that innkeepersare such selfish beings. And yet it is natural too;--so rapidly doesmankind pass by them, that theirs can be, at best, but a stage-coachsort of affection for their fellow-creatures--The coachman shuts thedoor--Drive on!--and it is all over. Thus, my dear Sir, the gaieties,the care, and the bustle in which you and I live, render our hearts butas an inn, where many a traveller stays for an hour, pays his score, andis forgotten.--I am resolved to let mine upon lease.----The bottle of wine was not long in making its appearance; and asGaultier set it on the table before the stranger, he asked if he couldserve him farther."Can you show me the way to the old Chateau of St. Loup?" demanded thestranger."Surely, I can, Sir," replied the innkeeper; "that is to say, as far asknowing where it is. But I hope Monsieur does not mean to-night.""Indeed do I," answered the stranger; "and pray why not? The night isthe same as the day to an honest man.""No doubt, no doubt!" exclaimed Gaultier, with the greatest doubt in theworld in his own mind.--"No doubt! But, Holy Virgin! Jesu preserveus!"--and he signed the cross most devoutly--"we all know that there arespirits, and demons, and astrologers, and the Devil, and all those sortof things; and I would not go through the Grove where old Pre Le Rouge,the sorcerer, was burnt alive, not to be prime minister, or the Cardinalde Richelieu, or any other great man,--that is to say, after nightfall.In the day I would go anywhere, or do any thing,--I am no coward,Sir,--I dare do any thing. My father served in the blessed Leagueagainst the cursed Huguenots--so I am no coward;--but bless you, Sir, Iwill tell you how it happened, and then you will see--""I know all about it," replied the stranger, in a voice that made theinnkeeper start, and look over his left shoulder; "I know all about it;but sit down and drink with me, to keep your spirits up, for you mustshow me the way this very night. Pre Le Rouge was a dear friend ofmine, and before he was burnt for a sorcerer, we had made a solemncompact to meet once every ten years. Now, if you remember aright, itis just ten years, this very day, since he was executed; and there is nobond in Hell fast enough to hold him from meeting me to-night at the oldchateau. So sit you down and drink!"--And he poured out a full cup ofwine for the innkeeper, who looked aghast at the portentous compactbetween the stranger and Pre Le Rouge. However, whether it was thatGaultier was too much afraid to refuse, or had too much esprit decorps not to drink with any one who would drink with him, can hardly bedetermined now; but so it was, that sitting down, according to thestranger's desire, he poured the whole goblet of wine over his throat atone draught, and, as he afterwards averred, could not help thinking thatthe stranger must have enchanted the liquor, for no sooner had heswallowed it, than all his fears of Pre Le Rouge began to die away,like morning dreams. However, when the goblet was drained, Gaultierbegan more justly to estimate the danger of drinking with a sorcerer;and that the stranger was such, a Champenois aubergiste of 1642 couldnever be supposed to doubt, after the diabolical compact sounscrupulously confessed. Under this impression, he continued rollinghis empty cup about upon the table, revolving at the same time his owncritical situation, and endeavouring to determine what might be his dutyto his King and Country under such perilous circumstances. Rolling thecup to the right--he resolved instantly to denounce this malignantenchanter to the proper authorities, and have him forthwith burnt alive,and sent to join Pre Le Rouge in the other world, by virtue of thehumane and charitable laws in that case especially made and provided.Then rolling the cup to the other side--his eye glanced towards thestranger's bottle, and resting upon the vacuum which their united thirsthad therein occasioned, his heart over-flowed with the milk of humankindness, and he pitied from his soul that perverted taste which couldlead any human being from good liquor, comfortable lodging, and thesociety of an innkeeper, to a dark wood and a ruined castle, an oldroasted sorcerer, and the Devil perhaps into the bargain."Would you choose another bottle, Sir?" demanded Gaultier; and as hiscompanion nodded his head in token of assent, was about to proceed onthis errand--with the laudable intention also of sharing all his newlyarisen doubts and fears with his gentle help-mate, who, for her part,was busily engaged in the soft domestic duties of scolding thestable-boy and boxing the maid's ears. But the stranger stopped him,perhaps divining, and not very much approving, the aforesaidcommunication. He exclaimed, "La Bourgeoise!" in a tone of voice whichoverpowered all other noises: the abuse of the dame herself--the tearsof the maid--the exculpation of the stable-boy--the cackle of the cocksand hens, which were on a visit in the parlour--and the barking of aprick-eared cur included. The fresh bottle soon stood upon the table;and while the hostess returned to her former tender avocations, thestranger, whose clear grey eye seemed reading deeply into Gaultier'sheart, continued to drink from the scanty remains of his own bottle,leaving mine host to fill from that which was hitherto uncontaminated byany other touch than his own. This Gaultier did not fail to do, tillsuch time as the last rays of the sun, which had continued to lingerfondly amidst a flight of light feathery clouds overhead, had entirelyleft the sky, and all was grey.At that moment the stranger drew forth his purse, let it fall upon thetable with a heavy sort of clinking sound, showing that the louis-d'orswithin had hardly room to jostle against each other. It was a sound ofcomfortable plenty, which had something in it irresistibly attractive tothe ears of Gaultier; and as he stood watching while the strangerinsinuated his finger and thumb into the little leathern bag, drawingforth first one broad piece and then another, so splendid did thestranger's traffic with the Devil begin to appear in the eyes of theinnkeeper, that he almost began to wish that he had been brought up asorcerer also.The stranger quietly pushed the two pieces of gold across the table tillthey got within the innkeeper's sphere of attraction, when they becamesuddenly hurried towards him, with irresistible velocity, and wereplunged into the abyss of a large pocket on his left side, close uponhis heart.The stranger looked on with philosophic composure, as if consideringsome natural phenomenon, till such time as the operation was complete."Now, Gaultier," cried he, "put on your beaver, and lead to thebeginning of the Grove. I will find my way through it alone. But harkye, say no word to your wife."Gaultier was all complaisance, and having placed his hat on his head, heopened the door of the auberge, and brought forth the stranger's horse,fancying that what with a bottle of wine, and two pieces of gold, hecould meet Beelzebub himself, or any other of those gentlemen of thelower house, with whom the Cur used to frighten the little boys andgirls when they went to their first communion. However, the stranger hadscarcely passed the horse's bridle over his arm, and led him a step ortwo on the way, when the cool air and reflection made the innkeeperbegin to think differently of the Devil, and be more inclined to keep ata respectful distance from so grave and antique a gentleman. A few stepsmore made him as frightened as ever; and before they had got to the endof the village, Gaultier fell hard to work, crossing himself mostlaboriously, and trembling every time he remembered that he wasconducting one sorcerer to meet another, long dead and delivered over inform, with fire and fagot, into the hands of Satan.It is probable that he would have run, but the stranger was closebehind, and cut off his retreat.At about a mile and a half from the little village of Mesnil, stood theold Chateau of St. Loup, situated upon an abrupt eminence, commanding aview of almost all the country round. The valley at its foot, and theslope of the hill up to its very walls, were covered with thick wood,through which passed the narrow deserted road from Mesnil, winding inand out with a thousand turns and divarications, and twice completelyencircling the hill itself, before it reached the castle gate, whichonce, in the hospitable pride of former days, had rested constantly openfor the reception equally of the friend and the stranger, but which nowonly gave entrance to the winds and tempests--rude guests, thatcontributed, even more than Time himself, the great destroyer, to bringruin and desolation on the deserted mansion. Hard by, in a littlecemetery, attached to the Chapel, lay many of the gay hearts that hadonce beat there, now quiet in the still cold earth. There, moulderinglike the walls that overshadowed them, were the last sons of the braveand noble race of Mesnil, without one scion left to dwell in the hallsof their forefathers, or to grieve over the desolation of theirheritage. There, too, lay the vassals, bowed to the will of a sternerLord, and held in the surer bondage of the tomb; and yet perhaps, inlife, they had passed on, happier than their chief, without his proudanxiety and splendid cares; and now, in death, his bed was surely madeas low, and the equal wind that whispered over the grave of the one,offered no greater flattery to the monument of the other. But, beyondall these, and removed without the precincts of consecrated ground, wasa heap of shards and flints--the Sorcerer's grave! Above it, some pioushand had raised the symbol of salvation--a deed of charity, truly, inthose days, when eternal mercy was farmed by the Church, like a turnpikeon the high road, and none could pass but such as paid toll. But,however, there it rose,--a tall white cross, standing, as that symbolshould always stand, high above every surrounding object, and full inview of all who sought it.As the aubergiste and his companion climbed the hill, which, leadingfrom the village of Mesnil, commanded a full prospect of the rich woodyvalley below, and overhung that spot which, since the tragedy of poorPre Le Rouge, had acquired the name of the Sorcerer's Grove, it wasthis tall white cross that first caught their attention. It stood uponthe opposite eminence, distinctly marked on the back-ground of theevening sky, catching every ray of light that remained, while behind it,pile upon pile, lay the thick clouds of a coming storm."There, Monsieur," cried Gaultier, "there is the cross upon theSorcerer's grave!" And the fear which agitated him while he spoke, madethe stranger's lip curl into a smile of bitter contempt. But as theyturned the side of the hill, which had hitherto concealed the castleitself from their sight, the teeth of Gaultier actually chattered in hishead, when he beheld a bright light shining from several windows of thedeserted building."There!" exclaimed the stranger, "there, you see how well Pre Le Rougekeeps his appointment. I am waited for, and want you no farther. I cannow find my way alone. I would not expose you, my friend, to the dangersof that Grove."The innkeeper's heart melted at the stranger's words, and he was filledwith compassionate zeal upon the occasion. "Pray don't go," criedGaultier, almost blubbering betwixt fear and tender-heartedness; "praydon't go! Have pity upon your precious soul! You'll go to the Devil,indeed you will!--or at least to purgatory for a hundred thousand years,and be burnt up like an overdone rabbit. You are committing murder, andconspiracy, and treason,"--the stranger started, but Gaultier wenton--"and heresy, and pleurisy, and sorcery, and you will go to theDevil, indeed you will--and then you'll remember what I told you.""What is fated, is fated!" replied the stranger, in a solemn voice,though Gaultier's speech had produced that sort of tremulous tone,excited by an inclination either to laugh or to cry. "I have promised,and I must go. But let me warn you," he continued, sternly, "never tomention one word of what has passed to-night, if you would live till Icome again. For if you reveal one word, even to your wife, the ninthnight after you have done so, Pre Le Rouge will stand on one side ofyour bed, and I on the other, and Satan at your feet, and we will carryyou away body and soul, so that you shall never be heard of again."When he had concluded, the stranger waited for no reply, but sprang uponhis horse, and galloped down into the wood.In the mean time, the landlord climbed to a point of the hill, fromwhence he could see both his own village, and the ruins of the castle.There, the sight of the church steeple gave him courage, and he pausedto examine the extraordinary light which proceeded from the ruin. In afew minutes, he saw several figures flit across the windows, and cast amomentary obscurity over the red glare which was streaming forth fromthem upon the darkness of the night. "There they are!" cried he, "PreLe Rouge, and his pot companion!--and surely the Devil must be withthem, for I see more than two, and one of them has certainly atail--Lord have mercy upon us!"As he spoke, a vivid flash of lightning burst from the clouds, followedinstantly by a tremendous peal of thunder. The terrified innkeeperstartled at the sound, and more than ever convinced that man's enemy wason earth, took to his heels, nor ceased running till he reached his owndoor, and met his better angel of a wife, who boxed his ears for hisabsence, and vowed he had been gallanting.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.CHAPTER I.The motto of which should be "Out of the frying-pan into the fire."The jingle of Claude de Blenau's spurs, as he descended with a quickstep the staircase of the Palais Cardinal, told as plainly as a pair ofFrench spurs could tell, that his heart was lightened of a heavy loadsince he had last tried their ascent; and the spring of his foot, as heleaped upon his horse, spoke much of renewed hope, and banishedapprehension.But the Devil of it is--(for I must use that homely but happyexpression)--the Devil of it is, that the rebound of hope raises us asmuch above the level of truth, as the depression of fear sinks us belowit: and De Blenau, striking his spurs into the sides of his horse,cantered off towards St. Germain as gaily as if all doubt and dangerwere over, and began to look upon bastilles, tortures, and racks, withall the other et-cetera of Richelieu's government, as little better thanchimeras of the imagination, with which he had nothing farther to do.Hope sets off at a hand gallop, Consideration soon contents herself witha more moderate pace, and Doubt is reduced, at best, to a slow trot.Thus, as De Blenau began to reflect, he unconsciously drew in the bridleof his horse; and before he had proceeded one league on the way to St.Germain's, the marks of deep thought were evident both in the pace ofthe courser and the countenance of the rider; De Blenau knitting hisbrow and biting his lip, as the various dangers that surrounded himcrossed his mind; and the gentle barb, seemingly animated by the samespirit as his master, bending his arched neck and throwing out his feetwith as much consideration as if the firm Chemin de St. Germain hadbeen no better than a quagmire.De Blenau well knew that even in France a man might smile, and smile,and be a villain; and that the fair words of Richelieu too oftenpreceded his most remorseless actions. He remembered also the warning ofMademoiselle de Bourbon, and felt too strongly how insecure a warrantywas conscious innocence for his safety; but still he possessed that sortof chivalrous pride which made him look upon flight as degrading underany circumstances, and more especially so when the danger was mostapparent. Like the lion, he might have slowly avoided the hunters whileunattacked; but once pressed by the chace, he turned to resist or tosuffer. Such was the quality of his mind; and in the present instance heresolved to await his fate with firmness, whatsoever that fate mightbe.I know not whether an author, like an Old Bailey witness, be, by thelaws in that case made and provided, obliged to tell, on every occasion,not only the truth, but the whole truth: however, lest I should offendagainst any known or unknown statute, be it remarked, that the wholecredit due to the determination of De Blenau is not to be attributed tothat great and magnanimous quality, called by some persons undauntedresolution, and by others fool-hardiness; for in this as in almostevery other proceeding of the human heart, there were two or threelittle personal motives which mingled with all his ideas, and, withouthis knowing any thing about it, brought his reasoning to the conclusionaforesaid.Of these little motives I shall only pick out one as a specimen; butthis one in the breast of a young man of five and twenty, living in aromantic age, and blest with a romantic disposition, may be consideredall sufficient. Now if it should be love!--As I write this volumeentirely for ladies, we are all agreed.--Love it was! and who is therethat will presume to say, Claude de Blenau was not completely justifiedin resolving to hazard all, rather than part with Pauline de Beaumont?As long as any hesitation had remained in the mind of De Blenau, he hadproceeded, as we have seen, with a slow unequal pace; but the moment hisdetermination was fixed, his thoughts turned towards St. Germain's, andall his ideas concentrating into one of those daydreams, that everyyoung heart is fond to indulge, he spurred on his horse, eager torealize some, at least, of the bright promises which hope so liberallyheld forth. It was late, however, before he arrived at the end of hisjourney, and internally cursing the etiquette which required him tochange his dress before he could present himself at the Palace, he sentforward his Page to announce his return, and beg an audience of theQueen.His toilet was not long, and without waiting for the boy's return, heset out on foot, hoping to join the Queen's circle before it separatedfor the evening. In this he was disappointed. Anne of Austria was alone;and though her eyes sparkled with gladness for his unexpected return,and her reception was as kind as his good services required, De Blenauwould have been better pleased to have been welcomed by other lips."I could scarce credit the news till I saw you, mon Chambellan," saidthe Queen, extending her hand for him to kiss; "nor can I truly believeit is you that I behold even now. How have you escaped from thatdreadful man?""I will tell your Majesty all that has happened," replied the Count;"and as I have a boon to ask, I think I must represent my sufferings inyour Majesty's cause in the most tremendous colours. But without a jest,I have had little to undergo beyond a forced attendance at theCardinal's fte, where the only hard word I received was from L'Angeli,the Duke of Enghien's fool, who, seeing my riding-dress, asked if I werePuss in Boots." De Blenau then shortly related all that had occurredduring his stay in Paris. "And thus, Madam," he added, "you see thatChavigni has kept his word; for had it not been for that promise, Idoubt not I should have been even now comfortably lodged in theBastille, with a table at his Majesty's expense."The Queen mused for a moment without making any reply; but from hercountenance it seemed that she was not a little troubled by what she hadheard."De Blenau," said she at length, in a calm but melancholy voice, "thereis something concealed here. The Cardinal has deeper plans in view. AsMarie de Bourbon told you, they are plotting my ruin. When first Ientered France, that man of blood and treachery resolved to make me hisslave. He flattered my tastes, he prevented my wishes, like an insidiousserpent he wound himself into my confidence; and I was weak enough todream that my husband's minister was my best friend. With as much vanityas insolence, he mistook condescension for love. He sought hisopportunity, and dared to insult my ears with his wishes. I need nottell you, De Blenau, what was my reply; but it was such as stung him tothe soul. He rose from where he had been kneeling at my feet, andthreatened such vengeance, that, as he said, my whole life should be onelong succession of miseries. Too truly has he kept his word."--The Queenpaused, and as was often her custom when any circumstance called hermemory back to the bitter events of her past life, fell into a deepreverie, from which it was not easy to rouse her."Too much of this," said she at length; "we must look to the present, DeBlenau. As the mother of two princes, Richelieu both hates and fears me;and I see that they are plotting my ruin. But yours shall not beinvolved therein.--De Blenau, you must fly till this storm has passedby.""Pardon me, madam," replied the Count, "but in this I cannot yield yourMajesty that obedience I would willingly show under any othercircumstances. I cannot, I must not fly. My own honour, madam, requiresthat I should stay; for if flight be not construed into an evidence ofguilt, it may at least be supposed a sign of cowardice.""Indeed, indeed! De Blenau," said the Queen, earnestly, "you must do asI require; nay," she added, with a mixture of sweetness and dignity, "asI command. If they can prove against you that you have forwarded lettersfrom me to my brother the King of Spain, they will bring you to theblock, and will most likely ruin me.""I trust to the promise your Majesty gave me when first I undertook tohave those letters conveyed to your royal brother King Philip," answeredDe Blenau: "you then pledged to me your word that they were alone of adomestic nature, and that they should always continue so, without evertouching upon one subject of external or internal policy, so that myallegiance to my king, and my duty to my country, should alike remainpure and inviolate. I doubt not that your Majesty has pointedly keptthis promise; and De Blenau will never fly, while he can lay his handupon his heart and feel himself innocent.""Yes, but remember, my good youth," replied the Queen, "that thisCardinal,--my husband's tyrant rather than his subject,--has commandedme, his Queen, to forbear all correspondence with my brother, and hasnarrowly watched me to prevent that very communication between Philipand myself, which your kindness has found means to procure. Remember toohis remorseless nature; and then judge whether he will spare the man whohas rendered his precautions vain.""Madam," replied De Blenau, "I do not fear; nothing shall make me fly.Though there be no bounds to what the Cardinal dare attempt, yet hispower does not extend to make me a coward!""But for my sake," still persevered Anne of Austria, labouring topersuade him to a measure on which she too well knew his safetydepended. "Remember, that if there be proved against me even so small acrime as having sent those letters, my ruin is inevitable, and there aremodes of torture which will wrench a secret from the most determinedconstancy.""I fear me," replied De Blenau, "that some act of mine must have muchdegraded me in your Majesty's opinion.""No, no, my friend!" said the Queen; "not so indeed,--I do not doubt youin the least: but I would fain persuade you, De Blenau, to that which Iknow is best and safest.""Your Majesty has now given me the strongest reasons for my stay,"replied De Blenau, with a smile; "I have now the means of proving myfidelity to you, and nothing shall tempt me to leave you at this moment.But in the mean time there is one favour I have to request.""Name it," replied, the Queen: "indeed, De Blenau, you might commandit.""Your Majesty is too good," said the Count. "I will make my story asbrief as possible, but I must explain to you, that Mademoiselle deBeaumont and myself were plighted to each other when very young.""I know it, I know it all," interrupted the Queen, "and that you loveeach other still; and believe me, my dear De Blenau, neither time nordisappointment has so frozen my heart that I cannot enter warmly intoall you feel. Perhaps you never discovered that Anne of Austria was anenthusiast.--But tell me, what difficulty has occurred between you?""Why, in truth, Madam," answered De Blenau, "the difficulty arises withyour Majesty.""With me!" cried the Queen. "With me, De Blenau! impossible! Nothingcould give me more pleasure than to see your union. This Pauline ofyours is one of the sweetest girls that ever I beheld; and with all hernative un-bought graces, she looks amongst the rest of the court like awild rose in a flower-garden,--not so cultivated, in truth, but moresimply elegant, and sweeter than them all."Those who say that all is selfishness, let them tell me how it is thatone simple word in praise of those we love, will give a thousand timesmore pleasure than the warmest commendation of ourselves.De Blenau's heart beat, and his eye sparkled, and he paused a moment erehe could reply; nor indeed were his first sentences very distinct. Hesaid a great deal about her Majesty's goodness,--and his ownhappiness,--and Pauline's excellence; all in that sort of confused way,which would make it appear simple nonsense were it written down; butwhich very clearly conveyed to the Queen how much he loved Pauline, andhow much obliged he was to her Majesty for praising her.After this, he entered rather more regularly into a detail of thosecircumstances which had induced Mademoiselle de Beaumont to suspect him."The point which seems to affect her most," continued De Blenau, "is thevisit with which Mademoiselle de Hauteford honoured me by your Majesty'scommand, in order to receive from me the last letter from your Majestyto the King of Spain, which I was unhappily prevented from forwardingby my late wounds. Now this, as affecting the character of the Lady yourMajesty employed in the business, does certainly require someexplanation. In regard to every thing else, Pauline will, I feel sure,consider my word sufficient.""Oh, leave it all to me, leave it all to me!" exclaimed the Queen,laughing. "What! jealous already is she, fair maid? But fear not, DeBlenau. Did she know you as well as I do, she would doubt herself soonerthan De Blenau. However, I undertake to rob the rose of its thorn foryou, and leave love without jealousy. A woman is very easily convincedwhere she loves, and it will be hard if I cannot show her that she hasbeen in the wrong. But take no unworthy advantage of it, De Blenau," shecontinued; "for a woman's heart will not hesitate at trifles, when shewishes to make reparation to a man she loves.""All the advantage I could ever wish to take," replied the Count,"would be, to claim her hand without delay.""Nay, nay--that is but a fair advantage," said the Queen. "Yet,"continued she, after a moment's pause, "it were not wise to draw theeyes of suspicion upon us at this moment. But there are such things asprivate marriages, De Blenau."--There was no small spice of romance in the character of Anne of Austria;and this, on more than one occasion, led her into various circumstancesof danger, affecting both herself and the state. Of an easy and generousspirit, she always became the partisan of the oppressed, and any thingthat interested or excited her feelings, was certain to meetencouragement and support, however chimerical or hazardous; while plansof more judgment and propriety were either totally discountenanced, orimproperly pursued. This appeared through her whole life, but moreespecially at an after period, when the Government fell into her ownhands, and when, like a child with some fine and complicated machine,she played with the engine of the state, till she deranged all itsfunctions.It was, perhaps, this spirit of romance, more than any politicalconsideration, which, in the present instance, made her suggest to theCount de Blenau the idea of a private marriage with Pauline de Beaumont;and he, as ardent as herself, and probably as romantic, caught eagerlyat a proposal which seemed to promise a more speedy union with theobject of his love, than was compatible with all the tedious ceremoniesand wearisome etiquette attendant upon a court-marriage of that day."I shall not see your Pauline to-night," said the Queen, continuing theconversation which this proposal had induced. "She excused herselfattending my evening circle, on account of a slight indisposition; butto-morrow I will explain every thing on your part, and propose to hermyself what we have agreed upon.""She is not ill, I trust?" said De Blenau."Oh no!" replied the Queen, smiling at the anxiety of his look, "notenough even to alarm a lover, I believe."This answer, however, was not sufficient for De Blenau, and taking leaveof the Queen, he sent for one of Madame de Beaumont's servants, throughwhose intervention he contrived to obtain an audience of no less aperson than Louise, Pauline's suivante. Now Louise was really a prettywoman, and doubtless her face might have claimed remembrance from many aman who had nothing else to think of. De Blenau remembered it too, butwithout any reference to its beauty, which, indeed, he had never stayedto inquire into.It must be remembered, that the morning previous to his journey toParis, the moment before he was joined by Chavigni, his eye had beenattracted by that nobleman, engaged in earnest conversation with a girl,habited in the dress of dear Languedoc; and he now found in thesoubrette of Mademoiselle de Beaumont, the very individual he had seenin such circumstances. All this did not very much enhance the regard ofDe Blenau towards Louise; and he satisfied himself with a simple inquiryconcerning her mistress's health, adding a slight recommendation toherself, to take care whom she gossiped with while she remained at St.Germain, conveyed in that stately manner, which made Louise resolve tohate him most cordially for the rest of her life, and declare that hewas not half so nice a gentleman as Monsieur de Chavigni, who was acounsellor into the bargain.After a variety of confused dreams, concerning queens and cardinals,bastilles and private marriages, De Blenau woke to enjoy one of thosebright mornings which often shine out in the first of autumn,--memorialsof summer, when summer itself is gone. It was too early to presenthimself at the Palace; but he had now a theme on which his thoughts werenot unwilling to dwell, and therefore as soon as he was dressed, hesauntered out, most lover-like, into the Park, occupied with the hope offuture happiness, and scarcely sensible of any external thing, save thesoothing influence of the morning air, and the cheerful hum ofawakening nature.As time wore on, however,--and, probably, it did so faster than hefancied,--his attention was called towards the Palace by an unusualdegree of bustle and activity amongst the attendants, who were now seenpassing to and fro along the terrace, with all the busy haste of a nestof emmets disturbed in their unceasing industry.His curiosity being excited, he quitted the principal alley in which hehad been walking, and ascending the flight of steps leading to theterrace, entered the Palace by the small door of the left wing. As noneof the servants immediately presented themselves, he proceeded by one ofthe side staircases to the principal saloon, where he expected to meetsome of the valets de chambre, who generally at that hour awaited therising of the Queen.On opening the door, however, he was surprised to find Anne of Austria,already risen, together with the Dauphin and the young Duke of Anjou,the principal ladies of the court, and several menial attendants, allhabited in travelling costume; while various trunk-mails, saddle-bags,portmanteaus, &c. lay about the room; some already stuffed to the gorgewith their appropriate contents, and others opening their wide jaws toreceive whatever their owners chose to cram them withal.As soon as De Blenau entered this scene of unprincely confusion, thequick eyes of Anne of Austria lighted upon him, and, advancing from thegroup of ladies to whom she had been speaking, she seemed surprised tosee him in the simple morning costume of the court."Why, De Blenau!" exclaimed she, "we wait for you, and you have neitherboots nor cloak. Have you not seen the Page I sent to you?""No, indeed, Madam," replied De Blenau; "but having loitered in the Parksome time, I have probably thus missed receiving your commands.""Then you have not heard," said the Queen, "we have been honoured thismorning by a summons to join the King at Chantilly.""Indeed!" rejoined De Blenau thoughtfully, "What should this mean, Iwonder? It is strange! Richelieu was to be there last night: so I heardit rumoured yesterday in Paris.""I fear me," answered the Queen, in a low tone, "that the storm is aboutto burst upon our head. A servant informs me, that riding this morning,shortly after sunrise, near that small open space which separates this,the forest of Laye, from the great wood of Mantes, he saw a large partyof the Cardinal's guard winding along towards the wooden bridge, atwhich we usually cross the river.""Oh I think nothing of that," replied the Count. "Your Majesty mustremember, that this Cardinal has his men scattered all over thecountry:--but, at all events, we can take the stone bridge farther down.At what time does your Majesty depart? I will but pay my compliments tothese ladies, and then go to command the attendance of my train, whichwill at all events afford some sort of escort."During this dialogue, the Queen had looked from time to time towards thegroup of ladies who remained in conversation at the other end of theapartment; and with that unsteadiness of thought peculiar to hercharacter, she soon forgot all her fears and anxieties, as she saw thedark eye of Pauline de Beaumont wander every now and then with a furtiveglance towards De Blenau, and then suddenly fall to the ground, or fixupon vacancy, as if afraid of being caught in such employment.Easily reading every line expressive of a passion to which she had oncebeen so susceptible, the Queen turned with a playful smile to De Blenau."Come," said she, "I will save you the trouble of paying yourcompliments to more than one of those ladies, and she shall stand yourproxy to all the rest. Pauline--Mademoiselle de Beaumont," shecontinued, raising her voice, "come hither, Flower! I would speak a wordwith you."Pauline came forward--not unhappy in truth, but with the blood rushingup into her cheeks and forehead, till timidity became actual pain, whilethe clear cold blue eye of Mademoiselle de Hauteford followed her acrossthe room, as if she wondered at feelings she herself had apparentlynever experienced.De Blenau advanced and held out his hand. Pauline instantly placed hersin it, and in the confusion of the moment laid the other upon it also."Well," said the Queen with a smile, "De Blenau, you must be satisfiednow. Nay, be not ashamed, Pauline; it is all right, and pure, andnatural.""I am not ashamed, Madam," replied Pauline, seeming to gain courage fromthe touch of her lover; "I have done De Blenau wrong in ever doubtingone so good and so noble as he is: but he will forgive me now, I know,and I will never do him wrong again."I need not proceed farther with all this. De Blenau and Pauline enjoyedone or two moments of unmingled happiness, and then the Queen remindedthem that he had yet to dress for his journey, and to prepare hisservants to accompany the carriages. This, however, was soon done, andin less than half an hour De Blenau rejoined the party in the saloon ofthe Palace."Now, De Blenau," said the Queen, as soon as she saw him, "you areprepared for travelling at all points. For once be ruled, and instead ofaccompanying me to Chantilly, make the best of your way to FrancheComt, or to Flanders, for I much fear that the Cardinal has not yetdone with you. I will take care of your interests while you are gone,even better than I would my own; and I promise you that as soon as youare in safety, Madame De Beaumont and Pauline shall follow you, and youmay be happy surely, though abroad, for a few short years, tillRichelieu's power or his life be passed away."De Blenau smiled. "Nay, nay," replied he, "that would not be like agallant Knight and true, either to desert my Queen or my Lady Love.Besides, I am inclined to believe that this journey to Chantilly bodesus good rather than harm. For near three months past, the King has beenthere almost alone with Cinq Mars, who is as noble a heart as e'er theworld produced, and is well affected towards your Majesty.--So I amlooking forward to brighter days.""Well, we shall see," said the Queen, with a doubtful shake of the head."You are young, De Blenau, and full of hopes--all that has passed awaywith me.--Now let us go. I have ordered the carriages to wait at the endof the terrace, and we will walk thither:--perhaps it may be the lasttime I shall ever see my favourite walk; for who knows if any of us willever return?"With these melancholy anticipations, the Queen took the arm of Madame deBeaumont, and, followed by the rest, led the way to the terrace, fromwhich was to be seen the vast and beautiful view extending from St.Germain's over Paris to the country beyond, taking in all the windingsof the river Seine, with the rich woods through which it flowed.The light mists of an autumnal morning still hung about the variousdells and slopes, softening, but not obscuring the landscape; and everynow and then the sunbeams would catch upon a tower or a spire in thedistant landscape, and create a glittering spot amidst the dark brownwoods round about.It is ever a bright scene, that view from St. Germain, and many havebeen the royal and the fair, and the noble, whose feet have trod theterrace of Henry the Fourth; but seldom, full seldom, has there beenthere, a group of greater loveliness or honour than that which thenfollowed Anne of Austria from the Palace. The melancholy which hung overthe whole party took from them any wish for farther conversation, than acasual comment upon the beauties of the view; and thus they walked onnearly in silence, till they had approached within a few hundred yardsof the extremity, where they were awaited by the carriages prepared forthe Queen and her ladies, together with the attendants of De Blenau.At that moment the quick clanging step of armed men was heard following,and all with one impulse turned to see who it was that thus seemed topursue them.The party which had excited their attention, consisted of a soldier-likeold man, who seemed to have ridden hard, and half-a-dozen chasseurs ofthe guard, who followed him at about ten or twelve paces distance."It is the Count de Thiery," said De Blenau; "I know him well: as goodan old soldier as ever lived."Notwithstanding De Blenau's commendation, Anne of Austria appearedlittle satisfied with the Count's approach, and continued walking ontowards the carriages with a degree of anxiety in her eye, whichspeedily communicated feelings of the same kind to her attendants.Pauline, unacquainted with the intrigues and anxieties of the court, sawfrom the countenances of all around that something was to beapprehended; and magnifying the danger from uncertainty in regard to itsnature, she instinctively crept close to De Blenau, as certain offinding protection there.Judging at once the cause of De Thiery's coming, De Blenau drew the armof Pauline through his, and lingered a step behind, while the rest ofthe party proceeded."Dear Pauline!" said he, in a low but firm tone of voice, "my ownPauline! prepare yourself for what is coming! I think you will find thatthis concerns me. If so, farewell! and remember, whatever be my fate,that De Blenau has loved you ever faithfully, and will love you till hislast hour--Beyond that--God only knows! but if ever human affectionpassed beyond the tomb, my love for you will endure in another state."By this time they had reached the steps, at the bottom of which thecarriages were in waiting, and at the same moment the long strides ofthe Count de Thiery had brought him to the same spot."Well, Monsieur de Thiery!" said Anne of Austria, turning sharp round,and speaking in that shrill tone which her voice assumed whenever shewas agitated either by fear or anger; "your haste implies bad news. Doesyour business lie with me?""No, so please your Majesty," replied the old soldier; "no farther thanto wish you a fair journey to Chantilly, and to have the pleasure ofseeing your Majesty to your carriage."The Queen paused, and regarded the old man for a moment with a steadyeye, while he looked down upon the ground and played with the point ofhis grey beard, in no very graceful embarrassment."Very well!" replied she at length; "you, Monsieur de Thiery, shall handme to my carriage. So, De Blenau, I shall not need your attendance.Mount your horse and ride on.""Pardon me, your Majesty," said De Thiery, stepping forward with an airof melancholy gravity, but from which all embarrassment was nowbanished. "Monsieur de Blenau," he continued, "I have a most unpleasanttask to accomplish: I am sorry to say you must give me up your sword;but be assured that you render it to a man of honour, who will keep itas a precious and invaluable charge, till he can give it back to thathand, which he is convinced will always use it nobly.""I foresaw it plainly!" cried the Queen, and turned away her head.Pauline clasped her hands and burst into tears: but amongst theattendants of De Blenau, who during this conversation had one by onemounted the steps of the terrace, there was first a whisper, then a loudmurmur, then a shout of indignation, and in a moment a dozen swords weregleaming in the sunshine.Old De Thiery laid his hand upon his weapon, but De Blenau stopped himin his purpose."Silence!" cried he in a voice of thunder; "Traitors, put up yourswords!--My good friends," added he, in a gentler tone, as he sawhimself obeyed, "those swords, which have before so well defended theirmaster, must never be drawn in a cause that De Blenau could blush toown. Monsieur le Comte de Thiery," he continued, unbuckling his weapon,"I thank you for the handsome manner in which you have performed adisagreeable duty. I do not ask to see the lettre de cachet, which, ofcourse, you bear; for in giving you the sword of an honourable man, Iknow I could not place it in better hands; and now, having done so,allow me to lead her Majesty to her carriage, and I will then follow youwhithersoever you may have commands to bear me.""Most certainly," replied De Thiery, receiving his sword; "I wait yourown time, and will remain here till you are at leisure."De Blenau led the Queen to the carriage in silence, and having handedher in, he kissed the hand she extended to him, begging her to rely uponhis honour and firmness. He next gave his hand to Pauline de Beaumont,down whose cheeks the tears were streaming unrestrained. "Farewell,dear Pauline! farewell!" he said. Her sobs prevented her answer, but herhand clasped upon his with a fond and lingering pressure, which spokemore to his heart than the most eloquent adieu.Madame de Beaumont came next, and embraced him warmly. "God protect you,my son!" said she, "for your heart is a noble one."Mademoiselle de Hauteford followed, greeting De Blenau with a calm coldsmile and a graceful bow; and the rest of the royal suite having placedthemselves in other carriages, the cavalcade moved on. De Blenau stoodtill they were gone. Raising his hat, he bowed with an air of unshakendignity as the Queen passed, and then turning to the terrace, he tookthe arm of the Count de Thiery, and returned a prisoner to the Palace.CHAPTER II.Which gives an example of "The way to keep him.""Well, Sir," said De Blenau, smiling with feelings mingled of melancholyresignation to his fate and proud disdain for his enemies, "imprisonmentis too common a lot, now-a-days, to be matter of surprise, even where itfalls on the most innocent. Our poor country, France, seems to havebecome one great labyrinth, with the Bastille in the centre, and all theroads terminating there. I suppose that such is my destination.""I am sorry to say it is," replied his companion. "My orders are tocarry you thither direct; but I hope that your sojourn will not be longwithin its walls. Without doubt, you will soon be able to clearyourself.""I must first know of what I am accused," replied the Count. "If theycry in my case, as in that of poor Clement Marot, Prenez le, il a mangle lard, I shall certainly plead guilty; but I know of no state crimewhich I have committed, except eating meat on a Friday.--It is as well,perhaps, Monsieur de Thiery," continued he, falling into a graver tone,"to take these things lightly. I cannot imagine that the Cardinal meansme harm; for he must well know that I have done nothing to deserve ill,either from my King or my country. Pray God his Eminence's breast be asclear as mine!""Umph!" cried the old soldier, with a meaning shake of the head, "Ishould doubt that, De Blenau. You have neither had time nor occasion toget it so choked up as doubtless his must be.--But these are badsubjects to talk upon: though I swear to Heaven, Sir Count, that when Iwas sent upon this errand, I would have given a thousand livres to havefound that you had been wise enough to set out last night for some otherplace.""Innocence makes one incautious," replied De Blenau; "but I will own, Iwas surprised to find that the business had been put upon you.""So was I," rejoined the other. "I was astonished, indeed, when Ireceived the lettre de cachet. But a soldier has nothing to do but toobey, Monsieur de Blenau. It is true, I one time thought to make anexcuse; but, on reflection, I found that it would do you no good, andthat some one might be sent to whom you would less willingly give yoursword than to old De Thiery. But here we are at the Palace, Sir. Thereis a carriage in waiting; will you take any refreshment before you go?"The prospect of imprisonment for an uncertain period, together with afew little evils, such as torture, and death, in the perspective, hadnot greatly increased De Blenau's appetite, and he declined acceptingthe Count de Thiery's offer, but requested that his Page might beallowed to accompany him to Paris. The orders of Richelieu, however,were strict in this respect, and De Thiery was obliged to refuse. "But,"added he, "if the boy has wit, he may smuggle himself into the Bastilleafterwards. Let him wait for a day or two, and then crave of the gaolerto see you. The prison is not kept so close as those on the outside ofit imagine. I have been in more than once myself to see friends who havebeen confined there. There was poor La Forte, who was afterwardsbeheaded, and the Chevalier de Caply, who is in there still. I have seenthem both in the Bastille.""You will never see the Chevalier de Caply again," replied De Blenau,shuddering at the remembrance of his fate. "He died yesterday morningunder the torture.""Grand Dieu!" exclaimed De Thiery; "this Cardinal Prime Ministerstands on no ceremonies. Here are five of my friends he has made awaywith in six months. There was La Forte, whom I mentioned just now, andBoissy, and De Reineville, and St. Cheron; and now, you tell me, Caplytoo; and if you should chance to be beheaded, or die under the torture,you will be the sixth.""You are kind in your anticipations, Sir," replied De Blenau, smiling atthe old man's bluntness, yet not particularly enjoying the topic. "Buthaving done nothing to merit such treatment, I hope I shall not be addedto your list.""I hope not, I hope not!" exclaimed De Thiery, "God forbid! I think, inall probability, you will escape with five or six weeks imprisonment:and what is that?""Why, no great matter, if considered philosophically," answered DeBlenau, thoughtfully. "And yet, Monsieur de Thiery, liberty is a greatthing. The very freedom of walking amidst all the beauties of the vastcreation, of wandering at our will from one perfection to another, isnot to be lost without a sigh. But it is not that alone--the sense, thefeeling of liberty, is too innately dear to the soul of man to be partedwith as a toy."While De Blenau thus spoke, half reasoning with himself, half addressinghis conversation to the old soldier by his side, who, by long service,had been nearly drilled into a machine, and could not, consequently,enter fully into the feelings of his more youthful companion, thecarriage which was to convey them to Paris was brought round to the gateof the Palace at which they stood. Figure to yourself, my dearly belovedreader, a vehicle in which our good friend, the Giant Magog, ofGuildhall, could have stood upright; its long sides bending inwards witha graceful sweep, like the waist of Sir Charles Grandison in his bestand stiffest coat; and then conceive all this mounted upon aninterminable perch, connecting the heavy pairs of wheels, which,straggling and far apart, looked like two unfortunate hounds coupledtogether against their will, and eternally struggling to get away fromeach other. Such was the chaise roulante which stood at the gate ofthe Palace, ready to convey the prisoner to Paris.The preparations that had been made for De Blenau's journey toChantilly, now served for this less agreeable expedition; and thevarious articles which he conceived would be necessary to his comfort,were accordingly disposed about the vehicle, whose roomy interior wasnot likely to suffer from repletion.It is sad to say farewell to any thing, and more especially whereuncertainty is mingled with the adieu. Had it been possible, De Blenauwould fain have quitted St. Germain's without encountering the freshpain of taking leave of his attendants; but those who had seen hisarrest, had by this time communicated the news to those who had remainedin the town, and they now all pressed round to kiss his hand, and take alast look of their kind-hearted Lord, before he was lost to them, asthey feared, for ever. There was something affecting in the scene, anda glistening moisture rose even in the eye of the old Count de Thiery,while De Blenau, with a kind word to say to each, bade them farewell,one after another, and then sprang into the carriage that was to conveyhim to a prison.The vehicle rolled on for some way in silence, but at length De Blenausaid, "Monsieur de Thiery, you must excuse me if I am somewhat grave.Even conscious rectitude cannot make such a journey as this verypalatable. And besides," he added, "I have to-day parted with some thatare very dear to me.""I saw that, I saw that," answered the old soldier. "It was bad enoughparting with so many kind hearts as stood round you just now, but thatwas a worse farewell at the end of the terrace.--Now out upon the policythat can make such bright eyes shed such bitter tears. I can hardly getthose eyes out of my head, old as it is.--Oh, if I were but forty yearsyounger!""What then?" demanded De Blenau, with a smile."Why, perhaps I might have ten times more pleasure in lodging you safein the Bastille than I have now," answered De Thiery. "Oh, Monsieur deBlenau, take my word for it, age is the most terrible misfortune thatcan happen to any man; other evils will mend, but this is every daygetting worse."The conversation between De Blenau and his companion soon dropped, asall conversation must do, unless it be forced, where there exists agreat dissimilarity of ideas and circumstances. It is true, from time totime, Monsieur de Thiery uttered an observation which called for a replyfrom De Blenau; but the thoughts which crowded upon the young Count weretoo many, and too overpowering in their nature, to find relief inutterance. The full dangers of his situation, and all the vague andhorrible probabilities which the future offered, presented themselvesmore forcibly to his mind, now that he had leisure to dwell upon them,than they had done at first, when all his energies had been called intoaction; and when, in order to conceal their effect from others, he hadbeen obliged to fly from their consideration himself.A thousand little accessory circumstances also kept continually renewingthe recollection of his painful situation. When he dropped his hand, aswas his custom, to rest it upon the hilt of his sword, his weapon wasgone, and he had to remember that he had been disarmed; and if by chancehe cast his eyes from the window of the carriage, the passing andrepassing of the guards continually reminded him that he was a prisoner.De Blenau was new to misfortune, and consequently the more sensible toits acuteness. Nor did he possess that buoyant spirit with which somemen are happily gifted by nature--that sort of carelessness which actsbetter than philosophy, raising us above the sorrows and uncomforts ofexistence, and teaching us to bear our misfortunes by forgettingthem as soon as possible. He had too much courage, it is true, to resignhimself to grief for what he could not avoid.--He was prepared toencounter the worst that fate could bring; but at the same time he couldnot turn his thoughts from the contemplation of the future, though itoffered nothing but dark indistinct shapes; and out of these hisimagination formed many horrible images, which derived a greaterappearance of reality from the known cruelty of Richelieu, in whosepower he was, and the many dreadful deeds perpetrated in the place towhich he was going.Thus passed the hours away as the carriage rolled on towards Paris. Itmay be well supposed that such a vehicle as I have described did notmove with any great celerity; and I much doubt whether theact-of-parliament pace which hackney-coaches are obliged to adhere to,would not have jolted the unhappy chaise roulante limb from limb, ifit had been rigorously enforced. But it so happened that the machineitself was the personal property of Monsieur de Thiery, who alwaysstyled it une belle voiture; and looking upon it as the most perfectspecimen of the coach-building art, he was mighty cautious concerningits progression. This the postilion was well aware of, and thereforenever ventured upon a greater degree of speed than might carry them overthe space of two miles in the course of an hour; but notwithstandingsuch prudent moderation, the head of Monsieur de Thiery would often beprotruded from the window, whenever an unfriendly rut gave the vehicle ajolt, exclaiming loudly, "Holla! Postillon! gardez vous de casser mabelle voiture;" and sundry other adjurations, which did not serve toincrease the rapidity of their progress.Such tedious waste of time, together with the curious gazing of themultitude at the State-prisoner, and uncertain calculations as to thefuture, created for De Blenau a state of torment to which the Bastilleat once would have been relief; so that he soon began most devoutly towish his companion and the carriage and the postilion all at the Deviltogether for going so slowly. But, however tardily Time's wings seem tomove, they bear him away from us notwithstanding.--Night overtook thetravellers when they were about a league from Paris, and the heaviestday De Blenau had ever yet known found its end at last.Avoiding the city as much as possible, the carriage passed round andentered by the Porte St. Antoine; and the first objects which presentedthemselves to the eyes of De Blenau, after passing the gates, were thelarge gloomy towers of the Bastille, standing lone and naked in themoonlight, which showed nothing but their dark and irregular forms,strongly contrasted with the light and rippling water that flowed likemelted silver in the fosse below.One of the guards had ridden on, before they entered the city, toannounce their approach; and as soon as the carriage came up, the outerdrawbridge fell with a heavy clang, and the gates of the court opening,admitted them through the dark gloomy porch into that famous prison, sooften the scene of horror and of crime. At the same time, two menadvancing to the door, held each a lighted torch to the window of thecarriage, which, flashing with a red gleam upon the rough stone walls,and gloomy archways on either side, showed plainly to De Blenau all thefrowning features of the place, rendered doubly horrible by theknowledge of its purpose.A moment afterwards, a fair, soft-looking man, dressed in a black velvetpourpoint, (whom De Blenau discovered to be the Governor,) approachedthe carriage with an official paper in his hand, and lighted by one ofthe attendant's torches, read as follows, with that sort of hurrieddrawl which showed it to be a matter of form:--"Monsieur le Comte de Thiery," said he, "you are commanded by the Kingto deliver into my hands the body of Claude Count de Blenau, to hold andkeep in strict imprisonment, until such time as his Majesty's will beknown in his regard, or till he be acquitted of the crimes with which heis charged, by a competent tribunal; and I now require you to do thesame."This being gone through, De Thiery descended from the carriage, followedby the Count de Blenau, whom the Governor instantly addressed with aprofound bow and servile smile."Monsieur de Blenau," said he, "you are welcome to the Bastille; and anything I can do for your accommodation, consistent with my duty, youshall command.""I hope you will let it be so, Sir Governor," said old De Thiery; "forMonsieur de Blenau is my particular friend, and without doubt he will beliberated in a few days. Now, Monsieur de Blenau," continued he, "I mustleave you for the present, but hope soon to see you in another place.You will, no doubt, find several of your friends here; for we all takeit in turn: and indeed, now-a-days, it would be almost accounted a pieceof ignorance not to have been in the Bastille once in one's life. So,farewell!" And he embraced him warmly, whispering as he did so, "Make afriend of the Governor--gold will do it!"De Blenau looked after the good old soldier with feelings of regret, ashe got into his belle voiture and drove through the archway.Immediately after, the drawbridge rose, and the gates closed with aclang, sounding on De Blenau's ears as if they shut out from him allthat was friendly in the world; and overpowered by a feeling ofmelancholy desolation, he remained with his eyes fixed in the directionDe Thiery had taken, till he was roused by the Governor laying his handupon his arm. "Monsieur de Blenau," said he, "will you do me the favourof following me, and I will have the honour of showing you yourapartment."De Blenau obeyed in silence, and the Governor led the way into the innercourt, and thence up the chief staircase to the second story, where hestopped at a heavy door plated with iron, and sunk deep in the stonewall, from the appearance of which De Blenau did not argue veryfavourably of the chambers within. His anticipations, however, wereagreeably disappointed, when one of the attendants, who lighted them,pulled aside the bolts, and throwing open the door, exposed to his viewa large neat room, fitted up with every attention to comfort, and evensome attempt at elegance. This, the Governor informed him, was destinedfor his use while he did the Bastille the honour of making it his abode;and he then went on in the same polite strain to apologize for thefurniture being in some disorder, as the servants had been very busy anthe chateau, and had not had time to arrange it since its last occupanthad left them, which was only the morning before. So far De Blenau mighthave imagined himself in the house of a polite friend, had not the boltsand bars obtruded themselves on his view wherever he turned, speakingstrongly of a prison.The end of the Governor's speech also was more in accordance with hisoffice: "My orders, Monsieur de Blenau," said he in continuation, "are,to pay every attention to your comfort and convenience, but at the sametime to have the strictest guard over you. I am therefore obliged todeny you the liberty of the court, which some of the prisoners enjoy,and I must also place a sentinel at your door. I will now go and giveorders for the packages which were in the carriage to be brought uphere, and will then return immediately to advise with you on what can bedone to make your time pass more pleasantly."Thus saying, he quitted the apartment, and De Blenau heard the heavybolts of the door grate into their sockets with a strange feeling ofreluctance; for though he felt too surely that liberty was gone, yet hewould fain have shrunk from those outward marks of captivity whichcontinually forced the recollection of it upon his mind. The politeattentions of the Governor, however, had not escaped his notice, and histhoughts soon returned to that officer's conduct."Can this man," thought he, "continually accustomed to scenes of bloodand horror, be really gentle in his nature, as he seems to showhimself? or can it be that he has especial orders to treat me withkindness? Yet here I am a prisoner,--and for what purpose, unless theyintend to employ the most fearful means to draw from me those secretswhich they have failed in obtaining otherwise?"Such was the nature of his first thoughts for a moment or two after theGovernor had left him; but rousing himself, after a little, fromreveries which threw no light upon his situation, he began to examinemore closely the apartment which bade fair to be his dwelling for sometime to come.It was evidently one of the best in the prison, consisting of twospacious chambers, which occupied the whole breadth of the square towerin the centre of the Bastille. The first, which opened from thestaircase and communicated with the second by means of a small door, wasconveniently furnished in its way, containing, besides a very faircomplement of chairs and tables of the most solid manufacture, thathappy invention of our ancestors, a corner cupboard, garnished withvarious articles of plate and porcelain, and a shelf of books, whichlast De Blenau had no small pleasure in perceiving.On one of the tables were various implements for writing, and on anotherthe attendant who had lighted them thither had placed two silver lamps,which, though of an antique fashion, served very well to light the wholeextent of the room. Raising one of these, De Blenau proceeded to theinner chamber, which was fitted up as a bed-room, and contained variousarticles of furniture in a more modern taste than that which decoratedthe other. But the attention of the prisoner was particularly attractedby a heavy iron door near the head of the bed, which, however, as hegladly perceived, possessed bolts on the inside, so as to prevent theapproach of any one from without during the night.So much of our happiness is dependent on the trifles of personalcomfort, that De Blenau, though little caring in general for verydelicate entertainment, nevertheless felt himself more at ease when, onlooking round his apartment, he found that at all events it was nodungeon to which he had been consigned: and from this he drew afavourable augury, flattering himself that no very severe measures wouldultimately be pursued towards him, when such care was taken of histemporary accommodation.De Blenau had just time to complete the perambulation of his new abode,when the Governor returned, followed by two of the subordinate ministersof the prison, carrying the various articles with which Henry de LaMothe had loaded the belle voiture of Monsieur de Thiery: and as thefaithful Page had taken care to provide fully for his master's comfort,the number of packages was not small.As soon as these were properly disposed about the apartment, theGovernor commanded his satellites to withdraw, and remained alone withhis prisoner, who, remembering the last words of the old Count deThiery, resolved, as far as possible, to gain the good will of one whohad it in his power not only to soften or to aggravate the pains of hiscaptivity, but even perhaps to serve him more essentially. De Thiery hadrecommended gold, all-powerful gold, as the means to be employed; but atfirst De Blenau felt some hesitation as to the propriety of offeringsordid coin to a man holding so responsible a situation, and no smallembarrassment as to the manner. These feelings kept him silent for amoment, during which time the Governor remained silent also, regardinghis prisoner with a polite and affable smile, as if he expected him tobegin the conversation."I will try the experiment at all events," thought De Blenau. "I couldalmost persuade myself that the man expects it."Luckily it so happened, that amongst the baggage which had been preparedfor Chantilly, was comprised a considerable sum of money, besides thatwhich he carried about him: and now drawing forth his purse, thecontents of which might amount to about a thousand livres, he placed itin the hands of the Governor."Let me beg you to accept of this, Monsieur le Gouverneur," said he,"not as any inducement to serve me contrary to your duty, but as aslight remuneration for the trouble which my being here must occasion."The smooth-spoken Governor neither testified any surprise at thisproceeding, nor any sort of reluctance to accept what De Blenauproffered. The purse dropped unrejected into his open palm, and it wasvery evident that his future conduct would greatly depend upon theamount of its contents, according as it was above or below hisexpectation."Monseigneur," replied he, "you are very good, and seem to understandthe trouble which prisoners sometimes give, as well as if you had livedin the Bastille all your life; and you may depend upon it, as I saidbefore, that every thing shall be done for your accommodation--alwayssupposing it within my duty.""I doubt you not, Sir," answered De Blenau, who from the moment theGovernor's fingers had closed upon the purse, could hardly helpregarding him as a menial who had taken his wages: "I doubt you not; andat the present moment I should be glad of supper, if such a thing can beprocured within your walls.""Most assuredly it can be procured to-night, Sir," replied theGovernor; "but I am sorry to say, that we have two meager days in theweek, at which times neither meat nor wine is allowed by Government,even for my own table: which is a very great and serious grievance,considering the arduous duties I am often called upon to perform.""But of course such things can be procured from without," said DeBlenau, "and on the days you have mentioned. I beg that you would notallow my table to bear witness of any such regulations; and farther, asI suppose that you, Sir, have the command of all this, I will thankyou to order your purveyor to supply all that is usual for a man of myquality and fortune, for which he shall have immediate payment throughyour hands."The tone in which De Blenau spoke was certainly somewhat authoritativefor a prisoner; and feeling, as he proceeded, that he might give offencewhere it was his best interest to conciliate regard, he added, thoughnot without pain,--"When you will do me the honour to partake my fare, I shall standindebted for your society. Shall I say to-morrow at dinner, that I shallhave the pleasure of your company?"The Governor readily accepted the invitation, more especially as theensuing day chanced to be one of those meager days, which he held inmost particular abhorrence. And now, having made some fartherarrangements with De Blenau, he left him, promising to send the mealwhich he had demanded.There is sometimes an art in allowing one's self to be cheated, and DeBlenau had at once perceived that the best way to bind the Governor tohis interest, was, not only to suffer patiently, but even to promoteevery thing which could gratify the cupidity of his gaoler or hisunderlings; and thus he had laid much stress upon the provision of histable, about which he was really indifferent.Well contented with the liberality of his new prisoner, and praying Godmost devoutly that the Cardinal would spare his life to grace the annalsof the Bastille for many years, the Governor took care to send De Blenauimmediately the supper which had been prepared for himself: an act ofgenerosity, of which few gaolers, high or low, would have been guilty.It matters little how De Blenau relished his meal; suffice it, that thecivility and attention he experienced, greatly removed his apprehensionsfor the future, and made him imagine that no serious proceedings wereintended against him. In this frame of mind, as soon as the Governor'sservants had taken away the remains of his supper, and the bolts weredrawn upon him for the night, he took a book from the shelf, thinkingthat his mind was sufficiently composed to permit of his thus occupyingit with some more pleasing employment than the useless contemplation ofhis own fate. But he was mistaken. He had scarcely read a sentence,before his thoughts, flying from the lettered page before his eyes, hadagain sought out all the strange uncertain points of his situation, andregarding them under every light, strove to draw from the present somepresage for the future. Thus finding the attempt in vain, he threw thebook hastily from him, in order to give himself calmly up to the impulsehe could not resist. But as the volume fell from his hand upon thetable, a small piece of written paper flew out from between the leaves,and after having made a circle or two in the air, fell lightly to theground.De Blenau carelessly took it up, supposing it some casual annotation;but the first few words that caught his eye riveted his attention. Itbegan."To the next wretched tenant of these apartments I bequeath a secret,which, though useless to me, may be of service to him. To-day I amcondemned, and to-morrow I shall be led to the torture or to death. I aminnocent; but knowing that innocence is not safety, I have endeavouredto make my escape, and have by long labour filed through the lock of theiron door near the bed, which was the sole fastening by which it wassecured from without. Unfortunately, this door only leads to a smallturret staircase communicating with the inner court; but should mysuccessor in this abode of misery be, like me, debarred from exercise,and also from all converse with his fellow prisoners, this informationmay be useful to him. The file with which I accomplished my endeavour isbehind the shelf which contains these books. Adieu, whoever thou art!Pray for the soul of the unhappy Caply!"As he read, the hopes which De Blenau had conceived from the comfortsthat were allowed him fled in air. There also, in the same apartment,and doubtless attended with the same care, had the wretched Caplylingered away the last hours of an existence about to be terminated by adreadful and agonizing death. "And such may be my fate," thought DeBlenau with an involuntary shudder, springing from that antipathy whichall things living bear to death. But the moment after, the blood rushedto his cheek, reproaching him for yielding to such a feeling though noone was present to witness its effects. "What!" thought he, "I who haveconfronted death a thousand times, to tremble at it now! However, let mesee the truth of what this paper tells;" and entering the bed-room, heapproached the iron door, of which he easily drew back the bolts, Caplyhaving taken care to grease them with oil from the lamp, so that theymoved without creating the smallest noise.The moment that these were drawn, the slightest push opened the door,and De Blenau beheld before him a little winding stone staircase,filling the whole of one of the small towers; which containing nochambers and only serving as a back access to the apartments in thesquare tower, had been suffered in some degree to go to decay. The wallswere pierced with loopholes, which being enlarged by some of the stoneshaving fallen away, afforded sufficient aperture for the moonlight tovisit the interior with quite enough power to permit of De Blenau'sdescending without other light. Leaving the lamp, therefore, in thebed-room, he proceeded down the steps till they at once opened from theturret into the inner court, where all was moonlight and silence, itbeing judged unnecessary, after the prisoners were locked in for thenight, to station even a single sentry in a place which was otherwise sowell secured.Without venturing out of the shadow of the tower, De Blenau returned tohis apartment, feeling a degree of satisfaction in the idea that heshould not now be cut off from all communication with those below incase he should desire it. He no longer felt so absolutely lonely asbefore, when his situation had appeared almost as much insulated asmany of those that the lower dungeons of that very building contained,who were condemned to drag out the rest of their years in nearlyunbroken solitude.Having replaced the paper in the book, for the benefit of any one whomight be confined there in future, De Blenau fastened the iron door onthe inside, and addressing his prayers to Heaven, he laid himself downto rest. For some time his thoughts resumed their former train, andcontinued to wander over his situation and its probable termination, butat length his ideas became confused, memory and perception graduallylost their activity, while fatigue and the remaining weakness from hislate wounds overcame him, and he slept.CHAPTER III.Which shows a new use for an old Castle; and gives a good receiptfor leading a man by the nose.Now if the reader imagined that I wrote the whole of the twelfth chapterof the last volume for the sole purpose of telling a cock and a bullstory about a country innkeeper and conjuror's first cousin, he was verymuch mistaken. Let him immediately transport himself back to the littlevillage of Mesnil St. Loup, and let him remember the church, and the oldtrees, and the ruined castle beyond, with all the circumstancesthereunto appertaining; and if any thing that has since passed has putthe particulars out of his mind, let him return to the aforesaid twelfthchapter, and learn it by heart, as a penance for having forgotten it.But if, on the contrary, he remembers it fully--I will go on with mystory.It was in the old Chateau of St. Loup, near the village of Mesnil, on asultry evening about the end of September, that a party was assembled,who, in point of rank and greatness of design, had seldom been equalledwithin those walls, even when they were the habitation of the great andbeautiful of other days. But years and centuries had passed since theyhad been so tenanted. The court-yard was full of weeds, and grass, andtangled shrubs: the ivy creeping over the ruined walls obtruded its longbranches through the unglazed windows, and the breaches which the siegeof time had effected in the solid masonry, gave entrance to the wind ofnight and the wintry tempest.The chamber that had been chosen for a place of meeting on the presentoccasion was one which, more than any other, had escaped the hand ofdesolation. The casements, it is true, had long ceased to boast ofglass, and part of the wall itself had given way, encumbering with itsbroken fragments the farther end of the great saloon, as it had oncebeen called. The rest, however, of the chamber was in very tolerablerepair, and contained also several pieces of furniture, consisting ofmore than one rude seat, and a large uncouth table, which evidently hadnever belonged to the castle in its days of splendour.At the head of this table sat Gaston Duke of Orleans, the youngerbrother of the King, leaning his head upon his hand in an attitude oflistless indifference, and amusing himself by brushing the dust whichhad gathered on the board before him, into a thousand fanciful shapeswith the feather of a pen--now forming fortifications with lines andparallels, and half moons and curtains--and then sweeping them allheedlessly away--offering no bad image of the many vast and intricateplans he had engaged in, all of which he had overthrown alike by hiscaprice and indecision.Near him sat his two great favourites and advisers, Montressor and St.Ibal: the first of whom was really the inconsiderate fool he seemed;the second, though not without his share of folly, concealed deeperplans under his assumed carelessness. These two men, whose pride was indaring every thing, affected to consider nothing in the world worthtrouble or attention, professing at the same time perfect indifferenceto danger and uncomfort, and contending that vice and virtue were merelynames, which signified any thing, according to their application. Suchwas the creed of their would-be philosophy; and Montressor lost noopportunity of evincing that heedlessness of every thing serious whichformed the principal point of his doctrine. In the present instance hehad produced a couple of dice from his pocket, and was busily engaged inthrowing with St. Ibal for some pieces of gold which lay between them.Two more completed the party assembled in the old Chateau of St. Loup.The first of these was Cinq Mars: his quick and ardent spirit did notsuffer him to join in the frivolous pastimes of the others, but on thecontrary, he kept walking up and down the apartment, as if impatientfor the arrival of some one expected by all; and every now and then, ashe turned at the extremity of the chamber, he cast a glance upon theweak Duke and his vicious companions, almost amounting to scorn.Beside the Master of the Horse, and keeping an equal pace, was thecelebrated President De Thou, famed for unswerving integrity and themild dignity of virtuous courage. His personal appearance, however,corresponded ill with the excellence of his mind; and his plainfeatures, ill-formed figure, and inelegant movements, contrastedstrongly with the handsome countenance and princely gait of Cinq Mars,as well as the calm pensive expression of his downcast eye, with thewild and rapid glance of his companion's.As the time wore away, the impatience of Cinq Mars visibly increased;and every two or three minutes he would stop, and look out from one ofthe open casements, and then approaching the table would take one ofthe torches, of which there were several lighted in the room, andstrike it against the wall to increase the flame. "It is veryextraordinary," cried he at length, "that Fontrailles has not yetarrived.""Oh! no, Cinq Mars," replied De Thou, "we are a full hour before thetime. You were so impatient, my good friend, that you made us all setoff long before it was necessary.""Why, it is quite dark," said the Master of the Horse, "and Fontraillespromised to be here at nine.--It is surely nine, is it not, Montressor?""Size ace," said the Gambler, "quatre  quatre, St. Ibal. I shall winyet!""Pshaw!" cried Cinq Mars--"who will tell me the time? I wish we couldhave clocks made small enough to put in our pockets.""I will show you what will tell us the hour as well as if we had,"answered De Thou. "Look out there in the west! Do you see what a redlight the sun still casts upon those heavy masses of cloud that arecoming up? Now the sun goes down at seven; so you may judge it canscarce be eight yet.""Cinq quatre!" cried Montressor, throwing. "I have lost, afterall--Monsieur De Thou, will you bet me a thousand crowns that it is notpast eight by the village clock of Mesnil St. Loup?""No, indeed!" replied the President; "I neither wish to win your money,Monsieur Montressor, nor to lose my own. Nor do I see how such a betcould be determined.""Oh! if you do not take the bet, there is no use of inquiring how itmight be determined," rejoined Montressor. "Monseigneur," he continued,turning to the Duke of Orleans, who had just swept away his lastfortification, and was laying out a flower-garden in its place; "can youtell how in the name of fortune these chairs and this table came here,when all the rest of the place is as empty as your Highness's purse?""Or as your head, Montressor," answered the Duke. "But the truth is,they were the property of poor old Pre Le Rouge, who lived for manyyears in these ruins,--half-knave, half-madman,--till they tried andburnt him for a sorcerer down in the wood there at the foot of the hill.Since then it has been called the Sorcerer's Grove, and the countrypeople are not fond of passing through it, which has doubtless saved theold Conjuror's furniture from being burnt for firewood; for none of theold women in the neighbourhood dare come to fetch it, or infallibly itwould undergo the same fate as its master.""So, that wood is called the Sorcerer's Grove," said St. Ibal, laughing:"that is the reason your Highness brought us round the other way, is itnot?"Gaston of Orleans coloured a good deal at a jest which touched too nearone of his prevailing weaknesses; for no one was more tinctured with thesuperstition of the day than himself, yet no one was more ashamed ofsuch credulity. "No, no!" answered he; "I put no faith in Pre Le Rougeand his prophecies. He made too great a mistake in my own case to showhimself to me since his predictions have proved false, I will answer forhim.""Why, what did he predict about you, Monseigneur?" asked De Thou, whoknew the faith which the Duke still placed in astrology."A great deal of nonsense," answered the Duke, affecting a tone veryforeign to his real feelings. "He predicted that I should marry theQueen, after the death of Louis. Now, you see, I have married some oneelse, and therefore his prophecy was false. But however, as I said,these chairs belonged to him: where he got them I know not--perhaps fromthe Devil; but at all events, I wish he were here to fill one now; hewould be a good companion in our adventures." As he spoke, a brightflash of lightning blazed through the apartment, followed by a loud androlling peal of thunder, which made the Duke start, exclaiming, "Jesu!what a flash!""Your Highness thought it was Pre Le Rouge," said St. Ibal; "but hewould most likely come in at the door, if he did come; not through thewindow."Gaston of Orleans heard the jests of his two companions without anger;and a moment or two after, Cinq Mars, who stood near one of thedilapidated casements, turned round, exclaiming, "Hark! I hear the soundof a horse's feet: it is Fontrailles at last. Give me a torch; I willshow him where we are.""If it should be the Devil now----" said Montressor, as Cinq Mars leftthe room."Or Pre Le Rouge," added St. Ibal."Or both," said the Duke of Orleans."Why for cunning and mischief they would scarcely supply the place ofone Fontrailles," rejoined St. Ibal. "But here comes one or theother,--I suppose it is the same to your Royal Highness which.""Oh, yes!" answered the Duke, "they shall all be welcome. Nothing likekeeping good company, St. Ibal."As he spoke, Cinq Mars returned, accompanied by Fontrailles, bothlaughing with no small glee. "What makes ye so merry, my Lords?"exclaimed Montressor; "a laugh too good a thing to be lost. Has Monsieurde Fontrailles encountered his old friend Sathanus by the road-side, orwhat?""Not so," answered Cinq Mars, "he has only bamboozled an innkeeper. Butcome, Fontrailles, let us not lose time: will you read over the articlesof alliance to which we are to put our names; and let us determine uponthem to-night, for, if we meet frequently in this way, we shall becomesuspected ere our design be ripe.""Willingly for my part," replied Fontrailles, approaching the table, andspeaking with some degree of emphasis, but without immediately deviatinginto declamation. "There certainly never was a case when speedy decisionwas more requisite than the present. Every man in this kingdom, from theKing to the peasant, has felt, and does now feel, the evils which we aremet to remedy. It is no longer zeal, but necessity, which urges us tooppose the tyranny of this daring Minister. It is no longer patriotism,but self-defence. In such a case, all means are justifiable; for when aman (as Richelieu has done) breaks through every law, human and divine,to serve the ungenerous purpose of his own aggrandizement; when hesports with the lives of his fellow-creatures with less charity than awild beast; are we not bound to consider him as such, and to hunt him tothe death for the general safety?"De Thou shook his head, as if there was something in the proposition towhich he could not subscribe; but Cinq Mars at once gave his unqualifiedassent, and all being seated round the table, Fontrailles drew forthsome papers, and proceeded."This, then, is our first grand object," said he: "to deprive thistyrant, whose abuse of power not only extends to oppress the subject,but who even dares, with most monstrous presumption, to curb andoverrule the Royal authority, making the Monarch a mere slave to hiswill, and the Monarch's name but a shield behind which to shelter hisown crimes and iniquities--I say, to deprive this usurping favourite ofthe means of draining the treasures, sacrificing the honour, andspilling the blood of France; thereby to free our King from bondage, torestore peace and tranquillity to our country, and to bring back to ourhomes long banished confidence, security, and ease--To this you allagree?"A general assent followed, and Fontrailles went on."Safely to effect our purpose, it is not only necessary to use everyenergy of our minds, but to exert all the local power we possess. Everymember, therefore, of our association will use all his influence withthose who are attached to him by favour or connexion, and prepare allhis vassals, troops, and retainers, to act in whatsoever manner shallhereafter be determined, and will also amass whatever sums he canprocure for the general object. It will also be necessary to concentratecertain bodies of men on particular points, for the purpose of seizingon some strong fortified places. And farther, it will be advisablenarrowly to watch the movements of the Cardinal, in order to makeourselves masters of his person.""But whose authority shall we have for this?" demanded De Thou; "forwhile he continues Prime Minister by the King's consent, we arecommitting high treason to restrain his person.""We must not be so scrupulous, De Thou," rejoined Cinq Mars; "we mustfree his Majesty from those magic chains in which Richelieu has so longheld his mind, before we can expect him to do any thing openly: but Iwill take it upon me to procure his private assent. I have sounded hisinclinations already, and am sure of my ground. But proceed,Fontrailles: let us hear what arrangements you have made respectingtroops, for we must have some power to back us, or we shall fail.""Well, then," said Fontrailles, "I bring with me the most generousoffers from the noble Duke of Bouillon. They are addressed to you, CinqMars, but were sent open to me. I may as well, therefore, give theircontents at once, and you can afterwards peruse them at your leisure.The Duke here offers to place his town and principality of Sedan in ourhands, as a dept for arms and munition, and also as a place of retreatand safety, and a rendezvous for the assembling of forces. He fartherpromises, on the very first call, to march his victorious troops fromItaly, when, as he says, every soldier will exult in the effort toliberate his country.""Generously promised of the Duke," exclaimed Montressor, slapping thetable with mock enthusiasm. "My head to a bunch of Macon grapes, heexpects to be prime minister in Richelieu's place.""The Duke of Bouillon, Monsieur de Montressor," replied Cinq Marssomewhat warmly, "has the good of his country at heart; and is too mucha man of honour to harbour the ungenerous thought you would attribute tohim.""My dear Cinq Mars, do not be angry," said Montressor. "Don't you seehow much the odds were in my favour? Why, I betted my head to a bunchof grapes, and who do you think would be fool enough to hazard a fullbunch of grapes against an empty head? But go on, Fontrailles; where arethe next troops to come from?""From Spain!" answered Fontrailles calmly; while at the name of thatcountry, at open war with France, and for years considered as its mostdangerous enemy, each countenance round the table assumed a look ofastonishment and disapprobation, which would probably have daunted anyother than the bold conspirator who named it."No, no!" exclaimed Gaston of Orleans, as soon as he had recoveredbreath. "None of the Spanish Catholicon for me;" alluding to the namewhich had been used to stigmatize the assistance that the League hadreceived from Spain during the civil wars occasioned by the accession ofHenry IV. to the throne. "No, no! Monsieur de Fontrailles, this is hightreason at once."St. Ibal was generally supposed, and with much appearance of truth, tohave some secret connexion with the Spanish court; and having nowrecovered from the first surprise into which he had been thrown by thebold mention of an alliance with that obnoxious country, he jested atthe fears of the timid and unsteady Duke, well knowing that by suchmeans he was easily governed. "Death to my soul!" exclaimed he. "YourHighness calls out against high treason, when it is what you have livedupon all your life! Why, it is meat, drink, and clothing to you. Alittle treason is as necessary to your comfort as a dice-box is toMontressor, a Barbary horse to Cinq Mars, or a bird-net andhawking-glove to the King. But to speak seriously, Monseigneur," hecontinued, "is it not necessary that we should have some farther supportthan that which Monsieur de Bouillon promises? His enthusiasm may havedeceived him;--his troops may not be half so well inclined to our causeas he is himself;--he might be taken ill;--he might either be arrestedby the gout, to which he is subject; or by the Cardinal, to whom we allwish he was not subject. A thousand causes might prevent his giving usthe assistance he intends, and then what an useful auxiliary would Spainprove. Besides, we do not call in Spain, to fight against France, butfor France. Spain is not an enemy of the country, but only of theCardinal; and the moment that man is removed, who for his soleinterest and to render himself necessary has carried on a war which hasnearly depopulated the kingdom, a lasting and glorious peace will beestablished between the two countries; and thus we shall confer anothergreat benefit on the nation.""Why, in that point of view, I have no objection," replied the Duke ofOrleans. "But do you not think that Louis will disapprove of it?""We must not let him know it," said Montressor, "till Richelieu isremoved, and then he will be as glad of it as any one.""But still," rejoined the Duke with more pertinacity than he generallydisplayed, "I am not fond of bringing Spanish troops into France. Whocan vouch that we shall ever get rid of them?""That will I," answered St. Ibal. "Has your Highness forgot what goodfaith and courtesy the Spanish government has shown you in your exile;as also the assistance it yielded to your late Royal Mother? Besides, weneed not call in a large body of troops. What number do you propose,Fontrailles?""The offer of Spain is five thousand," replied Fontrailles; "with thepromise of ten thousand more, should we require it. Nothing can be moreopen and noble than the whole proceeding of King Philip. He leaves itentirely to ourselves what guarantee we will place in his hands for thesafety of his troops.""Well, well," said the Duke of Orleans, getting tired of the subject, "Ihave no doubt of their good faith. I am satisfied, St. Ibal; andwhatever you think right, I will agree to. I leave it all to you andMontressor.""Well then," said Fontrailles hastily, "that being settled, we willproceed--""Your pardon, gentlemen," interposed De Thou, "I must be heard now--Yourschemes extend much farther than I had any idea of--Cinq Mars, I was notinformed of all this--had I been so, I would never have come here. Toserve my country, to rid her of a Minister who, as I conceive, hasnearly destroyed her, who has trampled France under his feet, andenthralled her in a blood-stained chain, I would to-morrow lay my headupon the block--Frown not, Monsieur de Fontrailles--Cinq Mars, my noblefriend, do not look offended--but I cannot, I will not be a party to thecrime into which mistaken zeal is hurrying you. Are we not subjects ofFrance? and is not France at war with Spain? and though we may all wishand pray God that this war may cease, yet to treat or conspire with thathostile kingdom is an act which makes us traitors to our country andrebels to our King. Old De Thou has but two things to lose--his life andhis honour. His life is valueless. He would sacrifice it at once forthe least benefit to his country. He would sacrifice it, Cinq Mars, forhis friendship for you. But his honour must not be sullied: and asthrough life he has kept it unstained, so shall it go with him unstainedto his last hour. Were it merely personal danger you called upon me toundergo, I would not bestow a thought upon the risk: but my fame, myallegiance, my very salvation are concerned, and I will never give mysanction to a plan which begins by the treasonable proposal of bringingforeign enemies into the heart of the land.""As to your salvation, Monsieur le President," said Montressor, "I'llundertake to buy that for you for a hundred crowns. You shall have anindulgence to commit sins ad libitum, in which high treason shall bespecified by name. Now, though these red-hot heretics of Germany, whoseem inclined to bring that fiery place upon earth, which his Holinessthreatens them with in another world, and who are assisted by ourCatholic Cardinal with money, troops, ammunition, and all thehell-invented implements of war,--though these Protestants, I say, putno trust in the indulgences which their apostacy has rendered cheap inthe market, yet I am sure you are by far too staunch a stickler for allantique abuses to doubt their efficacy. I suppose, therefore, whensalvation can be had for a hundred crowns, good Monsieur de Thou, youcan have no scruple on that score--unless indeed you are as stingy asthe dog in the fable.""Jests are no arguments, Monsieur de Montressor," replied De Thou, withstern gravity; "you have a bad habit, young Sir, of scoffing at whatwiser men revere. Had you any religion yourself of any kind, or anyreason for having none, we might pardon your error, because it wasfounded on principle. As for myself, Sir, what I believe, I believe fromconviction, and what I do, I do with the firm persuasion that it isright; without endeavouring to cloak a bad cause with a show of spirit,or to hide my incapacity to defend it with stale jokes and profaneraillery. Gentlemen, you act as you please; for my part I enter into noplan by which Spain is to be employed or treated with.""I think it dangerous too," said the unsteady Duke of Orleans."Ten times more dangerous to attempt any thing without it," exclaimedFontrailles.--"Should we not be fools to engage in such an enterprisewithout some foreign power to support us? We might as well go to thePalais Cardinal, and offer our throats to Richelieu at once."Montressor and St. Ibal both applied themselves to quiet the fears ofthe Duke, and soon succeeded in removing from his mind any apprehensionson the score of Spain: but he continued from time to time to looksuspiciously at De Thou, who had risen from the table, and was againwalking up and down the apartment. At length Gaston beckoned to CinqMars, and whispered something in his ear."You do him wrong, my Lord," exclaimed Cinq Mars indignantly, "I willanswer for his faith. De Thou," he continued, "the Duke asks yourpromise not to reveal what you have heard this night; and though I thinkmy friend ought not to be suspected, I will be obliged by your givingit.""Most assuredly," replied De Thou; "his Highness need be under no alarm.On my honour, in life or in death, I will never betray what I have heardhere. But that I may hear as little as possible, I will take one ofthese torches, and wait for you in the lower apartments.""Take care that you do not meet with Pre Le Rouge, Monsieur de Thou,"exclaimed St. Ibal as De Thou left them."Cease your jesting, gentlemen," said Cinq Mars; "we have had too muchof it already. A man with the good conscience of my friend De Thou, neednot mind whom he meets. For my own part, I am resolved to go on with thebusiness I have undertaken; I believe I am in the right; and if not, Godforgive me, for my intentions are good."The rest of the plan was soon settled after the President had left theroom; and the treaty which it was proposed to enter into with Spain wasread through and approved. The last question which occurred, was themeans of conveying a copy of this treaty to the Court of King Philipwithout taking the circuitous route by the Low Countries. Numerousdifficulties presented themselves to every plan that was suggested, tillFontrailles, with an affectation of great modesty, proposed to be thebearer himself, if, as he said, they considered his abilities equal tothe task.The offer was of course gladly accepted, as he well knew it would be:and now being to the extent of his wish furnished with unlimited powers,and possessed of a document which put the lives of all his associates inhis power, Fontrailles brought the conference to an end: it being agreedthat the parties should not meet again till after his return from Spain.A few minutes more were spent in seeking cloaks and hats, andextinguishing the torches; and then descending to the court-yard, theymounted their horses, which had found shelter in the ruined stable ofthe old castle, and set out on their various roads. By this time thestorm had cleared away, leaving the air but the purer and the moreserene; and the bright moon shining near her meridian, served to lightCinq Mars and De Thou on the way towards Paris, while the Duke ofOrleans and his party bent their steps towards Bourbon, and Fontraillesset off for Troyes to prepare for his journey to Spain.CHAPTER IV.Intended to prove that keen-sighted politicians are but buzzardsafter all, and to show how Philip the woodman took a ride earlierthan usual.I wish to Heaven it were possible, in a true story, to follow the oldGreek's rule, and preserve at least unity of place throughout. It wouldsave a great deal of trouble, both to writer and reader, if we couldmake all our characters come into one hall, say their say, and have donewith it. But there is only one place where they could be supposed tomeet--heroes and heroines, statesmen and conspirators, servant andmaster, proud and humble--the true Procrustes' bed which is made to fitevery one. However, as before I could get them there, the story would bedone, and the generation passed away, I must even violate all theunities together, and gallop after my characters all over the country,as I have often seen a shepherd in the Landes of France, striding hereand there upon his long stilts after his wilful and straggling sheep,and endeavouring in vain to keep them all together. I must ask thereader, therefore, to get into the chaise with me, and set off forChantilly; and as we go, I will tell him a few anecdotes, just to passthe time.It was a common custom with Louis the Thirteenth to spend a part of themorning in that large circular piece of ground at Chantilly, calledthen, as now, the Mange; while his various hunters, in which he tookgreat delight, were exercised before him. Here, while the few gentlementhat generally accompanied him, stood a step behind, he would leanagainst one of the pillars that surrounded the place, and remark, withthe most minute exactitude, every horse as it passed him, expressing hisapprobation to the grooms when any thing gave him satisfaction. But onthe same morning which had witnessed at St. Germain the arrest of DeBlenau, something had gone wrong with the King at Chantilly. He wasimpatient, cross, and implacable: and Lord Montague, an Englishnobleman, who was at that time much about him, remarked in a low voiceto one of the gentlemen in waiting, "His Majesty is as peevish as acrossed child, when Cinq Mars is absent."The name of his Grand Ecuyer, though spoken very low, caught the King'sear."Do any of you know when Cinq Mars returns?" demanded he. "We neverproceed well when he is not here.--Look at that man now, how he rides,"continued Louis, pointing to one of the grooms; "would not any one takehim for a monkey on horseback? Do you know where Cinq Mars is gone, MiLor?""I hear, Sire," replied Lord Montague, "that he is gone with Monsieur deThou to Troyes, where he has an estate, about which there is somedispute, which Monsieur de Thou, who is learned in such matters, is todetermine.""To Troyes!" exclaimed the King, "that is a journey of three days--Didnot some of you tell me, that Chavigni arrived last night, while I washunting?""I did so, please your Majesty," replied one of the gentlemen; "and Ihear, moreover, that the Cardinal himself slept at Luzarches last night,with the purpose of being here early this morning.""The Cardinal at Luzarches!" said the King, a cloud coming over hisbrow. "It is strange I had not notice--We shall scarce have room forthem all--I expect the Queen to-night--and the Cardinal and her Majestyare as fond of each other as a hawk and a heron poulet."Louis was evidently puzzled. Now the best way to cut the Gordian knot ofan embarras, is to run away from it, and let it settle itself. It issure to get unravelled somehow; and by the time you come back, athousand to one the fracas is over. Louis the Thirteenth, who of all menon earth hated what is called in the vulgar tongue a piece of work,except when he made it himself, was very much in the habit of adoptingthe expedient above mentioned, and, indeed, had been somewhat a loser bythe experiment. However, it was a habit now, confirmed by age, andtherefore more powerful than Nature. Accordingly, after thinking for amoment about the Queen and the Cardinal, and their mutual hatred, andtheir being pent up together in the small space of Chantilly, like twogame cocks in a cock-pit; and seeing no end to it whatever, he suddenlyburst forth--"Come, Messieurs, I'll go hunt. Quick! saddle the horses!" and castingkingly care from his mind, he began humming the old air Que ne suis jeun Berger! while he walked across the mange towards the stables. Butjust at that moment, Chavigni presented himself, doffing his hat withall respect to the King, who could not avoid seeing him.Louis was brought to bay, but still he stood his ground. "Ah! good day,Monsieur de Chavigni," exclaimed he, moving on towards the stables."Come in good time to hunt with us. We know you are free of the forest.""I humbly thank your Majesty," replied the Statesman; "but I amattending the Cardinal.""And why not attend the King, Sir? Ha!" exclaimed Louis, his browgathering into a heavy frown. "It is our will that you attend us, Sir."Chavigni did not often commit such blunders, but it was not very easy toremember at all times to pay those external marks of respect whichgenerally attend real power, to a person who had weakly resigned hisauthority into the hands of another: and as the Cardinal not onlypossessed kingly sway, but maintained kingly state, it sometimeshappened that the King himself was treated with scanty ceremony. This,however, always irritated Louis not a little. He cared not for thesplendour of a throne, he cared not even for the luxuries of royalty;but of the personal reverence due to his station, he would not bate aniota, and clung to the shadow when he had let the substance pass away.The Statesman now hastened to repair his error, and bowing profoundly,he replied, "Had I not thought that in serving the Cardinal I bestserved your Majesty, I should not have ventured on so bold an answer;but as your Majesty is good enough to consider my pleasure in the chase,and the still greater pleasure of accompanying you, your invitation willbe more than an excuse for breaking my appointment with the Cardinal."To bear the burthen of forcing one of the Council to break hisengagement with the prime Minister, and all for so trifling a cause asan accidental hunting-party, was not in the least what the King wishedor intended, and he would now very willingly have excused Chavigni'sattendance; but Chavigni would not be excused.The wily Statesman well knew, that Richelieu had that day a point tocarry with the King of the deepest importance as to the stability ofhis power. The Queen, whom the Cardinal had long kept in completedepression, being now the mother of two princes, her influence wasincreasing in the country to a degree that alarmed the Minister for hisown sway. It was a principle with Richelieu always to meet an evil inits birth; and seeing plainly that as the King's health declined--and itwas then failing fast--the party of Anne of Austria would increase, ifhe did not take strong measures to annihilate it--he resolved at once toruin her with her husband, to deprive her of her children, and, ifpossible, even to send her back to Spain. "And then," thought he, "afterthe King's death I shall be Regent.--Regent? King! ay, and one moredespotic than ever sat upon the throne of France. For twenty years thisyoung Dauphin must be under my guidance; and it will be strange indeedif I cannot keep him there till my sand be run." And the proud man, whoreasoned thus, knew not that even then he trembled on the verge of thegrave."Ainsi, dissipateurs peu sagesDes rapides bienfaits du temps,Nos dsirs embrassent des ges,Et nous n'avons que des instans."However, the object of his present visit to Chantilly was to completethe ruin of the Queen; and Chavigni, who suffered his eyes to be blindedto simple right and wrong by the maxims of State policy, lent himselfentirely to the Cardinal's measures, little imagining that personalhatred had any share in the motives of the great Minister whose steps hefollowed.A moment's reflection convinced Chavigni that he might greatly promotethe object in view by accompanying the King in the present instance. Heknew that in difficult enterprises the most trifling circumstances maybe turned to advantage; and he considered it a great thing gained atthat moment, to lay Louis under the necessity of offering some amends,even for the apparent trifle of making him break his appointment withRichelieu. In riding with the King, he would have an opportunity ofnoting the Monarch's state of mind, which he perceived was unusuallyirritated, and also of preparing the way for those impressions whichRichelieu intended to give: and accordingly he avoided with consummateart any subject which might open the way for Louis to withdraw hisprevious order to accompany him.Having already followed one royal hunt somewhat too minutely, we willnot attempt to trace the present; only observing that during the courseof the day, Chavigni had many opportunities of conversing with the King,and took care to inform him that the campaign in the Netherlands wasshowing itself much against the arms of France; that no plan was formedby the Government, which did not by some means reach the ears of theSpanish generals, and consequently that all the manoeuvres of theFrench troops were unavailing; and from this, as a natural deduction, heinferred, that some one at the court of France must convey informationto the enemy; mingling these pleasant matters of discourse, with sundrysage observations respecting the iniquity and baseness of thusbetraying France to her enemies.Louis was exactly in the humour that the Statesman could have wished.Peevish from the absence of Cinq Mars, and annoyed by the unexpectedcoming of Richelieu, he listened with indignation to all that Chavignitold him, of any one in France conveying intelligence to a country whichhe hated with the blindest antipathy.The predominant passion in the King's mind had long been his dislike toSpain, but more especially to Philip, whom he regarded as a personalenemy: and Chavigni easily discerned, by the way in which the news heconveyed was received, that if they could cast any probable suspicion onthe Queen, (and Chavigni really believed her guilty,) Louis would set nobounds to his anger. But just at the moment he was congratulatinghimself upon the probable success of their schemes, a part of the stormhe had been so busily raising fell unexpectedly upon himself."Well, Monsieur de Chavigni," said the King, after the chase was over,and the Royal party were riding slowly back towards Chantilly, "thishunting is a right noble sport: think you not so, Sir?""In truth I do, Sire," replied Chavigni; "and even your Majesty canscarce love it better than myself.""I am glad to hear it, Sir," rejoined the King, knitting his brows;"'tis a good sign. But one thing I must tell you, which is, that I donot choose my Royal forests to be made the haunt of worse beasts thanstags and boars.--No wolves and tigers.--Do you take me, Sir?""No, indeed, Sire," replied Chavigni, who really did not comprehend theKing's meaning, and was almost tempted to believe that he had suddenlygone mad. "Allow me to remind your Majesty that wolves are almostextinct in this part of France, and that tigers are altogether beasts ofanother country.""There are beasts of prey in every part of the world," answered theKing. "What I mean, Sir, is, that robbers and assassins are beginningto frequent our woods; especially, Sir, the wood of Mantes. Was it that,or was it the forest of Laye, in which the young Count de Blenau wasattacked the other day?"It was not easy on ordinary occasions to take Chavigni by surprise, andhe was always prepared to repel open attack, or to parry indirectquestions, with that unhesitating boldness, or skilful evasion, theproper application of which is but one of the lesser arts of diplomacy;but on the present occasion, the King's question was not only sounexpected as nearly to overcome his habitual command of countenance,but was also uttered in such a tone as to leave him in doubt whetherLouis's suspicions were directed personally towards himself. He replied,however, without hesitation: "I believe it was the wood of Mantes, Sire;but I am not perfectly sure.""You, of all men, ought to be well informed on that point, Monsieur deChavigni," rejoined the King, "since you took care to send a servant tosee it rightly done."The matter was now beyond a doubt, and Chavigni replied boldly: "YourMajesty is pleased to speak in riddles, which I am really at a loss tocomprehend.""Well, well, Sir," said Louis hastily, "it shall be inquired into, andmade plain both to you and me. Any thing that is done legally must notbe too strictly noticed; but I will not see the laws broken, and murderattempted, even to serve State purposes."Thus speaking, the King put his horse into a quicker pace, and Chavignifollowed with his mind not a little discomposed, though his countenanceoffered not the slightest trace of embarrassment. How he was to act, nowbecame the question; and running over in his own mind all thecircumstances connected with the attack upon the Count de Blenau, hecould see no other means by which Louis could have become acquaintedwith his participation therein, than by the loquacity of Philip, thewoodman of Mantes: and as he came to this conclusion, Chavigniinternally cursed that confident security which had made him reject theadvice of Lafemas, when the sharp-witted Judge had counselled him toarrest Philip on first discovering that he had remarked the livery ofIsabel and silver amongst the robbers.In the present instance the irritable and unusually decided humour ofthe King, made him fear that inquiries might be instituted immediately,which would not only be dangerous to himself personally, but mightprobably overthrow all those plans which he had been labouring, inconjunction with the Cardinal, to bring to perfection. Calculatingrapidly, therefore, all the consequences which might ensue, Chavigniresolved at once to have the Woodman placed in such a situation as toprevent him from giving any farther evidence of what he had seen. Butfar from showing any untimely haste, though he was the first to dismountin the court-yard in order to offer the King his aid in alighting, yetthat ceremony performed, he loitered, patting his horse's neck, andgiving trifling directions to his groom, till such time as Louis hadentered the Palace, and his figure had been seen passing the window atthe top of the grand staircase. That moment, however, Chavigni dartedinto the Chateau, and seeking his own apartments, he wrote an order forthe arrest of Philip the woodman, which with the same despatch he placedin the hands of two of his most devoted creatures, adding a billet tothe Governor of the Bastille, in which he begged him to treat theprisoner with all kindness, and allow him all sort of liberty within theprison, but on no account to let him escape till he received notice fromhim.We have already had occasion to see that Chavigni was a man whoconsidered State-policy paramount to every other principle; andnaturally not of an ungentle disposition or ignoble spirit, he hadunfortunately been educated in a belief that nothing which was expedientfor the statesman could be discreditable to the man. However, theoriginal bent of his mind generally showed itself in some degree, evenin his most unjustifiable actions, as the ground-work of a picture willstill shine through, and give a colour to whatever is painted above it.In the present instance, as his only object was to keep the Woodman outof the way till such time as the King's unwonted mood had passed by, hegave the strictest commands to those who bore the order for Philip'sarrest, to use him with all possible gentleness, and to assure his wifeand family that no harm was intended to him. He also sent him a purse,to provide for his comfort in the prison, which he well knew could notbe procured without the potent aid of gold.The two attendants, accustomed to execute commands which requireddespatch, set out instantly on their journey, proceeding with all speedto Beaumont, and thence to Pontoise, where crossing the river Oise theysoon after arrived at Meulan: and here a dispute arose concerning thenecessity of calling upon two Exempts of that city to aid in arrestingPhilip the woodman, the one servant arguing that they had no such ordersfrom their Lord, and the other replying that the said Philip might havetwenty companions for aught they knew, who might resist their authority,they not being legally entitled to arrest his Majesty's lieges. Thisargument was too conclusive to be refuted; and they therefore waited atMeulan till the two Exempts were ready to accompany them. It being nightwhen they arrived at Meulan, and the two Exempts being engaged in"potations deep and strong," drinking long life to the Cardinal deRichelieu, and success to the royal prisons of France, some time was ofcourse spent before the party could proceed. However, after the lapse ofabout an hour, discussed no matter how, they all contrived to get intotheir saddles, and passing the bridge over the Seine, soon reached thefirst little village, whose white houses, conspicuous in the moon-light,seemed, on the dark back-ground of the forest, as if they had crept forprotection into the very bosom of the wood; while it, sweeping roundthem on every side, appeared in its turn to afford them the friendlyshelter that they sought.All was silence as they passed through the village, announcing plainlythat its sober inhabitants were comfortably dozing away the darkness.This precluded them from asking their way to Philip's dwelling; butChavigni had been so precise in his direction, that notwithstanding thewine-pots of Meulan, the two servants, in about half an hour afterhaving entered the wood, recognized the abreuvoir and cottage, withthe long-felled oak and piece of broken ground, and all the otheret-cetera, which entered into the description they had received.There is nothing half so amusing as the bustle with which little peoplecarry on the trifles that are intrusted to them. They are so important,and so active, one would think that the world's turning round upon itsaxis depended upon them; while all the mighty business of the universeslips by as quietly as if the wheels were oiled; and the government ofa nation is often decided over a cup of coffee, or the fate of empireschanged by an extra bottle of Johanisberg.But to return. Chavigni's two servants, with the two Exempts of Meulan,were as important and as busy as emmets when their hill is disturbed--ora sous-secretaire when he opens his first despatch, and receivesinformation of a revolution in the Isle of Man--or the fleas in anItalian bed, when you suddenly light your candle to see what the Devilis biting you so infernally--or the Devil himself in a gale of wind--orany other little person in a great flurry about nothing. So havingdiscovered the cottage, they held a profound council before the door,disputing vehemently as to the mode of proceeding. One of the Exemptsproposed to knock at the door, and then suddenly to seize their prisoneras he came to open it; but Chavigni's servants, though somewhat dippedin the Lethean flood, in which the Exempts of Meulan had seduced them tobathe, remembered the strict orders of their master, to treat Philipwith all possible gentleness, and judging that the mode proposed mightstartle him, and affect his nerves, they decided against the motion.A variety of other propositions were submitted, and rejected by themajority, each one liking nobody's suggestion but his own; till one ofthe Exempts, not bearing clearly in mind the subject of discussion,knocked violently at the door, declaring it was tiresome to standdisputing on their feet, and that they could settle how they should gainadmission after they had got in and sat down.This seemed a very good motion, and settled the matter at once; andPhilip, who was in that sound and fearless sleep which innocence,content, and labour can alone bestow, not exactly answering at first,they all repeated the noise, not a little enraged at his want ofattention to personages of such high merit as themselves.The moment after, the Woodman appeared at the window, and seeing sometravellers, as he imagined, he bade them wait till he had lighted alamp, and he would come to them. Accordingly, in a moment or two Philipopened the door, purposing either to give them shelter, or to directthem on their way, as they might require; but when the light gleamedupon the black dresses of the Exempts, and then upon the well-knowncolours of Isabel and silver, the Woodman's heart sank, and his cheekturned pale, and he had scarcely power to demand their errand."I will tell you all that presently," replied the principal servant ofthe two, who, like many another small man in many another place, thoughtto become great by much speaking. "First let us come in and restourselves; for as you may judge by our dusty doublets, we have riddenfar and hard: and after that I will expound to you, good friend, thecause of our coming, with sundry other curious particulars, which mayboth entertain and affect you."Philip suffered them to enter the house, one after another, and settingdown the lamp, he gazed upon them in silence, his horror at gentlemenin black coats and long straight swords, as well as those dressed inIsabel and silver, being quite unspeakable."Well, Monsieur Philip le Bucheron," said the spokesman, throwinghimself into the oaken settle with that sort of percussion of breathdenoting fatigue: "you seem frightened, Monsieur Philip; but, goodMonsieur Philip, you have no cause for fear. We are all your friends,Monsieur Philip.""I am glad to hear it, Sir," replied the Woodcutter; "but may I knowwhat you want with me?""Why, this is the truth, Monsieur Philip," replied the servant, "itseems that his Majesty the King, whom we have just left at Chantilly, isvery angry about something,--Lord knows what! and our noble employer,not to say master, the Count de Chavigni, having once upon a timereceived some courtesy at your hands, is concerned for your safety, andhas therefore deemed it necessary that you should be kept out of theway for a time.""Oh, if that be the case," cried Philip, rubbing his hands withgladness, "though I know not why the King's anger should fall on me, Iwill take myself out of the way directly.""No, no, Monsieur Philip, that won't do exactly," answered the servant."You do not know how fond my master is of you; and so concerned is hefor your safety, that he must be always sure of it, and therefore hasgiven us command to let you stay in the Bastille for a few days."At that one word Bastille, Philip's imagination set to work, andinstantly conjured up the image of a huge tower of red copper, somewhatmouldy, standing on the top of a high mountain, and guarded by sevenhuge giants with but one eye apiece, and the like number of fierydragons with more teeth and claws than would have served a dozen. If itwas not exactly this, it was something very like it; for Philip, whosetravels had never extended a league beyond the wood of Mantes, knew asmuch about the Bastille as Saint Augustin did of Heaven,--so both drewfrom their own fancy for want of better materials.However, the purse which Chavigni's attendants gave him in behalf oftheir master, for they dared not withhold his bounty, however much theymight be inclined, greatly allayed the fears of the Woodman.There is something wonderfully consolatory in the chink of gold at alltimes; but in the present instance, Philip drew from it the comfortableconclusion, that they could not mean him any great harm when they senthim money. "I know not what to think," cried he."Why, think it is exactly as I tell you," replied the servant, "and thatthe Count means you well. But after you have thought as much as youlike, get ready to come with us, for we have no time to spare."This was the worst part of the whole business. Philip had now to takeleave of his good dame Joan, which, like a well-arranged sermon,consisted of three distinct parts; he had first to wake her, then tomake her comprehend, and then to endure her lamentation.The first two were tasks of some difficulty, for Joan slept tolerablywell--that is to say, you might have fired a cannon at her ear withoutmaking her hear--and when she was awake, her understanding did notbecome particularly pellucid for at least an hour after. This onordinary occasions--but on the present Philip laboured hard to make hermind take in that he was arrested and going to the Bastille. But findingthat her senses were still somewhat obdurate, and that she did nothingbut rub her eyes, and stretch and yawn in his face, he had recourse tothe same means morally, which he would have used physically to cleave anoak; namely, he kept shouting to her, "Bastille! Bastille! Bastille!"reiterating the word upon her ear, just in the same manner that he wouldhave plied the timber with his axe.At length she comprehended it all. Her eye glanced from the inner roomupon the unwonted guests who occupied the other chamber, and then to thedismayed countenance of her husband; and divining it suddenly, she threwher arms round the athletic form of the Woodman, bursting into a passionof tears, and declaring that he should not leave her.Of course, on all such occasions there must follow a very tender scenebetween husband and wife, and such there was in the present instance:only Joan, availing herself of one especial privilege of the fair sex,did not fail, between her bursts of tears and sobs, to rail loudly atthe Cardinal, the King, and all belonging to them, talking more hightreason in five minutes, than would have cost any man an hour tocompose; nor did she spare even the Exempts, or the two gentlemen inIsabel and silver, but poured forth her indignation upon all alike.However, as all things must come to an end, so did this; and Philip wascarried away amidst the vain entreaties his wife at length condescendedto use.The only difficulty which remained was, how to mount their prisoner,having all forgot to bring a horse from Meulan for that purpose; andPhilip not choosing to facilitate his own removal by telling them thathe had a mule in the stable.However it was at length agreed, that one of the Exempts should walk tothe next town, and that Philip should mount his horse till another couldbe obtained. As the party turned away from the hut, the chief servant,somewhat moved by the unceasing tears of Joan, took upon him to say thathe was sure that Charles the Woodman's son, who stood with his mother atthe door, would be permitted to see his father in the Bastille, if theywould all agree to say, that they did not know what was become of him,in case of any impertinent person inquiring for him during his absence.This they all consented to, their grief being somewhat moderated by theprospect of communicating with each other, although separated; andPhilip once more having bid his wife and children adieu, was carried onto a little village, where a horse being procured for him, the wholeparty took the road to Marly, and thence proceeded to Paris with allpossible diligence.Day had long dawned before they reached the Bastille, and Philip, whowas now excessively tired, never having ridden half the way in his life,was actually glad to arrive at the prison, which he had previouslycontemplated with so much horror.Here he was delivered, with the lettre de cachet, and Chavigni's note,to the Governor; and the servant again, in his own hearing, recommendedthat he should be treated with all imaginable kindness, and allowedevery liberty consistent with his safe custody.All this convinced the Woodcutter, as well as the conversation he hadheard on the road, that Chavigni really meant well by him; and withoutany of those more refined feelings, which, however they may sometimesopen the gates of the heart to the purest joys, but too often betray thefortress of the breast to the direst pains, he now felt comparativelysecure, and gazed up at the massy walls and towers of the Bastille withawe indeed, but awe not unmingled with admiration.CHAPTER V.Which shows that diadems are not without their thorns.This shall be a short Chapter, I am determined; because it is one of themost important in the whole book.During the absence of the King and Chavigni in the chase, two arrivalshad taken place at Chantilly very nearly at the same moment. Luckily,however, the Queen had just time to alight from her carriage, and seekher apartments, before the Cardinal de Richelieu entered the court-yard,thus avoiding an interview with her deadly enemy on the verythreshold,--an interview, from which she might well have drawn aninauspicious augury, without even the charge of superstition.As soon as Chavigni had (as far as possible) provided for his own safetyby despatching the order for Philip's arrest, he proceeded to theapartments of Richelieu, and there he gave that Minister an exactaccount of all he had heard, observed, and done; commenting particularlyupon the violent and irascible mood of the King, and the advantageswhich might be thence derived, if they could turn his anger in thedirection that they wished.In the mean while Louis proceeded to the apartments of the Queen, notindeed hurried on by any great affection for his wife, but desirous ofseeing his children, whom he sincerely loved, notwithstanding theunaccountable manner in which he so frequently absented himself fromthem.Never very attentive to dress, Louis the Thirteenth, when any thingdisturbed or irritated him, neglected entirely the ordinary care of hisperson. In the present instance he made no change in his apparel,although the sports in which he had been engaged had not left it in avery fit state to grace a drawing-room. Thus, in a pair of immensejack-boots, his hat pressed down upon his brows, and his whole dresssoiled, deranged, and covered with dust, he presented himself in thesaloon where Anne of Austria sat surrounded by the young Princes and theladies who had accompanied her to Chantilly.The Queen immediately rose to receive her husband, and advanced towardshim with an air of gentle kindness, mixed however with some degree ofapprehension; for to her eyes, long accustomed to remark the variouschanges of his temper, the disarray of his apparel plainly indicated theirritation of his mind.Louis saluted her but coldly, and without taking off his hat. "I am gladto see you well, Madam," said he, and passed on to the nurse who held inher arms the young Dauphin.The child had not seen its father for some weeks, and now perceiving arude-looking ill-dressed man, approaching hastily towards it, becamefrightened, hid its face on the nurse's shoulder, and burst into tears.The rage of the King now broke the bounds of common decency."Ha!" exclaimed he, stamping on the ground with his heavy boot, till thewhole apartment rang: "is it so, Madam? Do you teach my children, also,to dislike their father?""No, my Lord, no, indeed!" replied Anne of Austria, in a tone of deepdistress, seeing this unfortunate contretems so strangely misconstruedto her disadvantage. "I neither teach the child to dislike you, nordoes he dislike you; but you approached Louis hastily, and with yourhat flapped over your eyes, so that he does not know you. Come hither,Louis," she continued, taking the Dauphin out of the nurse's arms. "Itis your father; do not you know him? Have I not always told you to lovehim?"The Dauphin looked at his mother, and then at the King, and perfectlyold enough to comprehend what she said, he began to recognize hisfather, and held out his little arms towards him. But Louis turnedangrily away."A fine lesson of dissimulation!" he exclaimed; and advanced towards hissecond son, who then bore the title of Duke of Anjou. "Ah, my littlePhilip," he continued, as the infant received him with a placidsmile,--"you are not old enough to have learned any of these arts. Youcan love your father without being told to show it, like an ape at apuppet-show."At this new attack, the Queen burst into tears."Indeed, indeed, my Lord," she said, "you wrong me. Oh, Louis! how youmight have made me love you once!" and her tears redoubled at thethought of the past. "But I am a weak fool," she continued, wiping thedrops from her eyes, "to feel so sensibly what I do not deserve--Atpresent your Majesty does me deep injustice.--I have always taught bothmy children to love and respect their father. That name is the firstword that they learn to pronounce; and from me they learn to pronounceit with affection. But oh, my Liege! what will these dear children thinkin after years, when they see their father behave to their mother, asyour Majesty does towards me?""Pshaw!" exclaimed the King, "let us have no more of all this. I hatethese scenes of altercation. Fear not, Madam; the time will come, whenthese children will learn to appreciate us both thoroughly.""I hope not, my Lord"--replied the Queen fervently--"I hope not. Fromme, at least, they shall never learn all I have to complain of in theirfather."Had Anne of Austria reflected, she would have been silent; but it issometimes difficult to refrain when urged by taunts and unmeritedreproach. That excellent vial of water, which the Fairy bestowed uponthe unhappy wife, is not always at hand to impede the utterance ofrejoinders, which, like rejoinders in the Court of Chancery, only serveto urge on the strife a degree farther, whether they be right or wrong.In the present case the King's pale countenance flushed with anger."Beware, Madam, beware!" exclaimed he. "You have already been treatedwith too much lenity--Remember the affair of Chalais!""Well, Sir!" replied the Queen, raising her head with an air of dignity:"Your Majesty knows, and feels, and has said, that I am perfectlyguiltless of that miserable plot. My Lord, my Lord! if you can layyour head upon your pillow conscious of innocence like mine, you willsleep well; my bosom at least is clear.""See that it be, Madam," replied Louis, darting upon her one of thosefiery and terrible glances in which the whole vindictive soul of hisItalian mother blazed forth in his eyes with the glare of a basilisk."See that it be, Madam; for there may come worse charges than thatagainst you.--I have learned from a sure source that a Spaniard isseeking my overthrow, and a woman is plotting my ruin," he continued,repeating the words of the Astrologer; "that a Prince is scheming mydestruction, and a Queen is betraying my trust--so, see that your bosombe clear, Madam." And passing quickly by her, he left the apartment,exclaiming loud enough for all within it to hear, "Where is his Eminenceof Richelieu? Some one, give him notice that the King desires hispresence when he has leisure."Anne of Austria clasped her hands in silence, and looking up to Heavenseemed for a moment to petition for support under the new afflictionsshe saw ready to fall upon her; and then without a comment on thepainful scene that had just passed, returned to her ordinaryemployments.CHAPTER VI.Containing a great many things not more curious and interestingthan true.In the old Chateau of Chantilly was a long gallery, which went by thename of the Cours aux cerfs, from the number of stags' heads whichappeared curiously sculptured upon the frieze, with their long branchinghorns projecting from the wall, and so far extended on both sides as tocross each other and form an extraordinary sort of trellis-workarchitrave, before they reached the ceiling.The windows of this gallery were far apart, and narrow, admitting butlittle light into the interior, which, being of a dingy stone colour,could hardly have been rendered cheerful even by the brightest sunshine;but which, both from the smallness of the windows and the projection ofa high tower on the other side of the court, was kept in continualshadow, except when in the longest days of summer the sun just passedthe angle of the opposite building and threw a parting gleam through thelast window, withdrawn as quickly as bestowed.But at the time I speak of, namely, two days after the Queen's arrivalat Chantilly, no such cheering ray found entrance. It seemed, indeed, afit place for melancholy imaginings; and to such sad purpose had Anne ofAustria applied it. For some time she had been standing at one of thewindows, leaning on the arm of Madame de Beaumont, and silently gazingwith abstracted thoughts upon the open casements of the corridor on theother side, when the figures of Richelieu and Chavigni, passing by oneof them, in their full robes, caught her eye; and withdrawing from theconspicuous situation in which she was placed, she remarked to theMarchioness what she had seen, and observed that they must be going tothe council-chamber.Thus began a conversation which soon turned to the King, and to hisstrange conduct, which ever since their arrival had continued in anincreasing strain of petulance and ill-temper."Indeed, Madam," said the Marchioness de Beaumont, "your Majesty'sgentleness is misapplied. Far be it from me to urge aught against myKing; but there be some dispositions to have their vehemence checked andrepelled; and it is well also for themselves, when they meet with onewho will oppose them firmly and boldly.""Perhaps, De Beaumont," replied the Queen, "if I had taken that coursemany years ago, it might have produced a happy effect; but now, alas! itwould be in vain; and God knows whether it would have succeeded eventhen!"As she spoke, the door of the gallery opened, and an officer of theCouncil appeared, notifying to the Queen that his Majesty the Kingdemanded her presence in the council-chamber.Anne of Austria turned to Madame de Beaumont with a look of melancholyforeboding. "More, more, more still to endure," she said: and thenadded, addressing the officer, "His Majesty's commands shall beinstantly obeyed; so inform him, Sir.--De Beaumont, tell Mademoiselle deHauteford that I shall be glad of her assistance too. You will go withme, of course."Mademoiselle de Hauteford instantly came at the Queen's command, andapproaching her with a sweet and placid smile, said a few words ofcomfort to her Royal mistress in so kind and gentle a manner, that thetears rose in the eyes of Anne of Austria."De Hauteford!" said she, "I feel a presentiment that we shall soonpart, and therefore I speak to you now of what I never spoke before. Iknow how much I have to thank you for--I know how much you haverejected for my sake--The love of a King would have found few to refuseit. You have done so for my sake, and you will have your reward."The eloquent blood spread suddenly over the beautiful countenance of thelady of honour. "Spare me, spare me, your Majesty," cried she, kissingthe hand the Queen held out to her. "I thought that secret had beenhidden in my bosom alone. But oh let me hope that, even had it not beenfor my love for your Majesty, I could still have resisted. Yes! yes!"continued she, clasping her hands, and murmuring to herself the name ofa higher and holier King, "yes! yes! I could have resisted!"The unusual energy with which the beautiful girl spoke, on all ordinaryoccasions so calm and imperturbable, showed the Queen how deeply herheart had taken part in that to which she alluded; and perhaps femalecuriosity might have led her to prolong the theme, though a painful oneto both parties, had not the summons of the King required her immediateattention.As they approached the council-chamber, Madame de Beaumont observed thatthe Queen's steps wavered."Take courage, Madam," said she. "For Heaven's sake, call up spirit tocarry you through, whatever may occur.""Fear not, De Beaumont," replied the Queen, though her tone betrayed theapprehension she felt. "They shall see that they cannot frighten me."At that moment the Huissier threw open the door of thecouncil-chamber, and the Queen with her ladies entered, and foundthemselves in the presence of the King and all his principal ministers.In the centre of the room, strewed with various papers and materials forwriting, stood a long table, at the top of which, in a seat slightlyraised above the rest, sat Louis himself, dressed, as was usual withhim, in a suit of black silk, without any ornament whatever, exceptthree rows of sugar-loaf buttons of polished jet,--if these could beconsidered as ornamental. His hat, indeed, which he continued to wear,was looped up with a small string of jewels; and the feather, which fellmuch on one side, was buttoned with a diamond of some value; but thesewere the only indications by which his apparel could have beendistinguished from that of some poor avou, or greffier de la cour.On the right hand of the King was placed the Cardinal de Richelieu, inhis robes; and on the left, was the Chancellor Seguier. Bouthilliers,Chavigni, Mazarin, and other members of the council, filled the rest ofthe seats round the table; but at the farther end was a vacant space, infront of which the Queen now presented herself, facing the chair of theKing.There was an angry spot on Louis's brow, and as Anne of Austria entered,he continued playing with the hilt of his sword, without once raisinghis eyes towards her. The Queen's heart sank, but still she bore anundismayed countenance, while the Cardinal fixed upon her the fullglance of his dark commanding eyes, and rising from his seat, slightlyinclined his head at her approach.The rest of the Council rose, and Chavigni turned away his eyes, with anill-defined sensation of pain and regret; but the more subtle Mazarin,ever watchful to court good opinion, whether for present, or for futurepurposes, glided quietly round, and placed a chair for her at the table.It was an action not forgotten in after days.A moment's pause ensued. As soon as the Queen was seated, Richelieuglanced his eye towards the countenance of the King, as if to instigatehim to open the business of the day: but Louis's attention was deeplyengaged in his sword-knot, or at least seemed to be so, and the Cardinalwas at length forced to proceed himself."Your Majesty's presence has been desired by the King, who is like a Godin justice and in equity," said Richelieu, proceeding in that bold andfigurative style, in which all his public addresses were conceived, "inorder to enable you to cast off, like a raiment that has been soiled bya foul touch, the accusations which have been secretly made against you,and to explain some part of your conduct, which, as clouds between theearth and the sun, have come between yourself and your royal husband,intercepting the beams of his princely approbation. All this yourMajesty can doubtless do, and the King has permitted the Council to hearyour exculpation from your own lips, that we may trample under our feetthe foul suspicions that appear against you.""Lord Cardinal," replied the Queen, calmly, but firmly, "I wonder at theboldness of your language. Remember, Sir, whom it is that you thuspresume to address--The wife of your Sovereign, Sir, who sits there,bound to protect her from insult and from injury.""Cease, cease, Madam!" cried Louis, breaking silence. "First proveyourself innocent, and then use the high tone of innocence, if youwill.""To you, my Lord," replied the Queen, "I am ready to answer everything, truly and faithfully, as a good wife, and a good subject; but notto that audacious vassal, who, in oppressing and insulting me, butdegrades your authority and weakens your power.""Spare your invectives, Madam," said the Cardinal calmly, "for, if I benot much mistaken, before you leave this chamber you will be obliged toacknowledge all that is contained in the paper before me; in which case,the bad opinion of your Majesty would be as the roar of idle wind, thathurteth not the mariner on shore.""My Lord and Sovereign," said the Queen, addressing Louis, withoutdeigning to notice the Cardinal, "it seems that some evil is laid to mycharge; will you condescend to inform me of what crime I am accused,that now calls your Majesty's anger upon me?--If loving you toowell,--if lamenting your frequent absence from me,--if giving my wholetime and care to your children, be no crimes, tell me, my Lord, tell me,what I have done.""What you have done, Madam, is easily told," exclaimed Louis, his eyesflashing fire. "Give me that paper, Lord Cardinal;" and passing hastilyfrom article to article of its contents, he continued: "Have you not,contrary to my express command, and the command of the Council,corresponded with Philip of Spain? Have you not played the spy upon theplans of my Government, and caused the defeat of my armies in Flanders,the losses of the Protestants in Germany, the failure of all our schemesin Italy, by the information you have conveyed? Have you not written toDon Francisco de Mello, and your cousin the Archduke? Have you not----""Never, never!" exclaimed the Queen, clasping her hands, "never, so helpme Heaven!""What!" cried Louis, dashing the paper angrily upon the table. "Darestthou deny what is as evident as the sun in the noonday sky? Remember,Madam, that your minion, De Blenau, is in the Bastille, and will soonforfeit his life upon the scaffold, if his obstinacy does not make himdie under the question.""For poor De Blenau's sake, my Lord," replied the Queen,--"for the sakeof as noble, and as innocent a man as ever was the victim of tyranny, Iwill tell you at once, that I have written to Philip of Spain--my owndear brother. And who can blame me, my Lord, for loving one who hasalways loved me? But I knew my duty better than ever once to mentioneven the little that I knew of the public affairs of this kingdom: andfar less, your Majesty, did I pry into secret plans of State policy forthe purpose of divulging them. My letters, my Lord, were whollydomestic. I spoke of myself, of my husband, of my children; I spoke as awoman, a wife, and a mother; but never, my Lord, as a Queen; and never,never as a spy."As to De Blenau, my Lord, let me assure you, that before he undertookto forward those letters, he exacted from me a promise, that theyshould never contain any thing which could impeach his honour, or hisloyalty. This, my Lord, is all my crime, and this is the extent of his."There was a degree of simplicity and truth in the manner of the Queen,which operated strongly on the mind of Louis. "But who," said he, "willvouch that those letters contained nothing treasonable? We have but yourword, Madam; and you well know that we are at war with Spain, and cannotprocure a sight of the originals.""Luckily," replied Anne of Austria, her countenance brightening with aray of hope, "they have all been read by one whom your Majesty yourselfrecommended to my friendship. Clara de Hauteford, you have seen themall. Speak! Tell the King the nature of their contents without fear andwithout favour."Mademoiselle de Hauteford advanced from behind the Queen's chair; andthe King, who, it was generally believed, had once passionately lovedher, but had met with no return, now fixed his eyes intently upon thepale, beautiful creature, that, scarcely like a being of the earth,glided silently forward and placed herself directly opposite to him.Clara de Hauteford was devotedly attached to the Queen. Whether itsprang from that sense of duty which in general governed all heractions, or whether it was personal attachment, matters little, as theeffect was the same, and she would, at no time, have considered her lifetoo great a sacrifice to the interest of her mistress.She advanced then before the Council, knowing that the happiness, if notthe life of Anne of Austria, might depend upon her answer; and claspingher snowy hands together, she raised her eyes towards Heaven, "So helpme God at my utmost need!" she said, with a clear, slow, energeticutterance, "no line that I have ever seen of her Majesty's writing--andI believe I have seen almost all she has written within the last fiveyears--no line that I have seen, ever spoke any thing but the warmestattachment to my Lord the King; nor did any ever contain the slightestallusion to the politics of this kingdom, but were confined entirely tothe subject of her domestic life;--nor even then," she continued,dropping her full blue eyes to the countenance of the King, and fixingthem there, with a calm serious determined gaze, which overpowered theglance of the Monarch, and made his eyelid fall--"nor even then did theyever touch upon her domestic sorrows."Richelieu saw that the King was moved: he knew also the influence ofMademoiselle de Hauteford, and he instantly resolved upon crushing herby one of those bold acts of power which he had so often attempted withimpunity. Nor had he much hesitation in the present instance, knowingthat Louis's superstitious belief in the predictions of the Astrologerhad placed the Monarch's mind completely under his dominion."Mademoiselle de Hauteford," said he in a stern voice, "answer me. Haveyou seen all the letters that the Queen has written to her brother,Philip King of Spain, positively knowing them to be such?""So please your Eminence, I have," replied Mademoiselle de Hauteford."Well then," said Richelieu, rising haughtily from his chair while hespoke, "in so doing you have committed misprision of treason, and aretherefore banished from this court and kingdom for ever; and if withinsixteen days from this present, you have not removed yourself from theprecincts of the realm, you shall be considered guilty of high treason,and arraigned as such, inasmuch as, according to your own confession,you have knowingly and wilfully, after a decree in council against it,concealed and abetted a correspondence between persons within thekingdom of France, and a power declaredly its enemy."As the Cardinal uttered his sentence in a firm, deep, commanding voice,the King, who had at first listened to him with a look of surprise, andperhaps of anger, soon began to feel the habitual superiority ofRichelieu, and shrunk back into himself, depressed and overawed: theQueen pressed her hand before her eyes; and Chavigni half raisedhimself, as if to speak, but instantly resumed his seat as his eye metthat of the Cardinal.It was Mademoiselle de Hauteford alone that heard her condemnationwithout apparent emotion. She merely bowed her head with a look of themost perfect resignation. "Your Eminence's will shall be obeyed," shereplied, "and may a gracious God protect my innocent Mistress!" Thussaying, she again took her place behind the Queen's chair, with hardly achange of countenance--always pale, perhaps her face was a little palerbut it was scarcely perceptible."And now," continued Richelieu in the same proud manner, assuming atonce that power which he in reality possessed,--"and now let us proceedto the original matter, from which we have been diverted to sweep away abutterfly. Your Majesty confesses yourself guilty of treason, incorresponding with the enemies of the kingdom. I hold in my hand a paperto that effect, or something very similar, all drawn from irrefragableevidence upon the subject. This you may as well sign, and on thatcondition no farther notice shall be taken of the affair; but the mattershall be forgotten as an error in judgment.""I have not confessed myself guilty of treason, arrogant Prelate,"replied the Queen, "and I have not corresponded with Philip of Spain asan enemy of France, but as my own brother. Nor will I, while I havelife, sign a paper so filled with falsehoods as any one must be thatcomes from your hand.""Your Majesty sees," said Richelieu, turning to the King, from whom thefaint sparks of energy he had lately shown were now entirely gone. "Isthere any medium to be kept with a person so convicted of error, and soobstinate in the wrong? And is such a person fit to educate the childrenof France? Your Majesty has promised that the Dauphin and the Duke ofAnjou shall be given into my charge.""I have," said the weak Monarch, "and I will keep my promise.""Never! never!" cried the Queen vehemently, "never, while Anne ofAustria lives! Oh, my Lord!" she exclaimed, advancing, and castingherself at the feet of the King; with all the overpowering energy ofmaternal love, "consider that I am their mother!--Rob me not of my onlyhope,--rob me not of those dear children who have smiled and cheered methrough all my sorrows. Oh, Louis! if you have the feelings of a father,if you have the feelings of a man, spare me this!"The King turned away his head, and Richelieu, gliding behind the throne,placed himself at the Queen's side. "Sign the paper," said he, in a lowdeep tone, "sign the paper, and they shall not be taken from you.""Any thing! any thing! but leave me my children!" exclaimed the Queen,taking the pen he offered her. "Have I your promise?""You have," replied he decidedly. "They shall not be taken from you.""Well, then!" said Anne of Austria, receiving the paper, "I will signit; but I call Heaven to witness that I am innocent; and you, gentlemenof the Council, to see that I sign a paper, the contents of which I knownot, and part of which is certainly false." Thus saying, with a rapidhand she wrote her name at the bottom of the page, threw down the penand quitted the apartment.The Queen walked slowly, and in silence, to the apartments allotted toher use, without giving way to the various painful feelings thatstruggled in her bosom; but once arrived within the shelter of her ownsaloon, she sank into a chair, and burst into a flood of tears.Mademoiselle de Hauteford, who stood beside her, endeavoured in vain forsome time to calm her agitation, but at length succeeding in a degree."Oh, Clara!" said the Queen, "you have ruined yourself for my sake.""I hope, Madam," replied the young lady, "that I have done my duty,which were enough in itself to reconcile me to my fate; but if I couldsuppose that I have served your Majesty, I should be more than rewardedfor any thing I may undergo.""You have served me most deeply on this and every occasion," answeredthe Queen; "and the time may come, when the affection of Anne of Austriawill not be what it is now,--the destruction of all that possessit.--But why comes Mademoiselle de Beaumont in such haste?" shecontinued, as Pauline, who had been absent in the gardens of the Palace,and unconscious of all that had lately passed, entered the saloon withhurry and anxiety in her countenance."Please your Majesty," said Pauline, and then suddenly stopped, seeingthat the Queen had been weeping. "Proceed, proceed! wild rose," saidAnne of Austria; "they are but tears--drops that signify nothing.""As I was walking in the gardens but now," continued Pauline, "a littlepeasant boy came up to me, and asked if I could bring him to speech ofyour Majesty. I was surprised at his request, and asked him what was hisbusiness; when he told me that he brought you a letter from theBastille. This seemed so important that I made bold to take him into thePalace by the private gate, and concealed him in my apartments, till Ihad informed you of it all.""You did right, Pauline, you did right," replied the Queen. "It mustsurely be news from De Blenau. Bring the boy hither directly--not by theanteroom, but by the inner apartments--You, Clara, station Laporte atthe top of the staircase, to see that no one approaches."Pauline flew to execute the Queen's commands, and in a few minutes aclatter was heard in the inner chamber, not at all unlike the noiseproduced by that most unfortunate animal a cat, when some mischievousboys adorn her feet with walnut-shells.The moment after, the door opened, and Pauline appeared leading in afine curly-headed boy of about ten years old. He was dressed in hoddengrey, with a broad leathern belt round his waist, in which appeared asmall axe and a knife, while his feet, displaying no stockings, butwith the skin tanned to the colour of Russia leather, were thrust into apair of unwieldy sabots, or wooden-shoes, which had caused the clatteraforesaid."Take off his sabots, take off his sabots," cried the Queen, puttingher hands to her ears. "They will alarm the whole house.""Dame oui!" cried the boy, slipping his feet out of theirincumbrances. "J'avons oubli, et vous aussi, Mademoiselle," turningto Pauline, who, anxious to hear of De Blenau, would have let him comein, if he had been shod like a horse.The little messenger now paused for a moment, then having glanced hiseye over the ladies at the other end of the room, as if to ascertain towhich he was to deliver his credentials, advanced straight to the Queen,and falling down upon both his knees, tendered her a sealed packet."Well, my boy," said Anne of Austria, taking the letter, "whom does thiscome from?""My father, the Woodman of Mantes," replied the boy, "told me to give itinto the Queen's own hand; and when I had done so, to return straight tohim and not to wait, for fear of being discovered.""And how do you know that I am the Queen?" asked Anne of Austria, whotoo often suffered her mind to be distracted from matters of graveimportance by trifling objects of amusement. "That lady is the Queen,"she continued, pointing to Madame de Beaumont, and playing upon theboy's simplicity."No, no," said Charles, the Woodman's son, "she stands and you sit; andbesides, you told them to take off my sabots, as if you were used toorder all about you.""Well," rejoined the Queen, "you are right, my boy: go back to yourfather, and as a token that you have given the letter to the Queen,carry him back that ring;" and she took a jewel from her finger, and putit into the boy's hand. "Mademoiselle de Beaumont," she continued, "willyou give this boy into the charge of Laporte, bidding him take him fromthe Palace by the most private way, and not to leave him till he is safeout of Chantilly."According to Anne of Austria's command, Pauline conducted Charles to thehead of the staircase, at which had been stationed Laporte, theconfidential servant of the Queen, keeping watch to give notice of anyone's approach. To him she delivered her charge with the properdirections, and then returned to the saloon, not a little anxious tolearn the contents of De Blenau's letter. I will not try to explain hersensations. Let those who have been parted from some one that they love,who have been anxious for his safety, and terrified for his danger, whohave waited in fear and agony for tidings long delayed--let them call upall that they felt, and tinging it with that shade of romance, whichmight be expected in the mind of a young, feeling, imaginative,Languedocian girl of 1643, they will have something like a picture ofPauline's sensations, without my helping them a bit."Come hither, my wild rose," said the Queen, as she saw her enter. "Hereis a letter from De Blenau, full of sad news indeed. His situation isperilous in the extreme; and though I am the cause of all, I do not knowhow to aid him."Pauline turned pale, but cast down her eyes, and remained withoutspeaking."Surely, Pauline," said the Queen, misinterpreting her silence, "afterthe explanations I gave you some days ago, you can have no farther doubtof De Blenau's conduct?""Oh no indeed! Madam," replied Pauline, vehemently, "and now that I feeland know how very wrong those suspicions were, I would fain do somethingto atone for having formed them.""Thou canst do nothing, my poor flower," said the Queen, with amelancholy smile. "However, read that letter, and thou wilt see thatsomething must soon be done to save him, or his fate is sealed. DeBlenau must be informed that I have acknowledged writing to my brother,and all the particulars connected therewith; for well I know thatRichelieu will not be contented with my confession, but will attempt towring something more from him, even by the peine forte et dure."Pauline read, and re-read the letter, and each time she did so, thecolour came and went in her cheek, and at every sentence she raised herlarge dark eyes to the Queen, as if inquiring what could be done forhim. Each of the Queen's ladies was silent for a time, and then eachproposed some plan, which was quickly discussed and rejected, as eithertoo dangerous, or totally impracticable. One proposed to bribe theGovernor of the Bastille to convey a letter to De Blenau, but that wassoon rejected: another proposed to send Laporte, the Queen's valet dechambre, to try and gain admittance; but Laporte had once been confinedthere himself, and was well known to all the officers of the prison: andanother mentioned Seguin, Anne of Austria's surgeon; but he also was notonly too well known, but it appeared, from what De Blenau had informedthe Queen of his conference with Richelieu, that the very words of themessage which had been sent by him on the night of the young Count'srencontre with the robbers, had been communicated to the Cardinal; andthe whole party forgot that Louise, the soubrette, had been presentwhen it was delivered.In the mean while, Pauline remained profoundly silent, occupied by manya bitter reflection, while a thousand confused schemes flitted acrossher mind, like bubbles floating on a stream, and breaking as soon asthey were looked upon. At length, however, she started, as if some morefeasible plan presented itself to her thoughts----"I will go!" exclaimedshe,--"Please your Majesty, I will go.""You, Pauline!" said the Queen, "you, my poor girl! You know not thedifficulties of such an undertaking. What say you, Madame de Beaumont?""That I am pleased, Madam, to see my child show forth the spirit of herrace," replied the Marchioness. "Nor do I doubt of her success; for sureI am Pauline would not propose a project which had no good foundation.""Then say how you intend to manage it," said the Queen, with littlefaith in the practicability of Pauline's proposal. "I doubt me much, mysweet girl, they will never let you into the Bastille. Their hearts areas hard as the stones of the prison that they keep, and they will giveyou no ingress for love of your bright eyes.""I do not intend to make that a plea," replied Pauline, smiling inyouthful confidence; "but I will borrow one of my maid's dresses, anddoubtless shall look as like a soubrette as any one. Claude directsus, here, to ask at the gate for Philip the woodman of Mantes. Now hewill most likely be able to procure me admission; and if not, I can butgive the message to him and be sent away again.""Oh, no, no!" cried the Queen, "give no messages but in the lastextremity. How do we know that this Woodman might not betray us, andraise Richelieu's suspicions still more? If you can see De Blenau,well---- I will give you a letter for him; but if not, only tell theWoodman to inform him, that I have confessed all. If that reach thetyrant's ears, it can do no harm. Your undertaking is bold, Pauline:think you your courage will hold out?"The boundaries between emulation and jealousy are very frail, and Madamede Beaumont, who regarded the services which Mademoiselle de Hautefordhad rendered the Queen with some degree of envy, now answered for herdaughter's courage with more confidence than perhaps she felt. ButPauline's plan yet required great arrangement, even to give it theprobability of success. With a thousand eyes continually upon theiractions, it was no very easy matter even to quit Chantilly withoutcalling down that observation and inquiry which would have been fatal totheir project.To obviate this difficulty, however, it was agreed that Pauline shouldaccompany Mademoiselle de Hauteford, whose sentence of banishmentrequired her immediate presence in Paris, for the arrangement of heraffairs. On their arrival in that city, the two ladies were to take uptheir abode with the old Marchioness de Senecy, one of the Queen's mostdevoted adherents, and to determine their future proceedings by theinformation they received upon the spot.The greatest rapidity, however, was necessary to any hope of success,and neither Pauline nor Mademoiselle de Hauteford lost any time in theirpreparations. The Queen's letter to De Blenau was soon written. Paulineborrowed from her maid Louise, the full dress of a Languedoc peasant,provided herself with a considerable sum of money, that no means mightbe left untried, and having taken leave of her mother, whose boldcounsels tended to raise her spirits and uphold her resolution, sheplaced herself in the chaise roulante beside Mademoiselle deHauteford, buoyed up with youthful confidence and enthusiasm.It was rather an anxious moment, however, as they passed the gates ofthe Palace, which by some accident were shut. This caused a momentarydelay, and several of the Cardinal's guard (for Richelieu assumed thatof a bodyguard amongst other marks of royalty) gathered round thevehicle with the idle curiosity of an unemployed soldiery. Pauline'sheart beat fast, but the moment after she was relieved by the appearanceof the old concierge, or porter, who threw open the gates, and thecarriage rolled out without any question being asked. Her mind, however,was not wholly relieved till they were completely free of the town ofChantilly, and till the carriage slowly mounting the first little hill,took a slight turn to avoid a steeper ascent, showing them the towers ofthe chateau and the course of the road they had already passed, withoutany human form that could afford subject for alarm.Pauline, seeing that they were not followed, gave herself up tomeditations of the future, firmly believing that their departure hadentirely escaped the observation of the Cardinal. This, however, was notthe case. He had been early informed that one of the Queen's carriageswas in preparation to carry some of the ladies of honour to Paris; butconcluding that it was nothing more than the effect of that sentence ofbanishment which he had himself pronounced against Mademoiselle deHauteford, he suffered Pauline and her companion to depart withoutinquiry or obstruction; although some of the many tools of his power hadshut the Palace gates, as if by accident, till his decision was known.As the carriage rolled on, and Pauline reflected in silence upon thetask she had undertaken, the bright colouring of the moment's enthusiasmfaded away; the mists in which hope had concealed the rocks andprecipices around her path, no longer intercepted her view, and thewhole difficulties and dangers to which she exposed herself, presentedthemselves one after another to her sight. But the original motivesstill remained in full force. Her deep romantic attachment to De Blenau,her sense of duty to the Queen, and that generosity of purpose whichwould have led her at any time to risk her life to save theinnocent--much more the innocent and loved--of these, nothing coulddeprive her; and these kept up her resolution, although the veryinterest which her heart took in the success of her endeavour, made hermagnify the dangers, and tremble at the thought of failure.CHAPTER VII.Which shows what they did with De Blenau in the Bastille, and whathe himself did to get out of it.As a young member of what is technically called the lower house, orotherwise the House of Commons, when first he goes down after hiselection to take the oaths and his seat, his heart fluttering both withpride and timidity, most conscientiously resolves to be independent inall his opinions, and determines heroically to have no party: so had I,when I entered upon the arduous duties of giving this work to the publicin its present form, determined heroically to have no hero; but to doequal justice to all the several characters, and let each reader find ahero for himself.However, pursuing the course of the abovementioned young member of theCommons House of Parliament, who soon begins to perceive, that it is aseasy to eat oysters and brown sugar, as to vote with a party to whom hehas a natural antipathy; or for the needle to fly from the magnet as forhim to keep aloof from that faction to which individual interests,long-indulged habits, and early prejudices attach him; so, I soon beganto find that my own feelings more particularly inclining me to the Countde Blenau, I unconsciously made him the hero of my tale, dilated on hishistory, enlarged upon his character, quitted him with regret, andreturned to him with pleasure.At present, however, the course of my tale naturally conducts me oncemore to the gloomy walls of the Bastille, to give some account of thecircumstances which led to the latter events of the last chapter; andconsequently I feel no hesitation in once more taking up the history ofmy Hero.The sleep of the Count de Blenau was fully as sound within the Bastilleas ever it had been in his own hotel at St. Germain: nor was it till theday was risen high that he awoke, on the first morning after hisimprisonment.It was some moments before he could remember his precise situation, soprofound had been his sleep. But the unpleasant parts of our fate soonrecall themselves to our senses, though we may forget them for a time;and the narrow windows, the iron door, and the untapestried walls,speedily brought back to De Blenau's recollection many a painfulparticular, to which sleep had given a temporary oblivion.On rising, he missed in some degree the attendance to which he wasaccustomed; but nevertheless he contrived to get through the business ofthe toilet, without much difficulty; although no page was ready at hiscall, no groom prepared to adjust every part of his apparel. He thenproceeded into the outer chamber, which he mentally termed his saloon,and would willingly have ordered his breakfast, but his apartmentsafforded no means of communicating with those below, except by the irondoor already mentioned; the secret of which was of too great importanceto be lost upon so trifling an occasion.No remedy presented itself but patience, and proceeding to the window,which opened at will to admit the air, but which was strongly secured onthe outside with massy iron bars, he endeavoured to amuse the time bylooking into the court below, in which he could occasionally catch aglimpse of some of his fellow-prisoners, appearing and disappearing, asthey sometimes emerged into the open space within his sight, andsometimes retired into the part, which the thickness of the walls inwhich the window was placed, hid from his view.They were now apparently taking their morning's walk, and enjoying theprivilege of conversing with each other--a privilege which De Blenaubegan to value more highly than ever he had done. Amongst those that hebeheld were many whom he recognised, as having either known thempersonally, or having seen them at the court, or with the army; and thestrange assemblage of all different parties which met his eye in thecourt-yard of the Bastille, fully convinced him, that under theadministration of a man who lived in constant fear that his ill-gottenpower would be snatched from him, safety was to be found in no tenetsand in no station.Here he beheld some that had been of the party of Mary de Medicis, andsome who had been the avowed followers of Richelieu himself; some thatthe Minister suspected of being too much favoured by the King, and some,as in his own case, who had been attached to the Queen. One he saw whowas supposed to have favoured the Huguenots in France, and one that hadassisted the Catholic party in Germany."Well," thought De Blenau, "I am but one out of the many, and whateverplan I had pursued, most probably I should have found my way heresomehow. Wealth and influence, in despotic governments, are generallylike the plumes of the ostrich, which often cause her to be hunted down,but will not help her to fly."Whilst engaged in such reflections, De Blenau heard the bolts of thedoor undrawn, and the Governor of the prison entered, followed by hisservant loaded with the various requisites for so substantial a meal asa breakfast of that period. De Blenau and the Governor saluted eachother with every outward form of civility; and the Count, perceivingthat his custodier still lingered after the servant had disposed thevarious articles upon the table and had taken his departure, luckilyremembered that this was one of the jours maigres of which he hadheard, and invited his companion to partake of his morning meal. TheGovernor agreed to the proposal sans crmonie, and having done amplejustice to the dish of stewed partridges, which formed the principalornament of the table, he himself finished a bottle of the celebratedwine of Suresnes, which is one of the things now lost to the bonsvivants of Paris.De Blenau was not so much importuned by hunger as to envy the Governorthe very large share he appropriated of the viands before him; and hehad plenty of leisure to remark, that his companion performed his featsof mastication with a wonderful degree of velocity. But the Governor hada reason for thus wishing to hurry, what was to him a very agreeableoccupation, to its conclusion; for he had scarcely poured out the lastgoblet of his wine, and was still wiping and folding up his case-knife,(which, by the way, was the constant companion of high and low in thosedays, and the only implement they had for cutting their food,) when thedoor opened, and a servant appeared, giving the Governor a significantnod, which was answered by a sign of the same kind.Upon this the man retired, and the door being closed, the well-filledofficial turned to De Blenau,--"I did not tell you before, Monsieur leComte," said he, "for fear of taking away your appetite; but we have hada message this morning from Monsieur Lafemas,--you have heard ofMonsieur Lafemas, doubtless?--importing that he would soon be here toput some questions to you. Now, Monsieur de Blenau, you are a gentlemanfor whom I have a great regard, and I will give you a hint which may beof service to you. If in the examination which you are about to undergo,there be any questions to which you do not find it convenient to reply,do not refuse to answer them, but speak always in such a manner as tobear two interpretations, by which means I have known many a prisoneravoid the torture, and sometimes go on from examination to examination,till they gave him his liberty from pure weariness."De Blenau bowed, already determined as to the course he should pursue."When do you expect this worthy Judge?" he demanded. "I am perfectlyunconcerned as to his coming, let me assure you, though I feel obligedby your consideration for my appetite.""He is here now, Sir," replied the Governor; "we had better, if youplease, join him in the audience-hall. That servant came to announce hisarrival.""I will follow you instantly," replied the Count; upon which theGovernor rose and opened the door.The moment De Blenau had passed out, the guard, who had been stationedat the head of the stairs, followed at the distance of a couple ofpaces, while the Governor led the way. In this order they proceeded tothe inner court, which they had to pass before they could reach theaudience-chamber. This open space was still filled by the prisoners,who, glad of the little liberty allowed them, seldom retired to theircells, except when obliged by the regulations of the prison. The momentDe Blenau appeared in the court, there was a slight stir amongst itstenants, and the question of, "Who is he? who is he?" circulated rapidlyamong them."It is the Count de Blenau, by St. Louis!" exclaimed a deep voice,which De Blenau remembered to have heard somewhere before; but, thoughon looking round he saw several persons that he knew, he could not fixupon any one in particular as the one who had spoken.He had not time, however, for more than a momentary glance, and wasobliged to pass on to the door of the audience-hall, which opened into alittle narrow passage leading from the court. Here De Blenau paused foran instant to collect his thoughts, and then followed the Governor, whohad already entered.The audience-hall of the Bastille was a large oblong chamber, dimlylighted by two high Gothic windows, which looked into the outer court.The scanty gleam of daylight which would have thus entered, had thespace been open, was impeded by the dust and dirt of many a century, andby the thick crossing of the leaden framework, while its progress intothe hall itself was also farther obstructed by several heavy columnswhich supported the high pointed arches of the roof.This roof, the apartment having been originally intended for the chapel,would have afforded a relief to the dullness of the rest by itsbeautiful proportions, and the highly finished tracery with which it wasadorned, had the eye been able to reach it; but the rays, which from thecauses above mentioned were barely enough to illuminate the lower partof the hall, were lost before they could attain its height, leaving itin that profound obscurity, which cast a double gloom upon the spacebelow.The pavement of this melancholy hall was damp and decayed, many of thestones having strayed from their bed of mortar, and become vagrant aboutthe apartment; and the furniture, if it might be so called, far fromfilling it, served only to show its size and emptiness. At the fartherextremity was a long table, at the end of which, in a chair somewhatelevated, sat the Judge Lafemas, with a Clerk at a desk below him, andtwo or three Exempts standing round about.Near the end next De Blenau was another chair, which he conceived to beplaced for his use; while between two of the pillars, sitting on acurious machine, the use of which De Blenau at once suspected, appearedan ill-favoured muscular old man, whose lowering brow and doggedness ofaspect seemed to speak of many a ruthless deed.As the Count entered, the door closed after him with a loud clang; andadvancing to the table, he took his seat in the vacant chair, while theGovernor placed himself at a little distance between him and the Judge."Well, Monsieur de Blenau," said Lafemas in that sweet mild tone whichhe always assumed when not irritated by the taunts of Chavigni, "This isthe last place where I could have wished to meet a nobleman whosegeneral character has always engaged my most affectionate esteem."De Blenau knew Lafemas to be one of the meanest and most viperous of theCardinal's tools, and not feeling much moved to exchange courtesies withhim, he merely acknowledged the Judge's salutation by a silent bow,while the other proceeded: "I have requested the pleasure of yoursociety for a space, in order to ask you a few questions; your reply towhich will, doubtless, soon procure your liberation from this unpleasantplace.""I trust so, Sir," replied the Count, "as the detention of an innocentperson must occasion fully as much discredit to his Majesty'sGovernment, as it does inconvenience to the person himself.""You are quite right, you are quite right," rejoined the sweet-tonguedJudge. "Indeed, my very object in coming is to obtain such answers fromyou as will convince the Cardinal de Richelieu, who, though a profoundminister, is somewhat suspicious withal,--to convince him, I say, thatyou are innocent; of which, on my conscience, and as I believe in theSaviour, I have no doubt myself.--In the first place, then," hecontinued, "tell me as a friend, have you any acquaintance in Brussels?""I have!" replied De Blenau decidedly."That is honourable,--that is candid," said the Judge. "I told you,Monsieur le Gouverneur, that we should have no difficulty, and thatMonsieur de Blenau would enable me easily to establish hisinnocence.--Pray do you correspond with these friends," he continued,"and by what means?""I do correspond with them; but seldom: and then by any means thatoccur.""Monsieur de Blenau," exclaimed Lafemas, "I am enchanted with thisfrankness; but be a little more specific about the means. If you have noparticular objection to confide in me, mention any channel that you callto mind, by which you have sent letters to the Low Countries."De Blenau felt somewhat disgusted with the sweet and friendly manner ofa man whose deeds spoke him as cruel and as bloody-minded as a famishedtiger; and unwilling to be longer mocked with soft words, he replied,"Sometimes by the King's courier, Sir; sometimes by the Cardinal's: andonce I remember having sent one by your cousin De Merceau, but Ibelieve that letter never reached its destination; for you mustrecollect that De Merceau was hanged by Don Francisco de Mello, forripping open the bag, and purloining the despatches.""We have nothing to do with that, my dear Count," said Lafemas,struggling to maintain his placidity of demeanour.--"The next thing Ihave to inquire is,"--and he looked at a paper he held in his hand:"Have you ever conveyed any letters to the Low Countries for any oneelse?"De Blenau answered in the affirmative; and the Judge proceeded with aseries of questions, very similar to those which had been asked byRichelieu himself, artfully striving to entangle the prisoner by meansof his own admissions, so as to force him into farther confessions bythe impossibility of receding. But beyond a certain point De Blenauwould not proceed."Monsieur Lafemas," said he in a calm firm tone, "I perceive that youare going into questions which have already been asked me by hisEminence the Cardinal Prime Minister. The object in doing so isevidently to extort from me some contradiction which may criminatemyself; and therefore henceforward I will reply to no such questionswhatsoever. The Cardinal is in possession of my answers; and if you wantthem, you must apply to him.""You mistake entirely, my dear Count," said Lafemas; "on my salvation,my only object is to serve you. You have already acknowledged that youhave forwarded letters from the Queen,--why not now inform me to whomthose letters were addressed? If those letters were not of a treasonablenature, why did she not send them by one of her own servants?""When a Queen of France is not allowed the common attendants which asimple gentlewoman can command, she may often be glad to use theservants and services of her friends. My own retinue, Sir, trebles thatwhich the Queen has ever possessed at St. Germain's. But, without goinginto these particulars, your question is at once replied to byreminding you, that I am her Majesty's Chamberlain, and therefore herservant.""Without there were something wrong, Monsieur de Blenau," said Lafemas,"you could have no objection to state whether you have or have notconveyed some letters from her Majesty to Don John of Austria, DonFrancisco de Mello, or King Philip of Spain. It is very natural for aQueen to write to her near relations, surely!""I have already said," replied De Blenau, "that I shall reply to no suchquestions, the object of which is alone to entangle me.""You know not what you are exposing yourself to," rejoined the Judge;"there are means within this prison which would easily compel ananswer.""None," replied De Blenau, firmly. "My resolution is taken, and no poweron earth can shake it.""Really, Monsieur de Blenau, it would hurt me to the heart to leave youto the dreadful fate which your mistaken determination is likely tocall upon you. I could weep, truly I could weep, to think of what youare calling upon your own head;" and the Judge glanced his eye towardsthe machine, which we have already noticed, and from which the old manrose up, as if preparing for his task."You mean the torture?" said De Blenau, looking at it without a changeof countenance. "But let me tell you, Monsieur Lafemas, that you darenot order it to a man of my rank, without an express warrant for thepurpose; and, even if you had such authority, not all the torture in theworld would wring one word from me. Ask that instrument of tyranny,Sir," and he pointed to the Executioner,--"ask him how the noble Caplydied; and so would De Blenau also."Lafemas looked at the Governor, and the Governor at the Executioner, andso round. One of the dreadful secrets of the Bastille had evidentlyescaped beyond those precincts to which they were fearfully confined; noone could divine how this had occurred, and each suspected the other. Atemporary silence ensued, and then Lafemas proceeded:"The torture! no, Monsieur de Blenau: God forbid that I should think ofordering such a thing! But let me advise you to answer; for I must, ofcourse, report your refusal to the Cardinal Prime Minister, and you knowthat he is not likely to consider either your rank or your fortune, butwill, in all probability, order you the Question ordinary andextraordinary instantly.""The guilt be his then!" said De Blenau. "I have already told you myresolution, Sir; act upon it as you think fit."Lafemas seemed at a loss, and a whispering consultation took placebetween him and the Secretary, who seemed to urge more vigorous measuresthan the Judge himself thought proper to pursue; for their conferencewas terminated by Lafemas exclaiming in a tone not sufficiently low toescape De Blenau's ear, "I dare not, I tell you--I dare not--I have noorders.--Monsieur de Blenau," he continued aloud, "you may now retire,and I must report your answers to the Cardinal. But let me advise you,as a sincere friend, to be prepared with a reply to the questions youhave now refused to answer, before we next meet; for by that time Ishall have received his Eminence's commands, which, I fear, will be moresevere than my heart could wish."De Blenau made no reply, but withdrew, escorted as before; and it wereneedless to deny, that, notwithstanding the coolness with which he hadborne his examination, and the fortitude with which he was prepared torepel the worst that could be inflicted, his heart beat high as the doorof the audience-hall closed behind him, and he looked forward toreturning to his apartments with more pleasure than a captive usuallyregards the place of his confinement.The many agitating circumstances which had passed since, had completelybanished from his thoughts the voice which he had heard pronounce hisname, on the first time of his crossing the court; but as he returned,his eye fell upon the form of a tall, strong man, standing under thearchway; and he instantly recognized the Woodman of the forest ofMantes.De Blenau had spoken to him a thousand times in his varioushunting-excursions, and he could not help being astonished to meet himin such a place, little dreaming that he himself was the cause. "What,in the name of Heaven!" thought he, "can that man have done to meritconfinement here? Surely, Richelieu, who affects to be an eagle of thehighest flight, might stoop on nobler prey than that."As these thoughts crossed his mind, he passed by the foot of the littletower, containing the staircase which communicated with his apartmentsby the iron door in the inner chamber. This had evidently been longdisused; and on remembering the position of the two chambers which heoccupied, he conceived that they must have been at one time quitedistinct, with a separate entrance to each, the one being arrived at bythe turret, and the other by the chief staircase. He had, however, onlytime to take a casual glance, and wisely refrained from making thatvery apparent; for the Governor, who walked beside him, kept his eyesalmost constantly fixed upon him, as if to prevent any communicationeven by a sign with the other prisoners.On arriving at his chamber, the Governor allowed him to pass in alone,and having fastened the door, returned to Lafemas, leaving De Blenau tomeditate over his situation in solitude. The first pleasure of havingescaped from immediate danger having subsided, there was nothing verycheering to contemplate in his position. His fate, though postponed,seemed inevitable. Richelieu, he knew, was no way scrupulous; and theonly thing which honour could permit him to do, was to defend theQueen's secret with his life.The Queen herself indeed might relieve him from his difficulty, if hecould find any way of communicating with her. But in looking round forthe means, absolute impossibility seemed to present itself on all sides.In vain he sought for expedients; his mind suggested none that a secondthought confirmed. He once contemplated inducing the Governor to forwarda letter by the temptation of a large bribe; but a moment's reflectionshowed him that it was a thousand to one that the smooth-spoken officerboth accepted his bribe and betrayed his trust.Many other plans were rejected in a like manner, from a conviction oftheir impracticability, till at length a vague thought of gaining aninterview with the Woodman of Mantes, and, if possible, engaging him tobribe some of the inferior officers of the prison, crossed De Blenau'smind; and he was still endeavouring to regulate his ideas on thesubject, when the bolts were once more withdrawn, and the Governor againentered the apartment."Let me congratulate you, Monsieur de Blenau," said he, with a look ofsincere pleasure, which probably sprang more from the prospect ofcontinued gain to himself than any abstract gratification in De Blenau'ssafety. "Monsieur Lafemas is gone, and as the Cardinal is at Chantilly,you will be safe for three or four days at least, as nothing can bedecided till his Eminence returns."De Blenau well knew how to estimate the kindness of his friend theGovernor; but though he put its proper value upon it, and no more, hefelt the necessity of striving to make his interested meanness act thepart of real friendship."Well, Monsieur le Gouverneur," said he, assuming a cheerful air, "Isuppose, then, that I shall remain with you a day or two longer; norshould I, indeed, care so much for the confinement, where I am so welltreated, if I had some one to wait upon me whom I have been accustomedto.""I do not know how that could be arranged," replied the Governorthoughtfully; "I would do any thing to serve you, Monsieur de Blenau,consistent with my duty, but this is quite contrary to my orders; and ifI were to allow you one of my own servants, it would put me completelyin his power.""Oh, that would not do at all," said De Blenau; "but are there not someof the inferior prisoners--" The Governor's brow darkened.--"Of course,"continued the Count, "you would have to pay them for their trouble--andI, of course, would reimburse you. If you think that three hundredcrowns would induce one of them to wait on me for the time I am here, Iwould willingly pay the money into your hands, and you could make allthe necessary arrangements for the purpose."The countenance of the Governor gradually cleared up as De Blenau spoke,like a sheltered lake that, after having been agitated for a moment bysome unwonted breeze, soon relapses into its calm tranquillity, whenthat which disturbed it has passed away. The idea of appropriating, withsuch unquestioned facility, the greater part of three hundred crowns,was the sun which thus speedily dispersed the clouds upon his brow: andhe mused for a moment, calculating shrewdly the means of attaining hisobject."The worst of it is," said he at length, "that we have no inferiorprisoners. They are all prisoners of State in the Bastille---- Butstay," he added, a felicitous idea crossing his mind, "I remember therewas a man brought here this morning by Chavigni's people, and they toldme to give him all possible liberty, and employ him in the prison if Icould.""That will just do then," said De Blenau, inwardly praying that it mightbe the honest Woodman of Mantes. "He can visit me here occasionallyduring the day, to see if I have need of him, and the guard at the doorcan take good care that I do not follow him out, which is all that yourduty demands.""Of course, of course," replied the Governor; "it is your safe custodyalone which I have to look to: and farther, I am ordered to give youevery convenience and attention, which warrants me in allowing you anattendant at least. But here comes your dinner, Sir.""Dinner!" exclaimed De Blenau, "it surely is not yet noon." But so itproved: the time had passed more quickly than he thought: nor indeed hadhe any reason to regret the appearance of dinner, for the substantialand luxurious meal which was served up at his expense on that jourmaigre did not prove any bad auxiliary in overcoming whatever scrupleyet lingered about the mind of Monsieur le Gouverneur. At every mouthfulof Becasse, his countenance became more placable and complacent, andwhile he was busily occupied in sopping the last morsels of his Doradein the sauce au cornichons, and conveying them to the capaciousaperture which stood open to receive them, our prisoner obtained hisfull consent that the person he had mentioned should have egress andregress of the apartment; for which liberty, however, De Blenau wasobliged to pay down the sum of three hundred crowns under the speciousname of wages to the attendant.This arrangement, and the dinner, came to a conclusion much about thesame time; and the Governor, who had probably been engaged with DeBlenau's good cheer much longer than was quite consistent with his otherduties, rose and retired, to seek the inferior prisoner whose name hecould not remember, but whom he piously resolved to reward with a crownper diem, thinking that such unparalleled liberality ought to berecorded in letters of gold.In regard to De Blenau, the Governor looked upon him as the goose withthe golden eggs; but more prudent than the boy in the fable, he resolvedto prolong his life to the utmost of his power, so long, at least, as hecontinued to produce that glittering ore which possessed such wonderfulattraction in his eyes. De Blenau, however, was not the goose he thoughthim; and though he waited with some impatience to see if the person onwhom so much might depend, were or were not his honest friend theWoodman, yet his thoughts were deeply engaged in revolving every meansby which the cupidity of the Governor might be turned to his ownadvantage.At length the bolts were undrawn, and the prisoner, fixing his eyes uponthe door, beheld a little old man enter, with withered cheeks and sunkeneyes; a greasy night-cap on his head, and a large knife suspended by theside of a long thin sword, which sometimes trailed upon the ground, andsometimes with reiterated blows upon the tendons of his meagre shanks,seemed to reproach them for the bent and cringing posture in which theycarried the woodcock-like body that surmounted them."Well, Sir!" said De Blenau, not a little disappointed with thisapparition; "are you the person whom the Governor has appointed to waitupon me?""Oui, Monsieur," said the little man, laying his hand upon his heart,with a profound inclination of his head, in which he contrived to getthat organ completely out of sight, and, like a tortoise, to havenothing but his back visible. "Oui, Monsieur; I am CuisinierVivandier, that is to say, formerly Vivandier; at present, CuisinierAubergiste ici  la porte de la Bastille, tout prs. I have the honourto furnish the dinner for Monseigneur, and I have come for the plates.""Oh, is that all!" cried De Blenau; "take them, take them, my goodfriend, and begone."The little man vowed that Monseigneur did him too much honour, andgathering up his dishes with admirable dexterity, he held the heap withhis left arm, reserving his right to lay upon his heart, in whichposition he addressed another profound bow to De Blenau, and left theapartment. The prisoner now waited some time, getting more and moreimpatient as the day wore on. At length, however, the door once moreopened, and Philip the woodman himself appeared.Between Philip and the young Count there was of course much to beexplained, which, requiring no explanation to the reader, shall not behere recapitulated. Every circumstance, however, that Philip told,whether of his writing the letter to inform him of the plots ofChavigni and Lafemas, or of the manner and apparent reason of his beingdragged from his cottage to the Bastille, concurred to give De Blenaugreater confidence in his new ally; and perhaps Philip himself, fromhaving suffered a good deal on De Blenau's account, felt but the greaterinclination to hazard still more. Between two persons so inclined,preliminaries are soon adjusted: nor had De Blenau time to proceed withdiplomatic caution, even had he had reason to suspect the sincerity ofthe Woodman. The dangers of his situation admitted no finesse; and,overleaping all ceremonies, he at once demanded if Philip would andcould convey a letter from him to the Queen.Of his willingness, the Woodman said, there was no doubt; and after amoment's thought he added, that he had reason to hope that opportunityalso would be afforded him. "It will be dangerous," said he, "but Ithink I can do it.""Tell me how, good friend," demanded De Blenau, "and depend upon it,whatever risks you run on my account, whether I live or die, you willbe rewarded.""I want no reward, Sir," answered Philip, "but a good cause and a goodconscience; and I am sure, if I serve you, I am as well engaged as if Iwere cutting all the fagots in Mantes. But my plan is this: They tellme, that my children shall always be allowed to see me. Now I know myboy Charles, who is as active as a picvert, will not be long before hefollows me. He will be here before nightfall, I am sure, and he shalltake your letter to the Queen."De Blenau remained silent for a moment. "Was it your son who broughtyour letter to me?" demanded he. The Woodman assented; and the Countcontinued: "He was a shrewd boy, then. At all events, it must be risked.Wait, I will write, and depend upon you."The Woodman, however, urged that if he stayed so long, suspicion mightbe excited; and De Blenau suffered him to depart, desiring him to returnin an hour, when the letter would be ready. During his absence, theprisoner wrote that epistle which we have already seen delivered. In ithe told his situation, and the nature of the questions which had beenasked him by Lafemas. He hinted also that his fate was soon likely to bedecided; and desired, that any communication which it might be necessaryto make to him, might be conveyed through the Woodman of Mantes.More than one hour elapsed after this letter was written before Philipagain appeared. When he did so, however, he seemed in some haste."Monsieur le Comte," said he, "my son is here. They have let me take himinto my cell to rest, but I dare not be absent more than a moment, forfear they suspect something. Is the letter ready?"De Blenau placed it in his hand, and would fain have added some gold."The Queen is at Chantilly," said he, "and your son will want money forhis journey.""No, no, Sir," replied Philip, "that is no stuff for a child. Let himhave a broad-piece, if you like, to help him on, but no more.""Well then," said the Count, "accept the rest for your services. I havemore in that valise.""Not so, either, Monseigneur," answered the Woodman. "Pay for what isdone, when it is done;" and taking the letter and one gold piece, heleft the apartment.CHAPTER VIII.Which shows that Accident holds Wisdom by the leg, and like apig-driver with a pig, often makes her go forward by pulling herback.The heavy carriage which conveyed Pauline de Beaumont towards Parisrolled on with no great rapidity, and the time, to her anxious mind,seemed lengthened to an inconceivable degree. Towards night, everylittle town they entered she conceived to be the capital, and was notundeceived till Mademoiselle de Hauteford observed, that they had setout so late she was afraid they would be obliged to pass the night atEcouen.In her companion Pauline found but little to console or soothe her underthe anxiety and fear which the dangerous enterprise she had undertakennaturally produced. Mademoiselle de Hauteford had little either ofwarmth of heart or gentleness of disposition; and such were the onlyqualities which could have assimilated with Pauline's feelings at thattime.In combating the passionate love with which the King had regarded her,Mademoiselle de Hauteford had entirely triumphed over her own heart, andhaving crushed every human sensation that it contained, she substituteda rigid principle of duty, which, like the mainspring of a piece ofclock-work, originated all her actions, making them regular withoutenergy and correct without feeling.In the present instance, she seemed to look upon the task which Paulinehad undertaken as a thing which ought to be done, and therefore that nodoubt or hesitation of any kind could remain upon her mind. She talkedcalmly of all the difficulties and dangers which presented themselves,and of the best means of obviating them; but did not offer the leastconsolation to the fears of a young and inexperienced girl, who hadtaken upon herself a bold and perilous enterprise, in which her ownhappiness was at stake, as well as the lives and fortunes of others. Theindifferent coolness with which she spoke of risks and obstacles was farfrom reassuring Pauline, who soon dropped the conversation, and sinkinginto herself, revolved all the circumstances in her mind; her heartsometimes beating high with hope, sometimes sickening at the thought offailure.Thus in silence the travellers proceeded to Ecouen, where, from thelateness of the hour, they were obliged to pass the night; but leavingit early the next morning, they reached Paris in a short time, andalighted at the hotel of the Marchioness de Senecy. That Lady, itappeared, was absent, having left Paris some time before for a distantpart of the country; but this was no disadvantage, as Mademoiselle deHauteford was well known to the servants that remained in the house, andshe did not in the least hesitate to take up her abode there on theservice of the Queen, though the mistress of the mansion herself wasabsent.At Ecouen, Pauline had dressed herself in the clothes of her maidLouise, and on alighting at the hotel de Senecy, was taken by theservants for the soubrette of Mademoiselle de Hauteford. All this wasto her wish; and not a little delighted with the first success of herdisguise, she affected the ton paysan, and treated the domestics withthe same familiarity which they showed towards her.An old and confidential servant of the Queen was the only male attendantwho accompanied them to Paris, and he took especial care not toundeceive the others in regard to Mademoiselle de Beaumont's rank,though he had more than once nearly betrayed the secret by smiling atthe Lady's maid airs which Pauline contrived to assume. This task,however, was not of long duration; for Pauline's anxiety would notsuffer her to remain inactive, and she accordingly pressed her companionto set out speedily for the Bastille, afraid that under any long delayher courage, which she felt to be failing every moment, might give wayentirely, and that she might at length prove unequal to accomplish herundertaking.Mademoiselle de Hauteford, whose acquaintance with the city qualifiedher to act as guide, readily agreed to proceed immediately on theirexpedition; and Pauline's disguise as soubrette not permitting her tomake use of a mask like her companion, she covered her head as far asshe could with a large capuchin of brown tafetas, which, however, wasall-insufficient to conceal her face. This being done, she followed theLady of honour into the street, and in a moment found herself immersedin all the bustle and confusion of the capital.Poor Pauline's senses were almost bewildered by the crowd; butMademoiselle de Hauteford, leaning on her arm, hurried her on as far asthe Rue St. Antoine, where she stopped opposite to the Church of St.Gervais, or rather the narrow dirty street which leads towards it.Here she directed Pauline straight on to the Bastille, and pointing outthe church, told her that she would wait there for her return, offeringup prayers for the success of her enterprise.The magnificent peristyle of the Church of St. Gervais, which thecelebrated De Brosse is said to have pronounced the most perfect of hisworks,--observing, like Solon on the Athenian Laws, that it was not,indeed, the best that could be formed, but the best that could beadapted to the old gothic building which he was directed toimprove,--was then in the first gloss of its novelty, and amongst themany sombre smoky buildings that she had passed, offered to Pauline'seye a bright and conspicuous landmark, which she felt sure she could notmistake. She took, however, another glance, and then hurried on towardsthe Bastille.Totally ignorant of Paris and all that it contained; young, beautifuland timid; engaged in an undertaking full of danger and difficulty, anddressed in a manner to which she was unaccustomed; Pauline de Beaumontshrank from the glance of the numerous passengers that thronged the RueSt. Antoine; and every eye which, attracted by her loveliness, or by thefrightened haste with which she proceeded, gazed on her with more thancommon attention, she fancied could see into her bosom, and read thesecret she was so anxious to conceal.At length, however, her eye rested on a group of heavy towers,presenting nothing but massy stone walls, pierced with loop-holes, andsurmounted at various distances with embrasures, through the aperture ofwhich the threatening mouths of some large cannon were occasionallyvisible. Sweeping round this gloomy building was a broad fosse filledwith water, which prevented all approach but at one particular point,where a drawbridge, suspended by two immense chains, gave access to theouter court. But even here no small precaution was taken to guardagainst any who came in other than friendly guise; for the gate whichterminated the bridge on the inner side, besides the security affordedby its ponderous doors and barricadoes, possessed two flanking-towers,the artillery of which commanded the whole course of the approach.Pauline had often heard the Bastille described, and its horrorsdetailed, by the guests who occasionally visited her mother's chteau inLanguedoc; but, whatever idea she had formed of it, the frowningstrength and gloomy horrors which the original presented, far outdid thepicture her imagination had drawn; and so strong was the sensation offear which it produced upon her mind, that she had nearly turned backand run away the moment she beheld it. An instant's reflection, however,reawakened her courage."Claude de Blenau," she thought, "immured within those walls! and do Ihesitate when his life, perhaps, depends upon my exertion?" That thoughtwas enough to recall all her resolution; and rapidly crossing thedrawbridge, she passed what is called the grille. But here her fartherprogress was stayed by a massy door covered with plates and studs ofiron, which offered none of those happy contrivances either of modernor ancient days, by which people within are called upon to communicatewith people without. There was no horn, as in the days of chivalry, andif there had been, Pauline could not have blown it; but still worse,there was neither bell nor knocker; and the door, far from imitating thegates of Dis, in standing open night and day, seemed most determinatelyshut, although the comparison might have held in many other respects.With shaking knees and trembling hands Pauline tried for some moments togain admission, but in vain. The gate resisted all her weak efforts, hervoice was scarcely audible, and vexed, wearied, and terrified, and notknowing what to do, she burst into a flood of tears.At about a hundred yards on the other side of the fosse, forming onecorner of the Rue St. Antoine, on the face of which it seemed a wart, orimposthume, stood a little narrow house of two stories high, the frontof which displayed an immense board covered with a curious andremarkable device. This represented no other than the form of animmense wild boar, with a napkin tucked under his chin, seated at atable, on which smoked various savoury dishes, of which the aboveferocious gentleman appeared to be partaking with a very wild-boarishappetite. Underneath all was written, in characters of such a size thatthose who ran might read, Au Sanglier Gourmand, and then followed afarther inscription, which went to state that Jacques Chatpilleur,autrefois Vivandier de l'Arme de Perpignan,  present AubergisteTraiteur, fed the hungry, and gave drink to those that thirsted, at allhours of the day and night.Every one will allow that this man must have been blessed with acharitable disposition; and it so happened that, standing at his owndoor, with his heart opened by the benign influence of having cooked adinner for the Count de Blenau, he beheld the ineffectual efforts ofPauline de Beaumont to gain admission into the Bastille.The poor little man's heart was really moved; and skipping across thedrawbridge, he was at her side in a moment. "What seek you, charmantedemoiselle?" demanded the aubergiste, making her a low bow; and thenobserving her tears, he added, "Ma pauvre fille, do not weep. Do youwish to get in here?""Yes, indeed," replied Pauline; "but I cannot make them hear.""There are many who want to get out, who cannot make them hear either,"said the aubergiste: "but they shall hear me, at all events." Sosaying, he drew forth his knife, with a flourish which made Paulinestart back, and applied the handle with such force to the gate of theprison, that the whole place echoed with the blows. Immediately, alittle wicket was opened, and the head of a surly-looking Porterpresented itself at the aperture."Philip the Woodman! Philip the Woodman!" said he, as soon as he heardPauline's inquiries. "Who is he, I wonder? We have nothing to do withwoodmen here. Oh, I remember the man. And we are to break through allrules and regulations for him, I suppose? But I can tell MonsieurChavigni, or whoever gave the order, that I shall not turn the key forany one except at proper hours; so you cannot see him now, youngwoman--you cannot see him now.""And is not this a proper hour?" asked Pauline. "I thought mid-day wasthe best time I could come.""No!" answered the Porter, "I tell you no, my pretty demoiselle; this isthe dinner-hour, so you must come again.""When can I come then, Sir?" demanded Pauline, "for I have journeyed along way to see him.""Why, then you are in need of rest," replied the other, "so you will beall the better for waiting till evening. Come about seven o'clock, andyou shall see him.""Cannot I see him before that?" asked the young lady, terrified at thedelay."No! no! no!" roared the Porter, and turned to shut the wicket; butbethinking him for a moment, he called after Mademoiselle deBeaumont--"Who shall I tell him wants him, when I see him?"Pauline was unprepared with an answer, but the necessity of the momentmade her reply, "His daughter;" trusting that, as there must be someunderstanding between him and De Blenau, the Woodman would conceive hererrand, and not betray any surprise, whether he had a daughter or not.During this conversation, the aubergiste had remained hard by, reallycompassionating Pauline's disappointment."Ma pauvre fille," said he, as the wicket closed, "I am very sorrythat they treat you so; but they are great brutes in these prisons. BonDieu! you look very pale. Come in with me here to my little place, andtake some soup, and rest yourself till the time comes round."Pauline thanked him for his offer, but declined it, of course; tellinghim, that she was going to the house of a friend who waited for her; andthen taking leave of the good aubergiste, she left him interested inher sorrow, and enchanted by her sweet manner."La pauvrette!" said he, as he turned him home, "Elle a bien l'aird'une femme de qualit a. Il y a quelque chose la dessous, ou je metrompe."In the mean while, Pauline returned to the Church of St. Gervais, whereshe found Mademoiselle de Hauteford still on her knees in the Chapel ofSt. Denis.Pauline's recital of what had happened, called forth but few remarksfrom her companion, who only observed, that seven would be an unpleasanthour, for that by that time night began to fall. To Mademoiselle deBeaumont, however, night seemed more favourable to her enterprise thanday, when the trepidation which she felt was visible to every passingeye; and she congratulated herself on the prospect of the darknesscovering the agitation which might lead to suspicion if observed.I shall not follow the two ladies through the remaining part of theday. Suffice it, that Mademoiselle de Hauteford employed herself inpreparations for the long journey which the Cardinal's sentence ofbanishment required her to take, and that Pauline's time passed inanxiety and apprehension, till the hour came for her once more to visitthe Bastille.As soon as the long hand upon the dial pointed towards the Romancapitals IX. and the shorter one to VII. the two ladies set out in thesame guise, and on the same route, as in the morning, with only thisdifference in their proceedings, that the old domestic of the Queen, whohad accompanied them to Paris, received orders to follow at a few pacesdistance, well armed with sword and pistol.It was now quite dark, and the streets not being so crowded as when shebefore passed through them, Pauline proceeded more calmly, except whenthe torch-bearers of some of the gay world of Paris flashed theirflambeaux in her eyes as they lighted their lords along to party orspectacle. At the Church of St. Gervais she again left Mademoiselle deHauteford with the servant; and now, well acquainted with the way, ranlightly along till she arrived at the Bastille, where, not giving herresolution time to fail, she passed the drawbridge, and entered theouter gate, which was at that moment open. Before her stood the figureof the Porter, enjoying the cool evening air that blew through the opengate into the court. His hand rested upon the edge of the door, and themoment Pauline entered, he pushed it to with a clang that made her heartsink."Whom have we here," said he, "that comes in so boldly? Oh, so! is ityou, ma belle demoiselle?" he continued, as the light of the lanternswhich hung under the arch fell upon her countenance:--"well, you shallsee your father now. But first, I think, you had better go and speak tothe Governor; he is a man of taste, and would like such a prettyprisoner, no doubt; perhaps he might find a warrant for your detention."Pauline's heart sank at the idea of being carried before the Governor,well knowing how little competent she was to answer any inquiriesconcerning her errand; but the excess of fear will often give courage,and the most timid animals turn and resist when pressed to extremity.Thus Pauline summoned up all her resolution, and remembering theallusion which the Porter had made to Chavigni's orders in favour of theWoodman, she replied boldly: "This is no time for jesting, Sir! and asto detaining me, it would be as much as the Governor's post is worth, ifit came to Monsieur de Chavigni's ears that he ever thought of such athing.""So, so!" cried the Porter with a grin, "you are a friend of Monsieur deChavigni's. So--I thought there was something made him so careful of yonsour old Woodman. These great Statesmen must have their littlerelaxations. So that is it, Mademoiselle? He takes especial care of thefather for the daughter's sake."There was a drop or two of the warm blood of Languedoc flowing inPauline's veins with all her gentleness, and her patience now becamecompletely exhausted. "Well, Sir!" she answered, "all I have to say toyou is, that if I meet with any insolence, it may cost you dear. Sobring me to see my father, or refuse me at once.""I am not going to refuse you, my pretty demoiselle," replied thePorter; "though, truly, you speak more like a lady of quality than aWoodman's daughter. Now I'll swear you are Madame la Comtesse'ssuivante. Nay, do not toss your head so impatiently; your father willbe here in a minute; he knows of your having called at the wicket thismorning, and is to come here to see you at seven--But here is theGovernor, as I live--going to take a twilight walk, I suppose."As he spoke, the Governor approached: "Whom have you got here, porter?"he asked, while he eyed Pauline with one of those cool luxurious glancesthat made her shrink."This is the Woodman's daughter, Sir," replied the man, "who wishes tospeak with her father.""By the keys of St. Peter! which are something in my own way," exclaimedthe Governor, "thou art a beautiful daughter for a Woodman. Art thousure thy mother did not help thee to a better parentage? What is thyfather's name?"Terrified, confused, and ignorant of the Woodman's name, Paulinefaltered forth, unconscious of what she said, "I do not know.""Ha! ha! ha! thou sayest well, my pretty damsel," cried the Governorlaughing, and thinking that she answered his jest in kind. "It is a wisefather that knows his own child; and why not a wise child that knows hisown father? But without a joke, what is your supposed father's name?""My supposed father!" repeated Pauline, in the same state ofperturbation; "Oh, Philip the Woodman.""Nay, nay," replied the Governor, "that does not answer my meaningeither. What is the surname of this Philip the Woodman?"The impossibility of answering overpowered her. Pauline had not the mostremote idea of Philip's name, and another instant would indubitably havebetrayed all; but at the moment the Governor asked his question, Philiphad entered the court. He had heard the last sentence, saw Pauline'sembarrassment, and divining its cause, with quick presence of mindcaught her in his arms, and kissed her on both cheeks, with that sort offatherly affection which would have deceived the Governor's eyes by day,much less by the fainter light of the lanterns in the archway."My dear child!" cried he, "how art thou? and how is thy mother?" Andthen turning to the Governor, without giving her time to reply, he wenton, "My name, Sir, which you were asking but now, is Philip Grissolles,but I am better known by the name of Philip the Woodman, and some folksadd the name of the wood, and call me Philip the Woodman of Mantes.""Philip Grissolles!" said the Governor; "very well, that will do. It wasyour surname that I wished to know, for it is not put down in the orderfor your detention, and it must be inserted in the books. And now,Monsieur Philip Grissolles, you may take your daughter to your cell; butremember that you have to wait upon the Count de Blenau in half an hour,by which time I shall have returned. You can leave your daughter in yourcell till you have done attending the Count, if you like."He then proceeded to the gate, and beckoning to the Porter, he whisperedto him, "Do not let her go out till I come back. It is seldom that wehave any thing like that in the Bastille! Doubtless, that Woodman wouldbe glad to have her with him; if so, we will find her a cell."Philip turned his ear to catch what the Governor was saying, but notbeing able to hear it distinctly, he addressed himself to Pauline loudenough to reach every one round. "Come," said he, "ma fille, you arefrightened at all these towers and walls and places; but it is not sounpleasant after one is in it either. Take my arm, and I'll show you theway."Pauline was glad to accept of his offer, for her steps faltered so muchthat she could hardly have proceeded without assistance; and thus,leaning on the Woodman, she was slowly conducted through a great manynarrow passages, to the small vaulted chamber in which he was lodged.As soon as they had entered, the Woodman shut the door, and placing forPauline's use the only chair that the room contained, he began to pourforth a thousand excuses for the liberty he had taken with her cheek. "Ihope you will consider, Mademoiselle, that there was no other way for meto act, in order to bring us out of the bad job we had fallen into. ThePorter of the prison told me this morning that my daughter was comingto see me, and knowing very well I had no daughter, I guessed that itwas some one on the Count de Blenau's account; but little did I thinkthat it was you, Mademoiselle--you that I saw in the wood of Mantes onthe day he was wounded."Pauline was still too much agitated with all that had passed to make anyreply, and sitting with her hands pressed over her eyes, her thoughtswere all confusion, though one terrible remembrance still predominated,that she was there--in the very heart of the Bastille--far from allthose on whom she was accustomed to rely--habited in a disguise foreignto her rank--acting an assumed character, and engaged in an enterpriseof life and death.All this was present to her, not so much as a thought, but as a feeling;and for a moment or two it deprived her not only of utterance, but ofreflection. As her mind grew more calm, however, the great object forwhich she came began again to recover the ascendency; and she graduallyregained sufficient command over her ideas to comprehend the nature ofthe excuses which Philip was still offering for his presumption, as hetermed it."You did perfectly right," replied Pauline; "and, having extricated usfrom a dangerous predicament, merit my sincere thanks. But now," shecontinued, "without loss of time I must see the Count de Blenau.""See the Count de Blenau!" exclaimed Philip in astonishment."Impossible, Mademoiselle! utterly impossible! I can deliver a letter ora message; but that is all I can do.""Why not?" demanded Pauline. "For pity's sake, do not trifle with me. Ifyou have free admission to his prison, why cannot you open the way tome?""Because, Mademoiselle, there is a sentinel at his door who would notallow you to pass," replied Philip. "I have no wish to trifle with you,indeed; but what you ask is merely impossible."Pauline thought for a moment. "Cannot we bribe the sentinel?" shedemanded. "Here is gold.""That is not to be done either," answered Philip. "He is not allowed tospeak to any one, or any one to speak to him. The first word, his fusilwould be at my breast; and the second, he would fire: such are hisorders, Mademoiselle, and be sure he would obey them.""Well then," cried Pauline, "fly to the Count de Blenau, tell him thatthere is a lady here from the Queen, with a letter which she must nottrust to any one else, and ask him what is to be done--but do not staylong, for I am afraid of remaining here by myself."The Woodman promised not to be a moment, and hastened to the Count deBlenau's apartment, where the wary sentinel, as usual, examined him wellto ascertain his identity before he gave him admission. He then enteredand communicated as rapidly as possible to De Blenau the message he hadreceived."It is Mademoiselle de Hauteford, without doubt," said De Blenauthoughtfully; "I must see her by all means.""See her, Sir!" exclaimed Philip. "The guard will never let her pass. Itis quite impossible.""Not so impossible as you think. The gates of the inner court do notshut, I think, till nearly nine--Is there any one in the court?""No one, Sir," answered the Woodman; "all the State prisoners werelocked up at six.""Well then, Philip," proceeded De Blenau, "do you know a small tower inthe court, where you just see through the archway part of an old flightof steps?""Oh yes, I know it well," replied Philip. "The tower is never used now,they tell me. There is a heap of rubbish in the doorway.""Exactly," said the Count. "Now, my good Philip, bring the lady with allspeed to that tower, and up the old flight of steps till you come to asmall iron door: push that with your hand, and you will find that itbrings you into the inner room, where I will wait for you."Philip's joy and astonishment found vent in three Bon Dieu's! andthree Est-il possible's and rushing away without more loss of time, heflew to Pauline, whose stay in his cell had been undisturbed by anything but her own anxious fears. These, however, magnified every soundinto the approach of some one to be dreaded. Even the footstep of theWoodman made her heart beat with alarm; but the news he brought far morethan compensated for it, and, inspired with new hope, she followed himgladly through the gloomy passages which led to the inner court.The darkness which pervaded the unlighted avenues of the Bastille was sogreat, that Pauline was obliged to follow close upon Philip's footstepsfor fear of losing her way. The Woodman, however, was a little inadvance, when a faint light showed that they were approaching the openair, and Pauline began to catch an indistinct glimpse of the darktowers that surrounded the inner court. But at that moment Philip drewback:--"There is some one in the court," he whispered: "Hark!"--andlistening, she clearly heard the sound of measured steps crossing theopen space before her."It is the guard," said the Woodman, in the same low voice; "they aregoing to relieve the sentinel at the Count's door." He now waited tillthey were heard ascending the stairs, and then, "Quick, follow me acrossthe court, Mademoiselle," he said; "for they go through this passage ontheir return."Pauline was about to follow him as he desired, but her dress caught uponone of the staples of the doorway. Philip attempted to disentangle itfor her, but in vain, his efforts only fixed it the more. Paulineherself tried to tear it away, but the soubrette's stout serge-dresswould not tear. In the mean time they heard the "Qui vive?" of thesentinel, the countersign returned, the relief of the guard; and by thetime that Philip had by main strength torn away the dress from thestaple that had caught it, the steps of the soldiers were again hearddescending the staircase from the prison of De Blenau."For God's sake, Mademoiselle," whispered the Woodman, "run back asquickly as you can to my cell, for we cannot pass now without theirseeing us. I will wait here, for they would hear my heavy feet in thepassage, and follow us both; but if I can stop them a while, I will, togive you time."Pauline doubted not that she could remember the turnings, and, glidingalong as fast as possible, she endeavoured to find her way back. As shewent, she heard some words pass between Philip and the guard; andimmediately after, she distinguished that they had entered the passage,for the echoing tramp of their feet, reverberated by the low arches,seemed following close upon her. Terrified and agitated, she flew onwith the speed of lightning. But we all know how difficult it is toretrace any course we have pursued in the dark; and in her haste andconfusion, Pauline lost the turning she ought to have taken, and, afraidof going back, even after she discovered her mistake, she paused for amoment in a state of alarm and suspense, little short of agony.She could now distinctly hear the guard approaching, and not knowingwhere the passage might terminate, or what might obstruct the path, shefelt her way with her hand along the wall, till at length she discovereda small recess, apparently one of those archways which gave entrance tothe various cells, for beneath her fingers she felt the massy bolts andfastenings which secured it from without. She had scarce a moment tothink, but, placing herself under the arch, she drew back as far aspossible, in the hope that sheltered by the recess, and concealed by thedarkness, the guard would pass her by unnoticed.It was a dreadful moment for poor Pauline. The soldiers were not so nearas the echoes of the place had led her to imagine; and she had severalminutes to wait, holding her breath, and drawing herself in, as if tonothing, while the tramp of the armed feet came nearer and nearer, tillat length she felt, or fancied that she felt, their clothes brushagainst her as they passed; and then heard their steps becoming fainterand more faint as they proceeded to some other part of the building.It was not till all was again silent, that Pauline ventured, stilltrembling with the danger she had just escaped, to seek once more thepath she had lost in her terror. But her search was now in vain; she hadentirely forgot the turnings that she had taken in her flight, and inthe darkness only went wandering on from one passage to another,starting at every sound, and always convinced that she was mistaken, butnot knowing in what direction to seek the right.At length, however, she found herself at a gateway which led into whatseemed an open court, and imagining from the towers she saw round about,that she had arrived once more at the spot from which she had beenfrightened by the approach of the guards, she resolved again to seekmore cautiously the cell of the Woodman, to which, of course, he wouldreturn in search of her. But as she turned to put this resolve inexecution, she perceived a light coming down the passage towards her;and without giving herself a moment to reflect that it might possibly bethe Woodman himself, fear seized her again, and darting across thecourt, she looked round for some place of concealment.Exactly opposite, she perceived another archway similar to the one shehad left, and concealing herself within it, she paused to see who it wasthat followed, it just occurring to her mind at that instant, thatperhaps she was in full career away from the very person she wished tofind. But, the moment after, the light appeared in the archway, andglancing on the face of the man who carried it, discovered to her thefeatures of the Governor.This sight was not calculated to allay her fears; but her alarm wasinfinitely increased when she perceived that he began crossing the courttowards the spot where she stood. Flight again became her resource, and,turning to escape through the passages to which she supposed thatarchway led, as well as the others, she struck her foot against somesteps and had nearly fallen. Recovering herself, however, without lossof time she began ascending the steps that lay before her, nor stopped,till reaching a small landing-place, she looked through one of theloopholes in the wall, and beheld the Governor directing his course toanother part of the building.Satisfied that he did not follow her, but faint and out of breath withthe speed she had employed in her flight, Pauline paused for a moment'srepose; and stretching out her hand, she leaned against a door whichstood at the top of the staircase:--however, it afforded her no support,for the moment she touched it, it gave way under her hand, and flyingopen, discovered to her a well-lighted apartment. New terror seized uponPauline; her eyes were dazzled by the sudden glare, and drawing back shewould have fallen headlong down the stairs, but at that instant she wascaught in the arms of De Blenau.CHAPTER IX.Which gets Pauline out, and Philip in, and leaves De Blenau in themiddle.The tumult of joy and surprise--the mutual explanations--the delight ofDe Blenau--the relief to Pauline--with the thousand little et-ceteraof such a meeting, I must leave to the reader's imagination, which willdoubtless do much more justice to every circumstance than could thequill of a foolish bird such as I hold in my hand. Neither shall Idilate upon the surprise of Philip the woodman, when, on coming toinform De Blenau that he had lost the lady in the windings of theBastille, he discovered that she had found her way to the object of hersearch without his sage guidance. One piece of information, however, heconveyed, which hurried their conference towards a conclusion. TheGovernor, he said, who had been absent, had returned, and was thenengaged in visiting the western wards; and therefore he might be shortlyexpected in that part of the prison.This unpalatable news reminded Pauline to deliver the letter from theQueen, which in the joy and agitation of their first meeting she hadneglected to do. De Blenau looked it over with a hurried glance. "Shecommands me," said he, "to confess all exactly as it occurred; but onone or two points I have already refused to answer, and if I do so nowwithout producing the Queen's warrant for my conduct, I shall be held abase coward, who betrays his trust for fear of the torture.""And do you hesitate, Claude?" demanded Pauline, ratherreproachfully--"do you hesitate to take the only means which can saveyou? Do you think nothing of what I feel? You, Claude, may be proofagainst corporeal torture; but I can not endure much longer the mentalagony I have suffered since you have been confined here, especially whenI reflected that even while you were acting most nobly, I was suspectingyou ungenerously. If you love me as you profess, dear Claude, you willtake the means that the Queen directs to ensure your safety.""Well, dearest Pauline," replied De Blenau, yielding to theall-persuasive eloquence of woman's lips, "I will do as you wish, andendeavour to pursue such measures as will be both safe and honourable.But now conclude what you were telling me, of having lost yourself inthe prison, and how you found your way hither."It may be necessary to explain, that while this conversation had takenplace between De Blenau and Pauline in the inner apartment, Philip thewoodman had remained in the outer chamber, keeping watch with his earto the door which communicated with the staircase, in order to apprisethem in time of the Governor's approach. Pauline now had not time toconclude her little history of perilous escapes and dangers ere Philipentering from the outer chamber interrupted her: "Fly down the stairs,Mademoiselle," cried he, "and wait at the bottom till I join you. TheGovernor is coming, for I hear other steps on the stairs as well asthose of the sentinel at the top."Prisons are not places for great ceremonies, nor for all the mightydelicacies of general society; so Pauline suffered De Blenau to presshis lips upon hers unreproved, and then fled down the back staircasewith the speed of light; after which the Count shut and bolted the irondoor, and passed into the outer chamber, while the Woodman bustled aboutin the inner one, arranging the Count's apparel for the night, andappearing much more busy than he really was.Thus every thing was as it should be when the Governor entered; butstill there was an angry spot upon his brow, and with but a slightinclination to De Blenau, he looked through the door between the twochambers, saying, "Well, Mr. Woodman of Mantes, where is your daughter?She is not in your cell.""You have made sure of that in person, I suppose," replied Philip, inhis usual surly manner."Whether I have or not," answered the Governor, "does but littlesignify. I ask where is your daughter? We must have no strangerswandering about the Bastille.""I know my child's beauty as well as you do, Monsieur," replied Philip,"and was too wise to leave her in my cell, where every one that chosewould have liberty and time to affront her, while I was attending uponMonsieur le Comte here: so I made her come with me, and set her underthe archway of the old tower to wait till I was done. Now, if Monsieurhas done with me, I will go and conduct her to the outer gate, andnever with my will shall she set her foot within these walls again.""I have no farther need of you to-night, Philip," said De Blenau, as theWoodman stood at the door ready to depart; and then seeing that theGovernor turned to follow him out, he added, "Monsieur le Gouverneur,will you sup with me this evening?"Philip quitted the room, but the Governor was obliged to stay to reply."With pleasure, Sir, with pleasure," said he. "I will be back with youimmediately, before my servant brings the plates; but I must first takethe liberty of seeing this demoiselle out of the prison gates." He thenleft De Blenau, and having bolted the door, followed the Woodman quicklydown the steps. Philip, however, had gained so much upon him, that hehad time to whisper to Pauline, whom he found waiting in the archway:"The Governor is coming, but do not be alarmed. Let him think that Ibade you wait for me here till I had attended the Count."Pauline, however, could not help being alarmed. While the excitement ofher enterprise had continued, it afforded a false sort of courage, whichcarried her through; but now that her object was gained, all her nativetimidity returned, and she thought of encountering the Governor againwith fear and trembling. Nor had she much time to recall her spiritsbefore he himself joined them."Well, my fair demoiselle," he cried, "I think if I had known that youwere waiting here all alone in the dark, I should have paid you avisit;" and he raised the lamp close to Pauline's face, which was aspale as death. "Why, you look as terrified," proceeded the Governor, "asif you had been committing murder. Well, I will light you out, and whenyou come to-morrow, you will not be so frightened. At what hour do youcome, eh?""I desire that you would not come at all," said Philip aloud, as hefollowed the Governor, who was escorting Pauline along with an air ofgallantry and badinage which did not at all set off his thin demurefeatures to advantage, especially in the unbecoming light of the lampthat flickered upon them but at intervals, tipping all the acute anglesof his countenance with not the most agreeable hue. "I desire that youwould not come at all: you have been here once too often already. Letyour brother Charles come the next time."The Governor darted a glance at Philip, which certainly evinced that hisface could take on, when it liked, an expression of hatred, malice, andall uncharitableness; and in a minute or two after, by some means, thelamp went out in his hands. "Here, Philip," cried he, "take the lamp,and get a light.""Your pardon, Sir," answered the sturdy Woodman; "not till I have seenmy daughter beyond the gates.""Philip Grissolles, or Philip the Woodman, or whatever you callyourself," cried the Governor, "are you mad? Do you know what you areabout? Go and fetch me a light instantly, or refuse me at your peril.""I do refuse then," replied the Woodman, who had learned by conversationwith the Porter and turnkeys, how much power the Governor had placed inhis hands by permitting him to attend upon the Count de Blenau; "I amyour prisoner, Sir," he continued, "but not your servant.""I have allowed you to act as such in the prison," said the Governor,"and there are no servants here but mine.""In suffering me to attend upon the Count de Blenau," rejoined Philipboldly, "you have outstepped your duty, and broken the express order ofthe Cardinal. So much have I learned since I came here--therefore allowmy daughter to depart quietly, Sir. We shall find a light in thePorter's room.""By Heavens! I have a mind to detain the girl all night, for yourinsolence," cried the Governor, stamping with rage."Oh, for God's sake do not!" exclaimed Pauline, clasping her hands; butPhilip came close up to him,--"You dare not," said he, in a low voice;"for your head, you dare not." And then added aloud to Pauline, "Comealong, my child; Monsieur le Gouverneur will let you out."During this altercation they had continued to proceed; and the Governor,knowing that his violation of the Cardinal's commands with regard to thestrict confinement of De Blenau, might bring his head to the block ifsifted thoroughly, thought it best to abstain from irritating a personwho not only possessed, but knew that he possessed, so much power. Notthat he would not willingly have silenced the Woodman by some of thoseinfallible means which were much resorted to in that day; but that heknew Chavigni was not easily satisfied on such points; and thus beingin a situation which is popularly expressed by "the horns of adilemma," like a good Christian as he was, he chose rather to riskdiscovery than commit a murder which would undoubtedly be found out.Under these circumstances, he permitted Philip and Pauline to proceed tothe gates, and ordered the Porter to give the young lady egress, takingcare, however, to follow them all the way till they arrived at the lastgate opening upon the drawbridge, which, at the time they arrived, hadnot been yet raised for the evening.Pauline's heart beat with glad impatience as the Janitor put his keyinto the lock, whose bolt grating harshly, as it was withdrawn, producedto her ears most excellent music.It so unfortunately happened, however, that at the moment the gate swungheavily back upon its hinges, Charles, the Woodman's son, presentedhimself for admission; and having before had free access to his father,was proceeding calmly through the open door, without taking any noticeof Mademoiselle de Beaumont, whom he did not recognize in her disguise."What!" exclaimed the Governor, whose Bastille habits rendered him quickto the slightest suspicion; "do you not speak to your sister?""Sister!" said the boy, confounded; "I have no sister!"Pauline saw that in another moment all would be lost; and darting pastthe Governor, she was through the gate, and over the drawbridge in amoment."Nom de Dieu!" cried the Governor: "Follow her, Letrames!--quick,quick!"The Turnkey was on Pauline's footsteps in a minute; but she had gainedso much in the first instance, that she would certainly have escapedwith ease, if an envious stone had not obstructed her path at the bottomof the glacis, and striking her foot, occasioned her to fall. Paulineuttered a scream of both pain and fear; and two steps would have broughtthe Turnkey to the spot where she lay, when suddenly a small,strange-shaped figure in white, skipped over her prostrate form, andinterposed between her and her pursuer."Ventre Saint Gris!" cried the redoubtable Jacques Chatpilleur,cuisinier aubergiste, who thus came to her assistance--"You shall nottouch her!" and drawing the long rapier that hung beside hiscarving-knife, he made a pass so near the breast of the Turnkey, thatthe official started back full ten paces, not knowing, in the dim lightof the hour, what hobgoblin shape thus crossed his purpose. "Maraud!"continued the aubergiste, "Who are you that dare to injure thisdemoiselle? under the very walls of the Bastille, too, contrary to thepeace and quiet of His Majesty's true subjects! Get thee gone! or I willspit thee like a chapon de maine, or rather skewer thee like anortolan under the wings."This professional allusion, together with a moment's reflection,enabled Letrames, the turnkey, to call to mind the ancien vivandier;and showering upon him a thousand harsh epithets for his interference,he called upon him to stand aside, and let him secure his prisoner;still, however, standing aloof from the point of the weapon,--forJacques Chatpilleur, while vivandier to the army, had shown that hecould gather laurels with his sword, as well as with his knife; and hadas often, to use Sancho's expression, given his enemies a bellyfull ofdry blows, as he had filled his friends with more dainty fare; with thisdifference, however, that the drubbings he bestowed gratis.In the present instance, he either did not, or would not, know theTurnkey; and continued vociferating to him to hold off, and tell who hewas, with such reiteration, that for some time the other had noopportunity of replying. At length, however, he roared, rather thansaid, "Jacques Diable! you know me well enough; I am Letrames,Golier au chteau."The aubergiste looked over his shoulder, and seeing that Pauline wasno longer visible, he very quietly put up his rapier, saying, "Mais monDieu! mon ami, why did you not tell me that before? Je vous en demandemille pardons;" and seizing the Turnkey in his arms, he embraced him,making a thousand excuses for having mistaken him, and hugging him witha sort of malicious affection, which quite put a stop to his pursuit ofPauline.The only benediction that the gaoler thought proper to bestow on thelittle aubergiste, was a thousand curses, struggling all the time tofree himself from the serpent folds of Chatpilleur's embrace. But it wasnot till the aubergiste had completely satisfied himself, that hesuffered Letrames to escape, and then very composedly offered to assisthim in the pursuit, which he well knew would now be ineffectual.The darkness of the night had prevented this scene from being visiblefrom the gates of the Bastille, and Letrames, on his return to theprison, was too wise to complain of the conduct of our friendChatpilleur; a vivandier at the gates of the Bastille being much tooconvenient an acquaintance to be quarrelled with upon trifles.During his absence, the wrath of the Governor turned upon Philip thewoodman. "What is the meaning of this? Villain!" exclaimed he, "this isnone of your daughter! Fouchard! La Heuterie!" he called aloud to someof his satellites--"quick! bring me a set of irons! we shall soon hearwho this is, Monsieur Philip Grissoles!""You will never hear any thing from me more than you know already,"replied Philip; "so put what irons on me you like. But you had betterbeware, Sir Governor; those that meddle with pitch will stick theirfingers. You do not know what you may bring upon your head.""Silence, fool!" cried the Governor, in a voice that made the archwayring; "you know not what you have brought upon your ownhead.--Fouchard! La Heuterie! I say, why are you so long? Oh, here youcome at last. Now secure that fellow, and down with him to one of theblack dungeons!--Porter, turn that young viper out," he continued,pointing to Charles, who stood trembling and weeping by his father'sside; "Turn him out, I say!--we will have no more of these traitors thanwe have occasion for."At the word the dark dungeon, Philip's courage had almost failed him,and it was not without an effort that he kept his sturdy limbs frombetraying his emotion, while the gaolers began to place the irons on hiswrists and ancles: but when he heard the order to drive forth his son,he made a strong effort and caught the boy in his arms: "God bless you,Charles! God bless you, my boy! and fear not for me," he exclaimed,"while there is a Power above."It was a momentary solace to embrace his child, but the Porter soon torethe boy from his arms, and pushing him through the gate closed it afterhim, rejoicing that he should no more have to turn the key for any ofthe Woodman's family. "Now," said he, "now we shall have no moretrouble; I hate to see all our good old rules and regulations brokenthrough. I dare say if his Eminence the Cardinal--God protect him!--wereto follow this Monsieur Chavigni's advice, we should have every thingout of order; and all the good store of chains and irons here in thelodge would get rusty for want of use.""Peace, peace!" cried the Governor: "La Heuterie, take that fellow down,as I told you. He shall have the question to-morrow, and we shall see ifhe finds that so easy to bear. Away with him, quick!--A fool I was to beso deceived!--I suspected something when she stammered so about herfather's name." So saying, he turned to hear the report of Letrames, whoat that moment returned from his unsuccessful pursuit of Pauline.In the mean while, the gaolers led Philip, who moved with difficulty inhis heavy irons, across the first and second court, and opening a lowdoor in the western tower displayed to his sight a flight of stepsleading down to the lower dungeons. At this spot La Heuterie, who seemedsuperior in rank to his fellow-turnkey, lighted a torch that he hadbrought with him at his companion's lantern, and descending to thebottom of the steps, held it up on high to let Philip see his way down.The Woodman shuddered as he gazed at the deep gloomy chasm whichpresented itself but half seen by the glare of the torch, the light ofwhich glancing upon the wall in different places, showed its green dampand ropy slime, without offering any definite limit to the dark andfearful vacuity. But he had no time to make any particular remark, forthe second gaoler, who stood at his side, rudely forced him on; anddescending the slippy stone steps, he found himself in a large longvault, paved with round stones, and filled with heavy subterranean air,which at first made the torch burn dim, and took away the Woodman'sbreath. As the light, however, spread slowly through the thick darkness,he could perceive three doors on either hand, which he conceived to giveentrance to some of those under-ground dungeons, whose intrinsic horror,as well as the fearful uses to which they were often applied, had givena terrific fame to the name of the Bastille, and rendered it moredreaded than any other prison in France.During this time they had paused a moment, moving the torch slowlyabout, as if afraid that it would be extinguished by the damp, but whenthe flame began to rise again, La Heuterie desired his companion tobring the prisoner to number six, and proceeding to the extremity of thevault, they opened the farthest door on the left, which led into a lowdamp cell, cold, narrow, and unfurnished, the very abode of horror anddespair. Into this they pushed the unfortunate Woodman, followingthemselves, to see, as they said, if there was any straw."Have you brought some oil with you?" demanded La Heuterie, examining arusty iron lamp that hung against the wall: "This is quite out.""No, indeed," replied Fouchard, "and we cannot get any to-night: but hedoes not want it till day. It is time for him to go to sleep.""No, no," rejoined the other, who seemed at least to have some humanfeeling; "do not leave the poor devil without light. Give him yourlantern, man; you can fetch it to-morrow, when you come round to trimthe lamps."The man grumbled, but did as La Heuterie bade him; and having fastenedthe lantern on the hook where the lamp hung, they went away, leavingPhilip to meditate over his fate in solitude."I have brought it on myself at last," thought the Woodman, as lookinground him he found all the horrors he had dreamed of the Bastille morethan realized; and his spirit sank within him. Cut off from allcommunication with any human being, he had now no means of making hissituation known; and the horrible idea of the torture shook all hisresolution and unmanned his heart.It would hardly be fair to pursue the course of his reflections anyfarther; for if, when he remembered his happy cottage in the wood ofMantes, and his wife, and his little ones, a momentary thought ofdisclosing all he knew crossed the Woodman's mind, the next instant, theruin of the Queen, the death of the good Count de Blenau, and a train ofendless ills and horrors to those who confided in him, flashed acrosshis imagination, and nerved his heart to better things. He called tomind every generous principle of his nature; and though but a humblepeasant, he struggled nobly against the dishonouring power of fear.Sleep, however, was out of the question; and he sat mournfully on thestraw that had been placed for his bed, watching the light in thelantern, as inch by inch it burned away, till at last it gleamed for amoment in the socket--sank--rose again with a bright flash, and thenbecame totally extinguished. He now remained in utter darkness, and athousand vague and horrible fancies crowded upon his imagination whilehe sat there, calculating how near it was to day, when he fancied thateven the momentary presence of the gaoler would prove some relief to theblank solitude of his situation. Hour after hour, however, passed away,and no glimpse of light told him it was morning. At length the dooropened and the gaoler appeared, bringing with him a fresh lighted lamp,thus offering a frightful confirmation of Philip's fears that the beamsof day never penetrated to the place of his confinement.The gaoler took down the lantern, and having fastened the lamp in itsplace, gave to the unfortunate Woodman a loaf of bread and a pitcher ofwater. "Come!" exclaimed Fouchard, in a tone which spoke no greatpleasure in the task; "get up; I am to take off your irons for you: andtruly, there is no great use of them, for if you were the Devil himself,you could not get out here.""I suppose so," answered Philip. "But I trust that it will not be longbefore I am released altogether.""Why, I should guess that it would not," answered the gaoler, insomewhat of a sarcastic tone, still continuing to unlock the irons;"People do not in general stay here very long.""How so?" demanded Philip anxiously, misdoubting the tone in which theother spoke."Why," replied he, "you must know there are three ways, by one of whichprisoners are generally released, as you say, altogether; and one wayis as common as another, so far as my experience goes. Sometimes theydie under the torture; at other times they are turned out to have theirhead struck off; or else they die of the damp: which last we call beingHome sick." And with this very consolatory speech he bundled up theirons under his arm, and quitted the cell, taking care to fasten thedoor behind him.CHAPTER X.Showing what it is to be a day after the Fair; with sundry othermatters, which the reader cannot fully comprehend without readingthem.Having now left the Woodman as unhappy as we could wish, and De Blenauvery little better off than he was before; we must proceed with Pauline,and see what we can do for her in the same way.It has been already said that, in the hurry of her flight, she struckher foot against a stone, and fell. This is an unpleasant accident atall times, and more especially when one is running away; but Paulinesuffered it not to interrupt her flight one moment longer thannecessary. Finding that some unexpected obstacle had delayed herpursuer as well as herself, she was upon her feet in a moment; andleaving him to arrange his difference with Monsieur Chatpilleur in thebest way he could, she flew on towards the Rue Saint Antoine, withoutstopping to thank her deliverer; and, indeed, without knowing that thegood aubergiste, taking a sincere interest in her fate, had, at thehour appointed, waited at the door of his auberge till he saw her enterthe Bastille, and then, from some undefined feeling that all would notgo right, had watched anxiously to see her safe out again.The interest not being reciprocal, Pauline had forgot all about theaubergiste; and only seeing that some one obstructed her pursuer, shefled, as I have said before, to the Rue Saint Antoine. She passedJacques Chatpilleur's little auberge, without any exchange of sentiment,even with the Sanglier Gourmand, and darted by the boutique of apassementier with the same celerity. The next shop was a marchand debroderie et de dentelle, with a little passage, or cul de sac,between it and the following house, which was occupied by abrocanteur, both which trades requiring daylight in aid of theiroperations, were at that hour firmly closed with bolt and bar, nor shedone solitary ray to light the passenger along the streets.Just as she had come opposite to the first of these, Pauline found someone seize her robe behind, and the next minute a large Spanish cloak wasthrown over her head, while a gigantic pair of arms embracing her waist,raised her from the ground, and bore her along the street. Naturallyconceiving that she was in the power of some of her pursuers from theBastille, Pauline did not perceive, in the dreadful agitation of themoment, that she was carried in a different direction; and, givingherself up for lost, she yielded to her fate without scream or cry.Whoever it was that held her, carried her like a feather; but afterstriding along through several turnings, he paused, placed her on theground, and still holding the cloak over her head with one hand, seemedto open a door with the other. The next moment he raised her again,though in a different position, and carried her up what was evidently asmall winding staircase, at the top of which he again opened a door,where, even through the cloak, Pauline could perceive that they hadentered some place which contained a powerful light. The moment the doorwas open, some one exclaimed, "It is her! Oh Jesu! yes, it is her!" in avoice which sounded so like that of her maid Louise that Pauline wasmore than ever bewildered. The person who had carried her, now placedher in a chair, and taking the additional security of tying the cloakover her head, communicated for a few minutes with the other person inwhispers; after which Pauline fancied that some one quitted the room.The covering was then removed from her eyes, and she found herself in asmall, meanly-furnished apartment, whose only occupant, besidesherself, was a handsome man, of very gigantic proportions, and of thatsort of daring aspect which smacked a little of the bravo. He was welldressed in a pourpoint of green lustring, braided with gold lace,slightly tarnished; the haut-de-chausses was of the same, tied downthe side with red ribbons; and the cloak which he removed from Pauline'shead seemed to form a part of the dress, though he had deprived himselfof it for the moment, to answer the purpose in which we have seen itemployed. On the whole, he was a good-looking cavalier, though there wasa certain air of lawlessness in his countenance and mien which madePauline shrink."Nay, do not be afraid, Mademoiselle," said he, with a strong Normanaccent: "Point de danger, point de danger;" and he strove to reassureher to the best of his power. He possessed no great eloquence, however,at least of the kind calculated to calm a lady's fears; and the onlything which tended to give Pauline any relief, was the manifest respectwith which he addressed her, standing cap in hand, and reiterating thatno harm was intended or could happen to her.She listened without attending, too much frightened to believe his wordsto their full extent, and striving to gain from the objects round aboutsome more precise knowledge of her situation. She was evidently not inthe Bastille; for the door of the room, instead of offering to her viewbolts and bars, of such complicated forms that, like the mousetrap, theywould have puzzled the man that made them, was only fastened by a singlewooden lock, the key of which, like a dog's tongue in a hot day, keptlolling out with a negligent inclination towards the ground, very muchat ease in its keyhole. The more Pauline gazed around her, the more shewas bewildered; and after resolving twenty times to speak to the Norman,and as often failing in courage, she at last produced an articulatesound, which went to inquire where she was. The Norman, who had beenwalking up and down the room, as if waiting the arrival of some one,stopped in the midst, and making a low inclination, begged to assureMademoiselle that she was in a place of safety.The ice being broken, Pauline demanded, "Did not I hear the voice of mymaid Louise?""No; it was my wife, Mademoiselle," replied her companion drily; andrecommencing his perambulations, the young lady sank back into herself.At length a tap was heard at the door, and the Norman starting forwardwent on the outside, closing it after him, though not completely; and ofthe conversation which ensued between him and some other man, Paulinecould catch detached sentences, which, though they served but little toelucidate her position to herself, may be of service to the reader.At first all was conducted in a whisper, but the Norman soon brokeforth, "Sachristie! I tell you she got in. I did not catch her till shewas coming out.""Monseigneur will be precious angry with us both," answered the other."How I missed you, I cannot imagine; I only went to call upon la petiteJeanette, and did not stay five minutes.""And I just stepped into the Sanglier Gourmand," rejoined our Norman,"which is opposite, you know. There I thought I could see all that wenton. But that maraud, Jacques Chatpilleur, was always at his door aboutsomething; so finding that I could not get my second bottle of wine, Iwent down to the cave for it myself; and she must have passed while Iwas below.""How did you find out, then, that she had got into the Bastille?"demanded the other.The Norman's reply was delivered in so low a tone that Pauline couldonly distinguish the words--"Heard a scream--saw her running past likemad--threw the cloak over her, and brought her here.""Perhaps she was not in, after all," rejoined the other; "but at allevents, we must tell Monseigneur so. You swear you caught her just asshe was going in, and I'll vow that I was there and saw you."A new consultation seemed to take place; but the speakers proceeded sorapidly, that Pauline could not comprehend upon what it turned exactly,although she was herself evidently the subject of discussion. "Oh, shewill not tell, for her own sake," said one of the voices. "She would bebanished, to a certainty, if it was known that she got in; and as to thefolks at the Bastille, be sure that they will hold their tongues."Something was now said about a letter, and the voice of the Normanreplied, "Monseigneur does not suppose that she had a letter. Oh, no!trust me, she had none. It was word of mouth work, be you sure. Theywere too cunning to send a letter which might be stopped upon her. No,no, they know something more than that.""Well, then, the sooner we take her there, the better," rejoined theother; "the carriage is below, but you must blind her eyes, for she mayknow the liveries.""Ah! your cursed livery betrayed us once before," answered the Norman."Holla! la haut! mon Ange, give me a kerchief; I will tie her eyeswith that, for the cloak almost smothers her, poor little soul!"A light step was now heard coming down stairs, and a third person wasadded to the party without. What they said, Pauline could not make out;but though speaking in a whisper, she was still confident that shedistinguished the voice of her maid Louise. "Harm!" said the Norman,after a moment, "we are going to do her no harm, chre amie! She willbe down there in Maine, with the Countess, and as happy as a Princess.Give this gentleman the trunk-mail, and get yourself ready against Icome back; for we have our journey to take too, you know, ma petitefemme."The Norman now laid his hand upon the lock; there was a momentary bustleas of the party separating; and then entering the room, he informedPauline that she must allow him to blindfold her eyes. Knowing thatresistance was in vain, Pauline submitted with a good grace; and, herfears considerably allayed by the conversation she had overheard,attempted to draw from the Norman some farther information. But here hewas inflexible; and having tied the handkerchief over her eyes, so ascompletely to prevent her seeing, he conducted her gently down thestairs, taking care to keep her from falling; and having arrived in theopen air, lifted her lightly into a carriage, placed himself by herside, and gave orders to drive on.The vehicle had not proceeded many minutes, when it again stopped; andPauline was lifted out, conducted up a flight of stone steps, and thenled into an apartment, where she was placed in a fauteuil, the luxurioussoftness of which bespoke a very different sort of furniture from thatof the chamber which she had just left. There was now a little bustle,and a good deal of whispering, and then every one seemed to leave theroom. Fancying herself alone, Pauline raised her hand, in order toremove the handkerchief from her eyes, at least for a moment; but a loud"Prenez garde!" from the Norman, stopped her in her purpose, and thenext instant a door opened, and she heard steps approaching."Shut the door," said a voice she had never heard before. "Marteville,you have done well. Are you sure that she had no conversation with anyone within the prison?""I will swear to it!" answered the Norman, with the stout asseverationof a determined liar. "Ask your man Chauvelin, Monseigneur; he was by,and saw me catch hold of her before she was at the gate.""So he says," rejoined the other; "but now leave the room. I must havesome conversation with this demoiselle myself. Wait for me without.""Pardie!" muttered the Norman, as he withdrew; "he'll find it out now,and then I'm ruined.""Mademoiselle de Beaumont," said the person that remained, "you havebeen engaged in a rash and dangerous enterprise--Had you succeeded init, the Bastille must have been your doom, and severe judgment accordingto the law. By timely information on the subject, I have been enabled tosave you from such a fate; but I am sorry to say that, for the safety ofall parties, you must endure an absence from your friends for sometime."He paused, as if expecting a reply; and Pauline, after a moment'sconsideration, determined to answer, in order to draw from him, ifpossible, some farther information concerning the manner in which he hadbecome acquainted with her movements, and also in regard to her futuredestination. "I perceive, Sir," said she, "from your conversation, thatyou belong to the same rank of society as myself; but I am at a loss toimagine how any gentleman presumes to attribute dangerous enterprises,and actions deserving imprisonment, to a lady, of whom he neither does,nor can know any thing.""My dear young lady," replied her companion, "you make me smile. I didnot think that I should have to put forth my diplomatic powers againstso fair and so youthful an opponent. But allow me to remind you that,when young ladies of the highest rank are found masquerading in thestreets at night, dressed in their servants' garments, they subjecttheir conduct, perhaps, to worse misconstructions than that which I haveput upon yours. But, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, I know you, and I knowthe spirit of your family too well to suppose that any thing but somegreat and powerful motive could induce you to appear as you do now.Withdraw that bandage from your eyes, (I have no fear of encounteringthem,) and look if that be a dress in which Mademoiselle de Beaumontshould be seen."Pauline's quick fingers instantly removed the handkerchief, and raisingher eyes, she found that she was placed exactly before a tall Venetianmirror, which offered her a complete portrait of herself, sitting in animmense arm-chair of green velvet, and disguised in the costume of aLanguedoc paysanne. The large capote, or hood, which she had worn,had been thrust back by the Norman, in order to blindfold her eyes, andher dark hair, all dishevelled, was hanging about her face in glossyconfusion. The red serge jupe of Louise had acquired in the passagesof the Bastille no inconsiderable portion of dust; and near the knee onwhich she had fallen at the foot of the glacis, it was stained withmire, as well as slightly torn. In addition to all this, appeared alarge rent at the side, occasioned by the efforts of Philip the woodmanto disengage it from the staple on which it had caught; and the blackbodice had been broadly marked with green mould, in pressing against thewall while the guards passed so near to her.Her face also was deathly pale, with all the alarm, agitation, andfatigue she had undergone; so that no person could be more differentfrom the elegant and blooming Pauline de Beaumont than the figure whichthat mirror reflected. Pauline almost started when she beheld herself;but quickly recovering from her surprise, she cast her eyes round theroom, which was furnished in the most splendid and costly manner, andfilled with a thousand objects of curiosity or luxury, procured from allthe quarters of the globe.Her attention, however, rested not upon any of these. Within a few pacesof the chair in which she sat, stood a tall elegant man, near thatperiod of life called the middle age, but certainly rather below thanabove the point to which the term is generally applied. He wassplendidly dressed, according to the custom of the day; and the neattrimming of his beard and mustaches, the regular arrangement of his darkflowing hair, and the scrupulous harmony and symmetry of every part ofhis apparel, contradicted the thoughtful, dignified expression of hiseyes, which seemed occupied with much higher thoughts. Vandyke hastransmitted to us many such a physiognomy, and many such a dress; butfew of his costumes are more splendid, or his countenances moredignified, than was that of the stranger who stood beside Mademoisellede Beaumont.He paused for a moment, giving her time to make what examination sheliked of every thing in the apartment; and as her eye glanced tohimself, demanded with a smile, "Well, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, do yourecollect me?""Not in the least," replied Pauline: "I think, Sir, that we can neverhave seen each other before.""Yes, we have," answered her companion, "but it was at a distance.However, now look in that glass, and tell me--Do you recollectyourself?""Hardly!" replied Pauline, with a blush, "hardly, indeed!""Well then, fair lady, I think that you will no longer demand my reasonsfor attributing to you dangerous enterprises, and actions, as you say,deserving imprisonment; but to put an end to your doubts at once, lookat that order, where, I think, you will find yourself somewhataccurately described." And he handed to Pauline a small piece ofparchment, beginning with the words of serious import 'De par le roy,'and going on to order the arrest of the Demoiselle Pauline, daughter ofthe late Marquis de Beaumont, and of the Dame Anne de la Hautire; withall those good set terms and particulars, which left no room for mistakeor quibble, even if it had been examined by the eyes of the sharpestlawyer of the Cour des Aides."What say you now, Mademoiselle de Beaumont?" demanded her companion,seeing her plunged in embarrassment and surprise."I have nothing to say, Sir," replied Pauline, "but that I must submit.However, I trust that, in common humanity, I shall be allowed to see mymother, either when I am in prison, or before I am conveyed thither.""You mistake me," said the other; "you are not going to a prison. I onlyintend that you should take a little journey into the country; duringthe course of which all attention shall be paid to your comfort andconvenience. Of course, young lady, when you undertook the difficulttask of conveying a message from the Queen to a prisoner in theBastille, you were prepared to risk the consequences. As you have notsucceeded, no great punishment will fall upon you; but as it isabsolutely necessary to the Government to prevent all communicationbetween suspected parties, you must bear a temporary absence from theCourt, till such time as this whole business be terminated; for neitherthe Queen, nor any one else, must know how far you have succeeded orfailed."Pauline pleaded hard to be allowed to see her mother, but in vain. Thestranger was obdurate, and would listen to neither entreaties,promises, nor remonstrances. All she could obtain was, the assurancethat Madame de Beaumont should be informed of her safety, and that,perhaps, after a time she might be permitted to write to her. "Listen tome," said the stranger, cutting short the prayers by which she wasattempting to influence him. "I expect the King and Court from Chantillywithin an hour; and before that time you must be out of Paris. For yourconvenience, a female servant shall attend you, and you will meet withall the respect due to your rank; but for your own sake, ask noquestions, for I never permit my domestics to canvass my affairs withany one--nay, they are forbidden ever to mention my name, except forsome express and permitted purpose. I will now leave you, and sendMathurine to your assistance, who will help you to change your dressfrom that coffre. You will then take some refreshment, and set out asspeedily as possible. At the end of your journey, you will meet withone to whose care I have recommended you, and you will then learn inwhose hands you are placed. At present, I have the honour of bidding youfarewell."The uncertainty of her fate, the separation from her mother, the vagueuneasy fear attendant upon want of all knowledge of whither she wasgoing, and the impossibility of communicating with her friends under anyevent, raised up images far more terrifying and horrible to the mind ofPauline, than almost any specific danger could have done; and, as hercompanion turned away, she hid her face in her hands and wept.Hearing her sob, and perhaps attributing her tears to other motives, hereturned for a moment, and said in a low voice: "Do not weep, my dearchild! I give you my honour, that you will be well and kindly treated.But one thing I forgot to mention. I know that your object was to visitthe Count de Blenau; and I know, also, that a personal interest hadsomething to do in the matter. Now, Mademoiselle de Beaumont, I canfeel for you; and it may be some comfort to know, that M. de Blenau has,at least, one person in the Council, who will strive to give to theproceedings against him as much leniency as circumstances will admit."This said, he quitted the apartment, and in a moment after Pauline wasjoined by the female servant of whom he had spoken. She was a staid,reputable-looking woman, of about fifty, with a little of the primnessof ancient maidenhood, but none of its acerbity. And, aware of Pauline'srank, she assisted her to disentangle herself from her uncomfortabledisguise with silent respect, though she could not help murmuring toherself. "Mon Dieu! Une demoiselle mise comme a." She then called theyoung Lady's attention to the contents of the coffre, asking whichdress she would choose to wear; when, to her surprise, Pauline foundthat it contained a considerable part of her own wardrobe. Forgettingthe prohibition to ask questions, she could not help demanding ofMathurine how her clothes could come there; but the servant was eitherignorant, or pretended to be so, and Pauline could obtain noinformation. As soon as she was dressed, some refreshments were placedon the table by Mathurine, who received them from a servant at one ofthe doors, which she immediately closed again, and pressed Pauline toeat. Pauline at first refused; but at length, to satisfy her companion,who continued to insist upon it with a degree of quiet, perseveringcivility, that would take no refusal, she took some of the coffee, whichwas at that time served up as a rarity. As soon as ever the domesticperceived that no entreaty would induce her to taste any thing else, shecalled in a servant to carry the coffre to the carriage, and thennotified to Pauline that it was time for them to depart.Pauline felt that all resistance or delay would be vain; and sheaccordingly followed Mathurine down a magnificent staircase into acourt-yard, where stood a chaise roulante, the door of which was heldopen by the Norman we have already mentioned, while two men-servantsappeared ready mounted to follow the vehicle, as soon as it set out.Mathurine placed herself by Pauline's side when she had entered; and theNorman, having closed the door, opened the porte-cochre of the court,and the carriage drove out into the street.We will not take the trouble of following Mademoiselle de Beaumont onher journey, which occupied that night and the two followingdays:--suffice it to say, that on the evening of the second day theyarrived in the beautiful neighbourhood of Chteau du Loir. The smilingslopes, covered with the first vines; the rich fruit-trees hangingactually over the road, and dropping with the latest gifts of liberalNature; the balmy air of a warm September evening; the rosy cheeks ofthe peasantry; and the clear, smooth windings of the river Loir,[A] allannounced that they were approaching the land of happy Touraine: andafter putting her head more than once from the window, Mathurine, with asmile of pleasure, pointed forward, exclaiming, "Voil le Chteau."[A] Not the Loire.Pauline's eyes followed to the point where the other's hand directedthem; and upon a high ground, rising gently above the trees whichcrowned a little projecting turn of the river, she beheld a group oftowers and pinnacles, with the conical-slated roofs, multifariousweathercocks, long narrow windows, one turret upon the back of another,and all the other distinctive marks of an old French chteau.CHAPTER XI.In which De Blenau finds that he has got the rod in his own hand,and how he uses it; together with a curious account of a tremendouscombat and glorious victory.I can easily imagine myself, and I dare say the reader will not findmuch difficulty in fancying, that the Count de Blenau suffered not alittle inquietude while he remained in uncertainty respecting Pauline'sfree exit from the Bastille.Take and draw him, as Sterne did his captive. See him walking up anddown the chamber with the anxiety of doubt upon his brow and in hisheart, listening for every sound in the court-yard, catching thefootstep of the sentinel at his door, and fancying it the return of theGovernor,--hope struggling against fear, and fear remainingvictor,--conjuring up a thousand wild, improbable events, and missingthe true one; and, in short, making his bosom a hell wherein totorment his own heart.Thus did Claude de Blenau, during that lapse of time which the Governormight reasonably be supposed to be occupied in the duties of his office.But when a longer time passed, and still no news arrived of Pauline'sescape, the uncertainty became too great for mortal endurance; and hewas about to risk all, by descending into the court through the turret,when the challenge of the sentinel announced the approach of some one,and in the next moment the Governor entered the room, his pale featuresflushed with anger, and his lip quivering with ill-subdued rage."Monsieur de Blenau!" said he, in a tone that he had never beforepresumed to use towards his wealthy prisoner, "here is something wrong.There has been a woman in the prison to-night, passing for that rascalWoodman's daughter: and I am given to understand, that she has broughteither letter or message to you. But I will ascertain the truth--ByHeaven! I will ascertain the truth!""Have you detained her, then?" exclaimed De Blenau, losing all cautionin his fears for Pauline."Oh, ho! Monsieur le Comte," said the Governor, fixing on him his keenand angry eye; "then you do know that she has been here? But do youknow, Sir, that it may cost me my head?""Very possibly, if you tell any body," replied De Blenau; who by thistime had recovered his self-possession, and had, upon reconsideration,drawn from the Governor's speech a different conclusion from that whichhe had formed at first; feeling sure, that if Pauline had not escaped,his anger would have taken a calmer form. "Listen to me, Sir Governor,"continued he firmly, after having determined in his own mind the line ofconduct which he ought to pursue: "let us deal straightforwardly towardseach other, and like friends as we have hitherto done. We are both insome degree in each other's power. On your part, do not attempt toentrap me into any acknowledgment, and I will show you that I will notmake use of any advantage you may have given me----""I do not understand your meaning, Sir," cried the Governor, stillangrily: "I have given you no advantage. By Heaven! I will have theapartment searched;--ay, Sir, and your person too.""Will you so?" replied De Blenau, coolly drawing from his bosom theQueen's billet, and approaching the edge to the lamp so that it caughtfire. The Governor started forward to seize it; but the strong arm ofthe Count held him at a distance, till the few lines the Queen hadwritten were irretrievably destroyed; and then freeing him from hisgrasp, he pointed to a chair, saying, "Now, Monsieur le Gouverneur, sitdown and listen to a few words of common sense." The Governor placedhimself in the chair with a look of bitter malignity; but this softeneddown gradually into an expression of thoughtful cunning, as De Blenauproceeded--"Thus stands the case," said the Count; "I was committed toyour charge, I think, with positive orders not to allow me communicationwith any person whatsoever--was it not so?" The Governor assented: "Itso happened, however," continued the Count with a smile, "that at ourvery first interview, you conceived a friendship for me of the mostliberal and disinterested nature," (the Governor bit his lip,) "a sortof love at first sight; and, for the sake of my accommodation, you notonly broke through the positive commands of the Cardinal Prime Minister,in suffering me once to have communication with another person, butallowed such to take place at all times, according to my pleasure; andalso took especial pains to procure the attendance of the person Iwished, paying him with my money, for which, and other excellentpurposes, you have, within the space of six days, received from meupwards of one thousand crowns."The Governor winced most desperately; and fully convinced, that a taleso told, would readily convey his head under the axe of the executioner,if it reached the ears of Richelieu, he cursed himself for a fool, DeBlenau for a knave, and Philip the woodman for something between thetwo; most devoutly wishing both the others at the Devil, so he couldslip his own neck out of the halter.De Blenau, without much skill in reading the mind's construction by theface, easily divined what was passing in his companion's bosom; andperceiving him to be much in the situation of a lame dog, he resolvedstill to apply the lash a little, before he helped him over the stile."Well, Sir Governor," continued he; "now we will suppose, as a merehypothesis to reason upon, that, through this very liberty which yourdisinterested kindness has allowed me, I have received thosecommunications from without, which it was the Cardinal's great object toprevent. How ought you to act under such circumstances? Ought you to goto the stern, unrelenting Richelieu, and say to him,--'May it pleaseyour Eminence, I have intentionally and wilfully broken through everyorder you gave me--I have taken the utmost pains that they should not beobserved; and I have so far succeeded in thwarting your designs, thatMonsieur de Blenau, from whom I have received one thousand crowns, andfrom whom I expect a thousand more the moment he is liberated--I say,that this good friend of mine, and your enemy, has gained all theinformation which you wished to prevent,'--This would be a prettyconfession of faith!"De Blenau paused, and the Governor bit his lip; but after a moment, helooked the Count full in the face, and replied, "Perhaps it might be thebest way."De Blenau, however, was not to be deceived; he saw terror in the deadlyhue of the Governor's pale cheek, and the anxious rolling of his sunkeneye, and he went on--"Perhaps it might be the best way--to have yourhead struck off without delay; for what would your confession avail theCardinal now, after the mischief is done?--Would it not be better to sayto yourself,--'Here is a young nobleman, whom I believe to beinnocent--for whom I have a regard--whom I have served already, and whois both willing and able to reward any one who does serve him; and who,lastly, will never betray me, let happen what will. Under thesecircumstances, should I not be a fool of the first water, to inquireinto a matter, the truth of which I am very unlikely to discover, andwhich, if I do, it will be my duty to disclose: whereas, standing as theaffair does now, without my knowledge in the least, my ignorance makesmy innocence, and I betray no one. Even supposing that the whole befound out, I am no worse than I was before, for the story can but betold at last; while, if the Count be liberated, which most likely hewill, instead of losing my office, or my head, I shall gain a thousandcrowns to indemnify me for all the trouble I have had, and shall ensurehis friendship for life.' Now, Monsieur le Gouverneur, this is what youought to say to yourself. In my opinion, the strength of argument is allon one side. Even if there were any thing to know, you would be a foolto investigate it, where you must of necessity be your own accuser;where all is to be lost, and nothing can be gained.""You argue well, Monsieur de Blenau," answered the Governor,thoughtfully; "and your reasoning would be convincing, if it extended toall the circumstances of the case. But you do not know one half;--you donot know, that Chavigni, from whose eyes nothing seems hidden, knew ofthis girl's coming, and sent me an order to detain her, which thatsottish fool the Porter never gave me till she had escaped--How am I toget over that, pray?""Then, positively, she has escaped?" demanded De Blenau."Yes, yes, she has escaped!" replied the Governor pettishly: "you seemto consider nothing but her; but, let me tell you, Monsieur de Blenau,that you are fully as much concerned as I am, for if they discover thatshe has got in, you will have a touch of the peine forte et dure, tomake you confess who she is, and what she came for.""Truly, I know not what can be done," answered the Count. "Chavigniseems to know all about it.""No, no! he does not know all," replied the Governor; "for he says here,in his note, that if a young lady dressed in a jupe of red serge, witha black bodice, comes to the gate of the prison, asking any thingconcerning the Count de Blenau, we are to detain her: now she nevermentioned your name, and, God knows, I heeded not what she was dressedin.""Then the matter is very simple," replied the Count; "no such person ashe bade you detain, has been here. This is no matter of honour betweenman and man, where you are bound to speak your suspicions as well asyour knowledge. No person has come to the gate of the prison asking anything concerning me; and so answer Chavigni.""But the Porter, Monsieur de Blenau," said the officer, anxiously,--"hemay peach. All the other dependents on the prison are my own, placed byme, and would turn out were I to lose my office; but this porter wasnamed by the Cardinal himself.--What is to be done with him?""Oh! fear not him," answered De Blenau; "as his negligence was the causeof your not receiving the order in time to render it effectual, yoursilence will be a favour to him.""True! true!" cried the Governor, rubbing his hands with all the raptureof a man suddenly relieved from a mortal embarrassment: "True! true!I'll go and bully him directly--I'll threaten to inform the Cardinal,and Chavigni, and the whole Council; and then--when he begins to fancythat he feels the very rope round his neck--I'll relent, and becharitable, and agree to conceal his mistake, and to swear that the ladynever came.--How will Chavigni know? She will never confess it herself,and at that hour it was too dark for any one to watch her up to thegates.--Morbleu! that will do precisely.""I see little or no danger attending upon it," said the prisoner; "and,at all events, it is a great deal better than conveying your neck intothe noose, which you would certainly do by confessing to Richelieu thecircumstances as they have occurred.""Well, well, we will risk it, at all events," replied the Governor, who,though not quite free from apprehension respecting the result, had nowregained his usual sweet complacency of manner. "But one thing, Monsieurde Blenau, I am sure you will promise me; namely, that this attemptshall never be repeated, even if occasion should occur: and for therest--with regard to your never betraying me, and other promises whichyour words imply, I will trust to your honour."De Blenau readily agreed to what the Governor required, and repeated hispromises never to disclose any thing that had occurred, and to rewardhis assistance with a thousand crowns, upon being liberated. Mindful ofall who served him, he did not forget Philip the woodman; and deeplythankful for the escape of Pauline, was the more anxious to ascertainthe fate of one who had so greatly contributed to the success of herenterprise."Speak not of him! speak not of him!" exclaimed the Governor, breakingforth into passion at De Blenau's inquiries. "This same skilful plotterattends upon you no longer. You will suffer some inconvenience for yourscheme; but it is your fault, not mine, and you must put up with it asbest you may.""That I care not about," replied De Blenau. "But I insist upon it thathe be treated with no severity. Mark me, Monsieur le Gouverneur: if Ifind that he is ill used, Chavigni shall hear of the whole business. Iwill risk any thing sooner than see a man suffer from his kindness forme.""You paid him well, of course," said the Governor, drawing up his lip,"and he must take his chance. However, do not alarm yourself for him: heshall be taken care of--only, with your good leave, Seigneur Comte, youand he do not meet again within the walls of the Bastille.--But in thename of Heaven! what clatter is this at the door?" he exclaimed,starting from his chair, at a most unusual noise which proceeded fromthe staircase.The Governor, indeed, had good reason to be astonished; for never wasthere a more strange and inconsistent sound heard within the walls of aprison, than that which saluted their ears. First came the "Qui vive?"of the sentinel; to which a voice roared out, "Le Diable!" "Quivive?" cried the sentinel again, in a still sharper key. The answer tothis was nothing but a clatter, as the Governor had expressed it, suchas we might suppose produced by the blowing up of a steam-kitchen: thenfollowed the discharge of the sentinel's firelock; and then sundry blowsgiven and received upon some hard and sonorous substance, mingled withvarious oaths, execrations, and expletives then in use amongst the lowerclasses of his Christian Majesty's lieges, making altogether a mostdeafening din.At this sound the Governor, as little able to conceive whence itoriginated as De Blenau himself, drew his sword, and throwing open thedoor, discovered the redoubtable Jacques Chatpilleur, CuisinierAubergiste, striding in triumph over the prostrate body of thesentinel, and waving over his head an immense stew-pan, being theweapon with which he had achieved the victory, and through whichappeared a small round hole, caused by the ball of the soldier'sfirelock. In the mean while was to be seen the sentinel on the ground,his iron morion actually dented by the blows of his adversary, and hisface and garments bedabbled, not with blood, indeed, but with thePoulet en blanquette and its white sauce, which had erst been tenantof the stew-pan."Victoria! Victoria! Victoria!" shouted the aubergiste, waving hisstew-pan; "Twice have I conquered in one night! Can Mieleraye orBouillon say that? Victoria! Victoria!" But here his triumph received acheck; for looking into the unhappy utensil, he suddenly perceived theloss of its contents, which had flown all over the place, thetreacherous lid having detached itself during his conflict with thesentinel, and sought safety in flight down the stairs. "Mon Poulet! monPoulet!" exclaimed he, in a tone of bitter despair, "le nid y est,mais l'oiseau est parti,--the nest is there, but the bird is flown.Helas, mon Poulet! mon pauvre Poulet!" and quitting the body of hisprostrate foe, he advanced into the apartment with that sort of zig-zagmotion which showed that the thin sinewy shanks which supported hiswoodcock-shaped upper man, were somewhat affected by a more than usualquantity of the generous grape.The whole scene was so inexpressibly ludicrous, that De Blenau burstinto an immoderate fit of laughter, in which the Governor could not helpjoining, notwithstanding his indignation at the treatment the sentinelhad experienced. Recovering himself, however, he poured forth his wrathupon the aubergiste in no measured terms, demanding how he dared toconduct himself so in the Royal Chateau of the Bastille, and what hadbecome of the Count de Blenau's supper, adding a few qualificatoryepithets, which may as well be omitted."Eh bien, Monsieur! Eh bien!" cried the aubergiste, with very littlerespect for the Governor: "as for the gentleman there, lying on hisbelly, he ought to have let me in, and not fired his piece at me. Heknew me well enough. He might have cried Qui vive? once,--that waswell, as it is the etiquette.""But why did you not answer him, sacr maraud?" cried the Governor."I did answer him," replied the other, stoutly. "He cried Qui vive?and I answered Le Diable, car le Diable vive toujours. And as for thesupper, I have lost it all. Je l'ai perdu entre deux mtins. The firstwas a greedy Norman vagabond, who feeds at my auberge; and while I wasout for a minute, he whips me up my matelot d'anguille from out of thecasserole, and my dinde pique from the spit, and when I came backfive minutes after, there was nothing left but bare bones and emptybottles. Pardie! And now I have bestowed on the head of that varlet apoulet en blanquette that might have comforted the stomach of a King.Oh Dieu! Dieu! mes malheurs ne finiront jamais. Oh! but I forgot," hecontinued, "there is still a fricandeau  l'oseille with a coldpat, that will do for want of a better.--Monseigneur, votreserviteur," and he bowed five or six times to De Blenau; "Monsieur leGouverneur, votre trs humble," and bowing round and round to everyone, even to the sentinel, who by this time was beginning to recover hisfeet, the tipsy aubergiste staggered off, escaping the wrath of theGovernor by the promise of the fricandeau, but not, however, withoutbeing threatened with punishment on the morrow.CHAPTER XII.The bureau of a Counsellor of State, or how things were managed in1642."Marteville, you have served me essentially," said the Count de Chavignias soon as he had left Pauline in what was called the ladies' hall ofthe Hotel de Bouthilliers, addressing the tall Norman, whom the readerhas already recognised beyond a doubt. "You know I never suffer any goodservice to go without its reward; therefore I will now pay you yours,more especially as I have fresh demands to make upon your zeal. Let ussee how our accounts stand;" and approaching a small table, which servedboth for the purposes of a writing-desk and also to support a strongebony cabinet clasped with silver, he drew forth a bunch of keys andopened a drawer plated with iron, which contained a quantity of gold andsilver coin. Chavigni then seated himself at the table, and the Normanstanding on his right hand, they began regularly to balance accounts,the items of the Norman's charge being various services of rather acurious nature."For stopping the Archduke's courier," said Chavigni, "and taking fromhim his despatches--fifty crowns is enough for that.""I demand no more," said Marteville; "any common thief could have doneit.""But, by the way, I hope you did not hurt him, for he came with a safeconduct.""Hurt him! no," replied the Norman: "we are the best friends in theworld. When I met him on the road, I told him civilly that I must havehis despatches; and that I would either cut his throat or drink a bottlewith him, whichever he liked: so he chose the latter, and when weparted, he promised to give me notice the next time he came on the sameerrand.""The rascal!" said Chavigni, "that is the way we are served. But now wecome to this business of the Count de Blenau--what do you expect for thewhole concern?""Nay but, Monseigneur, you forget," exclaimed the other; "there is onelittle item before that. Put down,--for being an Astrologer.""Why, I have given you fifty crowns on that account already," rejoinedthe Statesman; "you are exorbitant, Seigneur Marteville.""That fifty crowns went for my expenses--all of it," replied the other."There was my long black robe all covered with gimcracks; there was myleathern belt, painted with all the signs under heaven; there was mywhite beard, and wig, which cost me ten good crowns at the shop ofJansen the Peruquier: besides the harness of my horse, which was made tosuit, and my Astrologer's bonnet, which kept all fast upon my head.Now, Monseigneur, you cannot give me less than fifty crowns, for beingout two nights, and running the risk of being burnt alive.""I think not," said Chavigni, "so let that pass. But to come to theother business.""Why, first and foremost," replied the Norman, marking each article ashe named it, by laying the index of his right hand upon one of theimmense fingers of his left,--"For making love to Mademoiselle's maid.""Nay, nay, nay!" cried Chavigni, "this is too much. That must be part ofthe dower I have promised with her, of which we will talk presently. Buthave you married her?""No," answered the Norman, "not yet. We will see about that hereafter."Chavigni's cheek reddened, and his brow knit into a heavy frown. "Noevasions, Sir. I commanded you, when you took her away last night fromChantilly, to marry her directly, and you agreed to do so. Why is it notdone?""If the truth must be told, Monseigneur, it is not done, because it goesagainst a Norman gentleman's stomach to take up with any body'scast-offs.""Do not be insolent, Sir," cried the Statesman. "Did I not give you myhonour that your suspicion was false? Know, Sir, that though Chavignimay sometimes condescend to converse with you, or may appear to triflefor a moment with a girl like this Louise, it is merely to gain somegreater object that he does so; and that unless it be for some Statepurpose, he never honours such beings with his thoughts.""Well, well, Monseigneur," replied the other, seeing the fire thatflashed in his Lord's eye, "I will marry her: Foy de Normand! Don't beangry; I will marry her.""Foy de Normand! will not do," said Chavigni. "It must be this verynight.""Eh bien! Eh bien! Soit," cried the Norman, and then muttered tohimself with a grin, "I've four wives now living; a fifth won't makemuch difference.""What murmur you, Sir?" demanded the Statesman. "Mark me! in one hourfrom hence you will find a priest and two witnesses in the Cardinal'schapel! When you are married, the priest will give you a certificate ofthe ceremony, carry it to my intendant, and upon the sight of it he willpay you the sum we agree upon. Now, proceed with your demands.""Well then, Monseigneur," continued Marteville, "what is the informationconcerning Mademoiselle's coming to Paris worth?""It is worth a good deal," replied Chavigni, "and I will always pay morefor knowledge of that kind than any acts of brute force. Set that downfor a hundred crowns, and fifty more for catching the young lady, andbringing her here; making altogether two hundred and fifty.""Yes, Sir, yes; but the dot--the dowry you mentioned," cried theNorman. "You have forgot that.""No, I have not," replied Chavigni. "In favour of Louise, I will makethe sum up one thousand crowns, which you will receive the moment youhave married her.""Oh! I'll marry her directly, if that be the case," cried the Norman."Morbleu! that makes all the difference.""But treat her kindly," said Chavigni. "With the stipend of a thousandcrowns, which I allow you yearly, and what you can gain by particularservices, you may live very well; and perhaps I may add some littlegratification, if you please me in your conduct towards your wife.""Oh! I'll be the tenderest husband living," cried the Norman, "since mygratification depends upon her's. But I'll run and fetch her to bemarried directly, if you will send the Priest, Monseigneur.""Nay, stop a moment," said the Statesman. "You forget that I told you Ihad other journeys for you to take, and other services for you toperform.""No, Sir," answered the Norman, "all is prepared to set out this verynight, if you will tell me my errand."Chavigni paused for a moment, and remained in deep thought, gnawing hislip as if embarrassed by doubts as to the best manner of proceeding."Mark me, Marteville," said he at length: "there are two or three sortsof scoundrels in the world, amongst whom I do not look upon you as theleast." The Norman bowed with the utmost composure, very well aware ofthe place he held in Chavigni's opinion. "There are, however, some goodpoints about you," continued the Statesman; at which Marteville bowedagain. "You would rob, kill, and plunder, I believe, without remorse,any one you hated or did not care about; but I do not think you wouldforget a kindness or betray a trust.""Never!" said the Norman: "red-hot pincers will not tear from me what isintrusted to my honour.""So be it, then, in the present instance," said Chavigni; "for I amobliged to give you the knowledge of some things, and to enter intoexplanations with you, which I do not often do with any one. You mustknow, then, I have information that on the same day that Monsieur deCinq Mars set out from Chantilly with Monsieur de Thou, the Duke ofOrleans, with Montressor and St. Ibal, took their departure fromMoulins, and the Count de Fontrailles from Paris. They all journeyedtowards the same point in Champagne. I can trace Fontrailles to Troyes,the Duke and his companions to Villeneuve, and Cinq Mars and De Thou toNogent, but no farther. All this might be accidental, but there arecircumstances that create suspicion in my mind. Cinq Mars, when he setforth, gave out that he went to his estate near Troyes, in which I findhe never set his foot; and when he returned, his conference with Louiswas somewhat long. It might have been of hawks and hounds, it is true;but after it, the King's manner both to the Cardinal and myself was coldand haughty, and he suddenly took this resolution of coming to Parishimself to examine into the case of the young Count de Blenau:--inshort, I suspect that some plot is on foot. What I require of you thenis, to hasten down to Champagne; try to trace each of these persons, anddiscover if they had a conference, and where; find out the business thatbrought each of them so far, examine their track as you would the slotof a deer, and give me whatever information you collect; employ everymeans to gain a thorough knowledge of all their proceedings--force,should it be required--but let that be the last thing used. Here is thissignet, upon the sight of which all the agents of Government in thedifferent towns and villages will communicate with you." And he drewfrom his finger a small seal ring, which the Norman consigned to hispocket, his hands being somewhat too large to admit of his wearing it inthe usual manner."The Duke of Orleans and his pack I know well," answered Marteville,"and also Cinq Mars and De Thou; but this Count de Fontrailles--whatlike is he, Monseigneur?""He is a little ugly mean-looking man," replied Chavigni; "he frequentlydresses himself in grey, and looks like a sorcerer. Make him your firstobject; for if ever there was a devil of cunning upon earth, it isFontrailles, and he is at the bottom of the plot if there be one.""You traced him to Troyes, you say, Monseigneur? Had he any pretence ofbusiness there?""None," answered Chavigni; "my account says that he had no attendantswith him, lodged at the Auberge du Grand Soleil, and was poorlydressed.""I will trace him if he were the Devil himself," said the Norman; "andbefore I see you again, Monseigneur, I shall be able to account for eachof these gentry.""If you do," said Chavigni, "a thousand crowns is your reward; and ifyou discover any plot or treasonable enterprise, so that by your meansthey may be foiled and brought to justice, the thousand shall grow intoten thousand, and you shall have a place that will give you a life ofluxury."The Norman's eyes sparkled at the anticipation, and his imaginationpourtrayed himself and his five wives living together in celestialharmony, drinking the best vintages of Burgundy and Epernay, eating ofthe fat of the land, and singing like mad. These blissful ideas werefirst interrupted by the sound of horses' feet in the court. "Hark!"cried Chavigni, "they are putting the horses to the carriage; go down,and see that all be prepared for the young lady's journey.""Instantly," answered the Norman, "and after that I will carry Louise tothe Priest, finger your Lordship's cash, and we will set off forTroyes.""Do you intend to take her with you?" demanded Chavigni, in somesurprise."Nay, my Lord, you would not wish me to leave my bride on our weddingnight, surely," replied the Norman, in a mock sentimental tone. "But thetruth is, I think she may be useful. Woman's wit will often find a waywhere man's wisdom looks in vain; and as I have now, thanks to yourbounty, two good horses, I shall e'en set Louise upon one of them, andwith the bridle rein over my arm lead her to Brie, where, with your goodleave, we will sleep, and thence on upon our journey. Travelling with awoman, no one will suspect my real object, and I shall come sooner at mypurpose.""Well, so be it then," answered the Statesman. "You are now, as youwished to be, intrusted with an affair of more importance than stoppinga courier, or carrying off a weak girl; and as the reward is greater, sowould be the punishment in case you were to betray your trust. I rely onyour honour; but let me hint at the same time, that there is such athing as the rack, which has more than once been applied to persons whoreveal State secrets. Keep good account of your expenses, and such asare truly incurred for the Government, the Government wall pay."Thus ended the conference between Chavigni and the Norman, neither ofwhom we shall follow much farther in this volume. Of Chavigni it is onlynecessary to say, that immediately after the departure of Pauline heproceeded to the Louvre to wait the arrival of Louis the Thirteenth, whosoon after entered Paris, accompanied by the Queen, Cinq Mars, and allthe usual attendants of the court, and followed by the Cardinal andthose members of the Council who had not previously arrived along withChavigni.In regard to the Norman, inspired by the agreeable prospect of athousand crowns, he was not long in visiting the Chapel of the PalaisCardinal, where the Priest speedily united him to a black-eyed damselthat he brought in his hand. Who this was, it does not suit me todiscover to the reader. If he have found it out already, I cannot helpit; but if he have not, I vow and protest that in the whole course ofthis true history I will afford him no farther explanation; no, not evenin the last sentence of the last page of the last volume.Immediately after their marriage the Norman put his bride upon horsebackand proceeded to Brie, each carrying behind them a valise, containing avariety of articles which would doubtless greatly edify the reader tolearn, but which unfortunately cannot now be detailed at full length,the schedule having been lost some years after by one of theircollateral descendants in the great fire of London, where it had foundits way in consequence of the revocation of the edict of Nantes. Allthat can be affirmed with certainty is, that in the valise of the Normanwere three shirts and a half with falling collars, according to thefashion of that day; a pourpoint or doublet of blue velvet, (which washis best,) and a cloak to match; also (of the same stuff) ahaut-de-chausses, which was a machine then used for the same purposeas a pair of breeches now-a-days; and over and above all the rest washis Astrologer's robe and grey beard, folded round a supernumerary braceof pistols, and a small stiletto. Into the Lady's wardrobe we shall notinquire: suffice it to say, that it accompanied its mistress safe fromBrie to Troyes, where, putting up at the Grand Soleil, the Normanbegan his perquisitions concerning Fontrailles.Now having left all my friends and acquaintances at sixes and sevens, Ishall close this volume; and if the reader be interested in their fate,he may go on to the next, in which I mean utterly to annihilate themall, leaving nothing behind but the sole of the Count de Blenau's shoe,with FINIS at the bottom of the page.END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.CHAPTER I.Showing how a Great Minister made a great mistake.Strange to say, in the manuscript notes from which this true history isderived, there occurs the most extraordinary omission that perhaps everappeared in the writings of any one pretending to accuracy; and mostprovoking of all, I have searched memoirs and annals, histories andletters, state papers and private memoranda, and have consulted allsorts of tradition, oral and written, without being enabled to supplyfrom any other source the neglect of the original historian. Who wouldbelieve, that, after having interested the reader so deeply in thecharacter of Jacques Chatpilleur, Cuisinier Aubergiste, the writer ofthe above-mentioned notes would be so inconsiderate, so stupid, sodisappointing, as not to say one word concerning the farther progress ofthe redoubtable vivandier on that night, wherein he achieved the twofamous victories recorded in the last volume. But so it is: instead ofgiving us a pathetic account of the scanty supper he at length contrivedto furnish forth for the noble prisoner, or of satisfying our curiosityin regard to the means he employed to appease the wrath of the Governor,the notes skip over the farther proceedings of that entire night, andbring us at once upon the Count de Blenau's levee the next morning;entering into very minute details concerning the difficulties heencountered in arranging his mustaches, buttoning his pourpoint, &c.without assistance; all of which I shall pass over as contemptible andirrelevant, and below the dignity of authentic history.With the embarrassment of the Count de Blenau's mind we have somethingmore to do; and, to tell the truth, the more he reflected upon hissituation, the more he was puzzled in regard to his future conduct. Afresh examination, either by Lafemas or some member of the Council, wasto be expected speedily, under which he must either still refuse toanswer, which would infallibly be followed by the peine forte et dure;or he must acknowledge that the Queen had privily conveyed him an orderto confess all, which would involve his royal mistress and himself andPauline in dangers, the extent of which he hardly knew; or he must replyto the questions he had before refused to answer, and disclose what hadbeen intrusted to his honour, without showing that he was authorized todo so; in which case, the reproach of treachery and cowardice mustinevitably fall upon his name. This was a dilemma with three horns, andeach very sharp; so that it was difficult to determine which to jumpupon, and seemingly impossible to avoid them all. De Blenau was sadlychewing the cud of these bitter doubts, when he heard some one enter theouter chamber; and the moment after, the very privacy of his bedroom wasinvaded by the Governor, who entered with a countenance pale andagitated; and who, like all people who have something horrible tocommunicate, begged him not to be alarmed, in a tone that was enough tofrighten him out of his wits."Alarmed at what?" demanded the Count, summoning courage to encounterthe danger, whatever it might be."Why, Monsieur de Blenau," answered the Governor, "you must prepareyourself to meet the Cardinal himself; a messenger has just come to saythat he will be here in person without loss of time. He arrived lastnight at the Palais Cardinal, and brought the King to Paris with him.""You seem to hold this Cardinal in some fear," said De Blenau, almostsmiling, amidst his own embarrassment, at the evident terror of theGovernor. "I could have wished that he had given me a little more timefor consideration; but I am not so frightened at him as you seem to be,who have nothing to do with it.""But pray remember, mon cher Comte," cried the Governor, "that youpromised not to betray me to the Cardinal in any case."De Blenau's lip curled with contempt. "I think, you ought to know beforethis time," answered he, "that I am not likely to betray any one.--Butthere seems a noise and bustle in the court, in all probability causedby the arrival of the Cardinal. Go and receive him, and depend uponme."--Of all misfortunes on the earth, thought De Blenau, the curse ofcowardice is the most dreadful.In a few minutes his supposition respecting the arrival of the Cardinalwas confirmed by a summons to appear before the Council in the hall ofaudience; and with his mind still undecided, he followed the officeracross the court to the scene of his former examination. A difference,however, struck him in the present arrangements of the prison, fromthose which he had before remarked.The court, instead of being crowded by those prisoners who had theliberty of walking in it, was now entirely void; and, fixed like marbleon each side of the door opening into the audience-hall, was a soldierof the Cardinal's guard, between whom stood a clerk, or greffier, of thecouncil-chamber, seemingly waiting for the approach of the prisoner. Assoon as De Blenau was within hearing, the doors were thrown open, andthe Clerk pronounced, "Claude Count de Blenau, appear before the King incouncil.""The King!" thought De Blenau; "this Cardinal, not content with takingthe King's guards, must take his title also:"--but passing on throughthe open doors he entered the hall, where a very different scenepresented itself from that which had before met his eyes in the sameplace.The whole farther part of the chamber was filled with the officers andattendants of Richelieu: each side, as well as the interstices betweenthe massy pillars that supported the roof, was occupied by a body of theCardinal's guard: in the chair at the head of the table sat the Kinghimself with the Prime Minister on his right hand: Chavigni,Bouthilliers, Mazarin and others, occupied seats on either side; and tocomplete the array appeared several clerks, together with the officersof the prison, leaving only the space of about three feet at the bottomof the table, which remained clear for the prisoner to present himselfopposite the throne.Extraordinary as it was for the King himself to sit upon the examinationof a State prisoner, the whole demeanour and conduct of the monarch hadundergone a change since the return of Cinq Mars, which astonished thoseabout him more than even his resolution to be present at the councilheld that morning in the Bastille. Even those who were most accustomedto watch the changes of the King's variable disposition, would hardlyhave recollected in the Sovereign, who, with the easy dignity andself-possession of a clear and intelligent mind, presided at the head ofthe council-table, the same man who in general yielded his very thoughtsto the governance of Richelieu, and abandoned all his kingly duties toone whom he appeared both to dislike and dread. But so it was, that,stimulated by some unseen means, Louis seemed at once to have resumedthe King; and as soon as De Blenau entered the audience-hall, he at onceopened the business of the day himself with all those powers which hismind really possessed when called into activity."Monsieur de Blenau," said the King, "we are glad to see you. We haveheard much of you, and that always a good report, from those that welove, and therefore our confidence in your honour and integrity isgreat. There will be various questions asked of you to-day by themembers of the council present, which much affect the welfare of thekingdom, and our own personal happiness; and to these questions wecommand you, as a good subject and an honest man, to answer truly, andaccording to your conscience, without any reservation whatsoever."Before entering the audience-hall, De Blenau, well knowing that everycareless word might be subject to misconstruction, had determined tospeak as little as possible; and therefore, merely answering the King'sspeech by a profound inclination of the head, he waited in silence forthe questions to which he had alluded.Richelieu, the keen searching glance of whose eyes had been fixed uponhim during the whole time, paused for a moment in expectation of areply; but seeing that he said nothing, the Minister proceeded himself."I have heard with astonishment, Monsieur de Blenau," said he, "that youhave lately refused to answer questions, to which you had before repliedin conversation with me; and I can conceive no reason, Sir, why youshould object to give satisfaction on these points one day as much asanother.""Nor can I conceive," replied De Blenau, "any reason why your Eminenceshould cause questions to be put to me again which I had beforeanswered; and that reiteration even while the replies were yet new inyour mind.""My memory might want refreshing," answered the Cardinal; "and you mustalso remember, that the circumstances were very different at the twoperiods in which those questions were addressed to you. In the firstplace, you spoke merely in conversation; in the second case, you were aprisoner, and it was therefore necessary that your deposition should betaken from your own mouth.--But all this is irrelevant. The Council isnot inclined to take notice of your former contumacy, provided you nowreply to what shall be asked you."De Blenau was again silent, merely bowing to signify that hecomprehended, without pledging himself either to answer or not; andRichelieu proceeded with his questions, placing his hand, as he did so,upon a large packet of open letters which lay on the table before him."You have already informed me, Monsieur de Blenau, if I rememberrightly," said the Minister, "that you have, at various times, forwardedletters for the Queen, both by the usual public conveyances andotherwise."The King fixed his eyes intently upon the Count, while he replied atonce, "I have done so!""Can you remember," continued the Cardinal, "during what period you havebeen accustomed to send these letters for the Queen? I mean, of whatdate was the first?""I cannot precisely at this moment call to mind," answered De Blenau,"but it was shortly after your Eminence appointed me, or ratherrecommended me, to the office of Chamberlain to her Majesty.""You see, Sire," said Richelieu, turning to the King with a meaningglance, "just before the taking of Arras by the Imperialists----""Exactly so, your Eminence; I remember it by a circumstance thatoccurred at the time," interposed De Blenau, misdoubting the effect ofthe Cardinal's comments.Richelieu gave him a gracious smile for this confirmation of his remark."Pray, what circumstance was that, Monsieur de Blenau?" demanded he; buthis smile was soon clouded by the Count's reply."It was, that the lace lappets, in order to procure which her Majestywrote that letter to Brussels, were seized at Arras, that city havingfallen into the enemy's hands. The Queen was much grieved thereat. Youknow, Monseigneur, ladies set great store by their apparel."Chavigni smiled, but Richelieu's brow gathered into a heavy frown, andhis reply was in that deep hollow tone of voice, by which alone onecould distinguish when he was affected by any powerful feeling. His browat all times remained calm, except when he sought to awe or intimidate;his eye, too, was under command, scanning the passions of others, andexpressing none of his own, but those which he himself wished to appear;but his voice betrayed him, and when internally agitated, it would sinkto so low and cavernous a sound, that it seemed as if the dead werespeaking. It was in this tone that he answered De Blenau."The contents of that letter, Sir, are but too well known by theireffects. But I am to conclude, from your observation, that you are aswell aware of what the Queen's letters have contained, as the persons towhom they were addressed.""Not so, your Eminence," replied De Blenau. "The import of that letter Ihappened to be acquainted with by accident, but I pretend to no fartherknowledge.""Yes, yes, Sir," said Richelieu, "it is very evident that you know wellto be informed or not on any subject, as it suits your purpose.""Nay, Monsieur le Cardinal," interposed the King, "I think the younggentleman answers with all candour and discretion. We do not seek toperplex him, but to hear the truth; and sure I am that he will notdiscredit his birth or honour by prevarication.""Your Majesty's own honourable mind does justice to mine," replied theCount: "I will own that I am guarded in my speech; for surrounded bythose who seek to draw matter from my mouth, on which to found someaccusation against me, I were a fool to speak freely. Nevertheless, Iwill answer truly to whatsoever I do answer; and if there should come aquestion to which I cannot reply without betraying my duty, I will tellno falsehood, but, as I have done before, refuse to answer, and theconsequences of my honesty be upon my own head.""Well, Sir," said the Cardinal, "if you have done the harangue withwhich you are edifying the council, I will proceed with my questions;but first let me tell you, that I am not disposed to be dared withimpunity. I think you denied to me that you had ever forwarded anyletters to Don Francisco de Mello, Leopold Archduke of Austria, orPhilip King of Spain.--Beware what you say, Claude Count de Blenau!""If I understand your Eminence rightly," said the prisoner, "you do notask me whether I ever did forward such letters, but whether I everdenied to you that I did forward them: in which case, I must reply, thatI did deny having expedited any letter to Don Francisco de Mello, butthe two other names I never touched upon.""Then you acknowledge that you have conveyed letters from the Queen tothe Archduke and the King of Spain?" demanded Richelieu."I have made no such acknowledgment," answered De Blenau; "your Eminenceputs a forced construction on my words.""In vain you turn, Sir, like a rebellious serpent that strives in itswindings to escape the hand that grasps it. At once I ask you, have youor have you not, ever, by any means, expedited any letter from theQueen, or other person, to either the Archduke of Austria, or the Kingof Spain? This, Sir, is a question that you cannot get over!"The eyes of the whole Council fixed upon the Count as the Cardinalspoke. De Blenau paused for a moment to recollect himself, and thenaddressed himself directly to the King. "As a good and faithfulsubject," he said, "there is a great duty which I owe your Majesty, andI believe I have always performed it as I ought; but as a servant ofyour royal consort the Queen, I have other duties, distinct, though Ihope in no degree opposed to those which bind me to my King. As a man ofhonour also and a gentleman, I am bound to betray no trust reposed inme, whether that trust seem to me material or not; and though I feelsure that I might at once answer the questions proposed to me by hisEminence of Richelieu without any detriment or discredit to her Majesty,yet so sacred do I hold the confidence of another, that I must declineto reply, whatever be the consequence. However, let me assure you, Sire,that no word or deed of her Majesty the Queen, which has ever come to myears, has been derogatory to your Majesty's dignity, or contrary to yourinterest.""Then I am to conclude that you refuse to answer?" said Richelieusternly: "think, Monsieur de Blenau, before you carry your obstinacy toofar.""My conduct does not arise in obstinacy," replied De Blenau, "but from asense of what is due to my own honour; and unless it can be shown methat it is her Majesty's desire I should inform your Eminence of all Iknow respecting her affairs, from henceforth I hold my tongue, andanswer no farther questions whatever.""Be the consequence on your own head then, young man," exclaimed theCardinal. "We will now break up the council.--Monsieur de Blenau, takeleave of the sun, for you never see another morrow!"De Blenau's courage was unshaken, but yet a cold chilly feeling gatheredround his heart as Richelieu bade him take leave of the sun, and rose tobreak up the council. But still the King kept his seat, and Chavigni,hastily writing a few words on a scrap of paper, handed it to theCardinal, who, after reading it, appeared to think for a moment, andthen again addressed De Blenau. "There is one hope still left for you,Sir: did Monsieur de Chavigni understand you rightly, that if you hadthe Queen's command to confess what you know of her affairs, you wouldanswer the questions we put to you?"De Blenau breathed freely. "Undoubtedly!" replied he; "my honour willthen be satisfied, and there will be no subject on which I shall have areserve.""What will you consider a sufficient expression of her Majesty'scommands to that effect?" asked Chavigni: "I know that his Eminencewishes to treat you with all possible lenity, although the mere commandof the King in council ought to be sufficient warrant for you to yieldany information that may be required.""We think differently on many points, Monsieur de Chavigni," answered DeBlenau; "but if you can show me her hand-writing to any order, or if oneof the officers of her household will bear me a message from her Majestyto deliver what little I know of her affairs, I will do so withoutfarther hesitation."There was now a momentary consultation carried on in a low voice amongstthe various members of the council, apparently concerning which of theQueen's attendants should be sent for; but at length Chavigni whisperedto the Cardinal, "Send for La Rivire; he is a friend of Lafemas, andwill do any thing he is bid.""If Monsieur de La Rivire bear you the Queen's commands, will you besatisfied, Sir Count?" demanded Richelieu."The Queen's Gentleman-usher," said De Blenau; "most assuredly; thatwill be sufficient.""Go yourself, Chavigni," whispered Richelieu, "and as you come, tell himwhat to say.--We will wait his arrival," he proceeded aloud;--"but see,Monsieur de Chavigni, that he communicates with the Queen, and be fullyinformed of her wishes."De Blenau smiled, convinced from his late information through Paulinethat the Queen was still at Chantilly, and therefore that though LaRivire might be himself in Paris, and ready to swear any thing that theCardinal dictated, he could have no communication with Anne of Austria,unless, what seemed improbable, she had returned to the capital with theKing.As soon as De Chavigni had retired for the purpose of seeking LaRivire, Richelieu ran his eye over some memoranda, as if about to putfarther questions to De Blenau; but the King, not noticing theseindications of his purpose, addressed the prisoner himself. "Well,Monsieur le Comte," said he, "while Chavigni is gone, there are two orthree points on which I shall be glad to speak with you."Richelieu was surprised, and not particularly delighted, thinking thatthe King was about to continue the examination himself, which might notbe conducted precisely in such a manner as to produce the effect hewished; but, in the independent mood with which Louis was affected, hedared not, with all his daring, attempt to interrupt the course of hisSovereign's proceedings, and therefore remained silent, watching theopportunity of interposing, to give what turn he best could to theinterrogatory that appeared about to commence. In the mean while DeBlenau bowed his head, calmly prepared to bear the mental torture of along cross-examination, where every word might be subject to dangerousmisconstruction."I understand, Monsieur de Blenau," continued the King, while the wholeCouncil listened with attentive expectation--"I understand that you havethe best breed of boar-dogs in France. Pray are they of the Pomeranianor the Exul race?--and how can they be procured?"Richelieu bit his lip; but to De Blenau the King's question was like theclearing away of a threatened storm; and habitually attached to thechase, as well as deeply learned in all its mysteries, he was delightedto find that Louis turned the conversation to a subject equally familiarto both."Mine are the true Pomeranian breed, Sire," he replied; "flewed an inchdeep, with eyes like Sandarak--would light your Majesty home at night,if by chance you lost your way. In truth, they are only fit for amonarch; and Cinq Mars has now four couple of the best in education foryour Majesty, which, when well trained, and recovered from theirwildness, he will present to your Majesty in my name; and I humbly hopethat you will accept them in aid of your Royal sport.""We shall, we shall; and thank you well, Sir Count," replied the King,smiling most graciously at the prospect of possessing a breed which hehad been long seeking for in vain. "Monsieur le Cardinal, do you hearthat? We will hunt with them some day. You used to hunt in your day too;have you quite given it over?""I have been too much busied, Sire," answered Richelieu gravely, "inhunting from your Majesty's dominions Huguenot wolves and Spanish foxes,to pursue other game."Louis turned from him with an uneasy shrug, expressive of fully as muchdistaste for Richelieu's employments as the statesman experienced forhis; and once more addressing De Blenau, he plunged deep into thescience of hunting, hawking, and fowling; giving the young Count athousand receipts, instructions, and anecdotes, which he listened towith the most reverential deference, not only in as much as theyproceeded from his Sovereign, but also as coming from the mostexperienced sportsman of the age.In the mean while, Richelieu was fain to employ himself in writing notesand memoranda, to allay the spleen and irritation that he felt at whathe internally termed the King's weak trifling; till at length he wasrelieved by the return of Chavigni, bringing with him the Queen's Usher,La Rivire.De Blenau well knew that this person, who was by birth just within therank of a gentleman (which word was then in France one of greatsignificance), had been placed in the service of Anne of Austria for thepurpose of acting as a spy upon her, from Richelieu's fear of hercorrespondence with Spain; but informed, as the Count now was, of theQueen's wishes, it was perfectly indifferent to him who appeared on herbehalf; his only object being, that his mistress's commands, publiclyexpressed, should, in the minds of all, free him from the imputation ofhaving betrayed her.La Rivire looked round him, as he entered, with a glance not altogetherfree from apprehension; for though Chavigni had given him fullinstructions and information concerning the services he was sent for toperform, yet there was something so terrible in the idea of theBastille, that he could hardly keep his limbs from trembling as hepassed the gates of the prison."Come hither, Monsieur de La Rivire," exclaimed the Cardinal, as soonas he appeared: "We are wasting too much time here." La Rivireapproached, and placed himself in the spot to which Richelieu pointed,almost exactly opposite to De Blenau.The Cardinal then proceeded. "Have you seen her Majesty the Queen sinceMonsieur de Chavigni informed you of the wishes of the Council?""I have, may it please your Eminence," replied La Rivire, in atremulous voice."And what was her Majesty's reply to our request?" asked Richelieu."Speak boldly!" he added, in a tone only calculated to reach the ear ofthe Usher, who stood close beside him, and showed plainly, by hishesitating manner, that he was under the influence of alarm. TheCardinal, however, attributed this to a wrong cause, thinking that LaRivire had not really seen the Queen, and was about to play his part,as prompted by Chavigni, but that in all probability he would spoil itby his hesitation.Just as La Rivire was proceeding to answer, however, Chavigni, who hadtaken his place at the council-table the moment he entered, and had beenwriting rapidly since, conveyed a slip of paper across to the Cardinal,who raised his hand for the Usher to be silent while he read. The wordswhich his friend had written greatly discomposed the Minister's plans.They were, "I am afraid it will not succeed: I have seen the Queen, whenshe not only told La Rivire, at once, to command the Count, in hername, to answer every question that related to her, but has given him aletter under her own hand to that effect. She is either innocent, orrelies devotedly on De Blenau: whichever is the case, her open conductwill clear her in the mind of the King. Act as you like.""What is the matter, Monsieur le Cardinal?" demanded Louis, somewhatimpatiently. "Why do we not proceed?""Because," answered Richelieu, "what Monsieur de Chavigni says is right,Sire, though, I confess, it did not strike me before. Shall we notbecome contemptible in the eyes of the world, by submitting to bedictated to by Monsieur de Blenau? And is it not a gross insult to yourMajesty's power, to obey the commands of the Queen, when he has refusedto obey your own? I am sorry that this did not appear to me earlier; butthe objection now seems to me so forcible, that I can proceed no fartherin this course."Louis paused. He was as jealous of the Queen possessing any authority asRichelieu could wish; but in the present instance he was urged, bydifferent motives, in an opposite direction. Some sparks of affectionhad revived in his bosom towards Anne of Austria, and he wished much tosatisfy himself regarding the suspicions which had been urged againsther. De Blenau was the dear friend of his favourite Cinq Mars; and hismind also had begun to yield to the arguments of those who sought thedestruction of the Minister. But, on the other hand, the habit of beingruled by Richelieu, and the specious arguments he produced, made Louishesitate:--"What, then, do you intend to do?" demanded he, addressingthe Cardinal."In the first place, Sire," replied Richelieu sternly, "I propose tointerrogate the prisoner once more, and if his contumacy stillcontinues, let the question be his doom."The King's naturally good feelings and love of justice here at onceovercame all doubt. "No, God forbid!" cried he, rousing himself toenergy. "What, are we Christians, Monsieur le Cardinal, and shall we puta fellow-creature to the torture, when there is a straight-forward wayto gain the information that we want? Fie upon it! No!"Richelieu's ashy cheek grew still a shade paler. It was the first timefor many a year he had undergone rebuke. He felt that trammels withwhich he had so long held the King enthralled were but as green lithestwined round the limbs of a giant. He saw that the vast fabric of hispower was raised upon a foundation of unsteady sand, and that even thenit trembled to its very base."Monsieur La Rivire, answer the King!" continued Louis, in a dignifiedtone. "What says the Queen to the request of our Council, that she wouldcommand her Chamberlain to answer those questions, in regard to which hehas a scruple on her account?""Her Majesty says, Sire," answered La Rivire, "that she is most willingto do any thing that will please your Majesty; and she has not onlyordered me to command, in her name, Monsieur de Blenau to inform theCouncil of every thing he knows concerning her conduct; but has alsowritten this letter, with her own hand, to the same effect." Andadvancing to the table, he bent his knee before the King, and presentedthe document of which he was the bearer.Louis took the letter, and read it through. "This looks not like aguilty conscience," said he, frowning upon Richelieu. "Give that toMonsieur de Blenau," he continued to one of the officers. "There, SirCount, is your warrant to speak freely; and though we think you carryyour sense of honour too far, so as to make it dangerous to yourself,and almost rebellious towards us, we cannot help respecting theprinciple, even though it be in excess.""May I always have such a judge as your Majesty!" replied De Blenau."Most humbly do I crave your royal pardon, if I have been at all wantingin duty towards you. Believe me, Sire, it has proceeded not from anyfault of inclination, but from an error in judgment. I have now nofarther hesitation, all my duties being reconciled; and, I believe, thebest way fully to reply to the questions which have been asked me, willbe by telling your Majesty, that I have on several occasions forwardedletters from the Queen, by private couriers of my own, or by any otherconveyance that offered. None of these letters have been either to theArchduke, to Don Francisco de Mello, or any other person whatever,connected with the Spanish Government, except her Majesty's brother,Philip, King of Spain, to whom I have assuredly sent several; but beforeI ever undertook to do so, her Majesty condescended to give me her mostpositive promise, and to pledge her Royal word, that the tidings shegave her brother should on all occasions be confined to her domesticaffairs, nor ever touch upon the external or internal policy of theGovernment, so that my honour and allegiance should be equallyunsullied. These letters have sometimes remained upon my person forweeks, waiting for the fit opportunity to send them; which circumstancehaving by some means been discovered, has caused me no smallinconvenience at times. Farther, I have nothing to tell your Majesty,but that I have ever heard the Queen express the greatest affection foryour Royal person, and the warmest wishes for your public and privatewelfare; and, on my honour, I have never observed her do, by word oraction, any thing which could be construed into a breach of the duty sheowes your Majesty, either as her sovereign or her husband."You see!" exclaimed the King, turning to Richelieu, as De Blenauconcluded; "You see--exactly what she confessed herself--not one tittleof difference."The anger of the Cardinal, at finding himself foiled, swept away hispolitical prudence. Irritated and weakened by a wearing disease, he wasin no frame of mind to see calmly a scheme he had formed with infinitecare, so completely overthrown; and forgetting that the King's energieswere now aroused to oppose him, he resolved to let his vengeance fall onthe head of De Blenau as the means of his disappointment. His browdarkened, and his eye flashed, and he replied in that stern and haughtymanner which had so often carried command along with it."If your Majesty be satisfied, of course so am I, whose sole wish was topurge the lily crown from the profaning touch of strangers. But as forMonsieur de Blenau, he has confessed himself guilty of a crime littleshort of high treason, in forwarding those letters to a foreign enemy.We have already condemned a woman to exile for a less offence; andtherefore the mildest sentence that the Council can pronounce, andwhich by my voice it does pronounce, is, that Claude Count de Blenaube banished for ever from these realms; and that, if after the space ofsixteen days he be found within their precincts, he shall be consideredas without the pale of law, and his blood be required at the hand of noman that sheds it!"There was an indignant spot glowing in the King's face while Richelieuspoke thus, that Chavigni marked with pain; for he saw that theprecipitant haste of the Minister was hurrying his power to its fall."Too much of this!" cried Louis angrily. "Lord Cardinal, you forget thepresence of the King. Monsieur de Blenau--We, by our royal prerogative,do annul and make void the sentence you have just heard, merelycommanding you to retire from this chateau of the Bastille, withoutholding communication with any persons attached to the Court, and torender yourself within the limits of our province of Bourbon, and thereto wait our farther pleasure. The Council is over," he continued,rising. "Monsieur le Cardinal de Richelieu, by sending the warrant forthe Count's release some time in the day to our Governor of theBastille, you will merit our thanks."The officers cleared the way for the King--the huissiers of thechamber threw wide the doors--and Louis, with a firm and dignified step,proceeded slowly out of the hall, followed by Richelieu, who,thunderstruck and confounded, kept his eyes bent upon the ground, in thesilence of deep astonishment. The rest of the Council, equally mute andsurprised, accompanied the Cardinal with anxiety in every eye; while theofficers of the Bastille and the Count de Blenau remained the soleoccupants of the hall of audience.CHAPTER II.In which De Blenau gets out of the scrape.The silence that reigned in the audience-hall of the Bastille after thescene we have described, endured several minutes, during which eachperson who remained within its walls, commented mutely on theextraordinary events he had just witnessed. De Blenau's feelings were ofcourse mingled, of surprise at the King's unusual conduct, andgratification at his own deliverance. The Governor's thoughts weredifferently employed, looking forward to the fall of Richelieu,speculating in regard to his successor, and trying to determine whowould be the best person to court in the changes that were likely toensue. "Like master, like man," says the adage; and the inferiorofficers of the prison, in compliance therewith, calculated upon theremoval of the Governor as a consequence of the ruin of the Ministerwho had placed him there, and laid their own minor plans for securingtheir places.De Blenau was the first to break silence. "Well, my friend," said he,addressing the Governor, "I am to be your guest no longer, it seems; butbe assured that I shall not forget my promises.""You are infinitely good, Monseigneur," answered the other, bowingalmost to the ground. "I hope you will believe that I have gone to thevery extreme of what my duty permitted, to afford you all convenience.""I have no doubt of it," replied the Count; "but let me ask what hasbecome of my good friend, Philip, the woodman? He must not beforgotten."The knowledge of the severity he had exercised towards poor Philip, inthe first heat of his anger, now called up a quick flush in the palecheek of the Governor; and he determined to shelter himself from theresentment of his late prisoner, by telling him that the Woodman hadbeen liberated.In those dangerous times, the acuteness of every one was sharpened bycontinual exercise; and De Blenau's eye, fixing on the varyingcountenance of his companion, soon detected that there was somethingamiss, by the alteration which his question produced. "Monsieur leGouverneur," said he, "give me the truth. I promise you that every thingshall be forgotten, provided you have not seriously injured him; but Imust know that the man is safe who has served me so faithfully.""The fact then is this, Monseigneur," replied the Governor; "thinking itbest for all parties, I ordered this Monsieur Philip Grissolles to beconfined till after your examination to-day, lest any thing mighttranspire that could injure you or me.""You thought of yourself alone, Sir," answered De Blenau somewhatbitterly; "but see that he be restored to that degree of liberty whichyou were ordered at first to permit, or you will hear more of me--"As he spoke, the door of the audience-hall, communicating with the outercourt, was thrown open so suddenly as to make the Governor start a paceback, and Chavigni entered the room with a countenance, from which allhis efforts could not banish the anxiety of his mind. Naturally quickand impatient, it often happened that his long training in the school ofpolitical duplicity did not suffice to overcome the struggles of hisoriginal disposition; and even the violent effort to conquer the nativeearnestness and impatience of his character would sometimes produce morevisible marks of its working than if he had suffered his passions totake their course. In the present instance, his fine features were drawnand sharpened by the attempt to drive from them any expression of hisfeelings, and his eye flashed with ill-subdued fire, as he irritatedhimself with a thousand conjectures concerning the latent movers of therecent occurrences. On entering, he pointed with his hand towards thedoor for the Governor to leave them; and seeing that he did notimmediately obey, he exclaimed in no very placable voice, "Begone! Iwish Monsieur de Blenau's company alone.--What do you wait for? Oh,there is the order for his liberation--There, take your pack with you."And he pointed to the lower officers of the prison, who thus dismissed,quickly followed the Governor as he shrunk away from the Statesman'shasty and irritable glance."Monsieur de Blenau," said Chavigni, as soon as the door was closed, "itwas not worth while to detain you here for an hour or two, till suchtime as the order could be sent for your emancipation; I therefore drewit out in the lodge.--But you owe me nothing for that;" he continued,seeing that De Blenau was about to thank him for the supposed service."I made it an excuse to stay behind, in order to seek an answer to aquestion or two. Now, I make no pretence of asking you these questionsas a friend, for I know that you consider me not as such; but I do itmerely on my own account, wishing for information on some pointsregarding which you alone can satisfy me. It is your business,therefore, to consider before you answer, whether so to do be for yourinterest or not. The only thing I will promise, which I do honestly, is,not to let your replies go beyond my own breast.""The method of your address is certainly extraordinary, Monsieur deChavigni," replied De Blenau: "but however we may differ on many points,I give you credit for so much frankness, that I believe you would notbetray even your enemy if he relied on you: neither do I know, or ratherrecollect, at this moment, any question I should hesitate to answer.Therefore propose what you think fit, and I will satisfy you, or not, assuits my convenience.""Between you and me, Monsieur de Blenau, there is no need of finewords. I have always found you strictly honourable, and therefore I relyon what you tell me, as if it were within the scope of my own knowledge.In the first place, then, you have been witness to an extraordinaryscene to-day.--Are you at all aware from what cause the King has actedas he has done, so at variance with his conduct for fifteen years?""Particularly, I am aware of no cause, and can only conjecture that hisMajesty is tired of being dictated to by his servant?""Umph!" said Chavigni, in a tone of dissatisfaction; "there is no needto triumph, Monsieur de Blenau. Am I to believe that you know of no onewho has instigated the King to take such singular steps in your favour?""Of none whatever!" answered the Count; "unless it were her Majesty theQueen,--the effect of any application from whom, would be quitedifferent, I should conceive.""No, no, no!" said Chavigni. "It was not on her that my suspicionsrested. I must have been mistaken. One word more.--Have you had any latecommunication with Monsieur de Cinq Mars?""About three weeks ago I wrote to him from St. Germain, sending someyoung hounds for the King's service; but that was long before I dreamedof finding my way hither.""I must have been mistaken," repeated Chavigni. "I thank you, Monsieurde Blenau. This must be a whim of the King's own--God grant it! for thenthe humour will soon pass.""And now, Sir," said De Blenau, "that I have answered your questions,there are one or two subjects on which you might give me satisfaction.Are you inclined to do so?""If I can, without injuring myself or others, or disclosing any planthat I am desirous to conceal," replied the Statesman."My questions shall regard the past, and not the future," said DeBlenau; "and are intended merely to gratify my own curiosity. In thefirst place then, I once saw you at St. Germain, in conversation with ademoiselle attached to Mademoiselle de Beaumont--to what did yourbusiness with her refer?""I did not think you had seen us," replied Chavigni. "I might answerthat I was making love, and probably you thought so as well as she didherself; but my conversation referred to you. I found that she had beenpresent when Seguin, the surgeon, brought the news of your having beenwounded to the Queen: and from her also I learned the words he made useof to let her know that you had not lost the packet which you had uponyou in the wood of Mantes.""Monsieur de Chavigni," said De Blenau, with more cordiality in hismanner than he usually evinced towards the Statesman; "the world is toowell aware of your domestic happiness for any one to suspect you ofdegrading yourself to a soubrette; I thank you for your candour. Nowtell me, is a poor man, called Philip, the woodman, detained here on myaccount? and why is he so?""He is," replied Chavigni, "and the reason is this:--he happened torecognize amongst those who attacked you a servant of mine, and was foolenough to tell it abroad, so that it reached the King's ears. Now,though every thing is justifiable in the service of the State, I did notparticularly wish that business investigated, and I therefore putMonsieur Philip in here to keep him out of the way for a time. You arenow of course aware why you were attacked. It was to secure the paperson your person, which papers we supposed were part of a treasonablecorrespondence between the Queen and the Spanish Government. All that isnow over; and therefore, if you will promise me not to stir the businessof that affray in any way--which indeed would do you no good--thismeddling Woodman shall have his liberty.""I never had the slightest intention of stirring it," replied De Blenau;"and therefore rest satisfied on that score. But at the same time I musttell you that the whole affair came to the King's ears through me, andnot through the Woodman, I believe. I observed your servant, as well ashe did, and did not fail to write of it to several of my friends, aswell as speak of it openly on more than one occasion; and this, dependupon it, has been the means by which it reached the ears of the King,and not by poor Philip.""Then I have done him wrong," said Chavigni, "and must make him someamends.--Let me see.--Oh, he shall be Sub-lieutenant of the forest; itwill just suit him. And now, Monsieur de Blenau, as a friend, let megive you one piece of advice. This country is in a troubled anduncertain state, and there will be, doubtless, many plots and cabalsgoing on. Retire, as you are commanded, into Bourbon; and if any oneattempt to lead you into any conspiracy, so far from acceding, do noteven listen to them; for the Cardinal owes you something for what hashappened to-day, and he is not one to forget such debts. The eye of anangry man is upon you!--so be as guarded as if you trod amongst vipers.The time will come when you will say that Chavigni has advised youwell.""And it is certainly advice which I shall follow, both from reason andinclination. But let me ask--am I to consider the King's prohibitionstrict in regard to communicating with any one at the Court?"Chavigni thought for a moment, and De Blenau imagined that he wasconsidering the circumstances under which Louis's command had beengiven; but it was not so. The mind of the Statesman rapidly reverted toPauline de Beaumont, all his precautions with regard to whom turned outto be nugatory; and he now calculated the consequences which were likelyto ensue under the present state of affairs. He had no fear, indeed, inregard to the responsibility he had taken upon himself; for it would beeasy to prove, in case of investigation, that Pauline had attempted indisguise to communicate privately with a State prisoner in theBastille, which would completely justify the measures he had pursued;but he wished on all accounts to let a matter drop and be forgottenwhich had already produced such disagreeable events, and he thereforedetermined boldly to inform Madame de Beaumont of what had been done,and the motives for doing it; and then--certain that for her own sakeshe would keep silence on the subject--to restore her daughter with allspeed.Though the thoughts of Chavigni were very rapid in combination, yet allthese considerations occupied him so long, that De Blenau, perceivinghis companion plunged into so profound a reverie, took the liberty ofpulling him out by the ear, repeating his former question, whether hewas to consider the King's prohibition in regard to communicating withthe Court as strictly to be observed."Undoubtedly!" replied Chavigni: "beyond all question! You do not wantto get into the Bastille again, do you? Oh! I perceive it isMademoiselle de Beaumont you are thinking of. But you cannot see her.She is neither in Paris, nor at St. Germain; but I will take care thatwhen she joins her mother in Paris, she shall be informed of yoursafety; and you can write yourself when you get into the Bourbonnois."The reader, who is behind the scenes, may probably take the trouble ofpitying De Blenau for the anxiety he would suffer on hearing thatPauline was neither at St. Germain nor in Paris; but there is nooccasion to distress himself. De Blenau knowing that Pauline hadabsented herself from the court for the purpose of conveying to him theepistle of the Queen, naturally concluded that Chavigni had beendeceived in regard to her absence, and that she was at all events insafety wherever she was.In the mean time Chavigni proceeded. "You must of course go to St.Germain, to prepare for your journey; but stay even there as few hoursas you well may. Remember, I have told you, the eye of an angry man isupon you!--To-day is yours--to-morrow may be his--take care that by theleast imprudence you do not turn your sunshine into storm. That you maymake all speed, I will lend you a horse; for I own I take some interestin your fate--I know not why--It shall be at the gates in an hour,together with an order for the Woodman's liberation: so now, farewell.I have wasted too much time on you already."With this speech, half kind, half rude, Chavigni left De Blenau. Whetherthe Statesman's motives were wholly friendly, or whether they might notbe partly interested, proceeding from a nice calculation of theprecarious state both of the Cardinal's health and of his power, weighedwith the authority the Queen might gain from the failure of either, theCount did not stay to investigate, although a suspicion of the latterkind flashed across his mind. In this, however, he did Chavigniinjustice. In natural character he was not unlike De Blenau himself,frank, honourable, and generous; but education is stronger than nature;and education had made them different beings.On the departure of the Statesman, the Count returned once more to theapartment he had occupied while a prisoner, with no smallself-gratulation on the change in his situation. Here he busied himselfin preparations for his departure, and took pains to ascertain that thepaper written by the unhappy Caply still remained in the book, as wellas that the file was yet in the position which it described. Havingfinished this examination, which he looked upon as a duty to the nextperson destined to inhabit that abode, he waited impatiently till thehour should be passed which Chavigni had named as the time likely toelapse before the horse he promised would be prepared.Ere it had flown much more than half, however, the Governor entered thechamber, and with many profound bows and civil speeches, informed himthat Monsieur de Chavigni had sent a horse for his use, and an order forthe immediate liberation of Philip, the woodman. De Blenau was gratifiedby Chavigni's prompt fulfilment of his word in this last respect; andremembering the thousand crowns which he had promised the Governor onhis liberation, he placed them in his hands, which brought him very nearto the end of the large sum of gold that his valise contained.Now De Blenau was perfectly well convinced that the Governor was asgreat a rogue as need be; but there is something so expansive in theidea of being liberated from prison, that he could not bear the thoughtof keeping his louis shut up in a bag any longer, and he poured themforth into the Governor's palm with as much satisfaction as if he wasemancipating so many prisoners himself.An ecu courant was worth, in that day, about three francs, and alouis d'or somewhere about four-and-twenty (more or less, according tothe depreciation), so that eight ecus, or crowns, went to the louis;and, consequently, the sum of one thousand crowns amounted very nearlyto one hundred and twenty-five golden louis, which was a very prettyreward for a rogue to receive for being a rascal in a good cause:nevertheless, the Governor, even when he had safely clutched thepromised fee, looked very wistfully at a little green silk bag, which DeBlenau reserved in his left hand, and which he calculated must containabout the same sum, or more.The Count, however, held it firm; and having given directions to whom,and when, his baggage was to be delivered, he descended into the innercourt, and cast his eyes round in search of his faithful friend Philip.But the Woodman had received at once his emancipation from the dungeonwhere we last left him, and the news that De Blenau was free; and thoughhe lingered in the court to see the young Count depart, with somethingboth of joy and pride in his feelings, yet there was a sort of timiddelicacy in the peasant's mind, which made him draw back fromobservation, amidst the crowd of prisoners that the court now contained,the moment that he perceived the Governor, with many a servile cringe,marshalling the late prisoner towards the gate of the Bastille; whilethose less fortunate persons, still destined to linger out their timewithin its walls, stood off with curious envying looks, to allow apassage for him now freed from their sad fellowship. De Blenau, however,was by no means forgetful of the Woodman, and not perceiving him amongstthe rest, he inquired where he was, of the obsequious Governor, whoinstantly vociferated his name till the old arches echoed with thesound. "Philip! Philip the woodman! Philip Grissolles!" cried theGovernor."Does he know that he is free altogether to return home?" demanded DeBlenau, seeing him approach."No, I believe not," replied the Governor. "I had the honour of waitingfirst upon your Lordship."Philip now came near, and De Blenau had the gratification of announcingto him, unforestalled, that the storm had blown over, and that he mightnow return to his cottage in peace. He also told him of the appointmentwith which Chavigni proposed to compensate his imprisonment--an officeso elevated, that the gayest day-dreams of Philip's ambition had neversoared to half its height. But the joy of returning to the bosom of hisfamily, to the calm shelter of his native forest, and the even tenor ofhis daily toil, swallowed up all his feelings--A throne would not havemade him happier; and the tears of delight streaming down his roughcheek, brought a glistening drop too into De Blenau's eye. Noble andaristocratic as he was, De Blenau felt that there was an aristocracyabove all--the nobility of virtue; and he did not disdain to grasp thebroad hand of the honest Woodman. "Fare you well, Philip," he said."Fare you well, till we meet again. I shall not easily forget you."The Woodman felt something more weighty in his palm than the hand of DeBlenau, and looked at the heavy green purse which remained in it with ahesitating glance. But the Count raised his finger to his lip with asmile. "Not a word," said he, "not a word, as you value my friendship."And turning round, he followed the Governor through the various passagesto the outer court, where stood Chavigni's horse caparisoned for hisjourney. De Blenau sprang into the saddle with the lightness ofrecovered freedom. The heavy gate was thrown open, the drawbridge fell,and, striking the sides of his horse with his armed heel, the newlyemancipated prisoner bounded over the clattering boards of thepontlev, and with a lightened heart took the road to St. Germain.His journey was soon made, and, as he approached the place of hisdestination, all the well-known objects round about seemed as if thereshone upon them now a brighter and more beautifying sun than when helast beheld them. At his hotel all was gladness and delight, andcrowding round their loved Lord, with smiles of welcome, his attendantscould scarcely be made to comprehend that he was again about to quit St.Germain. De Blenau's commands, however, immediately to prepare for along journey, recalled them to their duty; and eager to accompany himwherever he went, their arrangements were soon completed, and theMajordomo announced that all were ready.Not so the Count himself, who, notwithstanding the King's command, couldnot resolve to quit St. Germain's without visiting the Palace. Sendingforward, therefore, his train to the entrance of the forest, heproceeded on foot to the gate of the Park, and crossing the terrace,entered the chateau by the small door in the western quadrangle.Perhaps De Blenau was not without a hope that Pauline might havereturned thither from Paris; and at first, meeting none of the royalservants, he walked from empty chamber to chamber, with a degree ofundefined expectation that in each he should find the object of hiswishes: but of course his search was in vain, and descending to thelower part of the building, he proceeded to the Porter's chamber, who,having received no news to the contrary, informed him that the wholeCourt were still at Chantilly.I know not why it is, but somehow the heart, by long association withparticular objects, forms as it were a friendship even with thingsinanimate, when they have been the silent witnesses of our hopes or ourhappiness; they form a link between us and past enjoyment, a sort oflandmark for memory to guide us back to happy recollections; and to quitthem, like every other sort of parting, has no small degree of pain. Weare apt, too, to calculate all that may happen before we see them again,and the knowledge of the innumerable multitude of human miseries, fromamongst which Fortune may choose, gives generally to such anticipationsa gloomy hue. Looking back upon the towers of St. Germain, De Blenaufelt as if he were parting from Pauline, and parting from her for a longand indefinite time; and his heart sickened in spite of all the gaydreams to which his liberation had at first given birth.Who is there that even when futurity is decked in the brightest colourswhich probability can lend to hope--when youth, and health, and ardentimagination combine to guarantee all the promises of life--who is there,that even then does not feel the painful influence of parting from anything that is loved? Who is there in the world, the summer of whosebosom is so eternal, that at such moments, dark imaginings will notcloud the warmest sunshine of their heart, and cast a gloomy uncertainshadow on the most glowing scenes expectation can display? Just so DeBlenau. Fancy presented to his mind a thousand forebodings of evil, aswith many a lingering look he turned again and again towards the Palace;and even when at length he was joined by his train, who waited at theentrance of the forest, he was still absorbed in gloomy meditations.However, he felt it was in vain, and springing on his horse, he turnedhis face resolutely on his onward way.Skirting along the wood, he soon reached Versailles, and thenceproceeding with little intermission, he arrived in time to pass thenight at Etampes, from which place he set out early the next morning forOrleans. Continuing to trace along the course of the Loire with quickstages, he soon arrived at Nevers, where he crossed the river, andshortly after entered the Bourbonnois.CHAPTER III.Which shows the truth of the French adage, "L'habit ne fait pas lemoine."I know I am very wrong, very partial, and very inconsiderate, to givetwo consecutive chapters to the Count de Blenau, when I have more peopleto despatch than had Captain Bobadil in the play, and less time to do itin. But I could not help it; those two last chapters would go together,and they were too long to be clapped up into one pat, as I have seenSarah the dairy-maid do with the stray lumps of butter that float aboutin the butter-milk, after the rest of the churn's produce has beenotherwise disposed of. So I am very sorry, and so forth.--And now, ifyou please, my dear reader, we will go on to some one else. What wouldyou think of the Norman?--Very well!--For my part, I look upon him asthe true hero of the story; for according to the best accounts, he eatmore, drank more, lied more, and fought more than any one else, and wasa great rogue into the bargain; all which, in the opinion of Homer, isrequisite to the character of a hero. See the Odyssey passim.At Troyes, the Norman's perquisitions were very successful. NoBow-street officer could have detected all the proceedings ofFontrailles with more acuteness. Step by step he traced him, from hisfirst arrival at Troyes, till the day he set out for Mesnil St. Loup;and learning the road he had taken, he determined upon following thesame track, for he shrewdly concluded, that whatever business of importthe conspirator had been engaged in, had been transacted in the two daysand one night, which, according to the story of the garon d'aubergeat the Hotel du Grand Soleil, he had been absent from the good city ofTroyes.Now, our friend Monsieur Marteville had learned another piece of news,which made him the more willing to bend his steps in the directionpointed out as that which Fontrailles had taken. This was no other thanthat a considerable band of robbers had lately come down into that partof the country to collect their rents; and that their principal hauntwas supposed to be the thick woods which lay on the borders of the highroad to Troyes, in the neighbourhood of Mesnil.True it is, the Norman had abandoned his free companions of the forest,and received the wages of Monsieur de Chavigni; but still he kept up akind of desultory correspondence with his former associates, and had notlost sight of them till certain reports got about, that the LieutenantCriminel was going to visit the forest of Laye, which induced them toleave the vicinity of St. Germain, for fear that there should not beroom enough in the forest for them and the Lieutenant too. It wasnatural enough that Marteville should wish to make a morning call uponhis old friends: besides--I'll tell you a story. There was once upon atime a man who had a cat, of which he was so fond, that, understandingone Mr. Pigmalion had got an ivory statue changed into a wife by justasking it, he resolved to see what he could do for his cat in the sameway. But I dare say you know the story just as well as I do--how the catwas changed into a woman, and how she jumped out of bed after a mouse,and so forth; showing plainly, that "what is bred in the bone will nevergo out of the flesh;" that "nature is better than a schoolmaster;" andthat "you can never make a silk purse out of a sow's ear;" as Sanchowould say. But, however, the Norman had a strange hankering after hisgood old trade, and was very well inclined to pass a day or two in thefree forest, and do Chavigni's work into the bargain. There was a littleembarras indeed in the case, respecting Louise, for whom, in thesefirst days of possession, he did feel a certain degree of attachment;and did not choose to leave her behind, though he did not like to takeher with him, considering the society he was going to meet. "Pshaw!"said he at length, speaking to himself, "I'll leave her at Mesnil."This resolution he began to put in execution, by placing Louise upon onehorse, and himself upon the other, together with their several valises;and thus, in the same state and order in which they had arrived atTroyes, so they quitted it for Mesnil St. Loup. All the informationthat Marteville possessed to guide him in his farther inquiries,amounted to no more than this, (which he learned from the aforesaidgaron d'auberge;) namely, that the little gentleman in grey had takenthe road apparently to Mesnil; that he had been absent, as before said,two days and one night; and that his horse, when it came home, appearedto have been furnished with a new shoe en route. This, however, wasquite sufficient as a clue, and the Norman did not fail to turn it toits full account.Passing through the little villages of Mehun and Langly, the Norman eyedevery blacksmith's forge as he went; but the one was next to thepost-house, and the other was opposite the inn; and the Norman went on,saying within himself--"A man who was seeking concealment, would ratherproceed with his beast unshod than stop there." So, resuming hisconversation with Louise, they jogged on, babbling, not of green fields,but of love and war; both of which subjects were much within theknowledge of the Sieur Marteville, his battles being somewhat morenumerous than his wives, and having had plenty of both in his day.At all events, Louise was very well satisfied with the husband thatHeaven had sent her, and looked upon him as a very fine gentleman, and agreat warrior; and though, now and then, she would play the coquette alittle, and put forth all the little minauderie which a Languedocsoubrette could assume, in order to prevent the Norman from having toogreat a superiority, yet Monsieur Marteville was better satisfied withher than any of his former wives; and as she rode beside him, he admiredher horsemanship, and looked at her from top to toe in much the samemanner that he would have examined the points of a fine Norman charger.No matter how Louise was mounted: suffice it to say, that it was not ona side-saddle, such things being but little known at the time I speakof.While they were thus shortening the road with sweet discourse, at thedoor of a little hovel by the side of the highway, half hidden fromsight by a clumsy mud wall against which he leaned, half exposed by thelolloping position he assumed, appeared the large, dirty, unmeaning faceand begrimed person of a Champenois blacksmith, with one hand grubbingamongst the roots of his grizzled hair, and the other hanginglistlessly by his side, loaded with the ponderous hammer appropriated tohis trade. "C'est ici," thought the Norman; "Quatre vingt dix neufmoutons et un Champenois font cent--Ninety-nine sheep and a Champenoismake a hundred; so we'll see what my fool will tell me.--Holla!Monsieur!""Plait-il?" cried the Champenois, advancing from his hut."Pray has Monsieur Pont Orson passed here to-day?" demanded the Norman."Monsieur Pont Orson! Monsieur Pont Orson!" cried the Champenois, tryingto assume an air of thought, and rummaging in his empty head for a namethat never was in it: "Pardie, I do not know.""I mean," said the Norman, "the same little gentleman in grey, whostopped here ten days agone, to have a bay horse shod, as he was comingback from--what's the name of the place?""No!" cried the Champenois; "he was going, he was not coming, when hehad his horse shod.""But I say he was coming," replied the Norman. "How the devil do youknow he was going?""Mais dame!" exclaimed the other; "How do I know he was going? Why,did not he ask me how far it was to Mesnil? and if he had not beengoing, why should he wish to know?""It was not he, then," said the Norman."Mais dame! ouai!" cried the Champenois. "He was dressed all in grey,and had a bay horse, on whose hoof I put as nice a piece of iron as evercame off an anvil; and he asked me how far it was to Mesnil, andwhereabouts was the old Castle of St. Loup. 'Monsieur Pont Orson!Monsieur Pont Orson? Dieu! qui aurait dvin que c'toit Monsieur PontOrson?'""Mais je vous dis que ce n'toit pas lui," cried the Norman, puttingspurs to his horse. "Allons, chrie. Adieu, Monsieur Champenois,adieu!--Ha! ha! ha!" cried he, when at a little distance. "Ganache!he has told me all that I wanted to know. Then he did go to Mesnil--theold Chateau of St. Loup! What could he want there? I've heard of thisold chateau.""But who is Monsieur Pont Orson?" demanded Louise, interrupting thebroken cogitations of her husband."Nay, I know not, ma chre," replied her husband. "The man in themoon, with a corkscrew to tap yon fool's brains, and draw out all Iwanted to know about the person whom I told you I was seeking forMonsieur de Chavigni.--It was a mere name. But there, I see a steeple onyon hill in the wood. Courage! we shall soon reach it. It is not above aleague.--That must be Mesnil."The Norman's league, however, proved at least two, and Louise, though agood horsewoman, was complaining most bitterly of fatigue, when theyarrived in the little street of Mesnil St. Loup, and, riding up to thedwelling of our old friend Gaultier the innkeeper, alighted under thewithered garland that hung over the door."Holla! Aubergiste! Garon!" cried the Norman, "Holla!"But no one came; and on repeating the summons, the sweet voice of thedame of the house was all that could be heard, screaming forth a varietyof tender epithets, applicable to the garon d'curie, and intended tostimulate him to come forth and take charge of the strangers' horses."Don't you know, Lambin," cried she, "that that hog your master islying up-stairs dying for no one knows what? And am I to go out,Maraud, and take people's horses with my hands all over grease, whileyou stand l--s--ng yourself there? Cochon! if you do not go, I'llthrow this pot-lid at you." And immediately a tremendous rattle on theboards at the farther side of the stable, announced that she had been asgood as her word.This seemed the only effectual method of arousing the occultsensibilities of the garon d'curie, who listened unconcerned to hergentler solicitations, but, yielding to the more potent application ofthe pot-lid, came forth and took the bridle of the horses, while ourNorman lifted his lady to the ground.The sight of such goodly limbs as those possessed by MonsieurMarteville, but more especially the blue velvet pourpoint to which wehave formerly alluded, and which he wore on the present occasion, didnot fail to produce the most favourable impression on the mind of thelandlady; and, bustling about with the activity of a grasshopper, sheprepared to serve the athletic cavalier and his pretty lady to the bestcheer of the auberge."Would Madame choose some stewed escargots pour se restaurer? WouldMonsieur take un coup de vin before dinner to wash the dust out ofhis mouth? Would Madame step up-stairs to repose herself? Would Monsieurtake a gouter?" These and a thousand other civil proffers the hostessshowered upon the Norman and Louise, some of which were accepted, somedeclined; but the principal thing on which the Norman seemed to set hisheart was the speedy preparation of dinner, which he ordered with thetrue galloping profusion of a beggar on horseback, demanding the bestof every thing. While this was in progress, he forgot not the principalobject of his journey, but began with some circumlocution to draw thehostess towards the subject of Fontrailles' visit to Mesnil.At the very mention, however, of a little man in grey, the good landladyburst forth in such a torrent of invective that she went well nigh toexhaust her copious vocabulary of epithets and expletives; while theNorman, taken by surprise, stood gazing and shrugging his shoulders,wondering at her facility of utterance, and the vast rapidity with whichshe concatenated her hard names. The little man in grey, who had beenthere precisely ten days before, was, according to her opinion, a liar,and a rogue, and a cheat; a conjuror, a Huguenot, and a vagabond; a manwithout honour, principle, or faith; a maraud, a matin, amisrable; together with a great many other titles the enumeration ofwhich she summed up with "et s'il n'est pas le Diable, le Diablel'emporte!""C'est vrai," cried the Norman every time she paused to take breath;"C'est vrai. But how came you to find out he was so wicked?"The lady's reply was not of the most direct kind; but from it the Normangathered, with his usual acuteness, that after our friend Gaultier hadpointed out to Fontrailles the road to the old Castle of St. Loup, hereturned home, his mind oppressed with the consciousness of being theconfidant of a Sorcerer. He laboured under the load of this terrificsecret for some days; and then, his constitution not being able tosupport his mental struggles, he sickened and took to his bed, where hestill lay in a deplorable state, talking in his sleep of the conjuror ingrey, and of Pre Le Rouge, and the Devil himself, and sundry otherrespectable people of the same class. But when awake, it must beremarked, the aubergiste never opened his lips upon the subject,notwithstanding all the solicitations which his better half, beingtempted by the curiosity of her sex, did not fail to make. From allthis the good dame concluded that the little man in grey had bewitchedher husband and driven him mad, causing him to lie up there upon his bedlike a hog, neglecting his business and leaving her worse than a widow.All this was corn, wine and oil to the mind of the Norman, who, wiselyreserving his opinion on the subject, retired to consult with Louise,having a great esteem for woman's wit in such cases. After somediscussion, a plan was manufactured between them, which, though somewhatbold in conception, was happily brought to issue in the followingmanner.During the dinner, at which the bourgeoise waited herself, she was nota little surprised to hear Louise more than once call Marteville by thereverend appellation of mon pre; and if this astonished, how much washer wonder increased when afterwards, during a concerted absence of theNorman, the fair lady informed her, under a promise of profound secrecy,that the goodly cavalier, whose blue velvet doublet she had so muchadmired, was neither more nor less than the celebrated Pre Alexis,directeur of the Jesuits of Alenon, who was travelling in disguise inorder to place her (one of his penitents) in a monastery at Rome.True, Louise either forgot or did not know that they were not preciselyin the most direct road to Rome, but she was very safe in the person shespoke to, who had even less knowledge of where Rome stood than herself.Now the story of Louise was a very probable one in every other respect,considering the manners of the day; for les bons pres Jesuites veryoften travelled about in disguise for purposes best known to themselves,and very few of the bons pres, whether Jesuits or not, were averse toa fair penitent. Be that as it may, the simple bourgeoise neverdoubted it for a moment, and casting herself at the feet of Louise, sheentreated her, with tears in her eyes, to intercede with the reverenddirecteur to confess and absolve her sinful husband, who lay up-stairslike a hog, doing nothing.Just at this moment the Norman re-entered the room; and though hisprecise object, in the little drama they had got up, was neither morenor less than to confess the unhappy aubergiste, yet, as a matter ofform, he made some difficulty to meddling with the penitent of another;but after faintly advising that the Cur of the village should be sentfor, he agreed, as the case was urgent, to undertake the office ofconfessor himself, though he mildly reproached Louise, in presence ofthe hostess, for having betrayed his real character, and bade her bemore careful in future.As soon as he had signified his consent, the bourgeoise ran to tellher husband that the very reverend Pre Alexis, directeur of theJesuits of Alenon, had kindly consented to hear his confession andabsolve him of his sins; and in the mean while the Norman gavedirections to Louise, whose adroitness had often served him indiscovering the secrets of the Palace, while she had remained withMadame de Beaumont, to gain, in the present instance, all theinformation she could from the wife, while he went to interrogate thehusband.This being settled, as a blue velvet pourpoint was not exactly the garbto play a confessor in, Louise ran in all haste to strip theAstrologer's robe we have already mentioned of all its profane symbols,and the Norman, casting its shadowy folds over his lusty limbs, anddrawing the hood over his head, appeared to the eye as goodly a friar asever cracked a bottle. No great regard to costume was necessary, for thelandlady took it all for granted; and when she beheld the Norman issueforth from the room in which the valise had been placed, clothed in hislong dark robes, she cast herself at his feet in a transport ofreverence and piety.Monsieur Marteville, otherwise the Pre Alexis, did not fail to give herhis blessing with great gravity, and with a solemn demeanour and slowstep followed to the chamber of the sick man.Poor Gaultier was no longer the gay rosy-cheeked innkeeper which he hadappeared to Fontrailles, but, stretched upon his bed, he lay pale andwan, muttering over to himself shreds and tatters of prayers, andthinking of the little man in grey, Pre Le Rouge, and the Devil. Assoon as he beheld the pretended Pre Alexis enter his chamber, heessayed to rise in his bed; but the Norman motioned him to be still, andsitting down by him, exhorted him to make a full confession of his sins,and then, to give greater authenticity to his character, he knelt downand composed an extempore prayer, in a language equally of his ownmanufacture, but which the poor aubergiste believed devoutly to beLatin, hearing every now and then the words sanctissimus, in seculaseculorum, and benedictus, with which the Norman did not fail toseason it richly, being the only stray Latin he was possessed of."Humgumnibus quintessentialiter expositu dum dum; benedictus sintfoolatii et sanctissimus fourbi. Hi sty Aubergisti rorum coram nobisexcipe capones poulardici generi, fur grataverunt pectus, legbonibusvenzon in secula seculorum sanctissimus benedictus," said the Norman."Amen!" cried the innkeeper from the bottom of his heart, with suchfervency that the Pre Alexis could scarcely maintain his gravity.The Norman now proceeded to business, and putting down his ear to alevel with the lips of Gaultier, he once more desired him to make aclear breast."Oh, mon Pre," cried Gaultier, "Je suis un pauvre pcheur, unmisrable!"The good Father exhorted him to take courage, and to come to a detail ofhis crimes."Oh, mon Pre," cried he, "I have sold cats for rabbits, and moreespecially for hares. I have moistened an old hareskin with warm waterand bloodied it with chicken's blood, to make my cats and my badgers andmy weasels pass for what they really were not. I have cooked up snakesfor eels, and dressed vipers en matelot. I have sold bad wine ofBois-marly for good wine of Epernay; and, Oh, mon Pre, je suis unpauvre pcheur.""Well, well, get on," cried the Norman somewhat impatiently, "I'll giveyou absolution for all that. All innkeepers do the same. But what morehave you done?""Oh, mon Pre, je suis un pauvre pcheur," proceeded Gaultier in a lowvoice; "I have charged my customers twice as much as I ought to charge.I have vowed that fish was dear when it was cheap; and I have--""Nom de Dieu!" cried the Norman, getting out of temper with therecapitulation of Gaultier's peccadilloes. "Nom de Dieu! that is tosay, in the name of God, I absolve you from all such sins as are commonto innkeepers, masters of taverns, cooks, aubergistes and thelike--sins of profession as they may be called--only appointing you tokneel before the altar of your parish church for two complete hours,repeating the Pater and the Ave during the whole time, by way ofpenance;" thought he, for making me hear all this nonsense.--"But come,"he continued, "bring up the heavy artillery--that is, let me hear yourmore uncommon sins. You have some worse things upon your conscience thanany you have told, or I am mistaken.""Oh, mon Pre! Oh, mon bon Pre!" groaned Gaultier, "Je suis unpauvre pcheur, un misrable.""Now it comes," thought the Norman; "Allons, allons, mon fils, ayezcourage! l'Eglise est pleine de misricorde.""There was an old owl in the barn," said Gaultier, "and woodcocks beingscarce--""Ventre Saint Gris!" cried Marteville to himself, "this will nevercome to an end;" "Mais, mon fils," he said aloud, "I have told you,all that is pardoned. Speak, can you charge yourself with murder,treason, conspiracy, sorcery,"--Gaultier groaned--"astrology,"--Gaultiergroaned still more deeply--"or of having concealed any such crimes, whencommitted by others?" Gaultier groaned a third time. The Norman had nowbrought him to the point; and after much moaning, hesitation, and agonyof mind, he acknowledged that he had been privy to a meeting ofsorcerers.--Nay, that he had even conducted a notorious Astrologer, alittle man in grey, on the road to meet the defunct Pre Le Rouge andhis companion the Devil, at the old Chateau of St. Loup; and that it washis remorse of conscience for this crime, together with his terror atrevealing it, after the menaces of the Sorcerer, that had thrown himinto the lamentable state in which he then lay.By degrees, the Norman drew from him every particular, and treasuringthem up in his memory, he hastened to give the suffering innkeeperabsolution; which, though not performed in the most orthodox manner,quite satisfied Gaultier; who concluded, that any little difference ofform from that to which he had been used, proceeded from the Normanbeing a Jesuit and a directeur; and he afterwards was heard todeclare, that the Pre Alexis was the most pious and saintly of men, andthat one absolution from him was worth a hundred from any one else;although the Cur of the village, when he heard the method in which ithad been administered, pronounced it to be heterodox and heretical, andin short a damnable error.And here be it remarked, that a neighbouring Cur having taken up thequarrel of Pre Alexis, and pronounced his form to be the right one, aviolent controversy ensued, which raged in Champagne for more than fiftyyears, producing nine hundred pamphlets, three thousand letters, twentypublic discussions, and four Papal bulls, till at length it was agreedon all hands to write to the Jesuits of Alenon, and demand theirauthority for such a deviation from established rules: when it wasdiscovered that they administered absolution like every one else; andthat they never had such a person as Pre Alexis belonging to their veryrespectable and learned body.But to return to the Norman. As soon as he had concluded all theceremonies he thought right to perform, for the farther consolation ofGaultier, he said to him--"Fear not, my son, the menaces of theSorcerer; for I forbid all evil beings, even were it the Devil himself,to lay so much as the tip of a finger upon you; and moreover, I will gothis very night to the old Chateau of St. Loup, and will exorcise PreLe Rouge and drive his spirit forth from the place, and, morbleu! ifhe dare appear to me I will take him by the beard, and lead him intothe middle of the village, and all the little children shall drum himout of the regiment--I mean out of the town."With this bold resolution, Monsieur Marteville descended to the groundfloor, and communicated his design to Louise and the bourgeoise, whowere sitting with their noses together over a flaggon of vin chaud."Donnez moi un coup de vin," said he, "et j'irai."But Louise, who did not choose to trust her new husband out of hersight, having discovered by a kind of instinct, that in his case"absence was worse than death," declared she would go with him, and seehim take Pre Le Rouge by the beard. The Norman remonstrated, but Louisepersisted with a sort of sweet pertinacity which was quite irresistible,and, though somewhat out of humour with her obstinacy, he was obliged toconsent.However, he growled audibly while she assisted to disembarrass him ofhis long black robe; and probably, had it not been for his assumedcharacter, would have accompanied his opposition with more than one ofthose elegant expletives with which he was wont to season his discourse.Louise, notwithstanding all this, still maintained her point, and thehorses being brought forth, the bags were placed on their backs, and theNorman and his spouse set forth for the old Chateau of St. Loup, takingcare to repeat their injunction to the landlady not to discover theirreal characters to any one, as the business of the Pre directeurrequired the utmost secrecy.The landlady promised devoutly to comply, and having seen her guestsdepart, entered the public room, where several of the peasantry had bythis time assembled, and told every one in a whisper that the tallgentleman they had seen get on horseback was the Pre Alexis,directeur of the Jesuits of Alenon, and that the lady wasMademoiselle Louise de Crackmagnole, sa penitente. Immediately, theyall ran in different directions, some to the door, some to the window,to see so wonderful a pair as the Pre Alexis and his penitente. Thebustle, rushing, and chattering which succeeded, and which the landladycould no way abate, called the attention of the Sieur Marteville, who,not particularly in a good humour at being contradicted by Louise, wasso much excited into anger by the gaping of the multitude, that he hadwell nigh drawn the portentous Toledo which hung by his side, andreturned to satisfy their curiosity by presenting his person rathernearer than they might have deemed agreeable. He bridled in his wrath,however, or rather, to change the figure, kept it in store for somefuture occasion; and consoling himself with a few internal curses, inwhich Louise had her share, he rode on, and soon arrived at that part ofthe wood which we have already said was named the Sorcerer's Grove.Of the unheard of adventures which there befel, the giants that he slew,and the monsters that he overcame, we shall treat in a future chapter,turning our attention at present to other important subjects which callloudly for detail.CHAPTER IV.Being a Chapter of Explanations, which the reader has no occasionto peruse if he understands the story without it."Great news! Cinq Mars!" exclaimed Fontrailles. "Great news! theCardinal is sick to the death, and goes without loss of time toTarascon: he trembles upon the brink of the grave."Cinq Mars was stretched upon three chairs, the farthest of which he keptbalanced on its edge by the weight of his feet, idly rocking itbackwards and forwards, while his mind was deeply buried in one of theweak romances of the day, the reading which was a favourite amusementwith the Master of the Horse, at those periods when the energies of hismind seemed to sleep. "Too good news to be true, Fontrailles," hereplied, hardly looking up; "take my word for it, the Devil never dies.""That may be," answered Fontrailles, "but nevertheless the Cardinal, asI said, is dying, and goes instantly to Tarascon to try anotherclimate.""Why, where hast thou heard all this? and when didst thou come fromSpain?" demanded Cinq Mars, rousing himself. "Thou hast made goodspeed.""Had I not good reason?" asked the other. "But they tell me that I mustquestion you for news; for that it is something in regard to yourfriend, the young Count de Blenau, which has so deeply struck theCardinal.""Well then, I will give the story, in true heroic style," answered CinqMars, tossing the book from him. "Thou dost remember, O my friend!" hecontinued, imitating the language of the romance he had just beenreading, "how stormy was the night, when last I parted from thee, at theold Chateau of Mesnil St. Loup; and if the thunder clouds passed away,and left the sky clear and moonlighted, it was but to be succeeded by astill more violent tempest. For, long after thou wert snugly housed atTroyes, De Thou and myself were galloping on through the storm ofnight. The rain fell, the lightning glanced, the thunder rolled overhead, and the way seemed doubly long, and the forest doubly dreary, whenby a sudden blaze of the red fire of heaven, I descried some one,mounted on a white horse, come rapidly towards us.""Come, come, Cinq Mars!" exclaimed Fontrailles, "for grace, leave theland of romance--remember I have a long story to tell, and not much timeto tell it in. Truce with imagination therefore, for we have moreserious work before us.""It's truth--it's truth, thou unbelieving Jew," cried Cinq Mars. "Noromance, I can assure you. Well, soon as this white horseman saw twoothers wending their way towards him, he suddenly reined in his beast,and turning round, galloped off as hard as he could go. Now, ifcuriosity be a failing, it is one I possess in an eminent degree; so,clapping spurs to my horse, after him I went, full faster than he ranaway. As for De Thou, he calls out after me, loud enough to drown thethunder, crying, 'Cinq Mars, where are you going? In God's name stop--Weknow the place is full of banditti--If these are robbers, they maymurder you,'--and so on; but finding that I did not much heed, he alsowas smitten with a galloping fit, and so we followed each other, like aprocession, though with no procession pace: the white horseman first--Inext--and De Thou last--with about a hundred yards between each ofus--going all at full speed, to the great peril of our necks, and nosmall danger of our heads from the boughs. I was best mounted however,on my stout black horse Sloeberry--you know Sloeberry;--and sodistancing De Thou all to nothing, I began to come closer to my whitehorseman, who, finding that he could not get off, gradually pulled in,and let me come up with him. 'Well, Sir,' said he directly, with allpossible coolness--'you have ridden hard to-night.'--'In truth, I have,my man,' answered I, 'and so have you, and I should much like to knowwhy you did so.'--'For the same reason that you did, I suppose,' repliedthe boy, for such it was who spoke.--'And what reason is that?' Iasked.--'Because we both liked it, I suppose,' replied he.--'That maybe,' answered I; 'but we have all a reason for our likings.'--'True,Sir,' said the boy, 'and I dare say your's was a good one; pray,believe that mine was so also,'--All the time he spoke, he kept lookinground at me, till at last he got a good sight of my face. 'Are not youMonsieur de Cinq Mars?' cried he at length.--'And if I am, what followsthen?'--'Why it follows that you are the person I want,' said theboy.--'And what want you with me?'--'Who is that?' demanded he, pointingto De Thou, who now came up. I soon satisfied him on that score, and hewent on. 'My name is Henry de La Mothe, and I am Page to your goodfriend, the Count de Blenau, whom I have seen arrested and carried tothe Bastille.'"Now, you know, Fontrailles, how dear I hold De Blenau; so you may guesshow pleasantly this rang upon my ear. My first question to the Page was,whether my friend had sent him to me. 'No, no, Seigneur,' answered theboy; 'but as I knew you loved my master, and the King loved you, Ithought it best to let you know, in case you might wish to serve him. Hewas taken as he was about to go with the Queen to Chantilly, and theywould not let me or any other go with him, to serve him in prison. So Icast about in my mind, how I could serve him out of it, and consequentlycame off to seek you.'--'But how did you know where to find me?'demanded I, not a little fearing that our movements were watched; butthe boy relieved me from that by answering, 'Why, Sir, there was amessenger came over from Chantilly to desire the Queen's presence; andamongst all the questions I asked him, there was one which made him tellme that you had gone to Troyes upon some business of inheritance, and asI heard that the path through this wood would save me a league, I tookit, hoping to reach the town to-night.'"Well, all the Page's news vexed me not a little, and I thought of athousand things to relieve De Blenau ere I could fix on any. But ithappened, as it often does in this world, that chance directed me whenreasoning failed. Having made the best of my way, I arrived with De Thouand the boy at Chantilly, at the hour of nine the next night, andpassing towards my own apartments in the Palace, I saw the King'scabinet open, and on inquiry, found that he had not yet retired to rest.My resolution was instantly taken; and without waiting even to dust myboots, I went just as I was, to pay my duty to his Majesty. My shortabsence had done me no harm with Louis, who received me with more gracethan ever; so while the newness was on, I dashed at the subject next myheart at once. Like a well-bred falcon, I soared my full pitch, hoveredan instant in my pride of place, and then stooped at once withirresistible force. In short, Fontrailles, for the first time I believein my life, I boasted. I told Louis how I loved him; I counted over theservices I had done him. His noble heart--you may smile, Sir, but he hasa noble heart--was touched; I saw it, and gave him a moment to thinkover all old passages of affection between us, and to combine them withthe feelings of the moment, and then I told him that my friend--my bosomfriend--was suffering from the tyranny of the Cardinal, and demanded hisfavour for De Blenau. 'What can I do, Cinq Mars?' demanded he, 'you knowI must follow the advice of my ministers and counsellors.'"It was an opportunity not to be lost," exclaimed Fontrailles, eagerly;"I hope you seized it."--"I did," replied Cinq Mars. "I plied him hardon every point that could shake the influence of Richelieu. I showed himthe shameful bondage he suffered. I told him, that if he allowed thesovereign power, placed by God in his hands, to be abused by another, hewas as guilty as if he misused it himself; and then I said--'I pleadalone for the innocent, Sire. Hear De Blenau yourself, and if you findhim guilty, bring him to the block at once. But if he have done nothingworthy of death, I will trust that your Majesty's justice will instantlyset him free.' Well, the King not only promised that he would go toParis and examine De Blenau himself, but he added--'And I will be firm,Cinq Mars; I know the power is in my own hands, and I will exert it tosave your friend, if he be not criminal.'"This was all fair, Fontrailles; I could desire no more; but Louis evenout did my expectation. Something had already irritated him against theCardinal--I think it was the banishment of Clara de Hauteford. However,he went to the Bastille with Richelieu, Chavigni, and others of thecouncil. Of course I was not admitted; but I heard all that passed fromone who was present. De Blenau bore him nobly and bravely, and downrightrefused to answer any questions about the Queen, without her Majesty'sown commands. Well; Richelieu, according to custom, was for giving himthe torture instantly. But the King had many good reasons for notsuffering that to be done. Besides wishing to pleasure me, and beingnaturally averse to cruelty, he had a lingering inclination to crossRichelieu, and De Blenau's firmness set him a good example: so theCardinal was overruled; and the Queen's commands to De Blenau to confessall being easily procured, he owned that he had forwarded letters fromher Majesty to her brother the King of Spain. Now, you see, Richelieuwas angry, and irritated at being thwarted; and he did the most foolishthing that man ever did; for though he saw that Louis was roused, andjust in the humour to cross him, he got up, and not considering theKing's presence, at once pronounced a sentence of exile against DeBlenau, as if the sovereign power had been entirely his own, withoutconsulting Louis, or asking his approbation at all. Though, God knows,the King cares little enough about using his power, of course he doesnot like to be treated as a mere cipher before his own Council; andaccordingly he revoked the Cardinal's sentence without hesitation,sending De Blenau, merely for form's sake, into Bourbon, and thenrising, he broke up the Council, treating Richelieu with as scantyconsideration as he had shown himself. By Heaven! Fontrailles, when Iheard it, I could have played the fool for joy. Richelieu was deeplytouched, you may suppose; and what with his former ill health and thisnew blow, he has never been himself since; but I knew not that he was sofar gone as you describe.""It is so reported in Paris," replied Fontrailles, "and he has become sohumble that no one would know him. But mark me, Cinq Mars. The Cardinalis now upon the brink of a precipice, and we must urge him quickly down;for if he once again gain the ascendency, we are not only lost for ever,but his power will be far greater than it was before.""He will never rise more in this world," answered Cinq Mars. "His day, Itrust, is gone by: his health is broken; and the King, who always hatedhim, now begins to fear him no longer. I will do my best to strengthenLouis's resolution, and get him into a way of thinking for himself. Andnow, Fontrailles, for the news from Spain.""Why, my story might be made longer than yours, if I were to go throughall that happened to me on the road. It was a long and barren journey,and I believe I should have been almost starved before I reached Madrid,if I had not half filled my bags with biscuits. However, I arrived atlength, and not without some difficulty found a place to lodge, forthese cold Spaniards are as fearful of admitting a stranger to theirhouse, as if he were a man-tiger. My next step was to send for a tailor,and to hire me a lacquais or two, one of whom I sent instantly to Madamede Chevreuse, praying an audience of her, which was grantedimmediately.""Why thou wert not mad enough to make a confidante of Madame deChevreuse?" exclaimed Cinq Mars; "why, it is carrying water in a sieve.A thousand to one, she makes her peace with Richelieu, by telling himthe whole story.""Fear not, Cinq Mars," answered Fontrailles. "Have you yet to learn thata woman's first passion is revenge? To such extent is the hatred ofMadame de Chevreuse against the Cardinal, that I believe, were she askedto sacrifice one of her beautiful hands, she would do it, if it wouldbut conduce to his ruin."Cinq Mars shook his head, still doubting the propriety of what had beendone; but Fontrailles proceeded."However, I told her nothing; she knew it all, before I set foot inSpain. You must know, King Philip is a monarch no way insensible tofemale charms, and the Duchess is too lovely to pass unnoticed anywhere. The consequences are natural--A lady of her rank having takenrefuge in his dominions, of course the King must pay her everyattention. He is always with her--has a friendship, a penchant, anaffection for her--call it what you will, but it is that sort of feelingwhich makes a man tell a woman every thing: and thus very naturally ourwhole correspondence has gone direct to Madame de Chevreuse. My objectin first asking to see her, was only to gain an immediate audience ofthe King, which she can always command; but when I found that she knewthe whole business, of course, I made her believe that I came for theexpress purpose of consulting her upon it. Her vanity was flattered. Shebecame more than ever convinced, that she was a person of infiniteconsequence, and acknowledged discernment; entered heart and hand intoall our schemes; stuck out her pretty little foot, and made me buckleher shoe; brought me speedily to the King's presence, and made himconsent to all I wished; got the treaty signed and sealed, and sent meback to France with my object accomplished, remaining herself fullyconvinced that she is at the head of the most formidable conspiracy thatever was formed, and that future ages will celebrate her talents fordiplomacy and intrigue."Cinq Mars, though not fully satisfied at the admission of so light abeing as Madame de Chevreuse into secrets of such importance, could nothelp smiling at the account his companion gave; and as it was in vain toregret what was done, he turned to the present, asking what was to bedone next. "No time is now to be lost," said he. "For the whole dangeris now incurred, and we must not allow it to be fruitless.""Certainly not," answered Fontrailles. "You must ply the King hard toprocure his consent as far as possible. In the next place, a counterpartof the treaty must be signed by all the confederates, and sent intoSpain, for which I have pledged my word; and another, similarly signed,must be sent to the Duke of Bouillon in Italy. But who will carry it tothe Duke? that is the question. I cannot absent myself again.""I will provide a messenger," said Cinq Mars. "There is an Italianattached to my service, named Villa Grande, a sort of half-bredgentleman, who, lacking gold himself, hangs upon any who will feed him.They laugh at him here for his long mustaches, and his longer rapier;but if he tell truth, his rapier has done good service; so, as this willbe an undertaking of danger, he shall have it, as he says he seeks butto distinguish himself in my service, and being an Italian, he knows thecountry to which he is going.""If you can trust him, be it so," replied Fontrailles. "At present letus look to other considerations. We must seek to strengthen our party byall means; for though circumstances seem to combine to favour us, yet itis necessary to guard against any change. Do you think that the Queencould be brought to join us?""Certainly not!" replied the Master of the Horse; "and if she would, tous it would be far more dangerous than advantageous. She has no powerover the mind of the King--she has no separate authority; and besides,though Richelieu's avowed enemy, she is so cautious of giving offenceto Louis, that she would consent to nothing that was not openlywarranted by him.""But suppose we are obliged to have recourse to arms," said Fontrailles,"would it not be every thing in our favour to have in our hands theQueen and the Heir apparent to the throne.""True," answered Cinq Mars; "but if we are driven to such extremity, shewill be obliged to declare for some party, and that of necessity must beour's; for she will never side with Richelieu. We can also have her wellsurrounded by our friends, and seize upon the Dauphin should the caserequire it.""What say you, then, to trying the Count de Blenau? He is your friend.He is brave, expert in war, and just such a man as leads the blindmultitude. But more, he is wealthy and powerful, and has much credit inLanguedoc.""I do not know," said Cinq Mars thoughtfully, "I do not know.--De Blenauwould never betray us, even if he refused to aid our scheme. But I muchthink his scruples would go farther than even De Thou's. I have oftenremarked, he has that sort of nicety in his ideas which will not sufferhim to enter into any thing which may, by even a remote chance, cast ashade upon his name.""Well, we can try him at all events," said Fontrailles. "You, Cinq Mars,can ask him whether he will join the liberators of his country.""No, Fontrailles," answered the Master of the Horse in a decided tone;"no, I will not do it. Claude de Blenau is a man by whom I should notlike to be refused. Besides, I should hesitate to involve him, young andnoble-hearted as he is, in a scheme which might draw down ruin on hishead.""In the name of Heaven, Cinq Mars," cried Fontrailles, with realastonishment at a degree of generosity of which he could find no tracein his own bosom, "of what are you dreaming? Are you frenzied? Why, youhave engaged life and fortune, hope and happiness, in this schemeyourself, and can you love another man better?""There is every difference, Fontrailles--every difference. If I cut myown throat, I am a fool and a madman, granted; but if I cut the throatof another man, I am a murderer, which is somewhat worse. But I will beplain with you. I have embarked in this with my eyes open, and it is myown fault. Therefore, whatever happens, I will go on and do my best forour success. But mark me, Fontrailles, if all were to come over again, Iwould rather lay down one of my hands and have it chopped off, thanenter into any engagement of the kind."A cloud came over the brow of Fontrailles for a moment, and a gleam ofrage lighted up his dark grey eye, which soon, however, passed away fromhis features, though the rankling passion still lay at his heart, like asmouldering fire, which wants but a touch to blaze forth and destroy.But his look, as I have said, was soon cleared of all trace of anger;and he replied with that show of cheerfulness which he well knew how toassume, "Well, Cinq Mars, I do not look upon it in so gloomy a light asyou do; though perhaps, were it now to begin, I might not be so ready init either, for the chances we have run were great; but these, I trust,are over, and every thing certainly looks prosperous at present.However, there is no use in thinking what either of us might do had wenow our choice. We are both too far engaged to go back at this time ofday; so let us think alone of insuring success, and the glory of havingattempted to free our country will at least be ours, let the worstbefall us."The word glory was never without its effect on Cinq Mars. It was hispassion, and was but the more violent from the restraint to which hisconstant attendance on the King had subjected it, seldom having beenenabled to display in their proper field those high qualities which hepossessed as a soldier. "So far you are right, Fontrailles," replied he;"the glory even of the attempt is great, and we have but one course topursue, which is straightforward to our object. You, do every thing tobind the fickle goddess to our cause, and so will I; but thinking as Ido, I cannot find it in my heart to involve De Blenau. Manage that asyou like; only do not ask me to do it.""Oh that is easily done," answered Fontrailles, "without your bearingany part in it. Of course each of the confederates has a right to invitewhomsoever he may think proper to join his party, and it would be highlydishonourable of any other to dissuade the person so invited from aidingthe scheme on which all our lives depend. The Count de Blenau, I thinkyou say, is now retired to Bourbon. There also is the Duke of Orleans,and I will take care that he shall broach the subject to the Countwithout implicating you."Cinq Mars started from his seat, and began pacing the room with his eyesbent on the ground, feeling an undefined sensation of dissatisfaction atthe plans of Fontrailles, yet hardly knowing how to oppose them. "Well,well," said he at length; "it is your business, not mine; and besides, Ido not, in the least, think that De Blenau will listen to you for amoment. He has other things to think of. Mademoiselle de Beaumont isabsent, no one knows where; and he must soon hear of it.""Be that as it may," replied Fontrailles, "I will try. And now, CinqMars, let me touch upon another point;" and the wily conspiratorprepared all his powers to work upon the mind of his less cautiouscompanion, and to urge him on to an attempt which had already been theobject of more than one conspiracy in that day, but which, by someunaccountable means, had always failed without any apparent difficultyor obstacle. This was no other than the assassination of the Cardinal deRichelieu: and those who read the memoirs of the faction-breathingGondi, or any other of the historical records of the time, will wonderhow, without any precaution for his personal safety, Richelieu escapedthe many hands that were armed for his destruction.Princes and nobles, warriors and politicians had thought it no crime toundertake the death of this tyrant Minister; but yet there was somethingin the mind of Cinq Mars so opposite to every thing base andtreacherous, that Fontrailles feared to approach boldly the proposal hewas about to make. "Let us suppose, my noble friend," said he, in thatslow and energetic manner which often lends authority to bad argument,"that all our schemes succeed--that the tyrant is stripped of the powerhe has so abused--that the tiger is enveloped in our toils. What are weto do? Are we to content ourselves with having caught him? Are we onlyto hold him for a moment in our power, and then to set him loose again,once more to ravage France, and to destroy ourselves? And if we agree tohold him in captivity, where shall we find chains sufficient to bindhim, or a cage in which we can confine him with security, when there area thousand other tigers of his race ready to attack the hunters of theirfellow?""I propose nothing of the kind," answered Cinq Mars; "once stripped ofhis authority, let him be arraigned for the crimes which he hascommitted, and suffer the death he has merited. The blood of thousandswill cry out for justice, and his very creatures will spurn the monsterthat they served from fear.""Then you think him worthy of death," said Fontrailles, in that kind ofundecided manner which showed that he felt he was treading on dangerousground."Worthy of death!" exclaimed Cinq Mars; "who can doubt it?--Fontrailles,what is it that you mean? You speak as if there was something in yourmind that you know not how to discover. Speak, man. What is it you wouldsay?""Who will deny that Brutus was a patriot?" said Fontrailles; "a brave, anoble, and a glorious man? And Brutus stabbed Csar in theCapitol!--Cinq Mars, when the freedom of our country is at stake, shallwe wait tamely till we have preached a timid Monarch into compliance, ordrawn a foreign power to our aid, when one--single--hand could do thework of justice, and rid the world of a tyrant who has lived so much toolong?""Ha!" exclaimed Cinq Mars, starting back, and laying his hand upon hissword; "dost thou suppose me an assassin? Art thou one thyself, thatthou canst so well gloze over murder with a stale tale ofantiquity?--Monsieur de Fontrailles," he continued more calmly, butstill with stern indignation, "you have mistaken the person to whom youaddressed yourself. Pardon me. We will speak no more upon this subject,lest we end worse friends than we began."Fontrailles was not a common hypocrite; he saw at once that on thispoint persuasion would be vain, and defence of his first proposal wouldbut leave the worse impression on the mind of his companion; andtherefore his determination was formed in a moment to take up the exactreverse position to that which he had just occupied, and if possible toforce Cinq Mars into a belief that the proposal had only been made totry him. The first wild start of his companion had caused Fontrailles todraw back almost in fear; but instantly recovering himself, like awell-trained actor, every muscle of whose face is under command, hefixed his eyes on Cinq Mars, and instead of any sign of anger ordisappointment, he threw into his countenance an expression of gratifiedadmiration. "Cinq Mars, my noble friend!" he exclaimed, opening hisarms to embrace him as the other concluded; "you are the man I thoughtyou! Pardon me if I have sought to try you! but when I heard you proposeto affect the Cardinal's life by our plans, I knew not how far that ideamight lead you, and I wished to be sure of the man with whom I was sodeeply engaged. I declare before Heaven, that had I found that youproposed to do Richelieu to death by aught but legal means, I shouldhave been deeply grieved, and would have fled from France where-e'er myfortune might lead, leaving you to follow your plans as best you might.But I am now satisfied, and demand your pardon for having ever doubtedyou."Cinq Mars suffered the embrace which Fontrailles proffered, but returnedit coldly. Acting is ever acting, however near it may approach tonature; and notwithstanding all the hypocritical art of whichFontrailles was a master, and which he took care to exert on the presentoccasion, the mind of Cinq Mars still retained its doubts as to thecharacter of the man with whom he had so closely linked his fate. "If heis a villain," thought the Master of the Horse, "he is a most blackand consummate villain;" and though they parted apparently friends, therecollection of that morning's conversation still haunted theimagination of Cinq Mars like some ill vision; nor did the impressioncease with his waking thoughts, but visited him even during the hours ofrepose, making him believe himself chained in a dungeon with Fontraillesstanding over him turning a dagger round and round in his heart, whileever and anon he cried "Thou art a murderer!"CHAPTER V.Which evinces the necessity of saying, no; and shows what it is tohunt upon a wrong scent.In journeying onward towards the Bourbonnois, the thoughts of De Blenauhad full time to rest upon the late occurrences; and though these hadbeen of such a fearful nature, yet so rapidly had they passed, thatdangers and sorrows, prisons and trials, floated before his remembrancelike a confused and uncertain dream; and it required an effort to fixall the particular circumstances in their correct position, for thepurpose of investigating the motives of the principal actors in thoseevents which had so deeply affected himself.This, when he could turn his mind from happier contemplations, was theprincipal occupation of his thoughts; and more especially in reflectingupon the conduct of the King, De Blenau imagined that he could perceivea regular design in every part of the Monarch's behaviour, which intruth it did not possess. Under this view he was left to conclude, thathe had been ordered to retire to Bourbon for the specific reason that hehad there no acquaintance or influence which could be dangerous to theGovernment; but it is more probable that Louis, not wishing to reversethe Cardinal's sentence entirely, by freely pardoning De Blenau, had inthe hurry of the moment mentioned any province that suggested itself.However that might be, it so happened that De Blenau was hardly known toany individual within the limits to which, by the King's command, he wasbound to confine himself. Nor did he feel any additional uncomfort inthe prospect of passing a short space of time in comparative solitude;for his mind was not likely to be well attuned to society, whileconstrained to absent himself from those he loved best; and he wasrather pleased than otherwise, that the time of his separation fromPauline would be passed without the annoyance of associating with peopleto whom he was indifferent.De Blenau's first care, on arriving at Moulins, was to write to Paulinede Beaumont.Fancy might easily supply his letter, which is otherwise irrecoverablygone; but as each reader's imagination will do more justice to it,according to his own taste, than mine could do, I will leave itunwritten here, especially as I have undertaken to commemorate truthonly; and I really know nothing of the matter. Suffice it that it wasfull of all that affection, and gratitude, and hope, and delight couldsuggest, and gave a bright picture of a bright and happy mind. Ascouriers and posts in those days were as different from such things atpresent, as the first wooden clock was from a modern chronometer, DeBlenau did not choose to trust his letter to the uncertain conveyance ofthe Government carrier, or, as he was then called, the Ordinaire; butplacing it in the hands of his trusty page, Henry de La Mothe, he senthim forth upon a journey to St. Germain, with orders to deliver many akind greeting to Pauline in person, and to bring back an answer with allspeed.The boy set out, and De Blenau, flattering himself with the idea thathis banishment from court would not be of any long continuance, tookhis residence for the time in the immediate neighbourhood of Moulins,contenting himself with an old chateau, the proprietor of which was verywilling--his fortune and his castle both being somewhat decayed--tosacrifice his pride of birth, in consideration of a handsomeremuneration from the young Count.Here De Blenau had dwelt some time, waiting the return of his messenger,and in possession of that quiet solitude most consonant to his feelings,when he was disturbed by a billet left at his gate by a horseman, whowaited not to be questioned, but rode away immediately after havingdelivered it. The note itself merely contained a request, that the Countde Blenau would ride in the direction of St. Amand on the followingevening, at the hour of four, when he would meet with one who hadbusiness of importance to communicate. The hand-writing was unknown tohim, and De Blenau at first hesitated whether to obey the summons ornot; but curiosity has a thousand ways of strengthening itself, and atlast he reasoned himself into a belief, that whatever it might be, noharm could accrue from his compliance.Accordingly, on the following evening, as the hour drew near, he mountedhis horse, and, accompanied by his usual attendants, proceeded towardsSt. Amand. Having ridden on for more than an hour without meeting anyone above the rank of a peasant, he began to accuse himself for havingbeen the dupe of what might prove some foolish joke. He had even reinedin his horse with the purpose of returning, when he perceived a personapproaching on horseback, who, notwithstanding a sort ofcarelessness,--even perhaps, slovenliness of manner and carriage--hadabout him that undefinable air, which in all ages, and in every guise,denotes a gentleman, and a distinguished one. It was not, however, tillhe came near, that De Blenau recognised Gaston Duke of Orleans, whom hehad not seen for some time. The moment he did remember him, he gave himthe centre of the road, and saluting him respectfully, was passing on,never dreaming that the summons he had received could have proceededfrom him."Good day, Monsieur de Blenau. You are close upon the hour," said theDuke, drawing up his horse, and at once allowing the Count tounderstand that it was with him that the appointment had been made."I was not aware," replied De Blenau, "that the summons which I receivedlast night was from so honourable a hand, or I should have had nohesitation in obeying.""Why, that is right," said the Duke. "The truth is, I wished much to seeyou, Monsieur le Comte, upon a business wherein you may not only be ofmuch service to yourself and me, but also to your country. We will rideon, if you please; and as we go, I will explain myself farther."De Blenau turned his horse and rode on with the Duke; but the warningwhich Chavigni had given him, came strongly into his mind; and Gaston ofOrleans was too famous for the unfortunate conspiracies in which he hadbeen engaged, for De Blenau to think with aught but horror, of acting inany way with a man, the weak versatility of whose disposition hadalready brought more than one of his friends to the scaffold. Hetherefore waited for the Duke's communication, determined to cut itshort as soon as propriety admitted; and even to deviate from therespect due to his rank, rather than become the confidant of a Prince,whose station was his sole title to reverence."You do not answer me, Monsieur de Blenau," said the Duke, after havingwaited a moment or two for some reply. "Are you, Sir, inclined to serveyour country; or is the Cardinal de Richelieu your good friend?""That I am inclined to serve my country," replied De Blenau, "yourHighness need not doubt; and when my sword can avail that countryagainst a foreign adversary, it shall always be ready at her call. Inregard to his Eminence of Richelieu, I hope that he is no more my enemythan I am his; and that he will no more attempt to injure me than I willto injure him.""But has he not endeavoured to injure you already?" said the Duke."Listen to me, Sir Count. Suppose that there were many men at thismoment well inclined to free France from the yoke under which shelabours. Suppose I were to tell you that----""Let me beseech your Highness," interposed De Blenau, "to tell me nomore; for, if I understand you rightly, it must be a confidencedangerous either to you or me--dangerous to you, if I reveal it; anddangerous to me, if I do not. Pardon me, my Lord, for interrupting you;but let my ears remain in their present innocence of what you mean. Whatmay be your wishes with me, I know not: but before you proceed farther,let me say that I will enter into no scheme whatever against agovernment to which his Majesty has given his sanction, and which it isalways in his power to alter or remove at his pleasure, without any onebeing entitled to question his authority either in raising it or castingit down. And now, having ventured to premise thus much, if I can serveyour Highness personally, in any way where my honour and my allegianceare not at all implicated, I shall be most happy in an opportunity ofshowing my attachment to your royal person and family.""Why then, Monsieur de Blenau," replied the Duke, "I think the bestthing we can do is, to turn our horses different ways, and forget thatwe have met to-day at all. Our conference has been short, but it hasbeen to the purpose. But of course, before we part, I expect yourpromise, as a man of honour, that you will not betray me.""I have nothing to betray, my Lord," replied De Blenau with a smile."We have met on the road to St. Amand. We have not been five minutes ineach other's company. Your Highness has told me nothing, whatever I mayhave suspected; therefore you may rest perfectly secure that I havenothing to betray, even if they put me to the torture to-morrow. But asI think that for your Highness's sake, we had better be as littletogether as possible, I will humbly take my leave."So saying, De Blenau bowed low, and turned his horse towards Moulins,the Duke of Orleans preparing to take the other road; but suddenly thelatter stopped, and turning his head, asked if De Blenau had gained anynews of Mademoiselle de Beaumont."I am not aware of what your Highness alludes to," replied De Blenau,quickly reining in his horse, and returning to the side of the Duke."What, then you have not heard--When had you letters from St. Germain?""Heard what? In the name of God, speak, my Lord!" cried De Blenau: "Donot keep me in suspense.""Nay, Monsieur de Blenau, I know but little," answered the Duke. "All mynews came yesterday in a letter from St. Germain, whereby I find thatMademoiselle de Beaumont has disappeared; and as no one knows whithershe is gone, and no cause is apparent for her voluntary absence, it isconjectured that Richelieu, finding, as it is whispered, that sheendeavoured to convey intelligence to you in the Bastille, has causedher to be arrested and confined au secret.""But when did she disappear?--Who saw her last?--Have no traces beendiscovered?--Why do they not apply to the King?" exclaimed De Blenau,with a degree of agitation that afforded amusement, rather than excitedsympathy in the frivolous mind of the Duke of Orleans."Really, Monsieur de Blenau, to none of all your questions can I at allreply," answered Gaston. "Very possibly, the lady may have gone off withsome fair lover, in which case she will have taken care to leave notraces of her flight.--What think you of the weather?--will it rainto-day?""Hell and fury!" cried De Blenau, incensed at the weak trifling of thePrince, at a moment when his feelings were so deeply interested; andturning his horse round without farther adieu, he struck his spurs intothe animal's sides, and, followed by his attendants, galloped offtowards Moulins. Arrived at the chateau which he inhabited, his thoughtswere still in such a troubled state, as to forbid all calmconsideration. "Prepare every thing to set out. Saddle fresh horses.Send to Moulins for the Propritaire," were De Blenau's firstcommands, determined at all risks to set out for St. Germain, and seekfor Pauline himself. But while his orders were in train of execution,reflection came to his aid, and he began to think that the news whichthe Duke had given him might not be true--that Gaston might either bedeceived himself, or that he might have invented the story for thepurpose of forcing him into a conspiracy against Richelieu's government."At all events," thought he, "Henry de La Mothe cannot be longer absentthan to-morrow. I may miss him on the road, and thus be four dayswithout information instead of one." Accordingly, after some fartherhesitation, he determined to delay his journey one day, andcounterordered the preparations which he had before commanded.Nevertheless, his mind was too much agitated to permit of his restinginactive; and quitting the chateau, he walked quickly on the roadtowards Paris; but he had not proceeded more than a quarter of a league,when from the top of a hill he perceived a horseman coming at full speedtowards him. At first, while the distance rendered his form altogetherindistinct, De Blenau decided that it was Henry de La Mothe--it mustbe--it could be nobody else. Then again he began to doubt--the horse didnot look like his; and De Blenau had almost determined that it was nothis Page, when the fluttering scarf of blue and gold becoming apparent,decided the question, and he hurried forward, impatient even of thedelay which must yet intervene.The Page rode on at full speed; and even from that circumstance DeBlenau drew an unfavourable augury: he had something evidently tocommunicate which required haste. His horse, too, was not the same whichhad carried him away, and he must have changed him on the road: this toowas a sign of that urgent despatch which could alone proceed from somepainful cause. However, the Page came rapidly forward, recognized hislord, and drawing in his horse, alighted to give relief to De Blenau'sdoubts, only by confirming his fears.His first tidings were perfectly similar to the information which hadbeen given by the Duke of Orleans; but the more minute details which hehad obtained, forming part of the history which he gave De Blenau of allthat had occurred to him on his journey, I shall take the liberty ofabridging myself, instead of leaving them in the desultory andlong-winded condition in which they proceeded from the mouth of Monsieurde La Mothe.Setting out from Moulins on one of the Count de Blenau's strongesthorses, and furnished with plenty of that patent anti-attritioncomposition, which has facilitated the progression of all sorts ofpeople in all ages of the world, and in all states except inLycurgus-governed Sparta--namely gold, Henry de La Mothe was not long inreaching St. Germain; and with all the promptitude of his age andnature, he hastened eagerly towards the Palace, promising himselfinfinite pleasure in delivering a genuine love-letter into the fairhands of Mademoiselle Pauline. No small air of consequence, therefore,did he assume in inquiring for Mademoiselle de Beaumont, and announcingthat he must speak with her himself: but the boyish vivacity of the Pagewas soon changed into sorrowful anxiety, when the old servant of Anneof Austria, to whom his inquiries had been addressed, informed him thatthe young lady had disappeared, and was no where to be heard of. NowHenry de La Mothe, the noble Count de Blenau's gay Page, was anuniversal favourite at St. Germain; so out of pure kindness, and withoutthe least inclination in the world to gossip, the old servant took himinto the Palace, and after treating him to a cup of old St. Vallierwine, told him all about the disappearance of Pauline, which formed ahistory occupying exactly one hour and ten minutes in delivering.Amongst other interesting particulars, he described to the Page how hehimself had accompanied Mademoiselle de Hauteford and Mademoiselle deBeaumont from Chantilly to Paris, for the purpose of conveying news toMonsieur de Blenau, in the Bastille;--and how that night he followed thetwo young ladies as far as the church of St. Gervais, where theyseparated, and he remained at the church door, while Mademoiselle deHauteford went in and prayed for the good success of Pauline;--andfarther, how Mademoiselle de Hauteford said all the prayers she knew,and composed a great many new ones to pass the time, and yet no Paulinereturned;--and how at last she came out to know what the Devil hadbecome of her;--and how he told her, that he could not tell.He then went on to describe their search for Pauline, and theirdisappointment and distress at not finding her, and the insolence of alying Innkeeper, who lived opposite the prison, and who assured him thatthe young lady was safe, for that he himself had delivered her fromperil by the valour of his invincible arm. After this, he took up thepathetic, and showed forth in moving terms the agony and despair ofMadame de Beaumont on first hearing of the non-appearance of herdaughter; and then commented upon the extraordinary insensibility thatshe had since shown. "For after two days," said he, "she seemed to growquite satisfied, and to forget it all, the cold hearted old----cat.""'Tis just like her," said Henry de La Mothe. "They say, when herhusband was killed, she never shed a tear. But mark me, MonsieurMathieu, she shall not have the Count's letter. As Mademoiselle is nothere, I'll take it back to him unopened; so have a care not to tell theold Marquise that I have been here. Before I go back, however, I'll awayto Paris, to gather what news I can. That aubergiste meantsomething--I know him well. 'Tis old Jacques Chatpilleur, thevivandier, who served with the army in Roussillon, when I was therewith the Count.""Well, well, my good youth, go to Paris if you please," replied the oldservant. "You'll gain no tidings more than I have given you.--Did not Imake all sorts of inquiries myself? and they are not likely to deceiveme, I wot. Young birds think they can fly before they can peck; but go,go,--you'll gain no more than what I have told you."Henry de La Mothe did not feel very well assured of the truth of thislast position; and therefore, though his back ached with a four days'ride as fast as he could go, he set out again for Paris, where hearrived before night-fall; and entering the city by the Port St.Antoine, directed his course to the house of our doughty friend,Jacques Chatpilleur, where he was instantly acknowledged as an oldacquaintance by the worthy aubergiste, and treated with suitabledistinction. Although every moment was precious, the Page did not thinkfit to enter upon the business that brought him till the auberge wasclear of intruders; and this being the hour at which many an honestburgess of the good city solaced his inward man with boudin blanc andBurgundy when the fatigues of the day began to cease, Henry de La Mothethought he might as well follow the same agreeable calling, and while hewas at Rome, do as Romans did.More than an hour passed before the Page had an opportunity ofcommunicating fully with the good aubergiste; but when JacquesChatpilleur heard that the lady he had delivered from the clutches ofLetrames, was no less a person than Pauline, only daughter and heiressof the late celebrated Marquis de Beaumont, and that, notwithstandinghis assistance, she had somehow been carried off on that identicalnight, his strange woodcock-shaped person became agitated with variousextraordinary contortions, proceeding from an odd mixture of pleasureand grief, which at once took possession of him, and contended for themastery."Mon Dieu!" cried he, "to think that it was Mademoiselle de Beaumont,and that she should be lost after all!" And the aubergiste set himselfto think of how it could all have happened. "I'll bet a million," criedhe at length, starting from his reverie, and clapping his hands togetherwith a concussion that echoed to the Bastille itself--"I'll bet amillion that it was that great gluttonous Norman vagabond, who on thatvery night eat me up a matelot d'anguille and a dinde pique. He isunderstrapping cut-throat to Master Chavigni, and he has never been heresince. He has carried her off, for a million; and taken her away to someprison in the provinces, all for trying to give a little news to thegood Count. But I'll ferret out his route for you. On with your beaverand come with me. Margueritte, look to the doors while I am absent. Iknow where the scoundrel lodged; so come along, and we'll soon hear moreof him."So saying, the landlord of the Sanglier Gourmand led Henry de La Motheforth into the Rue St. Antoine, and thence through the several turningsand windings by which the Norman had carried Pauline to the latelodgings of Monsieur Marteville. Here Jacques Chatpilleur summoned allpersons in the house, male and female, lodger and landlord, to give afull, true, and particular account of all they knew, believed, orsuspected concerning the tall Norman who usually dwelt there. And suchwas the tone of authority which he used, and the frequency of hisreference to Henry de La Mothe, whom he always specified as "thishonourable youth," that the good folks instantly transformed, in theirown imaginations, the Page of the Count de Blenau into little less thanthe valet de chambre of the prime Minister, and consequently answeredall questions with becoming deference.The sum of the information which was thus obtained amounted to this,that on the evening in question, Monsieur Marteville had brought thithera young lady--whether by force or not, no one could specify; that shewas dressed as a Languedoc peasant, which Monsieur Chatpilleuracknowledged to be the disguise Pauline had assumed; and that the sameevening he had carried her away again on horseback, leading her steedby the bridle rein. It farther appeared that the Norman, while preparingto set out, had asked a great many questions about Troyes in Champagne,and had inquired whether there was not a wood extending over someleagues near Mesnil St. Loup, which was reported to be infested byrobbers. From all this the inhabitants of the house had concludeduniversally that his journey was destined to be towards Troyes, and thathe would take care to avoid the wood of Mesnil St. Loup.Henry de La Mothe now fancied that he had the clue completely in hishands, and returning with Jacques Chatpilleur to his auberge, he tookone night's necessary rest, and having exchanged his horse, which wasknocked up with its journey, he set out the next morning on his returnto Moulins.After this recital, all considerations of personal safety, the King'scommands to remain in Bourbon, the enmity of the Cardinal, and thewarnings of Chavigni, vanished from the mind of De Blenau like smoke;and returning to the Chateau, he ordered his horses to be instantlyprepared, chose ten of his most resolute servants to accompany him,ordered Henry de La Mothe to remain till he had recovered from hisfatigues, and then to return to St. Germain, and tell Madame de Beaumontthat he would send her news of her daughter, or lose his life in thesearch; and having made all other necessary arrangements, he took hisdeparture for Troyes without a consideration of the consequences.CHAPTER VI.The consequence of fishing in troubled water.We must now return to the two worthy personages whom we left jogging ontowards the Chateau of St. Loup, taking them up at the precise placewhere we set them down."Bon gr mal gr va le prtre au sn," grumbled the Norman."Remember, Madame Louise, I take you with no good-will: you insist upongoing; so now if you meet with any thing disagreeable, it is your ownfault,--mark that, ma poule.""I'm no more afraid of the Devil than yourself," answered Louise pertly;"and I suppose I shall meet with no one worse than he is.""You may," replied the Norman; "but come on, it gets late, and we haveno time to spare."The tone of Marteville was not very encouraging; but Louise was resolvednot to lose sight of her husband, and being by nature as bold as a lion,she followed on without fear. True it is, that she did not know thewhole history of the Sorcerer's Grove, or perhaps she might have feltsome of those imaginary terrors from which hardly a bosom in France wasaltogether free: although Louise, bred up by Madame de Beaumont, whosestrong and masculine mind rejected most of the errors of that age, hadperhaps less of the superstition of the day than any other person of herown class.The first approach to the Sorcerer's Grove was any thing but terrifying.The road, winding gently down the slope of the hill, entered the forestbetween some fine tall trees, which rising out of a tract of scantyunderwood and open ground, with considerable spaces between each of theboughs, afforded plenty of room for the rich sun to pour his raysbetween, and to chequer the green shadows of the wood with intervals ofgolden light. Every here and there, also, the declining sunbeams caughtupon the old knotted trunks, and on the angles of the broken ground oneither side, enlivening the scene without taking from its repose; andat the bottom of the hill, seen through the arch of boughs whichcanopied the way, appeared a bright mass of sunshine, with a glimpse ofthe sky beyond, where a larger open space than ordinary gave free accessto the day. From this spot, however, the road, entering the deeper partof the wood, took a direction towards the old Chteau of St. Loup; andhere the trees, growing closer together, began to shut out the rays;gloom and darkness spread over the path, and the rocks rising up intohigh broken banks on each side, cut off even the scanty light whichglided between the thick branches above. At the same time, the wholescenery assumed a wilder and more desolate character, and the windingsof the road round the base of the hill prevented the eye from catchingeven a glimpse of the prospect beyond.Here, strewed upon the path, lay great masses of green mouldy rock,fallen from the banks on each side, evincing plainly how seldom the footof man traversed its solitude; there again a mundic stream, blood-red,flowed across and tinged all the earth around with its own unseemly hue;while long brambles and creeping shrubs, dropping with chill dew, grewat the base of the rocks on either side, and shooting out their thornyarms, caught the feet of the horses as they passed. The deep solitude,the profound silence, the shadow of the overhanging woods, and thesombre gloom of every object around, began to have their effect on themind of Louise, and notwithstanding her native boldness of heart, sheset herself to conjure up more than one unpleasing vision. Her fears,however, were more of the living than the dead; and having now, againsther nature, kept silence a long while, out of respect to the angryhumour of her dearly beloved husband, she ventured to assert that itlooked quite a place for robbers, and added a hope that they should notmeet any."Pardie! I hope we shall!" replied the Norman. "Those you call robbersare fort honntes gens: they are merely gentlemen from the wars, as Iam myself: soldiers at free quarters, who have ever had a rightprescriptive to levy their pay with their own hand. I beg that you willspeak respectfully of them."Louise looked at her husband with an inquiring glance, not very wellknowing whether to take his speech seriously, or merely as a jest; butthere was nothing mirthful in the countenance of Monsieur Marteville,who, out of humour with his fair lady for persisting to accompany him,was in no mood for jesting. At this moment a whistle was heard in thewood, so like the note of a bird, that Louise was deceived, and wouldhave taken no farther notice of the sound, had not her companion appliedhis hand to his lips and imitated it exactly."What is that?" demanded Louise, upon whose mind a thousand undefinedsuspicions were crowding fast: "What noise is that in the wood?""It's only a pivert," replied the Norman with a grim smile, in theeffort of which the scar upon his lip drew the corner of his mouthalmost into his eye."A pivert!" replied Louise: "No, no, that is not the cry of awoodpecker--you are cheating me.""Well, you will see," replied Marteville; "I'll make him come out." Sosaying, he repeated the same peculiar whistle, and then drawing in hisrein, shook himself in the saddle, loosened his sword in the sheath, andlaid his hand on one of his holsters, as a man who prepares for anencounter, of the event of which he is not quite certain whether it willbe for peace or war.His whistle was again returned, and a moment after the form of a man wasseen protruding itself through the trees that crowned the high bankunder which they stood. His rusty iron morion, his still rustiercuirass, his weather-beaten countenance and dingy apparel, formedaltogether an appearance so similar to the trunks of the trees amongstwhich he stood, that he would have been scarcely distinguishable, had itnot been for the effort to push his way through the lower branches, therustling of which, and a few falling stones forced over the edge of therock at his approach, drew the eye more particularly to the spot wherehe appeared. In his hand he carried a firelock, which, by a naturalimpulse, was pointed at the Norman the moment he perceived a doublet ofblue velvet--as the fowling-piece of a sportsman is instinctivelycarried to his shoulder, on the rising of a partridge or a grouse. ButMonsieur Marteville was prepared for all such circumstances; and drawingthe pistol which hung at his saddle-bow, and which, if one might judgeby length, would carry a mile at least, he pointed directly towards therusty gentleman above described, crying out, "Eh bien, l'ami! Eh bien!Do you shoot your friends like woodcocks? or have you forgotten me?""Nom de Dieu!" cried the man above: "Je vous en demande millepardons, et mille, Monsieur le Capitaine. I'll come down to youdirectly. Christi! I had nearly given you a ball! But I'll come down!"While the robber was putting this promise in execution, Martevillewhispered a few words of consolation to Louise, bidding her not beafraid, that they were fort honntes gens, trs aimables to theirfriends, et cetera; but seeing that his words produced no effect, andthat the unfortunate girl, beginning to comprehend the nature of hischaracter, had burst into tears of bitter regret, he muttered a curse ortwo, not loud, but deep; and without any farther effort to allay herfears, sat whistling on his horse, till the robber, half sliding, halfrunning, managed to descend from the eminence on which he had firstappeared."Eh bien, Callot," said Monsieur Marteville to his former companion,"how goes it with the troop?""But badly," replied Callot: "What with one devilry or another, we havebut half a dozen left.""And where is Pierrepont Le Blanc?" demanded the Norman: "Could not hekeep you together?""Oh! we have sent him to the kingdom of moles," answered the robber,twisting his face into a most horrible grin. "First he quarrelled withone, and then he quarrelled with another; and then, as he was captain,and had the purse, he bethought him of taking himself off with all thetreasure. But we caught him on the road; and so, as I have said, we sentthe buccaneer on an embassy to the kingdom of moles. After that, therewere two of us shot near Epernay, by a party of the Guard; and then sixmore went to see what could be gathered upon the road to Perpignan, andone was taken and hanged at Troyes; so that there are but myself andfive others of the old band left.""And quite enough too, if you had a bold leader," replied the Norman."But where do you roost, mes jolis oiseaux?""No, no; we do not perch now," answered the robber; "we go to earth.Under the old castle here, are the most beautiful vaults in the world;and I defy Beelzebub himself to nose us, when we are hidden there.""But why not take to the chteau itself? Is it so far decayed?""Nay," replied the other, "for that matter, it is as good a nest as anyone would wish to house in: but it is not quite so forsaken as folksthink. We did put up there at first; but one night, while all of ourparty were out but three--being myself and two others who stayed--weheard suddenly the sound of horses, and looking out, we saw by thetwilight five stout cavaliers dismount in the court; and up they marchedto the very room where we were sitting, so that we had scarce time tobundle up our things and to cover. And there they sat for four goodhours; while we were shut up in the little watch-tower next to them,with no way to get out, and no powder but what was in our carbines, ormayhap we should have given them a dose or two of leaden pills, for atfirst we thought they were on the look-out for our band. But presentlyafter, up came another, and then they all set to, to talk high treason.I could not well hear, for the door was so thick, and we dared not move;but I know they spoke of a treaty with Spain, and bringing in Spanishtroops into France. Since then, we have kept to the vaults, for fear ofbeing nosed.""Well, Louise," whispered the Norman, turning to the soubrette, "yousee I did not come here for no purpose. It is this treaty with Spain Iwant to find out; and if I do, our fortune is made for ever, and youwill eat off gold, and drink out of gold, and be as happy as aprincess!"The prospects which her husband held out, and which might certainly becalled golden, were not without their effect on Louise; but still hisevident familiarity with the gentleman in the rusty steel coat did notat all suit her ideas of propriety, nor were the matters which theydiscussed in the least to her taste; but as remonstrance was in vain,and she began to perceive that the influence of her tears was not verygreat, she resigned herself to her fate in silence.Several more questions and replies passed between the Norman and hisancient comrade, which, as they tend to throw no light upon thishistory, shall not find a place therein. At length Monsieur Callot, inas hospitable and courtly a strain as he could assume, requested thepleasure of Monsieur Marteville's company to spend the evening in thevaults of the old chateau, if he had not grown too fine, by living amongthe great, to associate with his old friends. In return for this, theworthy Norman assured him, that he never was so happy as when he was intheir society, accepted the invitation with pleasure, and begged tointroduce his wife. Callot would fain have offered his salute to thelips of the fair lady, and had mounted on a huge stone beside her horsefor that purpose; but Louise repulsed him with the dignity of a duchess,and Callot did not press the matter farther, merely giving a shrewd winkof the eye and screw of the under-jaw, as much as to say, "she's nice,it seems," and then led the way towards the present abode ofMarteville's old band.The road which he took, wound through the very depth of the wood towardsthat side of the hill which, looking over the wide extent offorest-ground lying between the old castle and the high road to Troyes,seemed to offer nothing but dark inaccessible precipices, from theshallow stream that ran bubbling at its base to the walls of the ruinabove. Crossing the rivulet, however, which did not rise higher than thehorses' knees, the robber led the way round a projecting mass of rock,that seemed to have been forcibly riven from the rest, and which, thoughit left space enough for the horses to turn, would have effectuallyconcealed them from the sight of any one who might be in the wood.The two sides of the hill next to the village of Mesnil, and the ridgeof rising ground on which it was situated, sloped easily into thevalleys around, and were covered with a rich and glowing vegetation; buton the northern as well as the western side, which the Norman and hiscompanions now approached, the rock offered a very different character,and one, indeed, extremely rare in that part of the country.Wherever the eye turned, nothing presented itself but flat surfaces ofcold grey stone, with the deep markings of the rifts and hollows whichseparated them from each other. Occasionally, indeed, a patch of thinvegetable earth, accumulating on any point that offered the means ofsupport, yielded a slight gleam of verdure, so poor in hue, and solimited in extent, that it seemed alone to rival the lichens and stainsof the rocks around, and to serve but as a mockery of the naked cragthat bore it. Here and there too, a black antique pine, fixing itssturdy roots in the bleakest pinnacles, would be seen to start boldlyout, as if to brave the tempests, that, sweeping over the oaks in theforest below, spent their full fury on its more ambitious head. Theprincipal objects, however, that attracted attention, were the multitudeof deep fissures and hollows which presented themselves at every point,and the immense blocks of stone which, scattered about round the base ofthe rock, offered plentiful means of concealment to any one who mightthere seek to baffle a pursuer.Turning, as we have said, round the base of one of these large masses,the robber uttered three loud whistles, to give notice that it was afriend approached; and immediately after, from a cavern, the mouth ofwhich was concealed in one of the fissures above-mentioned, came forthtwo figures, whose wild apparel corresponded very well with that oftheir companion."Morbleu! Monsieur Marteville!" cried one of them, the moment herecognised the Norman, "est-ce vous? Soyez le bien venu! Come at alucky moment for some of the best wine of Bonne! The Gros St.Nicholas--you remember our old companion--has just returned from theChemin de Troyes, where he met two charitable monks, who, out of purebenevolence, bestowed upon him three paniers of good wine and twelvebroad pieces; though they threatened to excommunicate him, and the twowho were with him, for holding steel poniards to their throats whilethey did their alms. However, you are heartily welcome, and the more soif you are come to stay with us.""We will talk of that presently," said the Norman. "But in the firstplace, good friends, tell me, can one get up to the castle above, which,Callot says, is habitable yet? for here is my wife, who is not much usedto dwell in vaults, and may like a lodging above ground better.""Oh, certainly! Madame shall be accommodated," said the last speaker,who seemed to be more civilized than good Monsieur Callot. "Our owndwelling is well enough; but if she so please, I will show you up thestaircase which leads from the vaults to the court above. However, Ihope she will stay to partake of our supper, which is now before thefire, as you shall see.""She shall come down again," said the Norman, dismounting, and liftingLouise out of the saddle, "and will thank you for your good cheer, forwe have ridden far." So saying, he followed into the cave, which atfirst presented nothing but the natural ruggedness of the rock; but atthat spot where the daylight began to lose its effect in the increasingdarkness of the cavern, one might perceive, though with difficulty, thatit assumed the form of a regular arch cased with masonry; and in amoment or two, as they proceeded groping their way after the robber,they were warned that there were steps: mounting these, and turning tothe left, they discerned, at a little distance in advance, a bright redlight streaming from behind a projecting angle, which itself remained inutter obscurity. The robber here went on first, and they heard himannounce in a loud and jocular tone, "Le Sieur Marteville, et Madame safemme!" with as much ceremony as if he had been heralding them into thepresence of royalty."Bah! vous plaisantez!" cried a thick merry voice, seeming as if itissued from the midst of stewed prunes. But the Norman advancing, boreevidence of the truth of the other's annunciation, and was instantlycaught in the arms of the Gros St. Nicolas, as he was called; whomerited, at least, the appellation of gros, though with the sanctityhe appeared to have but little to do. He was fat, short, andprotuberant, with a face as round as the full moon, and as rosy as apeony. In fact, he seemed much better fitted for a burgess or a priest,an innkeeper or an alderman, than for the thin and meagre trade of acut-purse, which seldom leaves any thing but bones to be hanged at last.However, he bore him jollily; and, when the party entered, was, withmorion and breast-plate thrown aside, engaged in basting a large quarterof venison, which smoked before a stupendous fire, whose blazeilluminated all the wide vault, which formed their salle  manger andkitchen both in one."Est-il possible?" cried the Gros St. Nicolas, embracing our Norman,whose companion he had been for many years both in honourable anddishonourable trades;--"Mon ami! Mon Capitaine! Mon Brave! Mon Prince!Enfin, Mon Normand!"Quitting the ecstasies of the Gros St. Nicolas at meeting once more withhis friend, and the formalities of his introduction to Louise, we shallonly say that, according to the request of the Norman, one of thefreebooters led the way up a circular staircase in the rock, which soonbrought them into the open air, through a small arch entering upon thecourt of the old castle. Here Marteville, having marked all the peculiarturns which they had taken, with the accuracy which his former life hadtaught, bade good day to their guide, promising to rejoin the partybelow by the time the venison was roasted; and finding that more than anhour of daylight yet remained, he proceeded with Louise to explore theremains of the chteau.The little attentions he had lately paid, had greatly conciliated hisfair lady; and though still somewhat disposed to pout, she suffered himto explain his views with a tolerable degree of placability. "You mustknow, ma charmante Louise," said he, "that there is a tremendous plotgoing on against the Government; and that Monsieur de Chavigni hasintrusted me to discover it. You heard what Callot said, concerning atreaty with Spain. Now I have always understood, that when these secrettreaties are formed, a copy is deposited in some uninhabited place forgreater security. You see, I have traced Fontrailles to this castle, andit is evident that here he met the other conspirators: now where, then,can they have secreted the treaty but somewhere about here? So now,Louise, help me to find this paper, if it is to be found; and then wewill soon quit these men, of whom you seem so much afraid, and go andlive like princes on the fortune that Chavigni has promised."To this long speech of her husband, which he accompanied with sundrylittle caresses, Louise replied, in a tone still half sulky, that shewas ready to seek the paper, but that she did not see how they couldfind it, with nothing to guide them in the search. But nevertheless,when they did seriously begin their perquisitions, she displayed allthat sagacity in discovering a secret which women instinctively possess.Of course, the first place to which they particularly directed theirinquiries was the chamber in which, according to the account of Callot,the meeting of the conspirators had been held.Here they looked in every nook and corner, turned over every heap ofrubbish, examined the chairs and the table of old Pre Le Rouge, andhaving gone over every inch of the apartment, began anew and went overit all again. At length Louise, seemingly tired of her search in thatchamber, left her husband to pursue it as he pleased, and sitting downin one of the settles, began to hum a Languedoc air, beating time withher fingers on the table."Pardie!" cried the Norman, after having hunted for some time in vain:"it is not here, that is certain!""Yes, it is!" said Louise, very quietly continuing to beat time on thetable; "it is in this very room.""Nom de Dieu! where is it then?" cried Monsieur Marteville."It is here, in the inside of this hollow piece of wood," answeredLouise, tapping the table with her knuckles, which produced that sort ofempty echoing sound that evinced it was not so solid as it appeared.The Norman now approached, and soon convincing himself that Louise wasright, he took her in his arms and gave her a kiss that made the ruinecho. The next thing was to get into the drawer, or whatsoever it was,that occupied the interior of the table; but this not proving very easy,the impatient Norman set it upright upon one end, and drawing his sword,soon contrived to cleave it through the middle; when, to the delight ofthe eyes that looked upon it, appeared a large cavity neatly wrought inthe wood, containing a packet of vellum folded, and sealed at allcorners in blue and yellow wax, with neat pieces of floss-silk to keepit all together. The Norman could have eaten it up; and Louise, with adegree of impatient curiosity peculiarly her own, was already fingeringone of the seals, about to break it open, when Marteville stopped herwith a tremendous oath. "What are you going to do?" cried he: "you knowlittle what it is to pry into State secrets. If you had opened thatseal, instead of having perhaps a reward of twenty thousand crowns, weshould both have been sent to the Bastille for the rest of our lives."Louise dropped the packet in dismay; and the Norman continued, "Did younever hear of the Abb de Langy, who happening to be left by Monsieur deRichelieu in his private cabinet only for five minutes, with some Statepapers on the table, was sent to the Bastille for twelve years, merelyfor fear he had read them? No, no; this must go to Monsieur Chavigniwithout so much as cracking the wax.""Could not we just look in at the end?" demanded Louise, lookingwistfully at the packet, which her husband had now picked up. But uponthis he put a decided negative; and having now succeeded to his heart'scontent, the burly Norman, in the exuberance of his joy, began singingand capering till the old pile both echoed and shook with his giganticgambols. "Ma Louise," cried he at length, "vous tes fatigue. Jevais vous porter;" and catching her up in his arms, notwithstanding allremonstrance, he carried her like a feather into the court-yard, throughthe narrow arch, and threading all the intricacies of the vaults withthe same sagacious facility with which a ferret glides through thewindings of a warren, he bore her safely and in triumph into the sallemanger of the honourable fraternity below. This was not the mode ofprogression which Louise most admired, nor was she very much gratifiedat being exhibited to her husband's old friends in so ungraceful anattitude; and the consequences, of course, were, that she wouldwillingly have torn his eyes out had she dared.However, Monsieur Callot, Le Gros St. Nicolas, and others, appliedthemselves successfully to soothe her ruffled spirits; and the venisonbeing ready, and a long table laid, each person drew forth their knife,and soon committed infinite havoc on the plump haunch which was placedbefore them. The wine succeeded, and then that water of life which veryoften ends in death. All was hilarity and mirth, song, jest, andlaughter. Gradually, one barrier after another fell, as cup succeededcup. Each one told his own story, without regard to the rest; each onesang his own song; each one cracked his own joke. Louise had retired toa settle by the side of the fire, but still mingled in the conversation,when it could be called such; and Monsieur Callot, somewhat full ofwine, and a good deal smitten with her charms, plied her withassiduities rather more perhaps than was necessary. In the mean time,the Gros St. Nicolas, running over with brandy and good spirits, keptjesting the Norman upon some passages of his former life, which might aswell have been passed over and forgotten. "Madame!" cried he at length,turning round towards Louise, with an overflowing goblet in his hand,and his broad face full of glee, "I have the honour of drinking to yourhealth, as the fifth spouse of our good friend Monsieur de Marteville;and let me assure you, that of the three that are living and the twothat are dead, you are the most beautiful beyond compare!"Up started Louise in an agony of indignation, and forth she poured uponthe Gros St. Nicolas a torrent of vituperation for jesting upon such asubject. But on his part he only shrugged his shoulders, and declaredthat he did not jest at all. "Mon Dieu!" said he, "it is veryunreasonable to suppose that Monsieur Marteville, who is as big as fivemen, should be contented with one wife. Besides, it is trs agrableto have a wife in every province; I always do so myself."The thunder of Louise's ire, now increased in a seven-fold degree, wasturned instantly upon her dearly-beloved husband. Her eyes flashed, andher cheek flamed, and approaching him, where he sat laughing at thewhole business, she demanded that he should exculpate himself from thischarge of pentigamy, with a tone and manner that made the Norman, whohad drunk quite enough, laugh still more. With an unheard-of exertion ofself-command, Louise kept her fingers from his face; but she burst forthinto reproaches so bitter and stinging, that Marteville's mirth was soonconverted into rage, and he looked at her with a glance which wouldquickly have taught those who knew him well not to urge him farther. ButLouise went on, and wound up by declaring, that she would live with himno longer--that she would quit him that very moment, and finding her wayto Monsieur Chavigni, would tell him all--adding, that she would soonsend the Guard to ferret out that nest of ruffians, and that she hopedto see him hanging at the head of them. With this expression of herintentions, Louise darted out of the vault; but the Norman, who,speechless with rage, had sat listening to her with his teeth clenched,and his nether lip quivering with suppressed passion, started suddenlyup, cast the settle from him with such force that it was dashed topieces against the wall, and strode after her with the awful cloud ofdetermined wrath settled upon his brow.The mirth of the robbers, who knew the ungovernable nature of theircompanion's passions, was now over, and each looked in the face of theother with silent expectation. After a space, there was the murmur ofangry voices heard for a moment at the farther end of the passage; thena loud piercing shriek rang through the vault; and then all was silence.A momentary sensation of horror ran through the bosoms of even theferocious men whose habits rendered them familiar with almost everyspecies of bloodshed. But this was new and strange amongst them, andthey waited the return of the Norman with feelings near akin to awe.At length, after some time, he came, with a firm step and unblenchingbrow, but with a haggard wildness in his eye which seemed to tell thatremorse was busy with his heart. However, he sat him down without anyallusion to the past, and draining off a cup of wine, strove laboriouslyafter merriment. But it was in vain; the mirth of the whole party wasevidently forced; and Marteville soon took up another strain, whichaccorded better with the feelings of the moment. He spoke to them of thedispersion of the band, which had taken place since he left them;announced his intention of joining them again; and drawing forth apurse containing about a thousand livres, he poured them forth upon thetable, declaring them to be his first offering to the treasury.This magnificent donation, which came in aid of their finances at amoment when such a recruit was very necessary, called forth loud shoutsof applause from the freemen of the forest; and the Gros St. Nicolasstarting up, addressed the company much to the following effect:"Messieurs--every one knows that I am St. Nicolas, and no one will denythat I am surrounded by a number of goodly clerks. But although in mysaintly character I will give up my clerical superiority to nobody; yetit appears to me, that our society requires some lay commander;therefore I, your bishop, do propose to you to elect and choose theSieur Marteville, here present, to be our king, and captain in the wars,in room of the Sieur Pierrepont Le Blanc, who, having abdicated withoutcause, was committed to the custody of the great receiver-general--theearth, by warrant of cold iron and pistol-balls. What say ye, Messieurs,shall he be elected?"A shout of approbation was the reply; and Marteville, having been dulyelected, took the oaths, and received the homage of his new subjects.He then entered into a variety of plans for increasing the band,concentrating its operations, and once more rendering it that formidablebody, which it had been in former times. All this met with the highestapprobation; but the Captain showing the most marked dislike toremaining in the forest which they at present tenanted, and producing avariety of reasons for moving their quarters to Languedoc, where theneighbourhood of the court and the army offered greater facilities bothfor recruiting their numbers and their purses, it was agreed that theyshould disperse the next morning, and re-assemble as soon as possible,at a certain spot well known to the whole party, about forty leaguesdistant from Lyons.This was happily effected; and the Norman, on presenting himself at therendezvous, had the pleasure of introducing to the band two newassociates, whom he had found the means of converting on the road.Although abandoning himself heart and soul to the pleasures of hisresumed profession, our friend Marteville was not forgetful of thereward he expected from Chavigni; and as his official duties preventedhis being himself the bearer of the paper he had obtained, he despatchedit to Narbonne, where the Statesman now was, by his faithful subjectCallot, with orders to demand ten thousand crowns of Monsieur deChavigni, as a reward for having discovered it, adding also an elaborateepistle to the same effect.The Norman never for a moment entertained a suspicion that the paper hesent was any thing but the identical treaty with Spain, which theconspirators had been heard to mention; and he doubted not that theStatesman would willingly pay such a sum for so precious a document. Butthe embassy of Monsieur Callot did not prove so fortunate as had beenanticipated. Presenting himself to Chavigni, with as much importance ofaspect as the ambassador from Siam, he tendered his credentials, anddemanded the reward, at a moment when the Statesman was irritated by athousand anxieties and dangers.Making no ceremony with the fine blue and yellow wax, Chavigni, havingread the Norman's epistle, soon found his way into the inside of theother packet, and beheld in the midst of a thousand signs and figures,unintelligible to any but a professed astrologer, a prophetic scrollcontaining some doggrel verses, which may be thus rendered intoEnglish:--THE FATE OF RICHELIEU.Born beneath two mighty stars,Mercury with Mars combined,He shall prompt a thousand wars,Nor live the balm of peace to find.Less than a King, yet Kings shall fallAnd tremble at his fatal sway;Yet at life's end he shall recallThe memory of no happy day.And the last year that he shall know,Shall see him fall, and see him rise;Shall see him yield, yet slay his foe,And scarcely triumph ere he dies.Begot in factions, nursed in strife,Till all his troubled years be past,Cunning and care eat up his life,--A slave and tyrant, first and last.PERE LE ROUGE.Chavigni gazed at the paper in amazement, and then at the face ofMonsieur Callot, who, totally unconscious of the contents, remainedvery nonchalantly expecting the reward. "Ten thousand crowns!" cried theStatesman, giving way to his passion. "Ho! without there! take thisfellow out and flog him with your hunting whips out of Narbonne. Awaywith him, and curry him well!"The grooms instantly seized upon poor Callot, and executed Chavigni'scommands with high glee. The robber, however, though somewhat surprised,bore his flagellation very patiently; for under the jerkin which hewore, still lay the rusty iron corslet we have before described, whichsaved him from appreciating the blows at their full value.The matter, however, was yet to be remembered, as we shall see; for whenCallot, on his return to the forest, informed his captain what sort ofreward he had received for the packet, the Norman's gigantic limbsseemed to swell to a still greater size with passion, and drawing hissword he put the blade to his lips, swearing, that before twelve monthswere over, it should drink Chavigni's blood: and promises of such sorthe usually kept most punctually.CHAPTER VII.Wherein De Blenau finds out that he has made a mistake, and whatfollows.Having now conducted our truly-begotten friend, the Sieur Marteville,considerably in advance of the rest of the characters in this truehistory, it becomes us to show our impartiality by detailing theprincipal actions of our other personages, and also to display thecauses which brought the noble Count de Chavigni to such a distance asNarbonne, a little town in the southern nook of Languedoc, not above afew leagues from Perpignan. However, as all these circumstances arenaturally explained in the history of the Count de Blenau, we may aswell follow him on the useless pursuit into which he had been led bythe precipitancy of Monsieur Henry de La Mothe, his page, who would havesaved his master a great deal of trouble and distress, as we all know,if he had thought fit to see the Marquise de Beaumont; but young houndswill often cry upon a wrong scent, and mislead those who should knowbetter.Thus it happened in the present instance; and De Blenau, blinded byanxiety for Pauline, took the suspicions of his Page for granted,without examination. He knew that Chavigni scrupled not at any measureswhich might serve a political purpose; he knew that the Norman was inthe immediate employment of the Statesman, and was still less delicatein his notions than his master; and he doubted not that Pauline, havingbeen discovered issuing from the Bastille, had been carried off withoutceremony, and sent from Paris under the custody of the ci-devant robber.At all events, De Blenau, as he rode along, composed a very plausiblechain of reasoning upon the subject; and far from supposing that theNorman would avoid the wood in the neighbourhood of Mesnil, heconcluded, from his knowledge of Marteville's former habits, that aforest filled with robbers would fulfil all his anticipations ofParadise, and be too strong an attraction to be resisted.Thus cogitating, he rode on to Decize, and thence to Corbigny, where dayonce more broke upon his path; and having been obliged to allow thehorses a few hours' rest, he tried in vain for some repose himself.Auxerre was his next halt, but here only granting his domestics one hourto refresh, he passed the Yonne, and soon after entered Champagne, whichtraversing without stopping, except for a few minutes at Bar sur Seine,he reached Troyes before midnight, with man and horse too wearied tobegin their search before the following morning.It unluckily so happened that De Blenau did not alight at the hotel ofthe Grand Soleil, where he might have gained such information as wouldin all probability have prevented his farther proceedings; and as thekeeper of the auberge where he stopped, was at open war with thelandlord of the Grand Soleil, to all the inquiries which were made thenext morning, the only reply the aubergiste thought fit to give was,that "indeed he could not tell; he had never seen such a person as DeBlenau described the Norman to be, or such a lady as Pauline;"--though,be it remarked, every body in the house, after having gazed atMarteville and Louise for a full hour on their arrival, had watchedtheir motions every day, and had wondered themselves stiff at who theycould be and what they could want. At length, however, De Blenau caughthold of an unsophisticated hostler, of whom he asked if within the lastten days he had seen a carriage stop or pass through the town containingtwo such persons as he described.The hostler replied, "No; that they seldom saw carriages there; that atall gentleman, like the one he mentioned, had ridden out of the townjust two days before with a lady on horseback; but Devil a carriage hadthere been in Troyes for six years or more, except that of Monseigneurthe Governor."De Blenau, glad of the least intimation where news seemed so scanty, nowdescribed the Norman as particularly as he could from what he had seenof him while speaking to Chavigni in the Park of St. Germain's, dwellingupon his gigantic proportions, and the remarkable cut upon his cheek."Yes, yes!" replied the hostler, "that was the man; I saw him ride outwith a jolie demoiselle on the road to Mesnil St. Loup; but Devil acarriage has there been in Troyes for six years or more, except that ofMonseigneur the Governor.""Well, well," replied De Blenau, wishing if possible to hear more,"perhaps they might not be in a carriage. But can you tell me where theylodged while in the city of Troyes?"Even the obtuse faculties of the hostler had been drilled into knowingnothing of any other auberge in the town but his own. "Can't tell,"replied he. "Saw him and the lady ride out on horseback; but Devil acarriage has there been in Troyes for six years or more, except that ofMonseigneur the Governor."It may have been remarked, that a certain degree of impatience andhastiness of determination was one of the prevailing faults of DeBlenau's disposition; and in this case, without waiting for fartherexamination, he set out in pursuit of the Norman as soon as his horseswere ready, merely inquiring if there was any castle in theneighbourhood of Mesnil which might serve for the confinement of Stateprisoners.The landlord, to whom the question was addressed, immediately determinedin his own mind, that De Blenau was an agent of the Government; andreplied, "None, that he knew of, but the old Chateau of St. Loup; butthat Monseigneur had better have it repaired before he confined any onethere, for it was so ruinous they would get out, to a certainty, if theywere placed there in its present state."De Blenau smiled at the mistake, but prepossessed with the idea that theNorman was carrying Pauline to some place of secret imprisonment, hedetermined at once to proceed to the spot the aubergiste mentioned,and to traverse the wood from the high road to Troyes, as the mostlikely route on which to encounter the Norman, against whom he vowed themost summary vengeance, if fortune should afford him the opportunity.As, from every report upon the subject, the forest had been for sometime past the resort of banditti, De Blenau gave orders to his servantsto hold themselves upon their guard, and took the precaution of throwingforward two of his shrewdest followers, as a sort of reconnoitringparty, to give him intelligence of the least noise which could indicatethe presence of any human being besides themselves. But all thesemeasures seemed to be unnecessary; not a sound met the ear; and DeBlenau's party soon began to catch glimpses of the old Chateau of St.Loup, through the breaks in the wood; and gradually winding roundtowards the east, gained the slope which gave them a clear view of thewhole building.The whole appearance of the place was so desolate and dilapidated, thatthe first glance convinced De Blenau that Chavigni would never dream ofconfining Pauline within such ruinous walls; as the mere considerationof her rank would prevent him from using any unnecessary severity,though her successful attempt to penetrate into the Bastille afforded aplausible excuse for removing her from Paris. However, in order not toleave the least doubt upon the subject, he mounted to the court-yard,and having ascertained that every part of the building was equally unfitfor the purposes of a prison, and that it was actually uninhabitedexcept by owls and ravens, he determined to cross to a town, the spireof whose church he saw rising on the opposite hill, and to pursue hissearch in some other direction.Descending, therefore, by the same slope which he had previouslymounted, he wound round the base of the hill much in the same path bywhich Callot had conducted the Norman and Louise. The stream, however,formed the boundary of his approach to the castle on that side; andpassing the rocks, which we have already mentioned as strewed about atthe foot of the precipices, he followed the course of the river, till,winding into the wood, the castle, and the hill on which it stood, werelost to the sight. Here as he rode slowly on, revolving various plansfor more successfully pursuing the Norman, and reproaching himself fornot having made more accurate inquiries at Troyes, his eye was suddenlyattracted by the appearance of something floating on the river like thelong black hair of a young woman.De Blenau's heart sank within him; his courage failed, his wholestrength seemed to give way, and he sat upon his horse like a statue,pointing with his hand towards the object that had thus affected him,but without the power of uttering any order concerning it.In the mean while the hair waved slowly backwards and forwards upon thestream, and one of the servants perceiving it, dismounted from hishorse, waded into the water, and catching it in his grasp, begandragging the body to which it was attached towards the brink. As he didso, the part of a red serge dress, such as that in which Pauline hadvisited the Bastille, floated to the surface, and offered a horribleconfirmation of De Blenau's fears. The first shock, however, was passed,and leaping from his horse with agony depicted in his straining eye, hesprang down the bank into the stream, and raising the face of the deadperson above the water, beheld the countenance of Louise.Perhaps the immoderate joy which De Blenau felt at this sight might bewrong, but it was natural; and sitting down on the bank, he covered hisface with his hands, overcome by the violent revolution of feeling whichso suddenly took place in his bosom.In the mean while his servants drew the body of the unfortunate girl tothe bank, and speedily discovered that the mode of her death had been ofa more horrible description than even that which they had at firstsupposed; for in her bosom appeared a deep broad gash as if from theblow of a poniard, which had undoubtedly deprived her of life beforeher murderer committed the body to the stream.According to the costume of her country, Louise had worn upon the day ofher death two large white pockets above the jupe of red serge. Thesewere still attached to the black velvet bodice which she displayed inhonour of her marriage with the Norman, and contained a variety ofmiscellaneous articles, amongst which were several epistles from herhusband to herself in the days of their courtship, which showed DeBlenau that she had been employed as a spy upon Pauline and Madame deBeaumont ever since their arrival at St. Germain's: added to these was acertificate of marriage between Jean Baptiste Marteville and LouiseThibault, celebrated in the chapel of the Palais Cardinal, by FranoisGiraud. All this led De Blenau to conclude, that he had been misled inregard to the cause of Pauline's absence from St. Germain's; and heaccordingly proceeded to the little bourg of Senecy on his returntowards Troyes, making his men bear thither the body of Louise with asmuch decent solemnity as the circumstances admitted. Having hereintrusted to the good Cur of the place the charge of the funeral, andgiven two sums for the very different purposes of promoting thediscovery of the murderer and buying a hundred masses for the soul ofthe deceased, De Blenau pursued his journey, and arrived at Troyesbefore night.Putting up this time at the hotel of the Grand Soleil, De Blenau soonacquired sufficient information to confirm him in the opinion that theNorman had been accompanied by Louise alone; but at the same time, theaccounts which the people of the house gave respecting the kindness andaffection that Marteville had shown his bride, greatly shook thesuspicions which had been entertained against him by De Blenau, who,unacquainted with any such character as that of the Norman, knew notthat there are men who, like tigers when unurged by hunger, will playwith their victims before they destroy them.The next morning early, all was prepared for the departure of De Blenau,on his return to Moulins, when his farther progress in that directionwas arrested by the arrival of Henry de La Mothe, his page, accompaniedby one of the King's couriers, who immediately presented to the Counttwo packets, of which he had been the bearer from St. Germain's. Thefirst of these seemed, from the superscription, to be a common officialdocument; but the second attracted all his attention, and made his heartbeat high by presenting to him the genuine hand-writing of Pauline deBeaumont. Without meaning any offence to Royalty, whose insignia wereimpressed upon the seal of the other packet, De Blenau eagerly cut thesilk which fastened the billet from Pauline. It contained only a fewlines, but these were quite sufficient to give renewed happiness to theheart of him who read it. She had just heard, she said, that the King'smessenger was about to set out, and though they hardly gave her time tofold her paper, yet she would not let any one be before her incongratulating him on his freedom to direct his course wheresoever hepleased. She could not divine, she continued, whether his choice wouldlead him to St. Germain's, but if it did, perhaps he might be treated tothe history of an errant Demoiselle, who had suffered various adventuresin endeavouring to liberate her true Knight from prison.De Blenau read it over again, and then turned to the other paper, whichmerely notified that the King, contented with his loyal and peaceablebehaviour while relegu in Bourbon, had been graciously pleased torelieve him from the restrictions under which he had been placed for hisown benefit and the State's security; and informed him, in short, thathe had leave, liberty, and licence, to turn his steps whithersoever helisted."To St. Germain's!" cried De Blenau gaily. "To St. Germain's! You, Henryde La Mothe, stay here with Franois and Clement. Take good care ofMonsieur l'Ordinaire, and see that he be rewarded."--The messenger madehim a reverence.--"After you have reposed yourself here for a day,"continued the Count, "return to Moulins; pay notre Propritaire, andall that may be there due. There is the key of the coffre fort. Useall speed that you well may, and then join me at home. And now for St.Germain's."So saying, he sprang on his horse as light as air, gave the well-knownsignal with his heel, and in a moment was once more on the road toParis.Although I find a minute account of De Blenau's whole journey to St.Germain's, with the towns and inns at which he stopped, marked with theprecision of a road-book, I shall nevertheless take upon myself theresponsibility of abridging it as far as well can be, by saying that itbegan and ended happily.The aspect of St. Germain's, however, had very much changed since DeBlenau left it. Louis had now fixed his residence there; his confidencein the Queen seemed perfectly restored; every countenance glowed withthat air of satisfaction, which such a renewal of good intelligencenaturally produced; and the Royal residence had once more assumed theappearance of a Court.The first welcome received by De Blenau was from his gallant friend CinqMars, at whose request his recall had been granted by the King, and whonow, calculating the time of the exile's return, stood at the door of DeBlenau's hotel, ready to meet him on his arrival."Welcome, welcome back! my long-lost friend, Claude de Blenau,"exclaimed Cinq Mars, as the Count sprang from his horse; "welcome fromthe midst of prisons and trials, perils and dangers!""And well met, gallant Cinq Mars, the noble and the true," replied DeBlenau. "But tell me, in heaven's name, Cinq Mars, what makes all thischange at St. Germain's? Why, it looks as if the forest were a fair, andthat the old town had put on its holiday suit to come and see it.""Nay, nay! rather, like a true dame that dresses herself out for herlover's return, it has made itself fine to receive you back again,"replied the Master of the Horse. "But if you would really know thesecret of all the change that you see now, and will see still morewonderfully as you look farther, it is this. Richelieu is ill atTarascon, and his name is scarcely remembered at the Court, thoughChavigni, that bold rascal, and Mazarin, that subtle one, come prowlingabout to maintain, if possible, their master's sway. But the spell isbroken, and Louis is beginning to be a King again: so we shall seebright days yet.""I hope so; in truth I hope so, Cinq Mars," replied De Blenau. "But, atall events, we will enjoy the change so far as it has gone. And now,what news at the Palace? How fare all the lovely ladies of the Court?""Why well," answered Cinq Mars; "all well; though I know, De Blenau,that your question, in comprising a hundred, meant but one only. Well,what say you?--I have seen thy Pauline, and cannot but allow that thytaste is marvellous good. There is a wild grace about her, well worthall the formal dignity of a court. One gets tired of the stiff courtesyand the precise bow; the kissing of hands and the lisping of names; theMonseigneurings and the Madamings. Fie! one little touch of natureis worth it all.""But answer me one question, Monsieur le Grand," said De Blenau. "Howcame there a report about, that Pauline had been carried off by some ofthe Cardinal's people, and that no one knew where she was? for such atale reached me even in Bourbon.""Is it possible that you are the last to hear that story?" exclaimedCinq Mars. "Why, though the old Marquise, and the rest at the Palace,affect to keep it a secret, every one knows the adventures of yourdemoiselle errante."De Blenau's cheek flushed to hear such a name applied to Pauline; butCinq Mars continued, observing that his friend was hurt--"Nay, nay,every one admires her for the whole business, and no one more than I.But, as I was saying, all the world knows it. The Queen herself told itto Monsieur de Lomenie, and he to his cousin De Thou, and De Thou tome; and so it goes on. Well, but I must take up the gossip's tale at thebeginning. The Queen, wishing to communicate with you in prison, couldfind no messenger, who, for either gold or fair words, would venture hishead into the rat-trap, except your fair Pauline; and she, it seems,attempted twice to get into the Bastille, once by day and once at night,but both times fruitlessly. How it happened I hardly remember, but bysome means Chavigni, through some of his creatures, winded the wholeaffair; and posting from Chantilly to Paris, catches my fair lady in thevery effort, disguised as a soubrette; down he pounces, like a falconon a partridge, and having secured the delinquent, places her in acarriage, which, with the speed of light, conveys her away to his castlein Maine, where Madame la Comtesse de Chavigni--who, by the way, is anangel according to all accounts--receives the young lady and entertainsher with all kindness. In the mean while, Monsieur le Comte de Blenau isexamined by the King in person, and instead of having his head cut off,is merely relegu in Bourbon; upon which Chavigni finds he has losthis labour, and is obliged to send for the pretty prisoner back againwith all speed."Although De Blenau was aware, from his own personal experience, thatCinq Mars had mistaken several parts of his history, he did not thinkfit to set him right; and the Master of the Horse proceeded: "However,let us into thy hotel. Get thy dinner, wash the dust from thy beard,array thyself in an unsullied doublet, and we will hie to the dwellingof thy lady fair, to glad her eyes with the sight of thy sweet person."De Blenau smiled at his friend's raillery, and as the proposal very wellaccorded with his wishes, every moment seeming mis-spent that detainedhim from Pauline, he changed his dress as speedily as possible, and wassoon ready to accompany Cinq Mars to the Palace.As they proceeded on their way towards the gates of the Park, a figurepresented itself, which, from its singularity, was worthy of notice. Itwas that of a tall, thin raw-boned man, who, naturally possessing acountenance of the ugliest cast of Italian ugliness, had rendered itstill more disagreeable by the enormous length of his mustaches, whichwould have far overtopped his nose, had it been a nose of any ordinaryproportion; but a more extensive pear-shaped, ill-adapted organ neverprojected from a human countenance; and this, together with a pair ofsmall, flaming black eyes, which it seemed to bear forward with it abovethe rest of the face, protruding from a mass of beard and hair,instantly reminding the beholder of a badger looking out of a hole. Thechin, however, bore no proportion to the nose, and seemed rather toslink away from it in an oblique direction, apparently overawed by itsmore ambitious neighbour.The dress of this delectable personage was a medley of the French andFlemish costumes. He wore a grey vest of silk, with sleeves slashed atthe elbow, and the shirt, which was not conspicuously clean, buttoned atthe wrist with agate studs. His haut de chausse, which was of deepcrimson, and bore loops and ribbons of yellow, was fringed round theleg, near the knees, with a series of brazen tags or points butindifferently silvered; and as he walked along with huge steps, theseaforesaid tags clattered together with a sort of important sound, which,put in combination with the rest of his appearance, drew many a laughfrom the boys of St. Germain's. Over his grey vest was drawn astraight-cut doublet of yellow silk, without sleeves; and a pair of longboots, of untanned leather, covered all defects which might otherwisehave been apparent in his hose. His dress was completed by a tawdrybonnet with a high black plume: and a Toledo blade of immeasurablelength, with a worked iron hilt and black scabbard, hung by his side,describing with its point various strange figures on the dust of theroad."Here comes Villa Grande, the Italian lute-player," exclaimed Cinq Marsthe moment he saw him. "Do you know him, De Blenau?""I have heard him play on his instrument and sing at your house,"replied De Blenau; "and from his language that night, may say I know himthrough and through, for a boasting coxcomb, with as much courage as thesheath of a rapier,--which looks as good as a rapier itself till it istouched, and then it proves all emptiness. Mind you how he boasted ofhaving routed whole squadrons when he served in the Italian horse? and Idare say he would run from a stuffed pikeman in an old hall.""Nay, nay; you do him wrong, Claude," replied Cinq Mars. "He has rathertoo much tongue, it is true; but that is not always the sign of a badhound. I must speak to him, however, for he does me service.--Well,Signor Villa Grande," continued he, addressing the Italian, who nowapproached, swinging an enormous cane in his hand, and from time to timecurling up the ends of his mustaches; "you remember that you are to beready at a moment's notice. Be sure, also, that your mind be made up;for I tell you fairly, the service which you undertake is one ofdanger.""Monsieur," replied the Italian with a strong foreign accent, "I will beready, when you call upon me, in shorter time than you could draw yoursword; and as for my mind being made up, if there were an army drawn outto oppose my progress, I would be bound to carry the despatch to theDuke of Bouillon, or die in the attempt. Fear not my yielding it to anybody; piutosto morir vol'io, as the song has it," and he hummed a fewbars of one of his native airs.--"Oh Dio!" continued he, recognisingDe Blenau, who had turned away on perceiving that Cinq Mars spoke tothe Italian on some business of a private nature. "Oh Dio! Monsieur leComte de Blenau, is it really you returned at last? Benedetto quelgiorno felice! Doubtless you are aware of the glorious plans of yourfriend Monsieur le Grand.""Good day, Signor," answered De Blenau; "I know of no one's plans but myown, the most glorious of which, within my apprehension at present, isto get to the Palace as soon as possible. Come, Cinq Mars, are you atleisure?" and he took a step or two in advance, while the Master of theHorse gave the Italian a warning to put a bridle on his tongue, and notto let it run so loosely without any regard to necessary caution."For Heaven's sake, take care what you are about, Cinq Mars!" said DeBlenau, when he was again joined by his friend. "Of course you are thebest judge of your own plans; but unless you have a mind to ruin themall, do not trust them to such a babbling idiot as that; and bewarethat, in attempting to catch a lion, you do not get torn yourself.""Oh, no fear," replied the Grand Ecuyer; "that fellow knows nothing morethan it is absolutely necessary for him to know, and as for the rest, Ihave plunged into a wide sea, Claude, and must swim to land somehow."They had by this time reached the gates of the Palace, and Cinq Mars,knowing that some meetings are better in private, left his friend, andturned his steps towards the apartments of the King.In the mean while, De Blenau proceeded with a rapid pace towards thatpart of the Palace which had been assigned to Madame de Beaumont; andhis heart beat with that wild uncontrollable emotion, which the meetingwith one dearly loved can alone produce. At that very moment similarsensations were throbbing in the bosom of Pauline de Beaumont, who fromthe window had seen the approach of Cinq Mars and another; and longbefore her eye could distinguish a feature, her heart had told her whoit was. A sort of irresistible impulse led her, at first, to fly towardsthe door by which she expected him to enter; but before she was halfacross the room, some other feeling came over her mind. She returned toher seat at the window, and a blush stole over her cheek, though therewas no other person present to observe her emotion or pry into itscause.The door was partially open, and more than once she raised her eyestowards it, and thought that De Blenau was long in coming so short adistance. But presently she heard his step, and there was an impatienteagerness even in the sound of his footfall that convinced her he lostno time. Another moment and he entered the room--Every feeling but onewas at an end, and Pauline was in his arms.It is not at the moment when a lover has endured many sorrows, andescaped from many dangers, that a gentle heart can practise even theevery-day affectations which a great part of the world are pleased tomistake for delicacy; and far less inclined to attempt it than any otherperson in the world, was Pauline de Beaumont. The child of nature andsimplicity, her delicacy was that of an elegant mind and a pure heart.Of what she did feel she concealed little, and affected nothing; and DeBlenau was happy.Of course there was a great deal to be told, and De Blenau was listeningdelighted to an account of the considerate kindness with which theCountess de Chavigni had treated his Pauline, when the sound of voicesapproaching towards them stopped her in her history.It is precisely at such moments as those when we wish every body butourselves away, that the world is most likely to intrude upon us; andPauline and De Blenau had not met more than five minutes, as it seemedto them, when the Queen and Madame de Beaumont entered theapartment.--How long they had been really together is another question,for lovers' feelings are not always the truest watches."Welcome, my faithful De Blenau," said the Queen. "We encountered theGrand Ecuyer but now, who told us where we should find you. For my ownpart, I suppose I must in all justice forgive your paying your devoirshere before you came to visit even me. However, ere there be any onenear to overhear, I must thank you for all you have done for me, and forall you have suffered on my account. Nor must I forget my little heroinehere, who went through all sorts of peril and danger in conveying mymessage to you in the Bastille.""Your Majesty was very good in sending me such an angel of comfort,"replied De Blenau. "And certainly, had it not been for the commands shebrought me, I believe that his most Christian-like Eminence ofRichelieu would have doomed me to the torture for my obstinacy.""Put it in other words, De Blenau," said Anne of Austria. "You mean thatyou would have endured the torture sooner than betray your Queen. Buttruly, Pauline must have a stout heart to have carried through such anundertaking; and I think that the fidelity and attachment which you haveboth shown to me, offers a fair promise for your conduct towards eachother. What say you, Madame de Beaumont?""I think, Madame," replied the Marchioness, "that Pauline has done herduty with more firmness than most girls could have commanded; and thatDe Blenau has done his as well as it could be done.""Pauline merits more praise than her mother ventures to give," said theQueen. "But I had forgot the King's summons; and probably he is even nowwaiting for us. Come, Pauline; come, De Blenau. Louis gives highcommendation to your demeanour in prison; let us see how he greets youout of it."A message had been conveyed to Anne of Austria, just before the arrivalof De Blenau, intimating that the King desired to see her; and she nowled the way to the Salle Ronde, as it was then called, or the Salledes Muses, as it was afterwards named by Louis the Fourteenth, wherethe King waited her approach. Although the uncertain nature of Louis'stemper always made her feel some degree of apprehension when summoned tohis presence, the kindness he had lately shown her, and the presence ofa large proportion of her friends, made her obey his call with morepleasure than she usually felt on similar occasions.Louis's object, in the present instance, was to inform the Queen of thejourney he was about to make into the neighbourhood of Perpignan, inorder to confirm the inhabitants of Roussillon in their new allegianceto the crown of France; and Cinq Mars, who had always sincerely wishedthe welfare of Anne of Austria, took this opportunity of insinuating tothe King, that to show publicly his restored confidence in the Queen, sofar from lessening his authority, even in appearance, would be in truthonly asserting his own dignity, from which the proceedings of Richelieuhad so greatly derogated.De Blenau and Pauline followed a step or two behind the Queen andMadame de Beaumont, and would willingly have lingered still longer bythemselves; but as something must always be sacrificed to appearance,they quickened their pace as Anne of Austria approached the door of theSalle Ronde, and came up with her just as she entered the room inwhich the principal part of the French court was assembled. The momentshe appeared, Louis advanced towards the Queen from the brilliant circlein which he stood, and embraced her affectionately. "Welcome, my fairlady," said he. "I see you have brought the new returned exile withyou.--Monsieur de Blenau, I am glad to see you at court;--this is apleasanter place than where we met last.""I can assure you, Sire," replied De Blenau, "that I will never bewillingly in circumstances to meet your Majesty there again.""I do not doubt it, I do not doubt it," said the King. "You should thankHeaven that delivered you from such peril, Sir Count.--Madam," hecontinued, turning to the Queen, "I requested to see you, not only forthe pleasure which your presence must always give, but to inform you,that affairs of state will shortly call me to Narbonne, in Languedoc,from whence I shall return with all convenient speed.""Your Majesty soon leaves St. Germain's," replied the Queen. "I do notthink you love it for a sojourn, as in other days.""Not so," answered Louis; "so well do I love it, that I had purposed tohave worn out the rest of my days here, had not the duties of my stationcalled me hence: but my return will be speedy if God give me life.--Whatman can say how long he may remain? and I feel many a warning that mytime will be but short in this world.--Ha! what mean those drops in youreyes?--I did not know, Anne, that such were your feelings." And hepressed the Queen's hand, which he had continued to retain in his."Oh Louis!" replied Anne of Austria, and by that simple exclamationconveyed a more delicate reproach to the heart of her husband than shecould have done by any other expression in the range of language. Louisfelt it, and drawing her arm kindly through his own, he proposed aloudthat the whole party should walk forth upon the terrace. It was theQueen's favourite spot, and she easily understood that it was meant assome atonement for many a former slight. Those, too, who stood roundand saw what had taken place, began to perceive that a new star wasdawning in the horizon, and turned their eyes to watch its progress andcourt its influence.The King and Queen were followed by the greater part of the court; andduring the walk Louis continued to manifest that kindness towards hiswife, which had it been earlier shown, might have given him a life ofhappiness. "Let me beg you, Madam," said he, as at length they turned toenter the Palace, "not only to be careful of our children, for that I amsure you will be, but also to be careful of their mother, for my sake."The Queen's feelings were overpowering; the tears rolled rapidly downher cheeks, taking from her all power of utterance, and quitting theKing, after pressing his hand to her lips, she retired to her ownapartments, to indulge in solitude the new and delightful emotions whichher husband's unexpected kindness had excited.CHAPTER VIII.Which shows that the Moment and the Manner have often more to dowith Success than the Matter.The various preparations for the King's journey into Roussillon occupiedno small space of time. Litters and carriages were to be provided;relays of horses to be stationed on the road; cooks and victuallers wereto be sent forward; and a thousand other arrangements to be made,required either by the general difficulty of locomotion in those days,or by the failing health of the King. It was not then, as in the presenttime, when monarchs and subjects travel with equal facility all over theglobe: when a king gets into his travelling chaise with no more to dothan a private man, and is carried along over a level road without letor hindrance, jolt or jumbling, to whatsoever place his fancy mayincline him. The journey of a sovereign was then as formidable anundertaking as the passage of the Great Desert to a modern traveller,and required fully as much provision and circumspection.One great object of Richelieu's policy had been to diminish the feudalinfluence of the nobility, and by forcing them to reside with the Court,to break through their constant communication with their vassals. Inpursuit of this, he had drawn the greater part of the nobles to Paris;and now that his absence and declining favour with the King dissolvedthe charm which seemed to hold them in the capital, they congregated atSt. Germain's like a flock of bees, that, having lost their hive, flewforth in search of a new one. Many of these were bound, by their variousoffices in the household, to accompany the King in his present journey;others were particularly invited to do so either by Louis himself or byCinq Mars and Fontrailles, who sought to surround the King with thosewho, on any sudden emergency, might support their party against theCardinal; and a crowd of others, from vanity or interest, curiosity orambition, were glad to follow in the train of the Monarch.Thus the greater part of the nobles who had flocked to St. Germain's, onRichelieu's departure from Paris, now again left it in order to takepart in the journey to Narbonne. As all the horses, and every sort ofaccommodation on the direct road, were engaged for the service of theKing and those immediately attendant upon him, the greater part of theCourt took the indirect roads by which they could always be near theRoyal party; and the rest followed a day or two after, taking advantageof whatever conveniences might be left unappropriated.There were one or two, however, who departed before Louis, and of thesethe principal was Chavigni, who set out accompanied by a few servants,two or three days prior to that appointed for the King's expedition. Hisostensible destination was, like that of the rest of the Court, toNarbonne; but turning to the left, he directed his course towardsTarascon, and having travelled with the utmost rapidity, while Louisproceeded by easy stages, he had quite sufficient time to communicatefully with Richelieu, and proceed to Narbonne before the King'sarrival.The journey into Roussillon had been undertaken by the express advice ofRichelieu; and though Cinq Mars ventured boldly to attack the conduct ofthe Cardinal in every respect, to place all his measures in the worstpoint of view, and to encourage every sentiment in the King's mind whichwas in opposition to those of the Minister, still no change, or even aproposal of change in the Government had been mentioned, up to the timeof the Court reaching Narbonne. Richelieu was still Prime Minister, andthe Council remained composed of persons devoted to his interest, thoughthe views of Cinq Mars were already spoken of in more than one circle,and the consent of the King was so far assumed as a matter decided, thatthe two parties were distinguished by the names of Royalist andCardinalist.While the Court remained with the army near Perpignan, and after itsremoval to Narbonne, Richelieu still lay dangerously ill at Tarascon.His mind was deeply depressed, as well as his corporeal powers; and inthe opinion of all, a few weeks were likely to terminate both hisministry and his existence, even if the eager hand of his enemies didnot hurry him onward to more rapid destruction. But the fiery spirit ofCinq Mars brooked no delay: the lazy course of natural decay was tooslow for his impatience; and though De Thou, who accompanied his friendto Narbonne, reiterated in his ears the maxims of caution and wisdom, onthe other hand Fontrailles, fearful lest he should lose the merit andconsequent influence he should acquire by the removal of Richelieu,never ceased to urge the favourite to hurry on the completion of theirdesign.In the mean time, every thing seemed favourable to the conspirators; andCinq Mars felt confident that the secret inclination of Louis wouldsecond all his views; but nevertheless, he wished for some more publicand determinate expression of the King's opinion, before he asked hisconsent to the measures which had been concerted. After the arrival ofthe Court at Narbonne, however, the Monarch's conduct in respect toRichelieu became of so decisive a character, that no farther delayappeared necessary. Within a few miles of the place where the Cardinallay ill, the King seemed entirely to have forgotten that such a manexisted, or only to remember him with hatred. His name, if it was evermentioned, instantly called into Louis's countenance an expression ofuneasiness and disapprobation; and by no chance was the King ever heardto pronounce it himself. By all these circumstances, Cinq Mars wasdetermined to communicate to Louis, as soon as possible, the schemeswhich had been formed for freeing the country from the yoke ofRichelieu. He suffered, however, several days to elapse in waiting for afavourable opportunity, and at length, as often happens, growingimpatient of delay, took perhaps the most inauspicious moment that couldhave been selected. It was on a morning when every thing had gone wrongwith Louis.Notwithstanding his failing health, he still clung to his accustomedamusements, and very often rode forth to hunt when he was very unfit forany bodily exercise. On these occasions, the distressing consciousnessof his decaying powers always rendered him doubly irritable; and on theday which Cinq Mars unfortunately chose to broach the subject of thedismissal of Richelieu, a thousand trivial accidents had occurred toincrease his ill humour to the highest pitch. His horse had fallen withhim in the chase; they had beat the country for hours without findingany game worthy of pursuit; and when at length they did rouse a fineboar, and had brought him to bay, he broke out after killing two of theKing's best hounds, and plunged into the deepest part of the forest.Louis was returning home from this unsuccessful chase, when Cinq Mars,turning his eyes towards the towers of Tarascon, which just then wereseen rising above the trees in the distance, pointed to them with hishunting-whip, saying, "There lies the Cardinal!""Well, Sir," exclaimed Louis eagerly, catching at any thing on which tovent his irritability--"do you wish me to go and see him? Doubtless hewill be glad of the visit. Let us go." And he reined in his horse, as ifwith the intention of turning him towards Tarascon."Far be it from me to advise your Majesty so to do," replied Cinq Mars,who clearly perceived that the King's answer proceeded only from casualirritation. "It was the sight of the old towers of the Chateau, thatcalled the Cardinal to my mind. In truth, I had almost forgotten him.""Forgotten him, Cinq Mars!" cried the King. "I think he has done enoughto make himself remembered.""He has indeed, Sire," replied Cinq Mars, "and his memory will long lastcoupled with curses in the heart of every true Frenchman. But there helies; I trust, like the Tarasque, hideous but harmless, for thepresent.""What do you mean by the Tarasque?" demanded Louis; "I never heard ofit.""It is merely a whimsical stone dragon, Sire," replied Cinq Mars, "thatlies carved in the Church of St. Marthe, at Tarascon on the Rhone--athing of no more real use than the Cardinal de Richelieu.""Of no use, Sir!" exclaimed the King, his eye flashing fire. "Do youthink that we would repose such trust, and confide our kingdom's weal toone who is of no use? Silence, Sir!" he continued, seeing Cinq Marsabout to reply: "No more of this subject--we have heard too much of it."Cinq Mars was too wise to add another word, and the King rode on toNarbonne, maintaining a sullen silence towards all around him.Of the conversation which had passed not one word had escaped the earsof Fontrailles; and the moment the cortge had dismounted, hefollowed the Master of the Horse towards a distant part of the groundswhich lay behind the Chateau. Cinq Mars walked on as if he did not seehim, and at last finding that he persisted in following, he stoppedabruptly, exclaiming, "Well, Fontrailles! well! what now? What would yousay? I can guess it all, so spare yourself the trouble.""You mistake me, Cinq Mars," replied Fontrailles, "if you think I wouldblame you. You did your best, though the time was not the best chosen;but all I wish to press upon you is, not to let this dispirit you. Letthe subject die away for the present and seem forgotten, till the Kingis in a better mood. Every hour of his neglect is death to Richelieu;and besides, the King's consent is not absolutely necessary to us.""To me, absolutely necessary," replied Cinq Mars, "for I stir not onestep without it.""Nay, the King's private consent to you is of course necessary,"answered Fontrailles; "but you surely do not think of informing him ofthe treaty with Spain. After the affair is finished, and Richelieu'spower at an end, Louis will see the necessity of it; but such, you mustknow, is his hatred towards Spain, that he would consider the veryproposal as little better than high treason.""I am not yet determined in that respect," answered Cinq Mars; "myconduct will of course be decided by how I find the King inclined. Ilike no concealments, where they can be avoided. But in the first place,Villa Grande must carry the treaty to----"Cinq Mars paused; for, as he spoke, Chavigni turned sharp round from analley close by, and passed on. The Statesman bowed, en passant, to theMaster of the Horse, who but slightly returned his salutation, while, onthe other hand, Fontrailles doffed his hat and inclined his head with ahypocritical smile, in which habitual servility was strongly blendedwith triumphant malice.Chavigni spoke not, but there were two or three words had caught his earas he passed, which at once turned his suspicions into the rightchannel, and stimulated him to know more. We have already said that itwas a maxim with the Statesman, that in politics nothing is mean; and hewould have felt not the slightest hesitation in listening to theconversation of Cinq Mars, could he have done so without being observed.To effect this, it was necessary to take a large round in order toapproach the alley in which the two conspirators walked without drawingtheir attention to himself; but as he turned to do so, he observed theMaster of the Horse separate from his companion and come towards thespot where he stood, and not wishing to put Cinq Mars on his guard, byshowing that he was watched, he turned away and directed his stepstowards the Chteau."Must carry the treaty--" thought Chavigni. "Who must carry the treaty?If I could but have heard that name, I should then have had the clue inmy hands. However, Monsieur de Cinq Mars, you shall be well looked to,at least--take care that you trip not--for if you do, you fall." Thusthinking, he passed on to the stables, where his horses stood,intending, notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, and the failinglight, to ride over to Tarascon and communicate with Richelieu, even ifhe should be obliged to become a borrower of the night for a dark houror twain. His grooms, however, taking advantage of his absence, haddispersed themselves in various directions in search of amusement topass the hours in the dull town of Narbonne; and consequently Chavignicould find no one to saddle his horses for the proposed journey.Irritated at this impediment, he was about to quit the stable in searchof some of the truant grooms, when he again perceived Cinq Marsapproaching, accompanied by the Italian Villa Grande. They were inearnest conversation, and Chavigni, knowing that Cinq Mars had horseslodged next to his own, drew back, and searching for a crevice in thewooden partition, which was as old and decayed as he could desire, heapplied himself to listen to all that passed as soon as the Master ofthe Horse and his companion entered the adjoining stable. The firstwords he heard were from the Italian. "You know, Monseigneur," said he,"that the utmost a man can do, is to die in defence of his charge; andthat will I do, sooner than yield to any man that which you intrust tomy hands.""Well, well," replied Cinq Mars, "there is no need of so manyprofessions, good Sir. To-morrow morning then, at day-break, you setout. That is the horse--mind you use him well, but spare not his speed.Salute the noble Duke on my part with all kindness and love. At nine youcome for the treaty: but mark that you keep your time, for at ten Imust be with the King.""But Monseigneur, Monseigneur!" cried Villa Grande, as Cinq Mars turnedto leave him; "perhaps your lackeys will not let me have the horse.""Well then, when you come to-night," replied the Grand Ecuyer, "youshall have an order for him.""Now then, your secret is in my power," thought Chavigni, as Cinq Marsand his companion left the spot. "Monsieur de Villa Grande, I willinstantly make out an order for your arrest to-morrow morning, and saveyou the trouble of your journey.--Salute the noble Duke!" he continued,meditating on the words of Cinq Mars--"What Duke?--It must be Gaston ofOrleans--But he is a royal Duke--But we shall see." And as he walked ontowards the Chateau he bent his eyes upon the ground, revolving in hismind the various plans which suggested themselves for withdrawing hispatron and himself from the brink of that political precipice on whichthey stood.His thoughts, however, which for a moment wandered to every differentcircumstance of his situation, seeking amongst the many dangers thatsurrounded, some favourable point on which to found a hope, were allsuddenly recalled to one object, by the approach of Cardinal Mazarin,who by his hurried step and anxious countenance appeared to be troubledby some unforeseen event.Notwithstanding their being linked in one cause, notwithstanding theirpresent interests drawing together, notwithstanding all the apparentfriendship that existed between them, Chavigni looked upon the Cardinalas one who with less zeal had rivalled him in the favour of Richelieu,and who with less talent had insinuated himself as much into the affairsof Government; and Mazarin, although obliged to coalesce withRichelieu's favourite, looked forward to the day when the struggle forpre-eminence between them would come to a climax, and one would riseupon the ruin of the other: and he saw clearly that when that day didarrive, all his own subtlety would hardly qualify him to compete withthe bold mind and vigorous talents of Chavigni, unless he could in thefirst instance gradually acquire for himself such a superiority ofinterest, as to enable him to command rather than contend for thehighest station.The natural effect of these conflicting interests was a feeling ofjealous suspicion in the mind of each, which in Mazarin only appeared bythe care he took to strengthen his influence wherever it was mostopposite to that of Chavigni; while at the same time, he showed hisfellow statesman an outward respect and deference almost amounting toservility. But on the other part, Chavigni's hasty disposition made hisdislike more apparent, though he took no means of injuring his rival.As they approached each other, the Cardinal made a sign to the Page whoattended him to remain behind, and folding the train of his robe overhis arm, he advanced quickly to Chavigni, embracing him with thegreatest semblance of attachment. "My excellent friend," he exclaimed,"I have sought you everywhere: let me beg you to fly instantly toTarascon, or all our hopes are ruined.""In truth," replied Chavigni, not allowing Mazarin to explain themotives of his request; "your Eminence requires what I can hardly complywith; as I have but now got business on my hands which needs some timeto manage. But may I crave the object which would be gained by my goingto Tarascon? I should think that he who could stay two hostile armieson the point of battle, was fully sufficient to any stroke of policy."There was a sarcastic smile on the lip of Chavigni, as he alluded to thepeace which Mazarin had procured at Cazal, at the moment when the Frenchand Spanish armies were about to engage; but the Cardinal would see onlythe compliment. "You are too kind," replied he; "but in this instance,you only can succeed; you only, I feel assured--and that not without theexertion of all your influence--can prevent the Cardinal Prime Ministerfrom sending his resignation to the King.""His resignation!" exclaimed Chavigni, starting back with unfeignedastonishment. "In the name of Heaven, what do you mean?""I mean this, Chavigni," replied Mazarin, "that unless you reachTarascon before daylight to-morrow morning, and use every argument inyour power to produce, the courier, who bears the official resignationof his Eminence of Richelieu, will have set out for this place. I sawthe paper signed to-day, with my own eyes, before I came away; and allthat my utmost entreaties could gain was, that it should be delayedtill to-morrow morning, in hopes of your arrival before that time. HisEminence feels convinced that the King's favour and his own power arelost for ever; and in truth I begin to think so too.""Madness and folly!" exclaimed Chavigni, striking his hand against hisforehead with vexation. "Madness and folly!--Rascal, saddle me a horse,"he continued to a groom, who now loitered into the court with that sortof slow indifferent air which would put an angel in a passion. "Where,in the name of all the devils, have you been lingering? Pardon me, yourEminence--but I am vexed. I did not think his great mind was sooverthrown.--Saddle me a horse, I say. Slave, must you standeaves-dropping? Better you had been born deaf than overhear myconversation. There are such things as oubliettes to cure listeners.Saddle me a horse, I say.""Will you not take some of my servants with you?" said Mazarin; "theyare all in readiness.""No, no," replied Chavigni, "I go alone. Do not let it get abroad that Iam gone. I will be back betimes to-morrow.""You had better take one servant, at least," said the Cardinal. "Theroads are not safe. It is dangerous.""Dangerous!" exclaimed Chavigni. "Who thinks of danger when his all isat stake? Your Eminence has a great regard for human lives, I know--formine more especially. But depend upon it, I shall come home safeto-morrow, though I go alone to-night. Now, Sir," he continued to thegroom, who led forth a strong black hunter for his service, "girth upthe saddle a little tighter: unbuckle that cross from his poitral; I amneither going on a pilgrimage nor a procession."And now, walking twice round the horse to see that all the caparisonswere in right order, he sprang into the saddle, and dashing his rowelsinto the hunter's flank, galloped out of the court-yard, bowing with asmile as he passed by Mazarin, who started back a step, as the horse'sfeet, in the rapidity of its course, struck fire with the stones of thepavement.CHAPTER IX.Which shows how a King made reparation, and what came of it.While, as we have seen, Chavigni galloped off towards Tarascon,forgetting in the agitation produced by the tidings of Mazarin, to takethose measures which he had proposed in regard to Villa Grande, CinqMars returned directly towards the palace, or rather, the house whichhad been converted into a palace for the King's use. It was one of thoseold buildings which at that time were common in France, and which evennow are often to be met with in cities where the remains of ancientsplendour, left alone to the less destructive power of time, have notbeen demolished by the violence of turbulent times, or the still moreinveterate enmity of modern improvement. The whole front, with the twooctagonal towers at the sides, and the long corridors on the right andleft hand of the court, were ornamented with a multitude of beautifularabesques and bas reliefs. These last, the bas reliefs, entirelycovered the principal faade of the building, and offered a number ofpictures in stone, representing in some parts battles and triumphs, andin others displaying the humbler and more peaceful subjects of pastorallife and religious ceremonies. Amongst the rest was one medallion whichcaught the attention of Cinq Mars; and as the failing light preventedhim from seeing it where he stood, he approached to observe it. Thechisel of the sculptor usurping the place of the pencil, had therepourtrayed a landscape with a flock of sheep pasturing quietly by theside of a brook, while a shepherd appeared sleeping under a hill, downwhich a wolf was seen stealing upon the flock. Underneath was written inold gothic characters, Eveillez vous, le loup s'approche.Cinq Mars smiled as he read it, applying the warning to himself. "Lethim come," said he, thinking of Richelieu; "he will be caught himself."So saying, he turned, and entering the Palace, retired to his ownapartments. He had not remained there long, however, before he was oncemore joined by Fontrailles. "Follow me quick, Cinq Mars," cried theconspirator; "the King asks for you. Now is the moment to speak to him.He thinks that his peevishness hurt you this morning, and he is willingto make atonement."It may be well supposed that Cinq Mars lost no time in following hiscompanion up the great staircase to the King's apartments. It was,indeed, as Fontrailles had said. Since his return, Louis had enjoyed anhour of repose, which cleared from his mind the irritability induced byfatigue, and made him reproach himself for the unkindness he had shownto one so devotedly attached to him as the Master of the Horse. Theremembrance of it oppressed him, and he sent for his favourite, notindeed to apologize, but to wipe away the impression that hisirritability had caused, by more than usual kindness and familiarity.The two conspirators found Louis seated in a cabinet, which, beingplaced in one of the towers, partook of its octangular form. The wallswere wainscoted with dark carved oak, and even the plafond was all ofthe same gloomy-coloured material, except a massy gilt cornice andprojecting rose in the centre, from which hung a single silver lamp, therays of which, falling on the figure of the King beneath, gave anadditional paleness to his worn but fine countenance, and slightlytouching upon his plain black velvet suit, shone full on the richlyilluminated book in which he had been reading.Louis raised his eyes as Fontrailles entered, and then turning them fullon the noble countenance of Cinq Mars who followed, a pleased smilebeamed for a moment on his lip, and he exclaimed, "Well, Cinq Mars, artthou Nimrod enough to hunt again to-morrow after our misfortunes ofto-day? Come in, Monsieur de Fontrailles," he continued, seeing thatFontrailles remained near the door, hesitating whether he should retireor not, now that he had done the King's bidding in summoning the GrandEcuyer. "Come in, I pray--Sit you down, Gentlemen--it is the King'srequest: you, Cinq Mars, here--Monsieur de Fontrailles, there is a seat.Now," he continued, glancing his eye round as the light of the lampgleamed faintly on their several countenances--"now we look like somesecret triumvirate met to decide the fate of nations.""And that might be too," replied Cinq Mars: "your Majesty to command,and we to execute."The King took no notice, but went on with what he had himself beensaying: "There is Cinq Mars looks like a noble prince, and Fontrailleslike a wily minister, and I---- I believe," he continued laughing, "Ihave left myself no place but that of secretary.""Alas!" said Cinq Mars with a deep sigh, "alas! that there should be anyman in your Majesty's dominions more a king than yourself."Fontrailles and the King both started; and the Conspirator internallypronounced "All is lost," while Cinq Mars himself, who had spokenwithout thought, only felt the imprudence of his speech when it wasbeyond recall."Cinq Mars! Cinq Mars!" cried Louis, "that is a daring speech;--but Iknow it proceeded from your love for me, and therefore I pardon it. ButI will tell you that no man is more a King in France than I am.""I crave your Majesty's gracious pardon," replied the Master of theHorse. "If I have offended your Majesty, it was from love for you alonethat I spoke. My words were bolder than my thoughts, and I only meantto say that I could wish to see my Monarch show himself that great Kingwhich he naturally is. I would fain see the staff of command withdrawnfrom one who abuses it.""Cinq Mars," answered the King, "that staff is in my own hand. It wasbut lent, my friend; and it is now resumed."The Master of the Horse paused for a moment, not exactly certain how farhe could rely upon the King's good humour, which he had already tried soincautiously, and turned his eyes towards Fontrailles, as if forcounsel."Speak, Cinq Mars," said Louis, seeing his hesitation, "speak boldly,and fear not; for I fully believe that all your wishes are for myservice, and I would fain hear the voice of those that regard me withaffection, rather than for their own interest; and one of these do Ihold you to be.""Your Majesty does me justice," replied Cinq Mars. "Let me not offendyou then, when I say that the power you lent is scarcely resumed whilethe title under which it was enjoyed remains. The Cardinal Duke ofRichelieu, my liege, is still Prime Minister of France. He has still allthe power (though not exercised), the revenues, the offices. Oursoldiers are fighting at his command, our provinces are governed by hiscreatures, our high posts are filled by his friends. He has an army forhis servants, and more than the riches of a prince. Why not--oh, whynot, Sire, break the enchanter's wand that gave him so much sway, andsweep away the hordes that prey upon the State, like swarms of fliesupon a slain deer? Why not direct the operations of your troopsyourself, and let the armies of France be the armies of the King, andnot of Richelieu? Why not chase from your councils a man who has sooften abused the generous confidence of his Sovereign, and make himdisgorge the ill-gotten wealth which he has wrung from the hearts ofyour people?"As he spoke, Cinq Mars grew warm with his subject; his eye sparkled, hisarm was extended with that wild and graceful energy for which he wasconspicuous; his words flowed uninterrupted, with all the eloquence ofenthusiasm, and his fine and princely features acquired a new andstriking expression, while, animated in the cause of his Country'sliberty, he pleaded against the tyrant who had oppressed both king andpeople. Louis gazed on him at first as on one inspired; but as a hostof consequences crowded on his mind, threatening him with a thousandvague and unsubstantial dangers, he placed his hands before his eyes,and remained for some moments in deep thought."My friend," said he at length, "what is it you would have me do? Thisman--this bad man if you will--but still this great man--is like an oakwhose roots are deep in the earth; you may hew them asunder one by one,but it requires a giant's strength to pluck the tree up at once.Richelieu's power may be taken from him gradually; but to attempt whatyou propose, would instantly cause a rebellion amongst my subjects. Hehas so many who depend upon him; he has so many that are allied tohim--""What!" exclaimed Cinq Mars, "shall it be said that King Louis wasafraid to dismiss his own minister?""Not afraid for myself, Sir," replied the King, somewhat sharply; "butafraid of bringing the miseries of civil war upon my people."Perceiving that Cinq Mars was urging the King too impetuously,Fontrailles, who had hitherto remained silent, now joined in theconversation in a soft insinuating tone, calculated to remove any newlyraised irritation from Louis's mind. "All danger, Sire," said he, stilllabouring to quiet the King's fears without opposing his opinion, "alldanger, which might otherwise be imminent, could easily be obviated, bycommanding the noble Duke of Bouillon--"At the name of the Duke of Bouillon Louis made an impatient motion withhis hand. "He is Spanish at his heart," said he; "that Duke of Bouillonis Spanish, rank Spanish. But what of him, Monsieur de Fontrailles?""Believe me, my Liege," replied Fontrailles, "the Duke of Bouillon, whomI know well, is not so much a friend to Spain as he is an enemy toRichelieu. Remember, Sire, how he is linked with the Prince of Orange,the sworn adversary of Spain."Louis shook his head doubtingly. "But what of him, Fontrailles? Come, tothe point.""Only this, Sire," said Fontrailles. "The Duke commands an army in Italydevoted to your Majesty's service; but permit me or Cinq Mars to givehim private orders in your name to march them into France, and whoshall dare to murmur at your royal will?""Why, that might be done, it is true," answered Louis; "but I am afraid,mon Grand," he continued, applying to Cinq Mars the term by which hedistinguished him in his kindest and most familiar moments--"I amafraid, mon Grand, that though thou art a keen huntsman and a goodsoldier, thou wouldst make but a sorry minister.""I minister!" exclaimed the Grand Ecuyer; "God forbid! No, no, my Lord!never did such a thought cross my imagination. Believe me, Sire, I hadno view of personal aggrandizement in the proposal I submitted to yourMajesty.""But if you take from Richelieu his office, whom do you wish tosubstitute in his place?" demanded Louis; "some one must be minister.""True, my Liege; but are there not thousands well fitted for the post?"said Cinq Mars--"Politicians as deep, but more humane thanRichelieu--Men who can govern, and yet not tyrannize? I will undertaketo find such a one for your Majesty, and yet remain myself fullysatisfied with being the humble friend of my royal master, and thesincere well-wisher of my native Country. But let me order, in yourname, the Duke of Bouillon to march into France; and then, provided withsufficient forces to disarm this usurping Minister, and overawerebellion, your own royal will will be your only guide.""At present," said Fontrailles, "the King's love for his people operatesin two opposing directions, making him anxious to relieve them from theburden under which they groan, yet fearful of throwing a portion of theminto rebellion. But by the presence of the Duke's army, the Ministermight be removed, without endangering the tranquillity of the realm.""True," said Louis; "true. Monsieur de Fontrailles, you say right;" andplacing his hand before his eyes, the King thought for a moment,struggling inwardly to exert the powers of his mind, and call upsufficient resolution to deliver himself from the thraldom in which hehad so long been held. But dangers, and doubts, and difficulties swambefore his mental vision, like motes dancing in the sunbeam; and neverdestined in life to overcome his long-encouraged inactivity, he stroveto cast the responsibility from himself. "Well, well," exclaimed he,"Cinq Mars, you shall decide it; I will leave the conduct of it all toyou. But beware that you do not bring the miseries of civil war upon mykingdom; for be assured that if you do, I will require it of youdeeply--It is your own seeking, and the consequences be upon your ownhead.""Let it be so, then, my Liege," cried Cinq Mars, kissing the emaciatedhand of the feeble Monarch; "it shall not be my fault if France and mySovereign are not soon freed from the cloud that has so longovershadowed them both.""Well, well," said Louis, "we will trust in God for the event. Butbeware of Bouillon; Cinq Mars, he is rank Spanish at his heart. And now,gentlemen, to bed, for we must rise in time for our sport. But, intruth, I fear I shall not hunt much longer--the body fails me, CinqMars, though I was once a thing of strength, as thou art."CHAPTER X.How Chavigni rode fifty miles to ride back again.While these schemes for the downfall of his Patron were going forward atNarbonne, Chavigni spurred on rapidly towards Tarascon, where thefalling Minister lay sick, both in body and in mind. Besides thepersonal attachment of the Statesman to Richelieu, who had formed hisfortunes, and led him in the way to greatness, every consideration ofhis own interest bade him oppose the resignation of the Cardinal, whichhe clearly saw would bring inevitable destruction upon all personsconnected with the existing ministry.He had long perceived that a powerful party was forming againstRichelieu, especially since his absence and illness gave facility totheir operations. All Chavigni's talents and influence had been exertedto oppose them; but that the Cardinal would resign his high office, hehad never suspected for a moment, and therefore the tidings brought byMazarin came upon him like a thunder-stroke, taking from him all facultyof thought, but on that one thing. He was well aware too, that it was noeasy task to turn Richelieu from his purpose; and as he rode on, hismind was solely occupied by a thousand tumultuous and ill-digestedplans, for preventing the execution of what the Cardinal designed.Daylight set in the west, and night fell heavily over the earth withoutexciting a thought in the bosom of Chavigni; for the irritation of hisfeelings took away all sensation of bodily fatigue, and almost allattention to external objects, till at length the failing pace of hishorse showed him that he at least must have rest; and accordingly hepaused for a short space at a little village, a few leagues fromTarascon, in order to refresh his beast. But even here the agitation ofhis mind prevented him from seeking any repose himself, and he continuedwalking up and down before the little auberge, for the time that he wasthus compelled to remain.It was considerably past midnight, when Chavigni arrived at theresidence of the Minister. On entering the court-yard, all was indarkness, except where, in one spot, a light was seen burning in thechamber of the invalid, and throwing dark across the window the bentshadow of a sleeping attendant. The Statesman fastened his horse to oneof the iron hooks in the court-yard, and advanced, intending to makehimself heard by some one within, but he found that the grooms, grownnegligent during their Lord's sickness, had left the door unfastened,and pushing it with his hand, it readily gave way. "It is like hisfate," thought Chavigni: "while he is ill and sleeping, the gate is leftopen, and any one may enter."Passing onward through the hall, he now mounted the grand staircase,lighted by a lamp that had been left to die out as it might, andapproached the room where the Cardinal lay.The door of the antechamber opened stiffly, but still the drowsyattendant did not awake; and Chavigni passed on into the bed-chamber ofthe Cardinal, without any one being aware of his presence. "Were thisbut known," thought the Statesman, "how many assassins' hands would nowbe armed for this one man's destruction!"It was Richelieu alone, who, lying in feverish restlessness, caught thesound of approaching steps; and there was a sort of intensity in theglance which he fixed on the door communicating with the anteroom, whichseemed to say that his judgment of the visitor's purpose was not veryfavourable. However that might be, whether from the recklessness ofillness, or from the torpor of one who regards the future as a blank, hetook no farther notice of the sound he heard, than by fixing his eyessternly on the door. But the next moment, as the light fell strongly onthe face of his friend, the countenance of Richelieu brightened with asmile; and perceiving that Chavigni, who did not see he was awake,approached silently towards the attendant to rouse him, the Cardinalpronounced his name in an under-tone, and beckoned him towards hisbedside."It is grateful," said Richelieu, as the Statesman drew near, "to findthat even declining fortunes cannot alienate some hearts. You have seenMazarin, I suppose."Chavigni was about to answer, but the sound of the Cardinal's voice hadawakened the attendant, who was now gazing about in no small alarm, onperceiving a stranger standing by the Minister's bedside. Richelieu,however, without showing any anger at his negligence, calmly commandedhim to leave them; and as soon as they were alone, Chavigni proceeded."I have seen Cardinal Mazarin, my Lord, and from him I have learned apiece of news which grieves me most deeply. I cannot believe thatillness can have so far depressed the spirits of your Eminence, as tomake you entertain the thought of casting from you all those highhonours, which you have so long enjoyed, and of leaving France, in amoment of her greatest peril, to be governed by the hands of the weakand the designing.""It is not illness, Chavigni," replied the Cardinal, with a melancholyshake of the head. "No! but my day is over. The power has passed from myhands, and it only remains for me to yield the name of it, before thattoo is taken from me by my enemies.""Pardon me, your Eminence," said Chavigni; "but indeed the power is notgone from you. Under whose orders are our armies fighting? Under whosecommand is every city and fortress in France? Is it the character of agreat man--is it the character of a brave man, to yield all without astruggle?--to cast away the sword he has so long wielded, and to givehimself bound into the hands of his adversaries?""Mark me, Chavigni," said Richelieu, raising himself upon his elbow,"Louis is now within the distance of a few leagues. He knows that I amill--perhaps that I am dying; and yet, by no sign of common courtesydoes he show that he remembers me. But that was not the beginning. I sawthat my power was gone, when he dared, in the face of all the Council,to annul the sentence I had passed on that arrogant, stiff-necked Countde Blenau, who had the hardihood to defy the utmost extent of my power."And the Minister's eyes flashed with the memory of his anger."Had your Eminence followed my advice," replied Chavigni, "that businesswould never have occurred. There is that sort of gallant magnanimityabout Claude de Blenau which carries all before it; and I felt assuredthat neither fear nor interest would ever induce him to disclose anything intrusted to his honour. Depend upon it, Monseigneur, that it isbetter not to meddle with such men, when we can avoid it.""Well, well, Sir," exclaimed the Cardinal, impatiently, "without doubtyou were quite right and I was quite wrong. But do not teach me tobelieve that you too, Chavigni, lose your respect for my person when mypower is failing.""Pardon me, your Eminence," replied Chavigni, in a tone of deep feeling,"you wrong me much. Your Eminence has been more than a father to me.During the continuance of your power you have always exerted it in myfavour; and whether it remains with you or not, my respect and myaffection will never fail to follow you in every situation. Believe me,Monseigneur, that it is that respect and affection, which brings me hereeven now, to petition that you will wave your intention of----""Chavigni, it is useless," interposed the Cardinal. "I have only thechoice left, to yield it of my own free will, or to have it wrenchedfrom my unwilling hand. Judge which is the wisest--judge which is thebest.""Were that certainly the case," said Chavigni, thoughtfully."It is certainly the case," replied the Minister. "There are many,many combined against me:--singly, they are but reeds, and one by one Iwould break them like reeds; but united together, and with the King attheir head,"--and he shook his head despairingly,--"they are far toostrong either for you or me!""But could no means be found to separate them? Bethink you,Monseigneur,--avarice, revenge, ambition, might sow the seeds of discordamongst them, and give them like sheep into our hands.""It is too late, my friend!" replied the Cardinal: "it is too late! HadI foreseen it, I might have prevented their combining. I might havecrushed some, and bribed others; destroyed the powerful, and overawedthe timid. But it is now too late!""But whom does your Eminence think particularly implicated?" demandedChavigni."Oh, there are many--many--many!" replied Richelieu, withdrawing thethin pale hand he had stretched over his face as he finished the lastdesponding words "too late," probably desirous of hiding the emotionproduced by the conviction that his power was irretrievably gone.However, when that hand was removed, his countenance showed no traces ofany remaining agitation. "There are many, Chavigni," he said: "there areVendome, and Bouillon, and noisy Beaufort, and turbulent Gaston ofOrleans, and witty Marsillac, and cool, moralizing De Thou, who has sooften dared to pry into my actions and condemn them;--then there is,above all, sly Fontrailles, and Cinq Mars, whom I----""Ha!" exclaimed Chavigni, as the Cardinal's words recalled to his mindthe conversation between Cinq Mars and Fontrailles--"I had forgot--likean idiot, I had forgot!" and he struck his clenched hand violentlyagainst his brow, as if he sought to punish his own folly. "But it isnot yet too late," he cried, "it is not yet too late.""Forgot what, Chavigni?" demanded the Cardinal, seeing with astonishmentthe emotion which was called up in his friend by the remembrance of sogreat an oversight. "Forgot what? Too late for what? What is it movesyou so deeply?""Pardon me, your Eminence," replied Chavigni, "I have not time toexplain; only I have to ask two favours. The first is, that you willlet me take a stout horse from your stables; mine will go no farther.The next," he added, in a tone of greater composure, but still one ofearnest entreaty--"the next is, if you had ever a regard for me--if everI served you well and faithfully, that you will promise me to take nostep in the business we have spoken of, till my return; which shall bebefore to-morrow evening.""It can make but little difference waiting till that time," answered theCardinal. "But what is the matter, Chavigni? What is it agitates youthus?""Have I your promise, Monseigneur?" asked Chavigni quickly."You have," said Richelieu. "Out of regard for you, and solely becauseyou ask it, I will suspend my resolution till your return.""Well then, God protect your Eminence till we meet again!" exclaimed theStatesman. "I go upon your service; and if I do not succeed, I care nothow soon my head may be brought to the block, as a just punishment formy mad forgetfulness." Thus saying, he quitted the room, and descendingto the stables, called up the grooms whose sleepy movements illaccorded with the rapid emotions of his bosom. Now the stirrups were notlong enough, then the girths had to be buckled tighter, then the bit wasmislaid, and then the crupper could not be found. At length, however,the horse was fully prepared, and calling for a cup of wine, Chavignidrained it to the bottom, and galloping out of the court, was soon oncemore on the road to Narbonne. But it was in vain that he used whip andspur to arrive at that town before the hour appointed for the Italian'sdeparture. Ere he had measured half the way, the day rose bright overthe hills before him, and clenching his hands, he exclaimed in thebitterness of disappointment, "Too late! I am too late!" Still, however,he went on at full speed, hoping that by sending out couriers in everydifferent direction he might yet overtake the messenger.Every one who has ridden from Tarascon to Narbonne must remember thepicturesque beauties of that part of the country. At the spot whereChavigni had now arrived, high rocks breaking forth from a thickcovering of wood skirted his way on each side, and having ascended tothe top of the hill, an immense valley lay before him, scattered withforests and broken into a thousand inferior ridges, some of which boreupon their summits the steeple of a village church, some the ruins ofthose ancient towers which had been erected in days gone by to defendthe passes from the neighbouring Moors of Spain. At his feet thin wavesof white mist floating in the morning light, partially obscured the roadhe was going, till, rising out of the trees, it was seen winding alongthe mountains on the other side. Chavigni paused for a moment to traceits direction; and as he did so, his eye fell upon the figure of asingle horseman, descending into the valley from the opposite hill."Whom have we here?" thought the Statesman, not without a faint hopethat it might be the person he sought. Spurring on his horse, however,he rode forward to meet him; but on reaching the bottom of the descent,the figure he had seen from above became hidden by the windings of theroad amongst the trees, and Chavigni's heart fluttered lest thehorseman, whoever he was, might have taken the other road which turnedthrough the valley to the left.At length, however, the sound of a horse's feet was heard approachingquickly towards him, and, certain that he must now pass that way, theStatesman drew in his rein, and stood with his eyes intently fixed uponthe spot where the road verged into the forest. As there was still aconsiderable descent from the spot where Chavigni paused to the bottomof the valley, the sound was heard for a long time coming nearer andnearer before any one appeared. At length, however, the horseman came insight, presenting to the glad eyes of the Statesman the identical figureof the Italian, Villa Grande, with his long sword, extensive mustaches,and a pair of heavy pistols at his saddle-bow.Chavigni doubted not that to possess himself of the papers which theItalian carried, would require a desperate struggle, but without amoment's hesitation he drew his sword, and galloped on to attack him. Nosooner had Villa Grande perceived a stranger on the road before him,than he reined in his horse; but now, as Chavigni rode on full speedtowards him with a menacing attitude and drawn sword, the Italian, inhis terror, conceived at once that it was a robber, and throwing himselfto the ground in mortal fear, he fell on his knees, exclaiming--"I willgive it you all--every ducat, only spare my life!""Rise, rise! cowardly villain!" cried Chavigni, catching the bridle ofthe Italian's horse, which was starting away with a wild toss of thehead, as the Statesman rode up;--"rise, Sir Poltroon! do you not knowme?""Know you! know you!" exclaimed Villa Grande, gazing wildly at Chavigni."Oh, Monseigneur, is it you? How you frightened me!" But Villa Grande,who had trembled sufficiently when he thought it was a robber, trembledten times more than ever as he recognised the Statesman; and he couldscarcely find strength in his knees to raise himself from the ground."Rise, Sir!" exclaimed Chavigni impatiently; "and instantly give me thetreaty.""Treaty!" cried Villa Grande, still trembling, but endeavouring to puton a look of astonishment. "What treaty does Monseigneur mean? I know ofno treaty.""Lying slave!" exclaimed Chavigni, striking him with the flat side ofhis sword; "if you do not produce it within ten seconds of time, byHeaven I will cut it out of your base cowardly heart!""But if I do----" said the Italian, seeing there was no escape left."Come, Sir," cried the Statesman; "no buts for me. If you standshuffling one minute more, I will run my sword through you, and searchfor it on your carcase myself.""Well, well! Monseigneur, I see you know it all, and therefore it willbe no stain on my honour if I give it to you.""Honour!" cried Chavigni, with a scoff.--"Come, Sir, the treaty."Villa Grande approached his horse, and raising the flap of the saddle,with shaking hands, drew forth, from a pocket concealed in the padding,a large paper sealed in an envelope. Chavigni caught it eagerly from hisgrasp, and running his eye over the address, he read--"To Monseigneurthe Duke de Bouillon, Commander-in-Chief of all the armies of France,warring in Italy."--"Ha!" continued the Statesman, "this is not the roadto Italy. What brings you here?" and he turned towards Villa Grande. Butwhile the Statesman's eyes were fixed upon the paper, the wily Italianhad begun to creep towards the wood; Chavigni, however, perceiving hisdesign, caught one of the pistols from the horse's saddle-bow, andpointing it towards the fugitive, soon brought him back again. "Standyou there, Sir," said he. "Now tell me what makes you here, when thispacket was intended for Italy?""Why, Monseigneur--why--why--to tell the truth, there was another littledespatch to be delivered on the frontiers of Spain; here it is;" anddiving into a deep pocket in his doublet, he produced a packet smallerthan the other, and gave it into Chavigni's hand. "And now, Monseigneur,I have freely discovered all I know," continued Villa Grande, "I hopethat you, Monseigneur, will promise me your protection; for if the otherparty get hold of me, they will murder me to a certainty."Chavigni made no answer, but without any ceremony broke the seals of thetwo packets, and passing his horse's bridle over his arm while he readthem, he opened the treaty, and turned to the list of names by which itwas signed. In the mean while, Villa Grande kept his eyes fixed uponhim, watching for a favourable moment to escape, if the Statesman'sattention should be sufficiently engaged to allow him so to do."Ah! here I have them fairly written," proceeded Chavigni, speaking tohimself. "Philip, the most Catholic!--Olivarez!--then follow Gaston ofOrleans; Cinq Mars, Grand Ecuyer--Fontrailles;--and a space--forBouillon of course. Now let us see the letter to the noble Duke;" and heopened the one which he found in the same packet with the treaty. But ashe read, his eye fixed with painful earnestness upon the paper, and thecolour fled from his cheek. "God of Heaven! what is this?" said he,reading. "'Though I doubt not, my noble friend, that after all which haslately passed, you would put your forces in motion at my simple desire,the King's command is yet higher authority; and that I now send you, tomarch with all speed to the frontier, embarking five thousand foot atPorto Longone, to land at Marseilles. All this in case the friends andadherents of Richelieu should attempt to make head against the royalauthority.'----""All is lost!" muttered Chavigni. "But let us see the whole, at least,to provide for our own safety;" and he again turned to the paper, whichproceeded--"'I send you the treaty with Spain for your signature, whichis especially necessary to the article relative to your principality ofSedan. The troops of his Catholic Majesty are on the frontier, ready tomarch at our command; but I have been obliged to conceal from the Kingour Spanish connexion, as his hatred to that country is as great asever.'""I have you! I have you! Monsieur Cinq Mars," exclaimed Chavigni,clasping his hands with joy. "This treaty is your death warrant, or Iknow not King Louis.--Italian scoundrel!" he continued, turning to lookfor Villa Grande--"Ha! the slave has escaped--that must not be; he werethe best witness in the world against them;" and springing from hishorse, he tied him to a tree together with that of the Italian.While Chavigni had been reading, with all his attention fixed upon thepaper, and all his passions excited by its contents, Villa Grande,watching his moment, had crept gradually to the edge of the wood, anddarted into a narrow path, half covered with branches. But though theway he had taken was thus, in a degree, concealed, it did not escape thequick eye of the Statesman; and as the motions of the Italian, till hehad got into the wood, had been necessarily cautious, in order not tocall his attention; Chavigni, following as fast as lightning, sooncaught the sound of his retreating footsteps, reverberated from therocks around. As he advanced, he called loudly to the Italian to stop,and that he should have a free pardon; but Villa Grande, trusting to thedistance that was still between them, and hoping, if he could eludeimmediate pursuit, to be able to escape into Spain, continued runningon, while Chavigni as perseveringly followed, threatening and promisingby turns, but alike without effect.At length the strength of the Italian, already diminished by fear, beganto fail entirely; and Chavigni found that the distance between them wasrapidly lessening, when in a moment the sound of footsteps, which hadhitherto guided him, ceased entirely--a cry of agony reached his ear;and running still more quickly forward, he, too, had nearly beenprecipitated over the edge of a steep crag, which, in the hurry of hisflight, the unhappy Italian had not noticed. The Statesman's firstimpulse was to start back, for he was on the very brink of the precipicebefore he was aware; but soon recovering himself, he approached theedge, and looking over, beheld the mangled form of Villa Grande lyingon some rough stony ground at the bottom of the rock."God of Heaven!" cried Chavigni, "what a fall! The poor wretch mustsurely be dead. However, he must not lie there, for the wolves will soonbe at him;" and looking around, he sought for some way to descend therock. It was a considerable time before he could accomplish his object,but at length he succeeded, and on arriving at the spot where VillaGrande lay, he found that the Italian, in his flight, had taken adiagonal path through the forest, which cut off a large bend in the mainroad, and joined it again by a zig-zag path down the rock at somedistance. Thus the spot where Villa Grande was then lying, was abouthalf a mile from the place at which he had first been encountered byChavigni, if the high road was followed; but by the path through thewood the distance could not be more than a few hundred yards. Chavigni'sfirst care was to examine the body of the Italian, who was so entirelydeprived of sense, that at first the Statesman believed him to be dead;but in a moment or two some signs appeared which led him to concludethat life was not completely extinct; and taking him in his arms hecarried him to the spot where the horses stood. Here he placed him onthe stout black hunter which Cinq Mars had lent, and led him slowly to asmall town about a mile farther on the road.It has been already stated, that hardly was there a village so small inthe whole extent of France as not to be furnished with one or more ofthose agents of Richelieu's minute policy, whose principal dutyconsisted in communicating every thing that passed around them toanother class of superior agents, and also to facilitate all the secretoperations of Government in the sphere ascribed to them. The actual payreceived by these men was but small; but the favour shown to them on alloccasions, and the facilities afforded to them in their more ordinaryemployments, put them above competition with others in the same class,and amply rewarded their private services: for it must always beremembered that their connexion with the Government was held as aprofound secret, and consequently they always were seen to exercise someopen trade, which, in most cases, prevented their less ostensibleemployment from being even suspected by their neighbours.It was to the house of one of these inferior agents that Chavigni ledthe horse charged with the senseless body of Villa Grande; and havingcommanded that he should be taken in and placed in bed, he himself aidedin endeavouring to recall him to life, partly from the natural humanityof his disposition, partly from those political considerations whichwere ever paramount in his mind. Villa Grande, if he could be restored,would prove, Chavigni knew, too excellent a witness against theconspirators whom he had served, to permit of his life being lightlycast away; especially as it was evident, that either fear or briberywould induce him to confess any thing: but even had it not been for thisreflection, the Statesman's natural disposition would probably have ledhim to succour the unhappy man, in whose misfortune he had been sogreatly instrumental.After many efforts, Villa Grande once more began to evince that thevital spark was not yet extinguished; and having so far succeeded,Chavigni, upon whose mind a thousand subjects of deep import werepressing every moment for attention, gave directions to the agent wehave already mentioned, to show every attention to the wounded man, andto keep him, for that day, at his own house, which was situated aquarter of a league out of Limoux; but as soon as night came, to havehim privately removed to Corneille, at which place a surgeon could bemore easily procured from Carcasonne; and having reiterated the moststrict injunctions to keep the whole business profoundly secret, lestthe conspirators should learn the fate of their envoy, and take theirmeasures accordingly, Chavigni once more turned his steps towardsTarascon, to recount to Richelieu the events of the day.CHAPTER XI.Which was written expressly to prove that there is many a Slipbetween the Cup and the Lip.It was the small Chapel of St. Catherine, otherwise called the Queen'sChapel, attached to the Palace-church of St. Germain en Laye, to whichPotier, Bishop of Beauvais, proceeded with slow steps from the door ofprivate communication with the chateau, on a night in October, onethousand six hundred and forty-two. He was preceded by two young Abbs,carrying lighted tapers, and followed by a group, whose white garmentsspoke that they came on some occasion of joy. The first of these wasAnne of Austria, with her eyes animated, and her countenance glowingwith the interest she took in every thing which bore the leastappearance of secrecy or romance. Her right arm was passed through thatof the Marchioness de Beaumont, who moved on with a calm, rather gravecountenance; while on the Queen's left, walked a young lady in the firstgay spring of life, ever and anon turning a smiling, playful glancebehind to Pauline de Beaumont, who, leaning on the arm of Claude deBlenau, followed, agitated, blushing, and happy, towards the altar atwhich they were to be united for ever. Seguin, the Queen's physician,and Henri de La Mothe, the Count's page, were admitted as witnesses tothe ceremony; and an attendant was stationed at the door, to guardagainst any troublesome devotee entering the church during the time itwas thus occupied.The idea of marrying Pauline de Beaumont privately to the Count deBlenau, had entirely originated with the Queen, whose passion for anything romantic often threw both herself and her friends into situationsof great danger. In the present instance, she represented to Madame deBeaumont that a thousand circumstances might occur in those unhappytimes, to tear De Blenau again from her he loved; or that the Cardinalmight positively prohibit their marriage, and then, she asked, who woulddare to oppose him? whereas their private union would obviate alldifficulties, and incur no danger.Madame de Beaumont made many objections, and her daughter hesitated; butthe wishes of the Queen overcame all the Marchioness's scruples; and theentreaties of De Blenau were not less powerful with Pauline.The appointed night being arrived, and all the arrangements having beenmade as privately as possible, Pauline, as we have said, followed herMother and the Queen into the Chapel of St. Catherine. But as she didso, there was a sort of despondency fell upon her that she could notaccount for. As she leaned upon De Blenau, she felt that she was mosthappy in being united to him. She was agitated, it was true, but stillit was natural that she should be so, she thought. All her duties, allher ideas, were, by one single word, about to suffer an entire change,yet that did not take from her happiness. But still there was anundefined fear, a sort of melancholy presentiment, which weighed uponher spirits she knew not why. She asked herself, was De Blenau lesskind? Oh, no! And as the thought passed through her mind, she raised hereyes for a moment from the ground, on which they had been bent, andturned them on her lover. In so doing, they met the full, soft,affectionate gaze, with which De Blenau was at that moment regardingher, and a deep blush rose in her cheek, but soon faded away, and lefther again pale and thoughtful. She had not, however, much time toanalyse her feelings; for, by this time, the Bishop had reached thealtar, and waited their approach.Potier, Bishop of Beauvais, had little of that gentleness ofdisposition, or suavity of manner, calculated to re-assure Pauline. Hehad undertaken the office which he came there to fulfil, merely at thedesire of the Queen, and that not without making considerableopposition. But, though Potier was obstinate, Anne of Austria was stillmore so. She had resolved that the ceremony should be performed, andthat he should perform it, and she carried her point; but yet he madehis dislike to the task very apparent, and regarded the innocent Paulinewith no very friendly looks."Come, Mademoiselle," said he, as Pauline seemed to linger for a moment,"you and Monsieur le Comte will have enough of each other's societyafter my office is over. Let us proceed with the ceremony."The group arranged themselves round the altar, and the Bishop openingthe book began to read. The promise, which was to bind her to De Blenaufor ever, trembled on Pauline's lips, when a confused noise at theprivate door leading to the Palace caught her ear, and she paused.De Blenau, who had not heard it, turned towards her in surprise; butimmediately the voice of the attendant, who had been stationed there asportgreve, was heard exclaiming to some one, who apparently endeavouredto make his way into the church, "Stand back, I say. You do not enterhere! What is your authority?""My authority," replied another voice, "is a warrant of Council. Opposeit if you dare. Strike him down, if he does not let you pass." Andimmediately the door bursting open, an Officer of the Cardinal's Guard,with a file of soldiers, entered the church."Guard the doors," cried the Officer, "and let no one quit the place."And giving his partizan to one of the soldiers, he advanced towards thehigh Gothic arch, forming the boundary between the main aisle and theChapel of St. Catherine.Pauline clung to De Blenau. "Oh, Claude!" cried she, "they are going totear you from me again. My heart misgave me.--I was sure that somethingdreadful would interpose between us."De Blenau whispered a few words of comfort to her, and Potier himselfwas moved by her agitation. "Do not be afraid, young Lady," said he; "weare on sacred ground.--Stop, sir," he continued, advancing to the stepsof the Chapel, which the Officer had just reached: "what seek you here?And how do you presume to bring armed men into this Church?""I come, sir," answered the Officer, "with a warrant from his Majesty'sCouncil, to arrest Claude Count de Blenau;" and he made a step towardsthe Chapel."Hold!" exclaimed the Bishop, "You arrest him not here. This ground issanctuary; and I command you, in the name of God and our holy religion,to withdraw your men, and instantly to quit this Church." And he wavedhis hand with an air of dignified authority.The Officer paused. "But, Monseigneur," he replied, "the Count ischarged with high treason.""With high treason!" exclaimed the Queen.--"With high treason!" echoedPauline, clinging still closer to De Blenau's arm, which she heldencircled by both her own."He is charged with high treason," repeated the Officer; "and I mustfulfil my duty.""Were he charged with all the crimes which disgrace humanity," repliedthe Bishop, "here he is sanctuarized; and I command you, on pain ofexcommunication--you, Sir Officer, and your soldiers, to quit thechurch. I stand not here to see this altar violated, whatever be yourauthority."The Officer paused a moment, uncertain how to act. "Well, holy Father,"replied he at length, "I obey; but I shall take especial care to guardevery door of the church; so that if there be any blame, it does notfall on me." And muttering between his teeth the discontent he did notdare to vent aloud, he slowly withdrew his men.The eye of Anne of Austria watched them intently till the last soldierhad passed through the door which communicated with the Palace. Thenturning quickly to the Count, she exclaimed, "Fly quick, De Blenau, upthat staircase, cross the jube, through the monks' gallery round thechoir. You will find a door on the right that leads into the King'scabinet. Wait there till I send--Quick, fly--I desire--I command you.""Oh fly, Claude, fly!" reiterated Pauline, "they will murder you surelythis time, if you do not fly.""Pardon me, your Majesty--pardon me, dear Pauline," replied De Blenau;"it cannot be. There is no man in France more innocent, in deed, word,or even thought, of treason against his King and Country than I am; andClaude de Blenau flies from no one, so long as his honour and integrityremain by him: when these fail, then he may become a coward. But tothese will I now trust, and instantly surrender myself to his Majesty'swarrant. I did not interfere while Monseigneur defended the rights ofthe sanctuary, for he did but the duties of his high office; nor indeedwas I willing to yield my sword to a servant of Cardinal Richelieu. Takeit, Henry," he continued, unbuckling it from his side, and giving it tothe Page; "take it, and keep it for your master.""De Blenau, you are an obstinate man," said the Queen. "I will urgenothing; but look at this pale cheek, and fancy what the feelings ofthat sweet girl must be." And she pointed to Pauline who stood by withthe tears chasing each other down her face.Notwithstanding the firmness with which he spoke, there had been many abitter pang struggling in De Blenau's breast. The appeal of the Queen,and the sight of Pauline's distress, overcame his calmness; and startingforward, he caught her in his arms and pressed an ardent kiss upon herlips. "Dear, dear Pauline," he exclaimed, "all will go well, be assured.My innocence will protect me."Pauline shook her head mournfully, but her heart was too full to reply."Then you will not fly?" demanded the Queen, with some degree ofimpatience."He is in the right, Madam," said the Bishop. "As a good subject, he isbound to obey the laws of his country; and in duty to himself, he oughtnot to give weight to the charge against him by seeming afraid to meetit."Anne of Austria turned away with a look of angry disappointment. "Well,at all events," said she, "let us conclude the ceremony which has beenthus interrupted, and afterwards the Count can act as he pleases."De Blenau hesitated. He felt that what the Queen proposed, if carriedinto effect, would be the only consolation he could receive under thenew misfortune that had befallen him; but he felt also that it was aselfishness to wish it, and he looked towards the Bishop who had so wellsupported his first resolution. But Potier bent his eyes gravely on theground, disapproving the proposal, yet unwilling farther to oppose theQueen."It shall be as Pauline decides," said De Blenau, taking her hand andraising it gently to his lips. "Pauline," he continued, "you know howdeeply I love you; you know how I have longed for the hour that shouldgive me your hand. But I fear that I should be cruelly selfish, were Ito ask you to become the bride of one whose fate is so uncertain--Speak,dear Pauline."Mademoiselle de Beaumont spoke not, but she raised her eyes to De Blenauwith an expression which told that every feeling of her heart was givento him. The Marchioness, however, interposed. "No!" said she: "Claude,you are right; it is better to wait. The time will come, I feel sure,when you will be able to claim Pauline in the midst of smiles andhappiness, instead of tears and danger. Does not your Majesty think thisdelay advisable?""My opinion has been expressed already," replied Anne of Austriapeevishly. "But it is not my affair--act as you think fit. But were IPauline, and my lover gave me up so calmly, I would seek another in hisabsence to console me."De Blenau, deeply hurt, bit his lip, and by a strong effort forcedhimself to silence: but Pauline placed her hand in his, and raising hereyes to his face: "Fear not, Claude," she said; "in life and in death, Iam yours. None other shall ever possess the hand of Pauline deBeaumont.""You are a noble girl, Pauline," exclaimed the Queen. "De Blenau, I waswrong; but it vexes me to see that you will always be more in the rightthan I am. Do not look so sad, Pauline. The more I think of it, the moreI feel sure that De Blenau's innocence will stand him in good stead yet,in spite of the meager Cardinal: and I begin to reckon also somewhat onmy own influence with Louis; he is far kinder than in former days; andI will make it a point of earnest prayer, that De Blenau be fairly used.Besides, they have now no plea against him. There are no secret lettersto be discovered--no correspondence with the public enemy."Pauline shook her head mournfully. A cloud had come over the sun of herdays, and she fancied that he would never beam brightly again."If we could ascertain the reason of this arrest," said Madame deBeaumont, "it might in some degree satisfy our minds.""That may be easily done," replied the Bishop, "as Monsieur de Blenau isresolved to surrender himself. We can question the Officer, in regard towhat occurred at the place from whence he comes; and by that meansdiscover what circumstances have arisen to cast suspicion on the Count."What the Bishop proposed was instantly agreed to; and De Blenau sentforward his Page to inform the Officer of his determination.Anne of Austria then took a few steps along the nave, and turned to seeif he still held his resolution. De Blenau bowed. "I follow yourMajesty," he said "I feel that I have nothing to fear." And they passedon slowly and sadly to the other end of the church.As they went, Pauline still clung to the arm of her lover, as if shefeared that every moment they would tear him from her; and tear aftertear rolled silently down her cheeks. The heart of De Blenau also wastoo full for words, so that silence hung upon the whole party.At the door which communicated with the Palace, stood the Cardinal'sOfficer, with two or three of his men; and as she approached, the Queendesired him to follow her to the saloon. The Officer bowed low, andreplied, that he would obey her commands; but immediately advancing toDe Blenau, he laid his hand upon the Count's arm. "In the King's name,Monsieur le Comte de Blenau," said he, "I arrest you for high treason.Behold my warrant."Pauline recoiled with a look of fear; and De Blenau calmly put the man'shand from off his sleeve. "Pass on, Sir," he said, "I am your prisoner."The Officer hesitated; "Pass on, Sir," repeated the Count; "you have myword. I am your prisoner."The man passed on, but not before he had made a sign to the soldiers whowere with him, who suffered the Count and Pauline to pass, and thenclosing in, followed at a few paces distance.On reaching the saloon, the Queen took her seat; and beckoning toPauline, who, faint and terrified, was hardly able to support herself,she made her sit down on the footstool at her feet. "Now, Sir Officer,"said Anne of Austria, "what news bring you from Narbonne? How fares hisMajesty the King?""May it please you, Madame," he replied, "I come not from Narbonne, asyour Majesty supposes, but from Tarascon, where the King had justarrived when I departed.""The King at Tarascon!" exclaimed Anne of Austria. "In the name ofHeaven, what does he at Tarascon?""That is beyond my knowledge," answered the Officer. "All I can tellyour Majesty is, that for the last week there has been strange flying ofcouriers from one place to another. Monsieur de Chavigni has almostkilled himself with riding between Tarascon and Narbonne. Every thing isaltered, evidently, but no one knows how or why; and just as Aleron,Monsieur de Brez's maitre d'hotel, was about to give me the wholehistory, I received an order to set off for Paris instantly, and when Iarrived there, to take twenty troopers from the caserne, and come onhither on the errand which I have the honour to perform.""But did you hear nothing?" demanded the Queen, earnestly. "Did thisAleron tell you nothing?""Nothing, Madame," replied the Officer. "He had just made me promiseinviolable secrecy, and we were interrupted before he began his tale; orI would have told your Majesty with pleasure.""But from report?" said the Queen. "Did you gain no knowledge fromrumour?""Oh, there were rumours enough, truly," answered the man; "but as fastas one came, it was contradicted by another. Some said that the troopsat Perpignan had revolted, and some that Monsieur le Grand had killedCardinal Mazarin. Others brought word that Monsieur de Noyers had triedto poison the King; and others, that the King had kicked Fontrailles forhunting in short boots.""Nonsense!" said the Queen; "all nonsense.--It is unfortunate," shecontinued, musing, "that we can get no information. But tell me, whereare you ordered to conduct Monsieur de Blenau?--To the Bastille?"At the name of a place where both De Blenau and herself had suffered somuch, and which was associated in her mind with every horrible idea,Pauline clasped her hands over her eyes, as if to shut out the frightfulvisions it recalled."No, Madame," replied the Officer, "I am commanded to conduct Monsieurde Blenau, as quickly as possible, to Tarascon; and allow me to remindyour Majesty that the time is passing fast."De Blenau made a sign to the Officer, indicating that he was ready. Hesaw that Pauline's hands still covered her eyes, and, wishing to spareher the pain of such a parting, he bowed profoundly to the Queen, andmoved in silence to the door. The Queen and Madame de Beaumont saw hisintention, and remained silent; but as he reached the door, he could notresist the desire to turn and look once more upon her whom he wasleaving perhaps for ever--who had so nearly been his bride--whom he hadloved so long--who had undergone so much for him. It was excusable, butthe delay defeated his purpose. The sudden silence alarmed Pauline--sheraised her eyes--she saw De Blenau in the act of departing, and the lastfixed painful glance with which he regarded her. All but her love wasthat moment forgotten; and starting wildly forward, she threw herselfinto his arms, and wept bitterly on his bosom. But Madame de Beaumontadvancing, gently disengaged her from his embrace: Pauline hid her eyesupon her mother's shoulder; and De Blenau, with a heart ready to break,fled quickly from a scene that his fortitude could support no longer.CHAPTER XII.Which shows that a Man who has climbed a Mountain may stumble at aPebble; or the Consequences of one Oversight.We must once more go back to Narbonne, in order to explain the eventswhich had there taken place since the day on which Chavigni possessedhimself of the treaty with Spain. Cinq Mars, hearing nothing of hisagent, of course concluded that he was quietly pursuing his way; andwilling to take every precaution to insure the success of his plans, hespent the next day in riding over to the camp at Perpignan, andendeavouring to ingratiate himself with the officers and soldiers ofthat part of the army. The splendour of his train and equipages, themanly beauty of his person, his dexterity in all warlike exercises, andthe courteous familiarity of his manners, attracted all eyes, and wonall hearts; and Cinq Mars, well contented with the day's success, didnot return to Narbonne till very late at night.The next morning had been appointed for hunting; but that day the Kingwas rather later than usual, and Cinq Mars, as he waited in the saloontill Louis should be ready, took up a romance which some of the Pageshad left behind, and stretching his tall elegant form at length in thewindow-seat, he began reading, to pass the time.The book was The true History of Don Cleofas of Castille, and as CinqMars read on, he became interested in the fate of the hero. He hadopened the volume at that part where the Knight rescues Matilda from thepower of the Moors. He was in the act of persuading her to descend thestaircase in the tower, at the foot of which the repentant Renegadewaited with their horses; and Cinq Mars, whose whole heart was full ofromance, at one moment entered entirely into the vehement and almostangry arguments of Don Cleofas, and then again felt for the alarm anddoubt of the timid Matilda.So much, indeed, was he occupied, that as some one passed to and fromthe King's chamber, he scarcely raised his eyes to notice who it was;and when at last he did so, he found it was only a Page.The tale went on, and his eye ran from sentence to sentence, to see ifthe fears of Matilda had proved fatal to their hopes of escape; and hisheart beat with anxiety and alarm as the wind blew the door to behindthem, and they listened to hear whether the Moors had been awakened bythe sound. It was at that moment that another step met his ear, whosefirm, decided pace plainly told that it was not that of a domestic. CinqMars raised his eyes, and as he did so, they encountered those ofChavigni, who was passing on to the apartments of the King. Chavignibowed, with a peculiar smile. Cinq Mars returned his salutation, andagain began reading his book. "It is all over with your power, Monsieurde Chavigni," thought the Master of the Horse; "I will but read out thisadventure of the two lovers, and then I will come to disturb yourtte--tte with his Majesty."Cinq Mars read on. "Don Cleofas and his fair Matilda descended thestaircase in the city walls; but before they reached the gate, thealarm was given, and by the time they had mounted their horses, all thegarrison was armed for their pursuit. Flights of arrows followed themfrom the ramparts as they fled, and a body of horse kept close upontheir track. But still Don Cleofas pursued his way, the bridle ofMatilda's horse thrown over his arm, and his right hand ready to grasphis sword, should the Moors overtake them. It was up the ascent of asteep hill that he took his way, and at the top he reined in his horse,on the edge of the crags which looked down into a peaceful valley below.Don Cleofas sprang to the ground, gave one look to the Moors who werefollowing fast behind, and, as a last resource, catching Matilda in hisarms, he leaped from the brink, bounding from rock to rock in thedescent, with the agility of an izzard, till at length he reached thedeepest part of the valley below."--All this was told at full length inthe romance. The terrors of Matilda, the daring of the Knight, the angrygestures of the Moors, the steepness of the descent, and the calm beautyof the valley, were all dilated upon and described with the utmostminuteness and accuracy; which very much delighted Cinq Mars, but tookhim a long time to read; so that just at the moment he had got themsafely to near the end of their journey, the door of the King'sapartments again opened, and Chavigni passed through the room on hisreturn. Perceiving this to be the case, Cinq Mars thought that he mightas well go on with his book: which he had just begun to do, whenFontrailles entered the saloon and interrupted him. "In the name ofHeaven, Cinq Mars," exclaimed he, "what are you about?""I am waiting till the King is ready," answered the Master of the Horsecomposedly, scarcely taking his eyes from the romance."And is it possible," asked Fontrailles in a tone of angry astonishment,"that you have lain here reading that drivelling book, and sufferedChavigni to be again so long with the King?""Again!" said Cinq Mars, becoming more attentive; "he only passed oncethat I saw.""And ought he to have been there once, if that were all?" askedFontrailles. "But let me tell you, Cinq Mars, he was there last nightfor more than an hour. Oh, Cinq Mars! Cinq Mars! is this a time, whenour lives, our fortunes, and our country's weal are at stake, to sitthere dozing over a romance, and see our bitterest enemy have access tothe King's ear, but too easy to be abused? Depend on it, something morewill come of this.""But why did you not let me know," demanded the Master of the Horse,"that he had seen the King last night?""I learned it but this moment," replied Fontrailles. "But here comes aPage from the King's apartments. A message to you, Cinq Mars, on mylife."The Page approached. "I am commanded by the King's Majesty to acquaintyou, Monseigneur," said he, addressing the Grand Ecuyer, "that he feelshimself too unwell to enjoy the pleasures of the chase to-day. But hedesires that his indisposition may not prevent you, and the othergentlemen invited, from following your sport."--And having deliveredthis message, the attendant withdrew without waiting for any reply."Well, now you see, Fontrailles," exclaimed Cinq Mars, "there is nothingwrong here. Nothing can be more kind and considerate than, when illhimself, to wish us to follow the sport without him."An expression of heavy, deep-seated thought sat upon the brow of theclear-sighted, suspicious Fontrailles. He took two or three steps up anddown the apartment, and then, turning to Cinq Mars with a countenance inwhich painful anxiety and bitter irony were strangely mingled, heconsidered his companion with an attentive glance, which ran rapidlyover his tall elegant figure. "Cinq Mars," said he, "you are more thansix feet high, and could spare a few inches of your height upon anoccasion--even were they to make you shorter by the head, you wouldstill be a tall man. As for me, I am short already, and cannot afford tobe cut down. A word to the wise--I go to shelter myself frompruning-knives. Do as you please. We shall meet in this world or thenext. Adieu!" And turning on his heel, he quitted the saloon."The man is mad!" said Cinq Mars aloud as Fontrailles lefthim--"irretrievably cracked!" And jumping up from the window-seat, hedescended to the court-yard, called the huntsmen together, mounted hishorse, and led the chase as merrily as if nothing had happened but theordinary trifles of a day.Had he known all, very different would have been his feelings. The visitof Chavigni to the King was one on which the fate of France depended;and the wily Statesman had entered the apartments of the Monarch,prepared equally to guard every word he uttered himself, and to watchevery turn of Louis's irritable and unsteady mind.The King was leaning on a table in his Cabinet, dressed for the huntingexpedition we have mentioned, and more than an usual degree ofpeevishness was expressed in his countenance. "Well, Sir," exclaimedLouis as Chavigni entered, "what other bad news have you the pleasure ofbringing me? What other friends have turned traitors? What other poweris about to invade my dominions? By the Holy Trinity! I never see yourface but it makes me melancholy."Chavigni was not sorry to perceive the King's irritability. The nightbefore he had conveyed to him, in general terms, the news of a privatetreaty existing between Spain and some that Louis supposed his friends,and had promised to bring him that morning the names of the differentparties engaged. He now came to fulfil that promise, and he saw that theformer information had been working upon Louis's mind, and raised in ita degree of impatience and anger that would fall heavily on the firstobject presented to his resentment. Nor did Chavigni doubt that he wouldeasily be able to turn it in the direction that he wished."My Liege," replied he, "when I find your Majesty's confidence betrayed,your dominions threatened, and even your person in danger, it is my dutyto give your Majesty timely warning, although the news be as unpleasantfor me to bear as for you to hear. To conceal treason is the part of atraitor, and as one of your Majesty's Council----""Well, well, Sir," cried Louis, interrupting him, "spare yourexculpation. The executioner is doubtless guiltless of the blood hesheds, but it is not a right honourable trade."An angry flush came over Chavigni's countenance, but it quicklysubsided; and he replied calmly, "I came here, as your Majesty knows, togive you more minute particulars of the information I rendered youyesterday; and to prove to you that some whom you esteem your dearestfriends, and some who are your nearest relations, are the veriesttraitors in France. The affair for no one can be more unpleasant thanfor myself, for there are some to whom I wish well, that have in thismerited their death: therefore, Sire, if you find it too painful tohear, in the name of Heaven, let it rest in silence. I will hie me homeand burn the papers I have brought here; and satisfied with having donemy duty, only hold myself ready, when the misfortunes which must follow,do arrive, to serve your Majesty with my hand and heart." And bowingprofoundly, Chavigni took a step back, as if about to quit the presence."Hold, Monsieur de Chavigni," said the King, "you have done your duty,we do not doubt. But unpleasant tidings, Sir, are not to be receivedpleasantly. Were it ourself alone that they aimed at, perhaps we mightleave treason to overreach itself; but as the welfare of our kingdom isat stake, we must look the frowning truth in the face, and prepare topunish the guilty, be they who they may, that we may insure the safetyof the innocent.""Louis the Just," said Chavigni, advancing and using a term which hadbeen bestowed upon the King by the astrologers of the day from hishaving been born under the sign 'Libra,' "Louis the Just will not actotherwise than justly; and if I prove not to your Majesty'ssatisfaction that a most dangerous conspiracy is on foot, let your royalindignation fall upon me.""I know not what you call a conspiracy, Sir," answered Louis, his mindreverting to the plans of Cinq Mars, to which, as we have seen, he hadgiven his own sanction only a few nights before, and for the discoveryof which he felt as much alarm as if Richelieu possessed the power ofpunishing him also."The conspiracy I speak of, Sire," rejoined the Statesman, "is formednot only to oblige your Majesty to change your Ministers, but--""I can conceive no plan for obliging me to change my Ministers,"interrupted the King. "You must have mistaken, Monsieur de Chavigni;perhaps the persons whom you style conspirators, have only in view tomake me dutiful petition and remonstrance, in which case I should givetheir arguments all due weight and consideration. Therefore, if this bethe information you bring, I wish to hear no more."Long accustomed to observe every particular point of weakness in theKing's mind, Chavigni at once conceived the whole train of Louis'sthoughts, and judged from the very alarm which he saw in the Monarch'scountenance, that if the Cardinal's power could once be re-established,it would be more unbounded than ever; and as these ideas passed throughhis mind, they called a transient smile upon his lip."Why do you smile, Sir?" demanded the King, sharply."Pardon me, Sire," answered Chavigni. "But it was, that you should thinkme so weak as to trouble you upon such a subject. If leaguing with theenemies you have fought and conquered, be humble petition; if bringingforeign troops to invade your dominions, be dutiful remonstrance; ifpromising to deliver the strong places of France into the hands ofSpain, be loyalty and faith,--then have I unnecessarily disturbed yourrepose."Chavigni's speech worked upon the King, as he expected. "How say you!"exclaimed Louis, his eyes flashing fire. "Who has dared to conceive sucha thought? Who has had the hardihood to unite himself to Spain--oursworn enemy--our mortal foe?--Prove your assertion, Sir--Prove that sucha traitor exists in our dominions; and were he our own brother, we woulddoom him to death."Chavigni instantly caught at the idea. "Sorry I am to say, Sire," hereplied, "that your Majesty has but too truly divined the person. TheDuke of Orleans, unhappily, is the chief of this dangerous conspiracy.Behold, my Liege, his name to this treaty with Spain;" and artfullycontriving to conceal the greater part of the names with his hand inholding it before the King, he pointed out the great sprawling"Gaston," which stood the first on the list of signatures.Louis instantly recognised his brother's hand-writing. "Gaston ofOrleans! Gaston of Orleans!" he exclaimed, "will nothing satisfy you?Must you betray your country to her enemies, as well as plot againstyour brother's life with magicians and astrologers?"We have already had occasion to remark, that Louis, deeply imbued withall the superstitions of the age, put full faith in every part ofastrology, and dreaded nothing more than the effects of enchantment. Norcould any thing free his mind from the idea, that his brother had, informer times, conspired against his life, with certain magicians whowere actually executed for the crime; one amongst others being thefamous Pre Le Rouge, whom we have more than once noticed in this sagehistory. The Duke of Orleans himself escaped with a temporarybanishment, but the circumstance still rankled in the King's mind; andat present the anger which might perhaps have turned aside from CinqMars, had Chavigni at first suffered the favourite's name to appear, nowburst with full force upon the less favoured Gaston."Issue a warrant for his instant arrest," exclaimed the King. "ByHeaven, he shall not escape more than another man.""May it please your Majesty!" answered Chavigni, "to sign the warrantyourself. This is a case of no simple conspiracy, where the King'sbrother is at its head, and many of the first in the kingdom itssupporters; and the warrants ought not to be simple lettres de cachetof Council, but ought to bear the royal signature.""Well, Sir," replied the King, "have the warrants prepared, and I willsign them. I am going now to hunt, and at my return we will examinethese papers and speak farther.""I have the warrants drawn out here," said the Statesman, not choosingto let the first impression subside. "It will not detain your Majesty amoment; I felt convinced that you would not allow justice to slumber,and therefore had them prepared. This is against the body of Gaston ofFrance, Duke of Orleans," he continued, looking at one of the papers."Well, give it to me!" exclaimed the King, taking up a pen; "it shall bedone at once."Chavigni put the warrant in Louis's hand, and looked at him with intensefeeling, and a triumphant smile, as he hastily wrote his signature toit. "Now," thought Chavigni, "I have you, one and all. Now, proud CinqMars, and calculating Bouillon, you are in my power! He signs thewarrant against his own brother, and he dare not let you escape;" and,countersigning the warrant, he put a second into the King's hand,--"Thatis against the Duke of Bouillon, Sire!" and he calmly took up the first,and placed it in his portfolio."The Duke of Bouillon!" exclaimed Louis, with a sudden start,remembering the orders he had sent him, and terrified lest Richelieushould have discovered them. "Is his name to that paper?""No, Sire!" answered the Statesman; "it is not. But in the treatyitself, there is abundant proof of his concurrence; and it was on itsway to him in Italy when it was discovered. The same messenger bore itthat conveyed to him your orders to march his troops into France:" andChavigni fixed his keen penetrating glance upon the King's countenance.Louis turned away his head, and signed the warrant; while Chavigniproceeded to place before him that against Fontrailles, and subsequentlyone which authorized the arrest of Cinq Mars."How!" exclaimed the King, "here are the first and most loyal men in mykingdom. Monsieur de Chavigni, this is going too far!""Their names, my Liege," answered Chavigni, "are affixed to thetreasonable treaty in my hand.""It cannot be!" cried Louis, an expression of painful apprehensioncoming over his countenance: "It cannot be! My faithful, loyal Cinq Marsis no traitor. I will never believe it!" And he threw himself into aseat, and covered his eyes with his hands.Chavigni opened the treaty calmly, and briefly recapitulated theprincipal articles. "The first item is, my Liege," he proceeded, "thatSpain shall instantly furnish ten thousand men to enter France by theway of Flanders; and for a security to his Catholic Majesty, a seconditem provides, that the Duke of Bouillon shall place in his hands, forthe time being, the Principality of Sedan. A third goes on to arrange,that five principal fortified towns of France shall be given into thehands of Spain; and the whole concludes, with a solemn alliance,offensive and defensive, between the conspirators and the SpanishKing.--And to this treaty," added he, in a firm, deep tone of voice,"stand the names of Cinq Mars and Fontrailles.""Cinq Mars has been deceived, misled, abused!" cried the King, with adegree of agitation almost amounting to agony."That will appear upon his trial, my Liege," rejoined Chavigni; and thenwishing rather to soften the hard task he called upon Louis to perform,he added, in a gentler manner, "Your Majesty was born under the signLibra, and have always merited the name of Just. If any thing inextenuation of his fault appear in the case of Monsieur le Grand Ecuyer,that can be taken into your merciful consideration after his arrest; buthaving calmly given an order for the imprisonment of your own Royalbrother, your Majesty cannot--will not, show the manifest partiality ofletting a person equally culpable escape. May I once more request yourMajesty to sign the warrant?""Well, well!" cried Louis, snatching up the pen. "But remember, CinqMars must be pardoned. He has been deceived by that treacherous Duke ofBouillon and that oily Fontrailles. Oh, he is all honour and loyalty;have I not experienced a thousand instances of his affection?--It isfalse! it is false!" And he dashed down the pen without using it.Chavigni gazed on him for a moment with a feeling very nearly allied tocontempt. "Well then, your Majesty," he said at length, "is it yourpleasure that I cause the arrest of the Dukes of Orleans and Bouillon,with Monsieur de Fontrailles, and others concerned in this conspiracy,and let Monsieur de Cinq Mars know that Louis the Just makes adistinction between him and other men?""No, no, Chavigni," replied Louis, mournfully; "give me the paper--Iwill sign it--But Cinq Mars must be saved. He has been deceived--I willsign it;" and turning away his head, he wrote his name with a tremblinghand. But still he continued to hold the warrant, as if unwilling topart with it, repeating more than once in a tone rather of entreaty thancommand, "Indeed, indeed, Chavigni, he must be saved!""Will your Majesty look at this part of the treaty to see that I havestated it correctly?" said the Statesman, offering the papers to theKing. Louis laid down the warrant to receive them; and Chavigniinstantly raising the order for the arrest of Cinq Mars from the table,placed it in his portfolio with the rest. Louis saw that it was gonebeyond recall; and dropping the treaty from his hands, hid his face inhis cloak with feelings near akin to despair.Chavigni's object was gained, and the power of Richelieu re-established.Not only all the conspirators were delivered bound into his hands, butthe King himself was virtually in his power. Too weak, as the Statesmanwell knew, to stand alone, or to choose new ministers for himself, Louishad no resource but to yield himself once more blindly to the guidanceof the Cardinal; and from the moment he had signed the warrant againstCinq Mars, Chavigni looked upon him but as a royal tool to work out thedesigns of that great unshrinking politician, who had already so longused him for his own purposes.The unfortunate Monarch, also, was but too well aware of his own want ofenergy, and of the unsupported situation in which he had left himself;and yielding to his ancient dread of Richelieu, he charged Chavigni witha multitude of exculpatory messages to the Minister, calling him hisbest friend and his cousin, and adding various civil speeches andprofessions, which both Chavigni and the Cardinal knew how to estimate."There are many other persons, Sire," said the Statesman, as he wasabout to depart, "who are implicated more or less in this unhappyconspiracy; but as their guilt is either in a minor degree, or theirrank less elevated, I will not trouble your Majesty to put your personalsignature to the warrants against them. In the mean time, allow me tohint that the King ought not to be seen hunting with traitors when theyare known to be so.""No, no," replied Louis, mournfully; "I am in no mood for hunting now.But where go you, Monsieur de Chavigni? You will not leave me forlong," added the King, feeling that he must have some one to lean on,and little caring who, so that they yielded him support. "You will notleave me for long in this case of danger.""I am about to proceed to Corneille," replied Chavigni, "to order up abody of the Cardinal's guard. At present, I have no escort but a fewservants. We are surrounded by the retainers of the differentconspirators, and, were I to attempt the execution of your Majesty'swarrants, we might meet with opposition. But I will soon set that atrest, and before to-morrow morning there shall be a thousand men inNarbonne, truly devoted to your Majesty's service."The King gave an involuntary shudder; and Chavigni, with a mockery ofprofound respect, which he felt but little, took leave and quitted thepresence.The moment he was gone, Louis called to one of the attendants, andcarefully shutting the door when he had entered, "Franois," said he,"you are a silent, cautious man--I can trust you: Go to Monsieur leGrand Ecuyer, and, if he is alone, tell him, that France is a climatedangerous for his health, to betake himself elsewhere, and thatspeedily. But if there is any one with him, merely say, that the Kingfeels himself too unwell to enjoy the pleasures of the chase to-day; butthat he desires that his indisposition may not prevent the gentlemeninvited from following their sport. But, Franois, watch well CinqMars's return; find him out alone, and give him the first message. Onlybeware, that in it the King's name is never mentioned. Do youunderstand?"The Page bowed profoundly, but still maintained the same unbrokensilence, and retired to fulfil the King's commands. The presence ofFontrailles, however, prevented him from delivering the warning, untilthe Master of the Horse returned from hunting, when he found anopportunity of speaking to him alone. Such a caution, delivered by theKing's own Page, alarmed the favourite; and though it was by this timelate, he sent a servant to see if the city gates were shut. The servantscarcely gave himself the trouble to inquire, but returning immediately,informed his master that they were. Cinq Mars stayed--and before thenext morning, every avenue from Narbonne was occupied by the Cardinal'sguard.CHAPTER XIII.Containing a journey, a discovery, and a strange sight.I have known some persons in the world who, gliding quietly throughlife, have floated on upon the stream of time, like a boat on the watersof a broad and tranquil river, carried on by the unruffled tide ofprosperity, and lighted to their journey's end by the cloudless sun ofhappiness. And I have met with others, whose star seemed to rise inclouds, to hold its course through storms, and to set in blackerdarkness than that which gave it birth. But long continued joy loses itsfirst zest, and uninterrupted sorrow its first poignancy; habit robseven misery of its acuteness; and care that is long endured, bringsalong with it the power of longer endurance. It is the suddentransition from joy to sorrow, that is the acme of human suffering,adding the bitterness of regret for past enjoyment to all the pangs ofpresent distress.It was thus with Claude de Blenau. All his wishes had been nearlyfulfilled; Hope had almost grown into certainty; Pauline was almost hisown; when he was snatched from the bosom of joy and security to newscenes of misery and danger. The few last hours came back to his memorylike one of those bright visions that sometimes visit our slumber, withevery part so truly told, so faithfully drawn, that they become too likereality, and then, when our hearts are full of scenes that we haveloved, and pleasures that we have lost, the pageant fades, and we findit but a dream.When once he had torn himself from Pauline, the objects round him calledforth little of De Blenau's attention; and the carriage in which he wasplaced rolled on for many leagues, before he had sufficiently recoveredhis tranquillity even to think of the minor points of his situation. Themoon, which at their departure shone bright and clear on the broadmasses of the forest, had by this time sunk below the horizon; thedarkness which had followed her decline had also passed away; the greystreaks of dawn had warmed into the bright blushes of the early morning,and the new-risen sun began to look over a dewy world, that awokesparkling and smiling, as if for joy at his approach. But the scenewhich, at any other time, would have called up a thousand remembrancesof the happy days and hunter sports of his youth, scarcely now rousedhim from the reverie in which he was plunged; and if he looked round, orspoke to the person who conducted him, it was merely to ascertain inwhat direction they were going, or what was the ultimate destination oftheir journey. Never before had he so completely abandoned himself todespondency; but as a second and third day passed, he began to recoverfrom the first bitterness of his feelings, and endeavoured to draw fromthe Officer the precise crime with which he was charged, and whatcircumstances of suspicion had arisen against him. But no fartherinformation was to be procured. The Officer continued firm in the samestory he had told the Queen--that his orders were to conduct him toTarascon, and that he was quite ignorant of the circumstances which ledto his arrest. And with this De Blenau was obliged to be satisfied.During the journey the Officer showed much civility and attention to theprisoner, though he took good care to place a guard at the door of hischamber when they stopped for the night, which was always at the houseof one of those private agents of the Government, already mentioned,with whose dwellings the officers of the Cardinal's guard were generallyacquainted. After proceeding, however, for several days, he plainlyperceived that nothing could be farther from De Blenau's thoughts thanany plan for making his escape, and, in consequence, the watch he keptover his prisoner became far less strict, which afforded the Count manyopportunities of communicating freely with the persons at the variousplaces where they stopped for horses or refreshment.The arrest of Cinq Mars and several others, with the full restoration ofthe Cardinal's power, was at that moment, in France, one of those topicsof wonder and interest, which seem necessary from time to time to keepup the spirits of the gossiping classes of society; and though the goodfolks at inns and elsewhere found the appearance of a prisoner, escortedby a body of the Cardinal's guard, to act as a great check upon theirnatural loquacity; yet, as the officer was somewhat of a bon vivant,and rather attached to his bottle, the awe inspired by his functions wasnot so strong as to prevent the news of the Grand Ecuyer's misfortunefrom reaching the ears of De Blenau, who easily concluded that, fromtheir well-known intimacy, suspicion had fallen upon himself.The prisoner and his conductors at length began to approach that part ofthe country where the re-established Minister held his court, to whichall his old retainers and friends were now flocking, together with manyothers, who, led by hope or impelled by fear, hastened to offer theirservile adulation to a man they in general detested. The roads were thusthronged with people, and many a gay cavalcade passed by the carriage inwhich De Blenau was borne along, the horsemen looking for a moment intothe vehicle out of curiosity, but quickly turning away their eyes again,lest they should be obliged to acknowledge some acquaintance with aperson who had fallen under the Cardinal's displeasure.It was night when they arrived at Montolieu, and De Blenau asked hisconductor if he intended to stop there till morning."No, Monsieur le Comte," replied the Officer; "we must proceed asspeedily as possible to Mirepoix, where I expect orders for my fartherconduct.""Then you go to Tarascon, in the Pyrenees," said De Blenau. "I thoughthis Eminence was at the city of that name by the banks of the Rhone,opposite Beaucaire.""He was there some time ago," replied the Officer; "but he has sincegone to the mountains, where, doctors say, there are waters which havegreat virtues in sickness like his. For my part, I always thought thesprings there very bad, and neither fit for man nor beast. But,nevertheless, we must hasten on, Sir."The next place they stopped at was Corneille; and, according to hiscustom, the Officer remained with De Blenau in the carriage, while thetroopers arranged every thing that was necessary for proceeding on theirjourney. There seemed, however, to be a considerable bustle amongst themen; and after waiting patiently for a few minutes, the Officer drewback the curtain, and thrusting his head from the window, inquired thecause of delay? The answer he received, imported that no fresh horsescould be procured, and that those which had drawn them so far wereincapable of proceeding even to the next town. "How happens it thatthere are no horses?" demanded he impatiently; "there ought always to behorses reserved for the use of the Government." To this it was replied,that so many people had passed to the court at Tarascon, that everyhorse which could be hired, even at an exorbitant price, had beencarried away.The Officer paused, as if doubting what course to pursue; but therebeing no remedy, he was obliged to alight, in order to pass the night atCorneille; taking care, however, to despatch one of the troopers toMirepoix, to bring any orders which might be waiting for him in thattown.The moon was up, and as De Blenau descended from the carriage, heperceived a little stream dashing and glistening over the wheel of amill, that stood dark and defined against the moonlight sky. It was tothis they were apparently proceeding; and as they approached nearer,there was seen an irregular part of the building projecting from therest, which seemed appropriated to the particular use of the Miller. Atthe same time, on a wooden staircase, which wound up the outside of thehouse, appeared a man, holding a light, and habited in one of thosedusty jackets, which have been the insignia of flour-grinders from allgenerations. At the moment I speak of, he was holding a conversationwith one of the troopers, and, by his quick articulation and busygestures, seemed engaged in making remonstrances, without any greateffect."What does he say?" exclaimed the Officer, who caught a few words oftheir conversation as he got out of the carriage. "That we cannot stophere the night? Give him a cuff of the head, Joly, to teach him bettermanners to the Cardinal's guard. By Heavens! he shall find me horsesto-night, or he shall lodge me till to-morrow!""Stay if you will, Sir Officer," rejoined the Miller, raising hisvoice--"but I tell you that you ought not to stay; and as for laying afinger on me--you know I serve the Cardinal as well as you, and you darenot!""Dare not!" cried the Officer, who was by this time mounting thestairs, catching the Miller by the collar, and striking him a slightblow--"You are a refractory rascal, Sir!--Open the door of your house,or I will throw you over the staircase.--Come, Monsieur de Blenau,follow me."The Miller offered no resistance, but threw wide the door, and let theOfficer pass in. De Blenau came next, having taken little notice of thealtercation; but as he went by the Miller, who held the door open, heheard him mutter to himself in an under voice, "He shall pay for it withhis blood," in a deep bitter tone of determined hatred, that made theCount turn round, expecting to see the ferocious countenance of anassassin. Nothing, however, could be more different from the appearanceof the speaker, who was a smooth, pale-faced man, whose look expressedlittle besides peaceful tranquillity and patient resignation.The room into which they entered was a large uncouth chamber, filledwith various articles of household furniture, the unusual assemblage ofwhich showed that it was used for most of the different purposes oflife. There was a bed in one corner, with a large screen, or paravent,half drawn before it. Beside the fire hung a row of copper saucepansand cooking utensils; round about were several saddles, and other piecesof horse furniture; and in the centre was a large table, with two orthree half-emptied bottles and some glasses, which bore marks of havingbeen recently used; and at the same time a long bench was placed at oneside of the table, with three single seats on the other.On the opposite side of the apartment was a wooden partition, evidentlynew, which seemed to separate what had once been one large chamber intotwo, with a door of communication between them."Oh, ho! Monsieur Godefroy!" exclaimed the Officer, looking at thetable, and then turning a significant glance to the Miller. "So, youhave been carousing, and did not like to let us share in your goodcheer. But come, we will not be sent away like a dog without his dinner.Let us taste your Burgundy; and if you were to lay three of those plumpboudins upon the fire, they might savour the wine.""You are very welcome, Sir Officer, to any thing the house affords,"replied the Miller, neither civilly nor sulkily. "Help yourself to theboudins, while I go down for the wine.""They say in my province, Monsieur de Blenau," said the Officer, placinga seat for the prisoner near the fire, "Qui dort dine, et qui faitl'amour soupe. Now, as we have neither slept nor dined, and have no oneto make love to, let us sup, at least."De Blenau's only reply was, that he had no appetite; which seemedconsiderably to surprise the Officer, who, as soon as the Miller hadbrought in the wine, and his supper was ready, fell to with no smalleagerness, and did not leave off till he had transferred the greaterpart of the trencher's contents to his stomach. The Miller seemed moreinclined to follow the Officer's example than De Blenau; and his angerhaving apparently subsided, he pressed his guest to continue the meal inso sociable and friendly a manner, that De Blenau could scarcelyconceive that the words he had heard as he entered, had been any thingbut the effect of momentary irritation. But shortly after he had againcause to alter his opinion; the eagerness with which the Miller invitedhis companion to drink, producing bottle after bottle of differentwines, generally denied by their price to persons in his station oflife; and the subdued glance of triumph with which he viewed thevarious stages of intoxication at which the Officer gradually arrived,caught De Blenau's attention, and excited his suspicion. However, thevengeance, which the Miller meditated, was of a very different naturefrom that which the Count imagined. Nothing which could, by any chance,recoil upon himself ever entered his thoughts, and his plan reached nofarther than to render the man who had offended him, deeply culpable inthe eyes of Richelieu, thus calling upon his head that relentless angerwhich would be much more effectual vengeance than any punishment hecould himself inflict.Two or three hours had passed in this manner, during which time theOfficer had made various efforts to resist the fascination of thebottle, often pushing it away from him, as if resolved not to tasteanother drop, and then again, as he became heated in conversation,drawing it back and filling his glass with an almost unconscious hand,when the sound of a horse's feet was heard without, and starting up, hedeclared that it was news from Mirepoix, and staggered towards the door.The moment he had quitted the room, the Miller approached De Blenau,glanced his eyes round the chamber, and then addressed him in awhisper. "What a moment," said he, "for a prisoner to make his escape,while that drunkard's senses are confused with wine!"De Blenau started at the suddenness of the proposal, and eyed hiscompanion with an inquiring glance. "If you allude to me," he replied atlength, "I thank you, but I have no thought of escaping.""You have not!" said the Miller, apparently surprised. He thought for amoment, and then added--"Oh, you reckon on your innocence. But let metell you, Sir Count, that there is both danger and uncomfort in a longimprisonment.""I know it," answered De Blenau; "but I would rather submit to both,than cast a suspicion on my honour and my innocence, by attempting tofly."This was a sort of reasoning the other did not understand; and his lipcurled with a slight expression of contempt, which would have showeditself more visibly, had not De Blenau's rank, though a prisoner, keptthe bourgeois in awe. He turned away, however, seemingly with theintention of quitting the room; but when he got to the other side, hepaused, laid his hand upon his brow, and after thinking for a moment,again came back to De Blenau. "I advised you for your own good,Monsieur le Comte," he said; "and though you will not escape from thedangers of accusation, I will give you the means of proving yourinnocence. In that room," and he pointed to the small door in thepartition, "you will discover two packets of papers exactly similar:take either of them, and in that you will find enough to disprove allthat your enemies will say against you.""But," said De Blenau, "what right have I to possess myself of papersbelonging, probably, to another?""Pshaw!" cried the Miller, "one would think that your neck itched forthe axe! Are you not in my house? Do not I bid you take them? Of course,you will not betray me to the Government; but take the papers, for Igive them to you." And making a sign to De Blenau to use all speed, hewent to the door which opened on the road. Before he passed it, however,he turned to the prisoner once more and cautioned him to make no noise,nor regard any thing else in the room, but after having taken one of thepackets from the table on which they were placed, to quit it as speedilyas possible. The precaution, however, was useless; for before De Blenauhad even time to determine upon any line of conduct, the Officer againentered the room, and, balancing himself as well as he could, contrivedto arrive at the table after many a zig-zag and many a halt. He hadprecisely reached that pitch of intoxication, when a man, having forsome time suspected that he is tipsy, finds out that such a suppositionwas entirely a mistake, and that he never was more sober, or more in hissenses in his life: consequently, he had not the slightest objection todrink a bottle of the vin de Saint Peret, which the miller set beforehim; although the Burgundy he had already imbibed had very considerablydulled his perception, and detracted from his locomotive power. Thewine, as it creamed and sparkled in his glass, was raised to his headwith increased difficulty at every renewed draught; and at last, feelingsomething the matter with him he knew not what, he started from thetable, made an effort to reach a chair by the fire, but receivinginstantly internal conviction of the impossibility of the attempt, hecast himself upon the bed behind the screen, which happened to be nearerat hand, and in a few minutes all his senses were steeped in oblivion.Immediately the Miller raised his hand, pointed to the door in thepartition, and left the apartment as if unwilling to witness what was tofollow.De Blenau paused for a moment to reflect on this man's conduct; buthowever extraordinary it might be, he could see nothing to prevent hispossessing himself of papers which, he was assured, would prove hisinnocence of the crimes with which he was charged--a thing not alwayseasy to the most guiltless. Accordingly, rising from his seat, he passedby the bed where the Officer lay snoring in the fulness of ebriety, andopened the door in the partition to which he had been directed. The roomwith which it communicated was small, and dimly lighted by a lamp thatstood flickering on a table, as if it scarcely knew whether to go out ornot. Near the lamp lay various implements for writing, together with twopapers, one folded up and marked, the other open, and seemingly hardlyfinished. Around were scattered various basnets and vials, whichappeared to contain the medicaments for a sick man; and on one of thechairs was thrown a long sword, together with a poniard and a brace ofpistols.De Blenau advanced to the table, and taking up the open paper, ran hiseye hastily over its contents. In so doing, his own name met his sight;and forgetting the caution he had received, to make speed and quit theapartment as soon as he had possessed himself of it, he could notrefrain from reading on:--"With regard to Monsieur the Count de Blenau,"the paper proceeded, "the prisoner feels perfectly convinced that he wasalways ignorant of the treaty and the designs of the conspirators. For,Monsieur de Cinq Mars particularly warned him (the prisoner) never tomention the circumstance before the Count, because that he was not to bemade acquainted therewith; and moreover----"As De Blenau read, a deep groan came upon his ear, evidently proceedingfrom some one in the same room with himself, and, holding up the lamp,he endeavoured to discover who it was that had uttered it; but inlifting it suddenly, the feeble light was at once extinguished, and thewhole chamber remained in darkness, except where a gleam came throughthe doorway of the other room."Godefroy! Godefroy!" exclaimed a faint voice, "do not put out thelight--why have you left me so long?--I am dying, I am sure I amdying.""I will bring another light," said the Count, "and be with youinstantly." And forgetting, in the hurry of the moment, his peculiarsituation, and the caution which ought to have accompanied it, hehastened into the other apartment, where the Officer still layundisturbed in his drunken slumbers, and taking one of the rosin candlesfrom the table, returned to give what succour he could to the personwhose faint voice he had heard.On re-entering the chamber with the stronger light which he now brought,his eyes fell upon the drawn curtains of an alcove bed at the fartherextremity; and approaching quickly, he pulled them back, shading thecandle as well as he could, to prevent its glare from offending the eyesof the sick person.But his precaution was in vain. Light and darkness had become the sameto the pale inanimate form before him. De Blenau saw that, during themoment of his absence, being had passed away; and holding the lightnearer to the bed, he thought he could trace, in the disfiguredcountenance that lay in ashy paleness upon the pillow, the features ofthe Grand Ecuyer's Italian lute-player, Villa Grande.He was engaged in examining them more attentively, when some onesilently laid their hand upon his arm, and turning quickly round, hebeheld Chavigni, while the countenance of the Miller appeared in thedoorway, very little less pale than that of the dead man. De Blenau'sfirst impulse was to point to the dead man, while his eyes rested on thecountenance of Chavigni, in which a slight degree of agitation showeditself for a moment, and then disappeared."So!" said the Statesman, regarding the lifeless body of Villa Grande,"he is dead, poor wretch!--Gone on that uncertain journey which liesbefore us all, like a land covered with a thick mist, whose paths, orwhose termination, none of us can discover.--But to matters of life andmoment," he continued. "What do you here, Monsieur de Blenau?""I should suppose, Sir, that you are better acquainted with the objectof my journey than I am myself," replied the Count. "You must be wellaware it was undertaken against my will.""You have mistaken me, Sir," said Chavigni. "The end of your journeyhither, I am well aware of. But how came you in this chamber? What doyou with that paper which is in your hand? I expect a straightforwardanswer.""Did I give you any, Sir," replied De Blenau, "my answer should bestraightforward. But you ought to have known me better than so proudlyto demand a reply, when you are unentitled to interrogate me. Being aprisoner, I must be guarded as such, though I tell you at once I have nointention of trying to escape; and being defenceless, you may take thesepapers from me, though they are material proofs of my innocence.However, I will rely upon your justice,--upon your honour,--thatwhatever charges be brought against me, the confession of this man maybe opposed to them in my justification.""Monsieur de Blenau," replied Chavigni, "I wish you would sometimes giveme an excuse for doubting your sincerity; for then I could see the fatewhich is like to betide you, without regret. When you were liberatedfrom the Bastille, I told you that the eye of an angry man was upon you,and warned you as a friend to avoid all cause for suspicion. TheMinister has never forgotten you. You were the first who brought ashadow over his dominion--I hope, therefore, that your innocence can beproved beyond a doubt; for mercy or tenderness between you and theCardinal are out of the question. Nevertheless, I cannot let you keepthis paper, which belongs to the Council; but I will take care that anything which it contains in your favour shall not be lost. In the meanwhile I shall be obliged to send you to Lyons; and Heaven speed you assafely out of this scrape as out of the last.""If perfect innocence of any crime towards the State can save me," saidDe Blenau, following Chavigni into the outer room, "I have nothing tofear.""I hope it is so," replied the Statesman. "And now," he continued,turning to the Miller, "let me tell you, Master Godefroy, that you arehighly culpable yourself, for leaving a State prisoner wholly withoutguard when you saw the Officer, in whose custody he was, in such astate as this. Make no excuses, Sir--it shall be remembered."Chavigni now approached the drunken man, and tried to rouse him; butfinding it in vain, he called in the Sergeant, and writing a few wordsfor his warranty, ordered him to conduct the Officer, next morning, toTarascon under arrest."Monsieur de Blenau," he continued, turning to the Count, "you will dome the favour of accompanying me to Montolieu. The horses attached to mycarriage are fresher than those which drew you."The promptitude with which Chavigni's orders were given, brought all thepreparations to a rapid conclusion. A few minutes sufficed him to issuethe necessary commands for transferring the baggage which had beenbrought with De Blenau to the other carriage; and adding a few clearrapid directions to the Miller concerning the body of Villa Grande, theStatesman was ready to accompany De Blenau before he had been a quarterof an hour in the house.At Montolieu, De Blenau was permitted to rest a day, and was then sentforward under a fresh escort to Lyons. The prisoner was now hurriedrapidly on his journey, travelling the whole of the first night, and atlast only stopping for a few hours to give him some repose at a villageabout eight leagues from the city to which he was proceeding. As soon asdaylight dawned, they again began their journey; and taking the lowerroad by the banks of the Rhone, gradually approached the ancient town ofLyons.The first pause they made was a compelled one, upon the wooden bridge,situated on the river just below the town. This entrance had been chosento avoid the more populous suburbs; but the conductor of the escort hadbeen mistaken in his calculation, for owing to some circumstances ofgeneral interest, which drew all the idle and the curious to that spot,the bridge and the alleys to it were entirely covered with dense massesof human beings, which completely obstructed the way. With difficultythe carriage was dragged half over the bridge; and then, notwithstandingthe exertions of the guard, it was obliged to stop. De Blenau drew backthe leather curtain which obstructed his view, and turning his eyestowards the river, a scene burst upon his sight which at once explainedto him the cause of such an assemblage.There was a small but magnificent galley making its way slowly to thelanding-place. The rigging was adorned with streamers; the deckglittered with all the splendid apparel of a court, the rowers wereclothed in rich uniform, scarcely different from that of the guardswhich flanked each bank of oars; gold, and jewels, and blazonry shonearound. But the spot on which all eyes rested was a small canopy of richembroidery, upheld above the deck on silver poles by four officers ofthe guard, in such a manner as to keep off the rays of the sun, but notimpede the breeze of the river from playing round a pile of rich velvetcushions, on which, amidst the pomp and display of a sovereign prince,lay the emaciated form of the Cardinal de Richelieu. His countenance wascalm and unmoved; indeed, he seemed hardly to regard the scene around,listening to the conversation of an Abb, who stood beside him for thesole purpose of amusing him by various tales and anecdotes during thevoyage. Sometimes, however, he would raise his eyes, and appear to speakto some of those who stood by; and then his glance would rapidly turntowards a smaller boat, which, attached by two long ropes, was towed onat the stern of his own galley. In that boat, seated between two of theCardinal's guard, sat the imprudent and unfortunate Cinq Mars, and hiscompanion in misfortune, De Thou. All the gay gallant spirit of theMaster of the Horse, which once taught him to scoff at the very idea ofadversity as at a bugbear of the imagination, was now quelled and lost,and with a bending head, and eyes cast down, he sat perfectlymotionless, like a lifeless but elegant statue. De Thou, on thecontrary, calmly surveyed the passing scene. He seemed to have forgotthat he was there as a prisoner, borne, a part of that barbarous triumphwhich his enemy was enjoying; and, even when his glance met that of theCardinal, his countenance remained undisturbed by any emotion of anger,or any expression of reproach.I have said that Richelieu would sometimes turn his look towards theboat in which his captives were borne along; and still when he did so, amomentary gleam would lighten in his eyes, and he would hastily glancethem round the multitude that lined the shores and the bridge. Butthere was no sound of gratulation met his ear, no acclamation for hisregained ascendency. The busy whisper of curiosity would stir amongstthe people, or perhaps the murmur of compassion, as they gazed upon thevictims about to be sacrificed to his vengeance. But there was no loveto express; and fear changed their curses into the bitterness ofsilence.Such was the scene in the midst of which De Blenau found himself, whenthe carriage stopped. He had just time to become aware of all its mostpainful circumstances, when the guards again opened a way through thepeople, and the vehicle passed on. The high round tower ofPierre-en-Scize, raising its dark mass above the rest of the prison, wasthe next thing that met his view, and he doubted not that the place ofhis imprisonment was before him; but the carriage rolled on into thegreat Place Terreaux, where it suddenly drew up."Then I am not to be taken to Pierre-en-Scize?" said De Blenau to theofficer who had accompanied him from Montolieu."No, Monsieur le Comte," replied he, "Pierre-en-Scize will besufficiently occupied with Messieurs Cinq Mars, De Thou, and others;and when Monsieur de Bouillon, and the Duke of Orleans--""Good God!" exclaimed De Blenau, "is the Duke of Orleans implicated inthis unfortunate business?"The officer smiled. "Why, they do say, Sir, that the King himself is inthe conspiracy. But as to the Duke, you know more of his share in itthan any one else--at least so we are told. But I must now beg you todescend.""You are under a mistake, Sir," replied De Blenau. "I know nothing ofthe Duke, and as little of the conspiracy." And following the officer,he entered a house in the Place Terreaux, which had been changed for thetime from one of the public offices of the city into a place ofconfinement, and offered all the security without the horrors of aprison. The windows were grated, it is true, but they looked out intothe free world below, and the captive might sit there and forget that hewas denied the power of joining the gay throng that passed along beforehis eyes in all the pride of liberty.CHAPTER XIV.Giving a good receipt for proving a man guilty when he is innocent.De Blenau had not been long in his new abode, before he learned that theexpress orders of Chavigni had caused him to be carried thither, ratherthan to Pierre-en-Scize, where his confinement would have been morestrict; and he felt grateful for this mark of the Statesman'sconsideration. For the first few days, too, he experienced every kind ofattention, and was permitted to enjoy all sort of liberty consistentwith his safe custody.But this was not destined to endure long; and his imprisonment graduallybecame more rigorous than that which he had undergone in the Bastille.The use of books and writing materials was denied him, and every meansof employing his thoughts seemed studiously withheld. This mode ofweakening the mind, by leaving it to prey upon itself, had its effecteven on De Blenau. He became irritable and desponding; and as hereceived no intimation in regard to the charge against him, he began toconjure up a thousand vague unreal images, and to destroy them as soonas raised.After this had continued for some days, he was surprised by the door ofhis apartment opening one night, at the moment he was about to retire torest, giving admittance to the corrupt Judge Lafemas, and a personhabited as one of the Greffiers of the Court. There are some who arecruel from fear, and some from motives of interest; but few, I trust,who from natural propensity rejoice in the sufferings of afellow-creature. Such, however, was the character of Lafemas--at leastif we may believe the histories of the time; and in the present instancehe entered the chamber of De Blenau with a countenance which certainlyexpressed no great unwillingness in the performance of what is alwayspainful when it is a duty.In this place we shall but give a small part of the conversation betweenDe Blenau and the Judge; for the course of examination which the latterpursued toward the prisoner was so precisely similar in its nature tothat which he followed on a former occasion in the Bastille, that itsrepetition is unnecessary, especially as our history is now hurryingrapidly to its awful and inevitable conclusion. A part of it, however,may serve to illustrate the charges brought against De Blenau, and thecircumstances on which they were founded."Good night, Monsieur de Blenau," said Lafemas, approaching the table atwhich he sat. "I did not think to meet you again in prison: I had hopedthat when last you escaped so well, you would have been careful to keepyourself free from any thing of this kind.""Good night, Monsieur le Juge," replied De Blenau; "do me the favour ofsitting down--for I suppose I may do the honours of my chamber, thoughit be but a prison. I am glad to see you, Sir; for I trust you caninform me why I am here confined.""Monsieur de Blenau," said the Judge, seating himself, "we will be frankwith one another. You are very well aware how deeply you are implicatedin this conspiracy; and I will tell you that we have ample proofs ofevery thing. But at the same time I know of a way by which you can saveyourself; a way which one or two highly honourable men have embraced,having been misled at first by designing persons, but having returned toa sense of duty and honour, and confessed all they knew, together withthe names of those they supposed to be amongst the guilty.""I have no doubt, Sir," replied the Count, "that all and every thing yousay is correct and right. But there is one point, on which I am in thedark. I am not aware of what conspiracy you mean.--I have, it is true,conspired----" Lafemas turned an attentive ear, and De Blenau perceivedthat the Greffier who had followed the Judge was making a note of allthat passed. "Stop, gentlemen," said he, nodding to the officer; "takethe whole of my sentence, I beg. You shall have it in plain language--Ihave, it is true, conspired on more than one occasion, with sundry ofhis Majesty's lieges, to kill a fat buck or a lusty boar, in various ofthe royal forests in this kingdom. But this is the only conspiracy ofwhich I have been guilty; and for that I can plead his Majesty's freepermission and pardon.""All this is very good, Monsieur le Comte," said Lafemas, his browsdarkening; "but I must tell you that it will not serve the purpose youpropose. I came here to you as a friend--""And as a friend," interrupted De Blenau, "you brought with you thatgentleman in black to take down my words, in case I should be at a lossto remember what I had said.""I must once more tell you, Sir," said the Judge, "that this will notanswer your purpose, for a full confession has been made by Monsieur deCinq Mars since his condemnation.""Since his condemnation!" exclaimed De Blenau. "Good God! is it possiblethat he is condemned?"Lafemas was little capable of understanding any of those finer feelingswhich brighten the dull void of human existence. He read from the blackpage of his own mind, and fancied that every other was written in thesame dark character. All that he saw in the exclamation of De Blenau wasfear for himself, not feeling for his friend; and he replied, "Yes,Monsieur le Comte, he is condemned to lose his head for the crimes ofwhich he has been guilty: the question also formed part of his sentence,but this he has avoided by making a full confession, in which, as youmay easily suppose, your name is very fully comprised.""You may as well cease, Sir," replied the Count. "It may indeed be truethat my unhappy friend is guilty and has confessed his guilt; but nolanguage you can use will ever persuade me that, knowing my innocence,as he well does, he would say any thing that could implicate me.--I willfarther answer every thing that can possibly be asked of me in a veryfew words. As to myself, I have nothing to confess, for I am perfectlyguiltless towards the State: and as to others, I can give noinformation, for I am wholly ignorant of any plot, conspiracy, ortreason whatsoever.""I am sorry for your obstinacy, Monsieur de Blenau," said Lafemasrising; "for the Cardinal has resolved that you shall confess, and wehave the means of making the most stubborn answer. I am, in fact,commanded this very night to use measures which might not be veryagreeable to you. But I give you till to-morrow to consider, and so bidyou farewell."The plans of Cinq Mars had run into various ramifications, involving amultitude of persons in a greater or less degree; but all fell equallyunder the hatred of the Cardinal, and he spared no means, legal orillegal, to discover the most remote windings of the conspiracy, and toforce or induce the various parties to it to make confessions, whichwere afterwards used as evidence against themselves, as well as others.As the proofs against De Blenau were, of course, very defective, thelast command of Richelieu to Lafemas, before leaving Lyons, was to spareno power of intimidation, in order to make the prisoner criminatehimself, before even granting him the form of a trial. In pursuance ofthese directions, Lafemas ceased not for some days to torment De Blenauwith continual interrogatories, mingled with menaces and irritation,ingeniously calculated either to frighten his victim into someconfession of guilt, or to throw him off his guard by rousing his anger.More than once he was carried into the chamber of the Question, and oncewas even bound to the rack. But though, in the secret halls of theBastille, Lafemas would not have scrupled to proceed to any act ofcruelty, yet at Lyons, amidst people upon whose silence he could notrely, he dared not put the prisoner to the question, without someappearance of legal authority. At length, therefore, the day for histrial was fixed; but yet Lafemas prepared to make him previously undergoa species of refined torture, which none but a demon could have devised.Denied all the privileges usually conceded to prisoners, unacquaintedwith the precise charges to be brought against him, refused all legalassistance, and debarred the use of pen and ink, De Blenau clearly sawthat Richelieu had resolved on his destruction, and merely granted himthe form of a trial to gloss over his tyranny, in the eyes of thepeople; nevertheless, he prepared to defend himself as far as possible,and at all events to establish his innocence; for the honour of his goodname, though it might not even tend to save him from the injustice withwhich he was threatened. For this purpose he accurately examined hisconduct since his liberation from the Bastille, and noted carefullyevery circumstance, that he might be enabled to prove the nature of allhis occupations so correctly, that the impossibility of his joining inany conspiracy would be made evident. He found, however, that to do thiseffectually, some aid besides that of mere memory would be necessary,and possessing no other means of committing his thoughts to writing, hehad recourse to the expedient of pointing some pieces of wood, which heprocured from the gaoler, and then by charring them in the lamp, he wasenabled to make notes upon some torn linen, preparatory to his trial.Being thus occupied the greater part of the night, his usual time ofrest was from day-break to mid-day; but one night, a few days previousto the time appointed for his trial, he was disturbed in his occupationby the dull heavy clang of hammers in the great Square before hisprison, and proceeding to the window, he endeavoured to ascertain thecause. Through the bars he could perceive various lights, and peoplemoving about in different directions, but could not discern in what theywere employed; and quitting the casement, he returned to the slow andlaborious operation of writing his notes, in the manner we havedescribed. At length, wearied out, he threw himself upon his bed,without taking off his clothes, and soon fell into a profound sleep,which remained unbroken till late the next day. It is probable that hemight have slept still longer, had he not been aroused by histormentor, Lafemas, who, standing by his bedside, with two of hisinferior demons, roused him out of the happy forgetfulness into which hehad fallen. "Rise, Monsieur de Blenau, rise!" said the Judge, his eyesgleaming with malicious pleasure; "rise, here is something in thePlace which it is necessary you should behold."De Blenau awoke suddenly from his sleep, suffered himself to beconducted to the window, where the Judge and his two followers placedthemselves behind him, so as to obstruct his retreat, and in a manner toforce upon him the sight of what was passing in the Place.The Square of Terreaux was filled with an immense multitude, and therewas a deep awful silence reigned amongst them. All eyes were turnedtowards a spot exactly opposite the window at which De Blenau stood,where there appeared a high raised scaffold, covered with black cloth,and surrounded by a strong body of troops, who kept the multitude at adistance, without impeding their view of the dreadful scene which wasacting before them. A large log of timber lay across the front of thescaffold, and beside it stood a tall brawny man, leaning on an immenseaxe, which seemed as if a giant's force would hardly wield it, soponderous was its form. The Prevost of Lyons, dressed in black, andbearing his staff of office, stood on the other side with several of thecivil officers of the city; and a file of pikemen closed each flank ofthe scaffold, leaving the front open, as we have said, to the view ofthe spectators.But it was the form of his unhappy friend, Cinq Mars, that first rivetedDe Blenau's attention; and he continued to gaze upon him with painfulinterest, while, standing beside the block on which he was to suffer, hecalmly unloosed his collar, and made the executioner cut away the glossycurls of his hair, which otherwise, falling down his neck, might haveimpeded the blow of the axe. When this was over, Cinq Mars raised theinstrument of his death, and running his finger over the edge, seemed toascertain that it was sharp; and then laying it down, he turned to thegood De Thou, who stood beside him, a sharer in his punishment, thoughnot a sharer in his fault. Cinq Mars appeared to entreat his pardon forsome offence; and it is probable that having implicated him at all inthe conspiracy was the only circumstance that then weighed upon the mindof the Grand Ecuyer. The only reply of De Thou was a warm affectionateembrace; and then with the easy dignity of a mind at rest, Cinq Marswithdrew himself from his arms, and knelt down before the block--DeBlenau turned away his head."You had better observe, Monsieur de Blenau," said Lafemas, "the fatewhich those two traitors undergo; for such will be your own, if yourefuse the hand of mercy held out to you, and persist in obstinatesilence.--Ah!--so much!" continued he, looking from the window, "so muchfor Monsieur de Cinq Mars! That new fellow is expert--he has the headoff at one blow!""Wretch!" exclaimed De Blenau, forcibly passing him, and proceeding fromthe window, "unfeeling wretch!--Monsieur Lafemas," he added, afterpausing a moment, "you were perhaps right in supposing that this torturewas superior to any other you could inflict. But I have once more totell you, Sir, that by this or by any other means you will wring from menothing that can betray my innocence or my honour.""Then die as you deserve!" replied Lafemas; and after once more lookingfrom the window, and muttering to himself a few words, whose import DeBlenau did not catch, he left the apartment with his two followers. DeBlenau cast himself on the bed, and hiding his face in the clothes,endeavoured to drive from his memory the dreadful scene he had justbeheld; but it still continued for many an after-hour to hover beforehis eyes, and deprive him of all rest or peace.The hours of a prison are always slow, and they were now doubly slow toDe Blenau, having no other pastime than painful reflections, andanticipations equally bitter.At length, however, the day of his trial arrived, and he was conveyed ina carriage to Pierre-en-Scize, where, in the hall of audience, satethree of the devoted creatures of Richelieu, presiding over a bodyequally governed by themselves, and all prepared to pronounce a sentencealready dictated by the Minister. Although the President of theparliament of Grenoble nominally directed the business of the Court,Lafemas was not absent, and in his eyes De Blenau instantly discernedhis fate.The charge against the prisoner was read by one of the clerks, declaringhim to stand in danger of high treason, in having conspired with theSieurs Cinq Mars, Fontrailles, De Thou, and others, to bring foreigntroops into France, and for having treated and combined with a power atopen war with the kingdom for various treasonable and disloyal purposes.The evidence brought forward to establish this, was as frivolous as theaccusation was unfounded. Even the very semblance of justice was nearlyabandoned, the Judges seeming to go through the trial as a useless andtiresome ceremony, which might very well be dispensed with.It was proved, indeed, that the prisoner had often been seen in privatewith the unfortunate Cinq Mars; and it was also given in evidence by aservant of the Duke of Orleans, that he had carried a letter from thatPrince to De Blenau at Moulins; and that in consequence of that letter,as he conceived, the Duke had gone, with a great air of secrecy, to aparticular spot, where he was unaccustomed to ride upon ordinaryoccasions, and that there he was met by De Blenau. What conversationtook place between them, he could not tell; but after they hadseparated, the Duke, he said, gave particular orders that their meetingshould be mentioned to no man.The next witness brought forward was the messenger who had carried to DeBlenau the King's permission to return to court, and who proved that,instead of finding the Count at Moulins, or any where in theBourbonnois, to which, according to the King's command, he was bound toconfine himself, he had been conducted by the Count's page to Troyes inChampagne, where he found Monsieur de Blenau himself ready to set offfor some other place. This witness also added, that he had learned inthe town of Troyes, that Monsieur de Blenau had been absent one wholeday, during which time he had visited the old Castle of Mesnil St. Loup;and that at his return he did not go to the same hotel from which he hadproceeded in the morning.When the evidence was gone through, the President of Grenoble signifiedto the prisoner that he might speak in his own defence; and though wellassured that on his judges he could make no impression, De Blenauresolved not to allow the accusation to remain unrepelled, and repliedat some length to what had been urged against him. He showed theimpossibility of preparing any defence, when the nature of the chargehad never reached his ears till that day. He pointed out that, though hehad known and loved the unhappy Cinq Mars, their friendship was no proofthat he was at all acquainted with the conspiracy for which the otherhad suffered; and that though he had met the Duke of Orleans, andreceived a letter from him, that was not sufficient to show himconcerned in any plot against the State. He acknowledged that he hadleft the Bourbonnois without the King's permission; but he stated thepowerful motives which had induced him to do so, and gave a correctaccount, from the notes he had prepared, of every moment of his timesince he had been liberated from the Bastille. He farther declared hisinnocence: he proved that he had been absent from all the principalscenes of the conspiracy; and ended by demanding that the confession ofthe Italian Villa Grande should be produced.The President of Grenoble turned his eyes upon Lafemas; but that worthyJudge assumed an air of perfect unconsciousness, and demanded, whatItalian the prisoner meant?De Blenau now clearly and distinctly stated all he knew concerning him,and again demanded that his confession should be brought forward. Butstill Lafemas appeared in doubt. "Monsieur de Blenau," said he,"although this seems to me but a manoeuvre to gain time, I have noobjection that the papers of this Court should be searched, if you cangive us the baptismal name of this Italian, of whom at present we knownothing; and even this is a mere matter of grace and favour."De Blenau declared his incapacity to do so, but protested against theunjust proceedings of the Court, and showed that, if time andopportunity had been allowed for preparing his defence, he would havebeen enabled, by application to the Count de Chavigni, to bring forwardthe paper he mentioned, and to prove the truth of every thing he hadasserted, by the evidence of persons now at a distance. He was stillspeaking when Lafemas rose and interrupted him. "Perceiving," said theJudge, with unblushing effrontery, "that the prisoner has concluded hisdefence, I will now occupy the Court for a few moments, in order toexplain the reasoning on which my own opinion is founded, although I seebut one conclusion to which any one can come upon the merits of the casebefore us. It has been shown that the prisoner was the sworn--the bosomfriend of the traitor who has already suffered for his crimes; that hewas in constant communication with almost all the conspirators; and thatthe Royal Duke, who has unfortunately dyed his name with so black aspot, at the very same time that he was engaged in plotting the ruin ofhis country, was in secret correspondence with the individual before us.It has farther been proved, that the prisoner, after having beenrelegu in Bourbon, quitted the place to which he was bound to confinehimself, and went, upon what he cannot but own himself to be a wildromantic chase, into Champagne. This part of his story is a very strangeone, according to his own showing; but when we come to compare it withthe confession of the traitor Cinq Mars, the matter becomes more clear.It was in the old Castle of St. Loup, near the city of Troyes, says theconfession, that the principal meeting of the conspirators was held; andit was to this very Castle of St. Loup that the prisoner directed hiscourse from Moulins. Evidently for the purpose of concealment also, theprisoner, on his return to Troyes, instead of directing his course tothe inn where he had formerly alighted, proceeded to another, at which,unfortunately for himself, he was overtaken by the King's messenger. Ithink it is unnecessary to say more upon these points. To my mind theyare convincing. It is true, indeed, Monsieur de Blenau has shrewdly kepthis hand-writing from any paper which could prove him an active memberof this conspiracy. But what man in his senses can doubt that he wascriminally aware of its existence? This, then, is his crime: and Ipronounce the concealment of treason to be as great a crime as treasonitself. But if there were wanting a case in point to prove that the lawconsiders it as such, I would cite the condemnation of De Thou, who, buttwo days ago, suffered with the traitor Cinq Mars. Let us now, mybrethren," he added, "retire to consider of our sentence; for I haveonly spoken thus much, not to bias your opinion, but simply that theprisoner himself, before he leaves the Court, may know, at least, mysentiments."The Judges now withdrew to the cabinet appointed for theirdeliberations, and De Blenau was removed from the court to a smallapartment hard by. He had not been here a moment when his page, Henri deLa Mothe, burst into the room. "My dear, dear master!" exclaimed theboy, throwing himself at his feet, "they tell me that you certainly willnot be condemned, for that you have not been taken to what is called thedead man's dwelling: so the sentinel let me in to see you.""Henry! how came you hither!" exclaimed De Blenau, hurriedly--"But wehave no time to think of that--My fate is sealed--I have read it in thetriumphant glance of that demon, Lafemas.--Mark me, my boy, and if everyou loved me, obey me well.--When I am dead--Do you hear?--When I amdead, near my heart you will find a portrait. Take it, with this ring,to Mademoiselle de Beaumont. Tell her, that the one was the likeness ofall I love on earth; and the other, the ring that was to have bound herto me for ever. Say that De Blenau sends them to her in death, and thathis last thought was of Pauline de Beaumont.""Alas! Mademoiselle de Beaumont!" said the Page. But as he spoke, thedoor opened and an officer of the court entered, followed by a priest."Begone, boy!" said the officer, leading Henry to the door. "How cameyou in here? We have more serious matter in hand now.""Remember!" said De Blenau, holding up his hand impressively,"remember!" And Henry, bursting into tears, was hurried from theapartment. "Now, Father," continued De Blenau, turning to the Priest,"let us to your business.""It is a sad one, my son," he replied; "it is but to tell you, that youmust prepare to leave a world of sorrow!""God's will be done!" said De Blenau.CHAPTER XV.Which, if the reader can get through it, will bring him to the endof the history.All delay in the execution of a sentence where there exists no hope ofmercy, is but needless cruelty; yet De Blenau was suffered to lingerfourteen weary nights and days between the day of his condemnation andthat appointed for his death. It approached, however, at length. We aretold, by those who have had the best opportunities of judging, that thelast night of a condemned prisoner's existence is generally passed inslumber. It was so with De Blenau. Hope and fear were equally thingsgone by to him. The bitter sentence of death had rung in his ear. He hadtraced the last lines of affection to her he loved. He had paid thelast duties of religion; and fatigued with the strong excitement whichhis mind had undergone, he threw himself on his couch and fell into thatprofound sleep which only despair can give, and which approaches near toannihilation.He was yet buried in forgetfulness when the gaoler came to announce thatthe fatal hour was come, and for a moment, even after his spirit hadresumed her powers, memory still wandered far from the reality. He hadnot dreamed, but all thought of the last few months had beenobliterated, and remembrance escaping from the painful present, lingeredfondly over all he had left behind.It lasted not long, and as all the truth came rushing on his mind, hethought alone of his approaching fate, and to meet it as became him. Hisheart, indeed, was sick of all the instability of this world's things,and for an instant there was a feeling almost amounting to satisfaction,when he thought that the eternal balancing between hope and fear,between joy and disappointment, was soon to be over, and that his soul,wearied of change and doubt, would quickly have peace and certainty.But then again the lingering ties of earth, the fond warm fellowships ofhuman existence came strongly upon him, with all the throng of kindlysympathies that bind us to this world, and made him shrink from thethought of breaking them all at once.This also lasted but a moment--his fate was sealed, and hurrying overall that might in any degree undermine his fortitude, he followed intothe court-yard, where the Prevost de Lyons and several of theauthorities of the town, with a file of soldiers, waited his coming.The distance was so short from the place of his confinement to thescaffold where he had beheld for the last time his unhappy friend CinqMars, that the use of a carriage was dispensed with; and the guardhaving formed an avenue through the crowd, the gates were thrown open togive him exit for the last time."Monsieur de Blenau, will you take my arm," said the Prevost of Lyons:"mine is a sad office, Sir, but the arm is not an unfriendly one."De Blenau, however, declined it with thanks, saying that he needed nosupport, and with a Priest on one hand and the Prevost on the other, heproceeded calmly towards the scaffold, and ascended the steps with afirm unshaken footstep. The block, and the axe, and the maskedexecutioner were nothing in De Blenau's eyes but the mere weakprecursors of the one awful event on which all his thoughts were bent,and for which his mind was now fully prepared. There was but one thoughtwhich could at all shake his fortitude--there was but one tie to bebroken which wrung his heart to break. He thought of Pauline deBeaumont--but he thought also that he had merited a better fate; andproudly spurning the weakness that strove to grow upon his heart, heresolved to die as he had lived, worthy of her he loved. The veryfeeling gave new dignity to his air, and he stood erect and firm whilethe soldiers were disposed about the scaffold, and his sentence was readaloud by the Prevost.A great multitude surrounded the place, and fixed their eyes upon thevictim of arbitrary power, as he stood calm and unmoved before them, inthe spring of youth and the dignity of conscious innocence. There werefew who had not heard of the Count de Blenau, and all that they hadheard was good. The heart of man too, however fallen, has still onespot reserved for the dwelling of compassion, and its very weaknessmakes it soften to virtue in distress, and often even to forget faultsin misfortunes. However that may be, there was a glistening in the eyesof many as they turned their looks towards De Blenau, who, according tothe universal custom of the time, advanced to the front of the scaffoldto address them. "Good friends," said he, "it is the will of Heaven thathere I should give back the spirit which has been lent me; and so helpme that God into whose bright presence I now go, as I am innocent of anycrime towards my King and Country!" A murmur ran among the people. "Thisis my last asseveration," he continued; "and my last counsel to you is,to keep your hearts clear and guiltless, so that if misfortune shouldfollow any one as it has followed me, he may be able to lay his headupon the block as fearlessly as I do now." And retiring a step, heunloosed his collar, and knelt for the stroke of the executioner."A horse! A horse! A council messenger! Pardon for the Count! Pardon forthe Count!" cried a thousand voices from the crowd. De Blenau looked up.Headlong down the long narrow street that then led in a straight linefrom the square, his horse in foam, his hat left far behind, and hislong grey hair flying in the wind, spurring as if for life, came ahorseman, who ever and anon held up a packet in his hand, andvociferated something that was lost in the distance. He wore the dressof a Lieutenant of the King's forests, and dashing like lightningthrough the crowd, that reeled back on every side as he approached, hepaused not till he reached the foot of the scaffold,--threw himself fromhis horse--passed unopposed through the guards--rushed up the steps, andPhilip the Woodman of Mantes cast himself at De Blenau's feet. "Mynoble, noble Lord!" exclaimed the Woodman. It was all that he couldutter, for his breath was gone with the rapidity of his progress."What is all this?" cried the Prevost of Lyons, coming forward. "And whydo you stop the execution of the prisoner, Sir Lieutenant? What is allthis?"--Philip started on his feet, "What is it?" he exclaimed, "why, that noneof you blood-sucking wolves dare put a fang to the Count's throat:that's what it is! There is his pardon, with the King's own signature;ay! and the Cardinal's to boot! At least, so Monsieur de Chavigni tellsme; for being no great clerk, I have not read it myself."The Prevost unfolded the paper and read, "'Aujourd'hui,' &c.--Ah! yes,all in form.--'The King having learned that the crimes of the SieurClaude de Blenau, Count de Blenau, and Seigneur de Blancford, are not soheavy as at first appeared, and having investigated--&c. has ordainedand does ordain--out of his great grace, &c.--that the sentence of deathbe changed and commuted to perpetual banishment, &c.--And if aftersixteen days from the date hereof, he be found within the kingdoms ofFrance and Navarre,' &c.--You understand, Monsieur le Comte.--Well, Sir,I congratulate you. Here is the King's name; 'Louis,' et plus bas,'Richelieu'--Will you come and take some refreshment at my poorlodgings?"De Blenau was glad to accept the invitation, for his mind was too muchconfused to fix upon any plan of action at the moment. His resolutionhad borne him strongly up at the time when all hope seemed lost; but nowthe sudden change overpowered him; and amidst the acclamations of themultitude, he suffered himself to be conducted in silence to the houseof the Prevost; where he was soon after discovered by his Page, Henri deLa Mothe.We shall now pass quickly over the means which he took to procure moneyfor the expenses of the journey before him, merely saying that, throughthe kindness of the Prevost, he was soon furnished with the necessaryfunds for proceeding; and accordingly set out from Lyons the secondmorning after that, the events of which we have described. Two powerfulreasons induced De Blenau to turn his steps towards Spain: in the firstplace, it was much nearer than either Germany or Flanders, which werethe only other countries where he could hope for perfect security; and,in the next place, his road to the frontier passed not only close to hisown estates, but skirted the property of Madame de Beaumont, and he wasnot without hopes of meeting there some that were the dearest to him ofthe earth; for he learned from Henri de La Mothe, that the vengeance ofthe implacable Richelieu had extended to Pauline, and her mother, whohad been ordered once more to quit the Court of France, as a punishmentfor having conveyed information to him in the Bastille.Philip the Woodman was not forgotten in De Blenau's new arrangements;and under the pretence of charging him with a letter back to St.Germain's, in case Madame de Beaumont should not be in Languedoc, theyoung Count seduced him into a promise of accompanying him toArgentire. His real motive, however, was, to recompense the Woodman'sservices, on arriving at his own property, in a manner which the scantystate of his finances prevented him from doing at Lyons.Notwithstanding all the joy he felt at his deliverance, there was aheaviness hung over De Blenau as he rode out of Lyons, which he couldnot account for, and a sensation of fatigue which he had never feltbefore. To shorten the road, he beckoned to the Woodman, who, with Henride La Mothe, had dropped a little behind, and made him relate thecircumstances which led to his being despatched with the King's pardonto Lyons. Philip's story, which occupied a long while in telling, may beconsiderably shortened without disadvantage.It must be remembered, that at the time of De Blenau's liberation fromthe Bastille, Chavigni had promised, as some compensation for all thatPhilip had suffered by his means, to have him appointed Sous-lieutenantof the forest of Mantes: and he kept his word.Philip was placed in the office, and exercised its functions, but theactual brevet containing his official appointment had been delayed by amultitude of other affairs pressing for attention, till the Statesman'sreturn from Narbonne. At length, Philip heard that Chavigni hadreturned, and that the King, with all the Ministers, were once more atSt. Germain's; and he ventured to wait upon his patron, as he had beendesired, to remind him of expediting the brevet. There were severalpersons waiting, and in his turn he was shown into the Statesman'scabinet.Chavigni had forgotten his face, and asked the simple question, "Who areyou?"Such simple questions, however, often produce more importantconsequences. "I am the Woodman," replied Philip, "who was in prisonwith the Count de Blenau.""The Count de Blenau!" exclaimed Chavigni, while an expression ofhorror passed over his countenance. "By all the Saints, I had forgot!Yet, let me see, to-day is Wednesday--there is yet time--stay here amoment!" and he rushed out of the room, leaving the astonished Woodmannot knowing at all what he meant. In about a quarter of an hour theStatesman returned, breathless with the expedition he had used--"There!"he exclaimed, putting a paper into Philip's hand--"There is his pardon,signed by both the King and the Cardinal!--Away! take the swiftest horsein my stable!--lose not a moment, or you will be too late! Use theKing's name for fresh horses, and show that signature.--Tell the Count,Chavigni has kept his word.""And where am I to go?" demanded Philip, quietly, still completelyignorant of the cause of Chavigni's agitation."To Lyons, to Lyons! you fool!" cried Chavigni. "If you use not allspeed, the Count's head will be off before you arrive with his pardon.""The Count de Blenau?" demanded Philip."Yes, yes, I tell you!" reiterated the Statesman, "your good old friend,the Count de Blenau! So lose no time, if you would save his life."Philip lost no time, and arrived at Lyons, as we have seen, just at thecritical moment of De Blenau's fate.Though Philip's narrative served to interest De Blenau, and thechattering of Henri de La Mothe to amuse him on the way, nevertheless hecould not conceal from himself that there was a lassitude graduallygrowing upon him, which seemed to announce the approach of some serioussickness. Naturally of a strong constitution, and an ardent temperament,he never yielded to indisposition, till unable to sustain it any longer;and though fatigue, anxiety, and distress, had weakened him much, andhis two attendants often hinted that he looked unwell, and requiredrepose, De Blenau would not acknowledge that he was ill, until hearrived in the neighbourhood of Tournon. There, however, the powers ofnature failed him, and he felt that he could proceed no farther.Scarcely able to sit his horse, he entered the town, and looked eagerlyabout for some place where he could repose, when suddenly the eyes ofHenri de La Mothe rested upon the well-known sign of the SanglierGourmand, which, as they afterwards found, was still kept by no otherperson than the celebrated Jacques Chatpilleur, who had at last beendriven from the neighbourhood of the Bastille by the wrathful Governor,for one of his drunken achievements, very similar to the one recountedin our second volume, and had taken refuge in his native place, Tournon.Here De Blenau alighted, and was conveyed to a bed-chamber, where he wassoon attacked by a violent fever, which rapidly increased. Deliriumfollowed; and he quickly lost all remembrance of surrounding objects,though the name of Pauline de Beaumont would often tremble on histongue, and he fancied that he saw a thousand airy shapes hovering roundhis bed, and constantly reminding him of her he loved.In about twenty days the disease had run its course, and passed away,leaving him in a state of excessive weakness; but, in the mean time, thefever, which had nearly destroyed De Blenau, had entirely ruined theunhappy Jacques Chatpilleur. The report spread through Tournon, that theaubergiste had a malignant sickness raging in his house; and insteadof coming thither, as usual, for the good things of this life, thecitizens not only passed his door without entering, but even crossedover the way, as they went through the street, to be as far as possiblefrom the infected air. For some days after he discovered this defection,melancholy preyed upon the unhappy aubergiste; but suddenly he seemedto have taken a bold resolution; pulled down his sign; put by his potsand pans; resumed his gaiety; and no sooner did De Blenau talk of oncemore proceeding, than Jacques Chatpilleur laid before him his sadcondition, and prayed, as an act of justice, that he would take him withhim into Spain, and suffer him to be his Lordship's cook.De Blenau had not the heart to deny him; but another thing came now tobe considered. The time which, according to the ordinance of the King,had been allowed him for the purpose of quitting the realm, had longexpired, and he was now virtually an outlaw. Every one was called uponto deliver him up as an exile returned without grace, and by law hisblood could be required at the hand of no one who shed it. Thesecircumstances, though not very agreeable in themselves, would have givenDe Blenau but little concern, had not the Judge Lafemas been still inhis immediate neighbourhood. But from his vindictive spirit he hadevery thing to fear if discovered within the precincts of France afterthe allotted time had expired; and in consequence he determined totravel by night, as soon as his strength was sufficiently restored, andto effect his escape into Spain with as little delay as possible.Jacques Chatpilleur applied himself with all the vigour of an ancienvivandier to re-establish his new lord in his former robust health, andsucceeded so well as to leave but little traces of all that fever andanxiety had done upon his frame. In the mean time, Henri de La Mothetook care to prepare secretly every thing for their departure; andPhilip the Woodman, who had somewhat balanced between a wish to returnto his family, and love for the good young Count, determined to followhim to the frontier, as soon as he heard that his life was at the mercyof any one who chose to take it.Under these circumstances, one clear autumn night, towards twelveo'clock, De Blenau sallied forth from the little town of Tournon,accompanied by the somewhat curious escort of the Innkeeper, theWoodman, and the Page, and proceeding silently and cautiously, arrivedsafely in the neighbourhood of La Voulte, where, betaking themselves toone of the large open fields of the country, the party reposedthemselves under the mulberry-trees, which by this time had been longstripped both of their green leaves and their silken balls, but whichstill offered some degree of concealment, and something to which theycould attach their horses.At noon, Jacques Chatpilleur, as the most expert, was despatched to thetown for some provisions, which commission he executed with great zealand discretion, and returning, informed De Blenau that he had seen agentleman in black pass through the town, accompanied by a considerabletrain habited in the same sad colour.As De Blenau conjectured that this might be Lafemas, it was determinedto take additional precautions, and rather to live upon scanty fare thansend into any town again; and setting off as soon as it was dark, theypassed by Privas, and reached the skirts of the thick wood that beganabout Aubenas, and sweeping round La Gorce extended almost to Viviers onthe one side, and to L'Argentire on the other. Near to Viviers lay theestates of the Marchioness de Beaumont, and within a league ofArgentire was the Chteau de Blenau; but it was towards the former thatDe Blenau bent his steps as soon as the second night had come. Beforethey had gone far, it began to rain hard, and though the wood affordedsome covering, yet the lateness of the season had stripped it of allthat could yield any efficient shelter, except at a spot where twoevergreen oaks, growing together like twin-brothers, spread their stillverdant branches over a considerable space of ground. De Blenau wasinclined to proceed as quickly as possible; but Jacques Chatpilleur, whonow acted as body physician as well as cook, so strongly cautioned hislord to avoid the wet, that the whole party betook themselves to theshelter of the oaks, in hopes of the rain passing away.Before them lay a considerable tract of road, upon which, after abouthalf an hour of heavy rain, the moon began to shine once more; and DeBlenau was about to proceed, when the sound of horses was heard upon thevery path which they had just passed. De Blenau and his party drew backas quietly as possible behind the trees, and though the horses' feetstill made some noise, the water dropping from the branches of theforest was enough to cover the sound. Scarcely, however, were theythemselves concealed, when a horseman appeared upon the road in asombre-coloured suit, with some one riding on his right hand, whom DeBlenau judged to be an inferior, from the bending position in which helistened to what the other said. Six servants followed at a littledistance, and a straggler brought up the rear, wringing the wet from theskirts of his doublet. One by one, they passed slowly by; the uncertainlight showing them to be well-armed and mounted, but still not shiningsufficiently to allow De Blenau the opportunity of considering theirfeatures, though he thought that the form of the first rider was in somedegree familiar to him. It was not unlike that of Lafemas, yet, as faras he could judge, taller and more erect. The cavalcade passed on, andwere seen winding down the road in the moonlight, till they cameopposite to a spot where some felled timber and blocks of stoneembarrassed the ground. Immediately that they arrived there, there was abright flash, the report of a carbine, and one of the horses fellsuddenly to the ground. In a moment, nine or ten horsemen, and two orthree on foot rushed forth from the wood; and the clashing of steel, thereport of pistols, and various cries of wrath or agony came sweepingupon the gale."Were it Lafemas himself," cried De Blenau, "this must not be! Enavant pour la France!" and dashing his rowels into the horse's side, hegalloped headlong down the road, followed by the Woodman, the Page, andthe redoubtable Jacques Chatpilleur.Two moments brought them to the scene of the combat, and the moonshining out seemed expressly to light the fray. The one party wasevidently to be distinguished by their black habits, the other by theirrusty cuirasses and morions. Directly in the way of De Blenau was theCavalier he had marked as he passed, contending with a man of almostgigantic strength; but, notwithstanding the superior force of thelatter, his antagonist still foiled him by his skilful defence, whensuddenly one of the robbers on foot attacked the Cavalier also behind.Thus beset, he turned to strike him down, when the tremendous Norman(for it was no other) caught his bridle rein, and urging the horse back,threw him to the ground. The robber on foot shortened the pike hecarried to plunge it in his body. But by this time De Blenau's party hadcome up; and the courageous aubergiste galloping on, bore the point ofhis long sword in a direct line forward, which catching the pikemanjust below the cuirass, spitted him, to use Jacques Chatpilleur's ownexpression, just like a widgeon.In the mean while, the Norman had turned upon De Blenau, and snapped apistol at his head, which, however, missed fire. Enraged at hisdisappointment, he threw the weapon from him, and spurring on his horse,aimed a tremendous blow at the Count, which was instantly parried, andreturned by a straightforward lunge that cut him above the eye, anddeluged his face in blood. Mad with the pain, and half-blinded with thegore, Marteville attempted once more the feat by which he had overthrownhis former antagonist; and, catching De Blenau's rein, urged his horseback with Herculean strength. In vain the Count spurred him forward; hesank upon his haunches, and was floundering in the fall, when De Blenau,finding it inevitable, let go the rein, fixed his knees firm in thesaddle, and raising his sword with both hands, discharged it with allhis force upon the head of the Norman. The true steel passed clear on,hewed through the iron morion, cleft through hair and skull, and sankdeep into his brain. He reeled in the saddle; his hands let go theirgrasp, and he fell headlong to the ground, while the horse of De Blenau,suddenly released from the pressure, rose up, and plunging forward trodhim under its feet. De Blenau lost not his presence of mind for amoment, and while his horse was yet in the spring, he aimed a blow atthe Gros St. Nicolas, who had been hurrying to the assistance of hiscaptain, which disabled his shoulder, and threw him from his horse."Sauve qui peut!" cried the Robber, starting up on his feet andrunning for the wood, "Sauve qui peut! The Captain is dead!""Sauve qui peut! Sauve qui peut!" rang among the Robbers, and in a fewminutes De Blenau and his party were left masters of the field. TheCount drew up his horse, exclaiming, "Do not follow! Do not follow! Letus look to the wounded;" and dismounting, he hurried to assist thefallen Cavalier, who was struggling to disengage himself from his horse."Next to God, Sir, I have to thank you," said the stranger, as soon ashe had risen. "But--is it possible! Monsieur de Blenau!" he exclaimed asthe moonlight gleamed on the countenance of the Count. "God of heaven, Ithought you were in Spain long ago!""Monsieur de Chavigni! or I am mistaken," said De Blenau. "But I knowthat I can trust to your honour, and therefore must say, that though mylate illness may have rendered me an outlaw, by detaining me in Franceafter my sentence of exile, yet I will not regret it, as it has given methe opportunity of serving the man to whom I am indebted for mylife.--There, Sir, is my hand."Chavigni embraced him warmly. "Let us look to the men who are wounded,Monsieur de Blenau," said he, "and then I will give you a piece of newswhich, however painful to me, will be satisfactory to you.--Cannot someone strike a light, that we may examine more carefully what has occurredon this unhappy spot; for I see many on the earth.""It shall be done in the turning of a spit, Monseigneur," said JacquesChatpilleur, who had already collected some dry wood; and who nowquickly produced a fire by means of the flint of a pistol.The scene that presented itself was a sad one. On the earth lay two ofChavigni's servants dead, and one desperately wounded. To these wasadded Henri de La Mothe, who had received a severe cut on the head, andwas stunned with the blow. Not far from the body of the Norman lay hiscompanion Callot, who was the pikeman despatched by the bellicoseaubergiste. In addition to these was a robber, whose head had beennearly severed from his body by the cutlas which was borne by Philip thewoodman, in his capacity of Lieutenant of the King's forests; and one soseverely wounded by a pistol-ball from the hand of Chavigni, that hiscompanions had been obliged to abandon him. From him they learned thatthe attack upon Chavigni had been preconcerted; that understanding hewas bending his steps towards Montpellier, Marteville had obtained exactinformation of his course; and finding that he must pass through theforest by Viviers, had laid in wait for him, with the expectation bothof revenge and plunder."And now, Monsieur de Blenau," said Chavigni, as soon as theirinvestigation ended, "whither does your immediate path lay? You know youcan trust me.""I do," said De Blenau. "I go first towards Viviers, to the Chateau ofthe late Marquis de Beaumont.""And I go there too," said Chavigni. "I am even now expected; for I sentforward a servant to announce my coming.""Indeed!" exclaimed De Blenau, "May I ask your errand?"A faint smile curled Chavigni's lip, which was uncommonly pale. "Youwill hear on my arrival," said he; "for I see you are ignorant of whathas lately taken place, though the couriers must have arrived in all thetowns three days ago.--But let us have our wounded brought along, and wewill proceed to the Chateau.--It cannot be far distant."The preparations were soon made--the Chateau was soon reached--andPauline de Beaumont was soon once more clasped in the arms of herlover.--But let all that pass."Madame," said Chavigni, advancing to the Marchioness, "you doubtlesswonder as much as Monsieur de Blenau, what can have brought me hither.But as I came to Montpellier, I had the King's commands to inform you,that the fine which was imposed upon your estates is remitted in full.And to you, Monsieur de Blenau, I have to announce, that your banishmentis at an end, for his Majesty has given permission to all exiles toreturn to France, with a very few exceptions, amongst which you are notincluded.--I need not tell you from these circumstances, that--theCardinal de Richelieu is dead!""Good God!" exclaimed De Blenau, "so soon!""Even so!" replied Chavigni. "Monsieur de Blenau, doubtless you arehappy--for he was your enemy.--But he was to me a friend--he was nearlya father, and I mourn for him.""May he rest in peace!" said De Blenau. "He was a great man. May he restin peace!"*       *       *       *       *Little more remains to be said; for this long history draws towards itsclose. The sorrows, the dangers, and the difficulties, which had so longsurrounded De Blenau and Pauline, had now passed away, like the stormsof a summer day, that overcloud the morning, but leave the evening calmand fair. They were united--in the beautiful valleys of Languedoc, andin the fair scenes where they had first met, they continued to live onin happiness and love, till the hand of time led them gently to thegrave.That generation and its events have passed away; but there still remainsone record of the hero of this tale: for in a little village church,between Argentire and Viviers, stands a fine marble tomb, with thefigure of a knight sculptured in a recumbent posture. Underneath isengraven the date--one thousand six hundred and eighty-five, with thesimple inscription,"Ci git Claude, Comte de Blenau."NOTES."Aprs toutes les perscutions qui furent faites  plusieursparticuliers, le Roy suivant son naturel s'abandonna tout entier aupouvoir de son favori. Il se vit rduit  la vie la plus mlancolique etla plus misrable du monde, sans suite, sans cour, sans pouvoir, et, parconsquent, sans plaisir, et sans honneur. Ainsi se sont passsplusieurs annes de sa vie  St. Germain, o il vivoit comme unparticulier, et pendant que ses armes prenoient des villes et gagnoientdes batailles, il s'amusait  prendre des oiseaux."Memoires pour servir  l'Histoire d'Anne d'Autriche.*       *       *       *       *"Les ennemis de la Reine pour russir encore mieux dans les desseinsqu'ils avoient de la faire har du Roy son mari, se servirent fortementcontre elle des intelligences qu'elle avoit en Espagne."Madame de Motteville, Mem. de la Reine.*       *       *       *       *"Mais la Reine m'a cont qu'un jour il (le Cardinal) lui parla d'un airtrop galland pour un ennemi; et qu'il lui fit un discours fortpassionn; mais qu'ayant voulu lui rpondre avec colre et mpris, leRoy dans ce moment toit entre dans le cabinet o elle toit, qui par saprsence interrompit sa rponse."Madame de Motteville.*       *       *       *       *"Le Chevalier de Jars fut le plus maltrait, et comme il a t depuistout  fait de mes amis, et que dans sa perscution il y a quelqueschoses qui sont dignes de l'estime des honntes gens, je veux en marquerles principaux endroits qui pourront faire voir de quelle trempe toitson ame, quelle toit sa probit, la vigueur de son esprit et lagrandeur de son courage. Il fut onze mois dans la Bastille enferm dansun cachot. Il fut pris en hyver, et l'habit de velours noir qu'il yporta demeura toujours sur son corps tant qu'il habita dans cetteeffroyable demeure. On l'interrogea quatre-vingt fois avec toute laseverit possible, et il repondit toujours avec bon sens et fermet,sans se laisser entamer sur aucun chapitre, sans se couper en sesreponses, ni sans embarrasser personne. On l'en fit sortir pour le menerTroyes avec toutes les rudes apparences d'un homme qu'on alloit menerla mort....*       *       *       *       *A Troyes on lui donna pour Juge Lafemas, celui qui l'avoit djtourment dans la Bastille, qu'on appelloit le Bourreau du Cardinal.On accompagna celui-l d'un nombre suffisant de Juges pour lui faire sonprocs, qui ne furent pas plus honntes gens que lui. Il y travailla partoutes les voies que ces sortes de gens scavent pratiquer, et il futfortement second des autres. Ils voulurent lui acheter des fauxtemoins, &c....*       *       *       *       *Lafemas avoit promis au Ministre qu'il le tourmenteroit si bien, qu'ilen tireroit  peu pres ce qu'il en desiroit scavoir, et que sur peu demal il trouverait les moyens de lui faire son procs; selon les maniresmmes du Cardinal, qui,  ce que j'ai oi conter  ses amis, avoitaccoutum de dire qu'avec deux lignes de l'criture d'un homme onpouvoit faire le procs au plus innocent, parceque on pouvoit sur cettematire ajuster si bien les affaires que facilement on y pouvoit fairetrouver ce qu'on voudroit."Sur ce fondement Lafemas travaille au jugement du Chevalier de Jars; ille menace, il l'interroge et fait tout ce qu'une ame pleine de lchetest capable de faire....*       *       *       *       *En effet, il fut men sur la sellette, o fort constamment il rcusapour Juge Lafemas, lui reprocha toutes ses lchets, l'appella uneseconde fois sclrat, et avertit ses autres Juges de ce que Lafemasavoit promis au Cardinal contre lui. Il fut interrog tout de nouveau,et demeura trois heures en cet tat. Il se defendit si courageusementqu'il confondit ceux qui le vouloient perdre et qui avoient du moins ledessein de lui faire trahir ses amis. Sortant de l, le Prevt de l'Iles'approcha de lui et lui dit, 'Monsieur, bon courage! j'espre bien pourvous, car on m'a dit de vous ramener dans la prison o vous tes, etc'est l'ordinaire de mener ceux qu'on va condamner  mort dans un autrelieu.' Le Chevalier lui dit du mme ton dont il avoit accoutum decensurer les choses qu'il n'approuvoit pas. 'Mon ami, ces pendars l mevont condamner, je le vois bien  leur mine. Il faut avoir patience, etle Cardinal enragera de voir que je me moque de lui et de ses tortures.'*       *       *       *       *Ayant t condamn, on le mena sur l'chaffaut. Il y parut plein decourage et d'honneur. Il se moqua de ses ennemis, montrant de recevoirla mort avec une grande fermet. Etant prt d'avoir la tte tranche, onlui vint apporter sa grace."Madame de Motteville.THE END.