Project Gutenberg's Attila., by G. P. R. James (George Payne Rainsford)This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/licenseTitle: Attila.A Romance. Vol. I.Author: G. P. R. James (George Payne Rainsford)Release Date: August 6, 2015 [EBook #49634]Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ATTILA. ***Produced by Transcribed by Charles Bowen from page scansprovided by Google Books (Harvard College Library)Transcriber's Notes:1. Page scan source: Vol. I from Harvard College Libraryhttps://books.google.com/books?id=NxQ0LzIgW1UC2. The diphthongs ae and oe are represented by[ae] and [oe] respectively.ATTILA.A ROMANCE.BY THE AUTHOR OF"THE GIPSY," "ONE IN A THOUSAND," &c, &c.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.NEW YORK:HARPER & BROTHERS, 82 CLIFF-STREET.1838.TOWALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, ESQ.,THIS BOOK,AS A FEEBLE TESTIMONY OF STRONG PERSONAL REGARDAND SINCERE ADMIRATION,IS DEDICATED, BY HIS FRIEND,G. P. R. JAMES.ADVERTISEMENT.In giving this book to the public I have but little to explain. Thereader who takes it up may expect to find something respecting thePrincess Honoria. He will, however, find nothing. All that we know ofher history is uninteresting, except to those who love to dwell uponthe pruriencies of a degraded state of society: all that we know ofher character is disgusting to such as love purity and dignity ofmind. It would be tedious to the reader to explain why the author hasthought fit to alter several names of the persons acting prominentparts in the story of Attila. In so doing he has consulted principallyhis own ear; and in a few other deviations which he has made from thecourse of that great monarch's history, he has consulted his ownconvenience. In regard, however, to the change which he hasrepresented as taking place in the demeanour of Attila, hisabandonment of the simple habits which at first distinguished him, andhis dereliction from the calm equanimity which he displayed in hisearly intercourse with the Romans, the author believes that he isjustified by the records of history as well as the course of nature.He is inclined to think, also, that if, in regard to the facts ofAttila's death, we could display the chameleon truth, in the broadlight of day, without any of the shades and hues with which time andcircumstances have surrounded her, we should find her colour such ashe has represented it; but this, of course, must ever remain in doubt.A T T I L A.CHAPTER I.A LANDSCAPE IN DALMATIA.Music was in the air, and loveliness was spread out over the earth asa mantle.There was a voice of many waters--the bland musical tone of mountainstreams singing as they wend their way over the smooth round pebblesof their hilly bed towards the sea. And the song of life, too, washeard from every field, and every glade, and every valley; thetrilling of innumerable birds, the hum of insect myriads, the lowingof distant cattle, winding down from the uplands to pen or fold, theplaintive, subdued bleating of the patient sheep, the merry voice ofthe light-hearted herd as he led home his flock from the hills, aftera long warm southern day in the maturity of spring. Manifold sweetsounds--all blended into one happy harmony, softened by distance,rendered more melodious to the heart by associations felt but notdefined, and made more touching by the soft evening hour--filled thewhole air, and spread a calm, bright, contemplative charm over thelistening senses.The eye, too, could find the same delight as the ear, equal in depth,similar in character; for though sweet April had sunk in the warm armsof May, still, even in that land of the bright south, the reign ofsummer had not yet begun: not a leaf, not a flower, not a blade ofgrass had lost a hue under the beams of the sun, and many a balmy andrefreshing shower, during a long and humid spring, had nourished theverdure and enlivened the bloom.From the high round knoll upon the left, crowned with the five tallcypresses which perhaps flourished as seedlings on that spot in theyoung and palmy days of Greece, might be seen that unrivalled viewwhich has never yet found eye to gaze on it uncharmed--that viewwhich, of all prospects in the world, has greatest power, whensuddenly beheld, to make the heart beat fast, and the breath comethick with mingled feelings of wonder and delight. On one side, atabout a mile's distance, where the ground sloped gently down towardsthe sea, rose the palace of Diocletian, vast and extensive, massywithout being heavy, and equally sublime from its beauty and itsdimensions. Clear, upon the bright back-ground of the evening sky, cutthe graceful lines of the architecture; and, though a sudden break inthe outline of the frieze, with the massy form of a fallen capitalrolled forward before the steps of the magnificent portico whichfronted the sea, told that the busy, unceasing, unsparing hand ofman's great enemy had already laid upon that splendid building thecrumbling touch of ruin; yet, as, it then stood, with the setting sunbehind it, and the deep blue shadows of the evening involving all theminute parts of the side that met the eye, the effects of decay evenadded to the beauty of the object, by making the straight lines of thearchitecture at once contrast and harmonize with the gracefulirregularities of nature whereby it was surrounded. Several groups ofold and stately trees, too, still more diversified the prospect onthat side; and through the pillars of the portico might be caught theglistening line of the bright sea where it met and mingled with thesky.Behind, and to the right hand, stretching far away to the north, rosemountain upon mountain, in all the fanciful forms and positions intowhich those earth-born giants cast themselves in Greece, and over themall was thrown that lustrous purple which in those lands well deservesthe name of the "magic light of evening."Between the knoll of cypresses, however, and those far hills robed intheir golden splendour, lay a wide tract of country, gently slopingupward in a thousand sweeping lines, with here and there an abruptrock or insulated mound suddenly towering above the rest, whilescattered clumps of tall old trees, rich rounded masses of forest,villas, farms, vineyards, and olive grounds, filled up the interveningspace; and had all been as it seemed--had all those farms beentenanted, had none of those villas been in ruins--would have presenteda scene of prosperity such as the world has never known but once.Still decay had made no very great progress; still the land was richlycultivated; still the population, though not dense, was sufficient;and as the eye ran along the innumerable little promontories andheadlands of the bay, might be seen, rising up above some slightirregularities of the ground, a part of the buildings of the small butprosperous town of Salona. Close by the side of that knoll ofcypresses, breaking impetuously from a bank above, dashed on thebright and sparkling Hyader; now fretting and foaming with the largerocks amid which a part of its course was bound; now prattlingplayfully with the motley pebbles which in other parts strewed itsbed; now dashing like a fierce steed all in foam where it leapedover the crag into the sunshine; and then, where its clear bluewaters spread out uninterrupted under the cool shadow of a hill,seeming--like time to a young and happy heart--to stand still in calmand peaceful enjoyment, even while it was flowing away as quickly asever.The eye that followed the Hyader down its course--and there was an eyethat did so--rested on the bright and glowing west, and on thefairest, the most entrancing object of all that magic scene; forthere, stretched out beneath the setting sun, lay the gleaming watersof the Adriatic, studded all along its shores with a thousand purpleislands which rose out of that golden sea like gems.The air was calm and tranquil; the sky, the unrivalled deep blue sky,which hangs over that most lovely sea, was without a cloud, varyingwith one soft and equable declension from the intense purple zenith tothe warm rosy hues that glowed in the far west. The sea, also, wassmooth and peaceful, and would have seemed unbroken by a wave, had nothere and there a sudden bending line of light darted over the bosom ofthe waters, and told that they were moved in the evening light by thebreath of the breeze.Thus appeared the whole scene, when, from the opposite side of thebay, a white sail was seen to glide forward, as if coming from Salonatowards the palace of Diocletian, or the little village of Aspalathus.Slowly and peacefully it moved along, giving one more image of calmand tranquil enjoyment; and while it steered upon its way, four sweetvoices, sometimes joined in chorus by several deeper tones, brokeforth from the mound of cypresses, singing:--A HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN.I."Slow, slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,Thy course of beneficence done;As glorious go down to thy Thetis' warm breastAs when thy bright race was begun.For all thou hast doneSince thy rising, oh sun!May thou and thy Maker be bless'd!Thou hast scatter'd the night from thy broad golden way,Thou hast given us thy light through a long happy day,Thou hast roused up the birds, thou hast waken'd the flowers.To chant on thy path, and to perfume the hours--Then slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,And rise again beautiful, blessing, and bless'd!II."Slow, slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,Yet pause but a moment to shedOne warm look of love on the earth's dewy breast.Ere the starr'd curtain fall round thy bed,And to promise the time,When, awaking sublime,Thou shall rush all refresh'd from thy rest.Warm hopes drop like dews from thy life-giving hand,Teaching hearts closed in darkness like flowers to expand;Dreams wake into joys when first touch'd by thy light,As glow the dim waves of the sea at thy sight--Then slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,And rise again beautiful, blessing, and bless'd!III."Slow, slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,Prolonging the sweet evening hour;Then robe again soon in the morn's golden vest,To go forth in thy beauty and power.Yet pause on thy way,To the full height of day,For thy rising and setting are bless'd!When thou com'st after darkness to gladden our eyes,Or departest in glory, in glory to rise,May hope and may prayer still be woke by thy rays,And thy going be mark'd by thanksgiving and praise![1]Then slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,And rise again beautiful, blessing, and bless'd!"---------------[Footnote 1: It may not, perhaps, be unnecessary to remind the readerthat Christianity, though established in both the eastern and westernempires, was still far from universal; and even in the minds of itsmost enthusiastic votaries was strangely mingled with the picturesquesuperstitions of a former creed; so that the same man was often aChristian in belief, who was pagan in many of his habits and almostall his familiar expressions.]---------------CHAPTER II.THE ACTORS IN THE SCENE.The voices that sung were sweet, thrillingly sweet, and the music towhich the verse was wedded of that dreamy, wandering kind whichapproaches more nearly to the tones of an [AE]olian harp than to anyregular composition. It was, indeed, full of a wild and deliciousmelody, which was sometimes solemn and sublime, sometimes low andplaintive, and the same general theme might be heard running throughthe whole; but often the air wandered wide, like a bird upon the wing,and caught a note or two of a gladder or more joyous character, whichbrightened the general solemnity of the strain, like hope breaking inupon a life of grief. Music had not then reached that perfection whichit has since attained; but there was a touching beauty in its freshsimplicity which is now but seldom found. It possessed the freeunfettered charms of a graceful nature, cultivated, but not stiffened,by art, and it still went hand in hand with the sister spirit ofpoetry, in the land where both had birth.But the hymn which had just floated on the air derived peculiarsweetness from the fine harmony of the voices which sung it. It seemedthe varied tones of one family, where each knew every note in thevoice of the other, and modulated his own to suit it, with that spiritof love in the breasts of all, whereof the sweetest harmony that artcan compose is but the musical image. In the chorus, however, therejoined less cultivated singers; but, nevertheless, the voices weregenerally fine, and there was an enthusiastic eagerness on the tonguesthat repeated--"Then slow, mighty wanderer, sink to thy rest,And rise again beautiful, blessing, and bless'd!"which spoke of that happiness under the bright sun that was thensinking slowly to the breast of ocean, which is the poetry and melodyof life.Under the five tall cypresses, and partly reclining on the bank thatsloped to the bright Hyader, sat the group from which those soundsproceeded. It was separated, indeed, into two distinct parts;for--with a very short space of green turf between them and those theyserved--lay stretched out in various attitudes, some raising the headupon the hand, some reclining the chest upon the folded arms, somesupported on the elbow, eight or nine slaves of both sexes.There was nothing, however, in the countenances of any there whichspoke of the bitterness of slavery. There were no signs in their facesor their demeanour of the iron entering into their soul; and though,perhaps, no portion of human nature is originally so debased, and nocondition of bondage can be rendered so gentle, that the chain willnot gall and the load will not oppress, yet the lot was then common,and the accursed name of slave comprehended nearly, if not fully, onehalf of the earth's denizens. In the faces of those who lay stretchedeasily but not intrusively beside those to whom they were bound bythat inhuman tie, there might be traced a line of care--perhaps ashade, it might be, of melancholy--gathered by long-preserved andfruitless remembrances of scenes, and objects, and persons far away;and on none, but the countenance of one white-teethed Nubian girl, anda young glad boy, whose life was in the present hour, and to whosemind the past and the future were but a vapoury cloud, was seen thelight and laughing merriment of a heart which has known no sorrows inthe past. With all the rest, contentment with their lot seemedchastened by griefs experienced and gone by. They could smile, theycould sing when occasion called for mirth. Their minds were notirresponsive to sights or sounds of joy; but with them it was from thewell, not the fountain, that the sweet waters of enjoyment sprung:they sparkled not up spontaneously, but required to be drawn forth bythe hand of another.Yet if one, remembering their bondage, turned to gaze upon the groupnear which they sat, the condition of their feelings was easilyunderstood; for the forms and faces that were there--not in theoutward lineaments alone, but in the beaming forth of the divinespirit, as much expressed in the air and movements of the whole bodyas in the heart's interpreter, the face--told that the taskmasterswere of that kindly nobility of soul which, in after years, won for awhole class (that did not always merit the distinction) that mostexpressive name of gentle.Under the cypresses, not exactly where the shade fell--for the sun,near the horizon, had lost his meridian heat, and the western breezeswept over the cool bright waters of the Adriatic--were seated threewomen and a boy of some fourteen years of age. They were evidently ofthe highest race of the land in which they lived; and had nothing elsebespoken their rank, the broad deep border of purple, of triple die,which edged the snowy robe of the eldest of the party, would havedistinguished her as a Roman lady of patrician blood. She was scarcelybeyond the middle age; and time had treated her beauty leniently.Somewhat of the elastic grace, and all the slight pliant outline ofearly youth, was gone, but in contour and dignity much, too, had beengained; and the eye, more calm and fixed, was as bright and lustrous,the teeth as white and perfect, as ever. The hair, drawn up andknotted on the crown of the head, was still full and luxuriant; but,meandering through its dark and wavy masses, might here and there beseen a line of silver gray; while the cheek, which had once been aswarm and glowing as the morning dawn of her own radiant land, sorrowscalmly borne, but not the less deeply felt, had rendered as pale asthe twilight of the evening just ere night reigns supreme.Her dress was plain and unadorned, of the finest materials and thepurest hues; but the gems and ornaments then so common were altogetherabsent. The consciousness of beauty, which she might once have felt,was now altogether forgotten; its vanity she had never known. As muchgrace as health, perfect symmetry of form, and noble education frominfancy could give, she displayed in every movement; but it was thecalm and matronly grace, where all is ease, and tranquillity, andself-possession. The same placid charm reigned in the expression ofher countenance. She seemed to look with benevolence on all. Nay,more, as if the sorrows which had reached her in her high station hadtaught her that in every bosom, however well concealed, there is, orwill be, some store of grief, some memory, some regret, somedisappointment, there mingled with the gentleness of her aspect anexpression of pity, or, perhaps, its better name were sympathy, whichexisted really within, and formed a tie between her heart and that ofevery other human thing.She was, indeed, to use the beautiful words of the poet, "kind as thesun's bless'd influence."[2] Yet the bright dark eye, the proudarching lip, and the expansive nostrils, seemed to speak of a natureoriginally less calm, of days when the spirit was less subdued. Timeand grief, however, are mighty tamers of the most lion-like heart; andit was with that look of pity, mingling with tender pleasure, that shegazed down upon a beautiful girl of, perhaps, thirteen years of age,who, leaning fondly on her knees, as the hymn concluded, looked up inher face for sympathetic feelings, while the sweet sounds stilltrembled on her full rosy lips.---------------[Footnote 2: Cowley.]---------------Between the matron and the girl there was little resemblance, exceptinasmuch as each was beautiful; and though the lineaments, perhaps,regarded as mere lines, took in some degree the same general form, yetthere were too many shades of difference to admit the idea that thosetwo fair beings stood in the dear relationship of mother and child,although the fond, relying, clinging affection displayed in the looksof the younger, and the tender anxiety of the matron's smile as shegazed down upon her companion's face, argued affections no less strongbetween them than such a tie might have produced.Eudochia--for so was the younger called--offered a lovely specimen ofthat sort of beauty which, however rare in Italy even now, when thenative blood of the children of the land has been mingled with that ofmany of the fair-haired nations of the north, we find from thewritings of Petronius to have been not uncommon in his days. Her hairwas of a light brown, with a golden gleam upon it, as if, wherever itbent in its rich wavy curls, it caught and shone in the bright rays ofthe sun. Her eyes were of a soft hazel, though the long, sweepingblack lashes made them look darker than they were: but her skin was ofthat brilliant fairness which did indeed exceed the"Expolitum ebur indicum;"and the rose glowed through it on the cheeks, as pure and clear as inthose lands where the veiled sun shines most soft and tenderly. Herfeatures were, indeed, more Greek than Roman; but her complexionspoke, and not untruly, of a mixture in her veins of what was thencalled barbarian blood by the proud children of the empire. Her motherhad been the daughter of a German prince in alliance with Rome; butthe Romans of that day had learned to envy the noble Paulinus hissuccess with the beautiful child of the wealthy and powerful barbarianchief. Too short a time, indeed, had their union lasted; for thoughEudochia had drawn her first nourishment from her mother's bosom, yet,six months after her birth, the fair wife of Paulinus had left him tomourn her death with two motherless children. He had continued to holdher memory in solitary affection, filling up, as is so common withman, the vacant place left by love in the shrine of his heart with thedarker and sterner form of ambition; and while he led forward his sonTheodore in the same path, he left his daughter on the Dalmatianshore, with one whose kindred blood and generous nature ensured to thefair girl all a mother's tenderness and a mother's care. For her alonethe lips of Eudochia had learned to pronounce those sweetest of words,my mother--for her alone had her heart learned to feel the thrill offilial love.The affection, however, of the Lady Flavia--for so was called theelder of whom we have spoken--was divided. For the love of man, womanhas but one place in her heart, but maternal tenderness has many; andthe agony of Niobe was not less for every child that died than if shehad had but one. Flavia looked upon Eudochia as her child, and lovedher as such; but the two others, of whom we have said that group wascomposed, were in reality her children.Ammian, the boy, was like his mother in features and complexion, butnot in character. More of his dead father's nature had descended tohim, more of the wild and daring spirit which, sporting with perilsand dangers, contemning pain, and laughing at fear, found food for abright and eager imagination in scenes and circumstances which, toothers, were full of nothing but horror and dismay. His pastime, as aboy, was to climb the mountains, and spring from rock to rock acrossthe yawning chasms; to stand gazing down over the dizzy side of theprecipice, and to drink in the sublimity of the scene below; to dashthrough the wild waves when the southwest wind rolled them inmountains on the shore, or to mingle with the pagan inhabitants, whichstill filled many of the villages near, and to watch without takingpart in those sacrifices which were prohibited under pain of death bythe Christian emperors, but which often took place even in the openface of day. His mother put no check upon his hazardous pleasures, forshe was Roman enough to wish that her children might never know thename of fear. But yet her heart sometimes sunk with a chilly dreadwhen she witnessed his wild exploits; for though the qualities whichprompted them were those for which she had loved his father, yet shecould not forget that the same daring spirit had led that father todeath, by barbarian hands, in the wilds of Pannonia.There was one more in the group under the cypresses, and one that mustnot be passed over in silence. She, like Eudochia, was reclining byher mother's side; but had the great Florentine sought two lovelymodels from which to depict night and day, none could have been foundequal to these two beautiful girls. Ildica,[3] however, was fully twoyears older than Eudochia, and those two years made a greatdifference. Eudochia was a child; Ildica was no longer so. Eudochiawas the violet, but Ildica was the rose. Her form, too, spoke it;youth was in every trace: but there was the rounded contour, thegraceful sweeping lines, which tell that nature's brightest effort toproduce beauty is full and complete. She was at that age when thecauseless blush comes frequent, and the unbidding sigh is first known;when the cheek will sometimes glow as if with shame at the innocentconsciousness of loveliness; and her heart tells woman that she wascreated for others. Through the transparent cheek of the Dalmatiangirl the eloquent blood played apparent at every word, and the long,lustrous, deep black eyes, the very eyelids of which seemed floodedwith light, spoke of feelings within that snowy bosom which were yetto acquire intensity and fire. And yet Ildica fancied herself still achild. So gradual, so calm, had as yet been the transition, as theiryears passed away in that remote spot without any of the cares, theturmoils, the passions, and the follies of courts and of citiesbreaking the tranquil current of their days, that she hardly knew thetwo years which had effected so great a change in her being had passedotherwise than in infancy. She had never very eagerly sought the lightsports and pastimes of Eudochia, and others of the happy age: she hadalways shown a disposition to meditation and to feeling. It was notthat she wanted cheerfulness; far from it; but it was, that throughher very gayety was seen a train of deeper thought. There was acharacter of greater intensity in all she did than is usual in earlyyouth. She loved music, she loved poetry, she loved every art; and hermother saw her own mind reflected in that of her daughter, with ashade, perhaps, of more passionate energy derived from the characterof her father.---------------[Footnote 3: The learned reader will perceive that I have changed thelast syllable of this name, for the sake of a more regular femininetermination than the original gives, in sound at least, to an Englishear. Let me acknowledge at once, also, that I have followed the samebold plan throughout, changing everything that did not suit my purpose.]---------------Thus sat they by the bright stream of the Hyader, whose clear waterserved to mingle with the wine of their light evening meal, enjoying,with sweet tranquillity of heart, the loveliness of a scene which,remembered from his earliest days, had lured Diocletian thither, somecentury before, from all the charms of power and empire, to spend hislatter hours in a remote province and a private station. Simple asthat meal was, consisting of nothing but light cakes of a fine flour,with some dried fruits and some early strawberries, it was moredelicious to those who ate it, in that fair scene and that happy hour,than all the innumerable dishes of a Roman supper. Still there seemedsomething wanting; for--as the last stanza of the hymn was sung, andEudochia lay reclining on the Lady Flavia's lap, and gazing up in herexpressive face--the eyes of Ildica had followed the course of theHyader down towards the sea, and rested with a longing, anxious lookupon the boat that, with slow and easy motion, as the light but steadywind impelled it over the waters, steered onward, for some time,towards that part of the bay near which stood the little village ofAspalathus, a sort of appendage to the palace of Diocletian. Ammian,her brother, had remarked it too, and watched it also; but in a fewminutes its course was changed, and its prow turned towards one of theislands. Ildica said not a word, but she bent down her eyes on thegrass, and plucked one of the purple crocuses which checkered thegreen whereon she sat."He will not come to-day," said her brother, as if quite sure that thesame thoughts were in his bosom and his sister's at that moment; "and,besides, he would not appear in a solitary boat like that. Ten suchboats would not have held the gorgeous train which followed him whenhe came last year to take Theodore away.""But remember, Ammian, my son," said Flavia, smiling at the eagerlooks of her two children, "remember, when last he came, our cousinPaulinus was sent to Dalmatia on the emperor's service, as count ofthe offices, and now he comes but as a private man to see hisdaughter. He is not one of those degraded Romans who in the presentday never travel without an army of domestics. See, the boat haschanged its course again. It did but bear up against the current ofwind between the islands. Eudochia, my sweet child, it is perhaps yourfather after all."As she spoke, the boat, catching the favourable breeze, came morerapidly towards the land, and in a moment after was hidden from theireyes by the wavy ground which lay between them and the Adriatic. "Run,Aspar, run," cried Flavia to one of the slaves; "run and see where theboat lands. Shall we return homeward, Eudochia? we may meet himsooner."Ildica exclaimed, "Oh, yes!" but Eudochia and Ammian reminded theirmother that they had promised to meet Paulinus on the spot where theyhad parted from him, even where they then sat; and, while they waitedin the heart-beating moments of expectation, the light-footed slaveagain appeared upon the upland, which he had cleared like a hunteddeer, and stood waving his hand, as if to tell that their hopes wereverified.For a moment or two he paused, looking back towards the sea, and then,running forward to the cypress, he said, "Yes, lady, yes! they havereached the shore, and are coming hither. I saw them spring from theboat to the landing-place of the palace; and while several ran uptowards the portico bearing baggage, four took the path between therocks which leads up hither by the field of Eusebius, the gardener.""Was my brother there, good Aspar?" cried Eudochia, eagerly; "was mybrother there too?""I could not distinguish, sweet one," replied the slave; "the distancewas too long for my sight, and the sun was directly in my eyes; butthe one that came first was slight in form, and seemed more like yourbrother than the Count Paulinus himself. There was the lightness ofyouth, too, in his step, as he bounded up over the rocks like a fawntowards its doe!"Flavia smiled, and Ildica smiled too; but as she did so there was aslight, a very slight change of colour in her cheek. It grew paler;but it was not the paleness of either apprehension or disappointment;it only spoke of some intense feelings busy at her heart, though whatthey were she herself knew not. At that moment the slave exclaimed,"Lo, lo! he comes!" and all eyes were turned towards the upland.CHAPTER III.THE MEETING.The lower edge of the sun's broad golden disk touched, or seemed totouch, the rippling waters of the Adriatic, and sea and sky were allin one general glow, when the form of the expected guest rose over theslope, and, with joyful arms outstretched towards the group under thecypresses, he appeared clear and defined upon the bright expansebehind him. The figure was that of a youth of eighteen or nineteenyears of age, tall for his time of life, and of that form whichpromises great after strength. As he stood there, indeed, with hisfigure partly concealed by the mantle which fell from his shoulders,and with the smooth features, the unfurrowed brow, and beardless chinof youth, turned from the searching rays of the sun, one might haveattributed to him many more years than he had in reality numbered; butthere was the bounding joy of boyhood still in his steps, as, followedby three persons, among whom the eye of Flavia sought in vain forPaulinus, he sprang across the sloping ground to meet so many that heloved. To Flavia his first salute was given in the warm, the touching,the affectionate kiss of filial love; calling her, as he did so, bythe tender name which his heart always willingly granted to her whohad watched his infancy and formed his boyhood, "My mother!" His nextglance was, certainly, to Ildica, but his words and his embrace weregiven, first, to his sister Eudochia, and then even to Ammian, whom healso called "his brother."The words, however, were few, and the embrace short, ere he turned toIldica, and took her hand. But his aspect was for a moment timid anduncertain, as if he knew not well in what words and what manner he wasto greet her. Her eye, however, was full of light; her lip smiled withthe irrepressible spirit of joy; her breath seemed to come short withsome thrilling emotion in her bosom; and Theodore, growing bolder asher hand touched his, drew her, too, to his arms, and pressed a warmerkiss upon her lips. To her he would not say "My sister!" though hebegan those words which he had so often used towards her; but hestopped short, and his lips murmured, "My--my Ildica!"If any one marked the agitation of either of those two young and happybeings, it was among the slaves; for Eudochia and Ammian had no eyesas yet for the slighter indications of the heart's inmost feelings;and Flavia, without any other observation, asked eagerly, "But whereis Paulinus? Where is your father, Theodore.""Alas, my mother," replied the youth, "he has been disappointed, andwould not make me a sharer therein. Obliged to go into Cappadocia bythe emperor's commands, he proceeds from C[ae]sarea to escort theEmpress Eudoxia to Jerusalem. But he has promised, if fate bepropitious, to join us all here on his return. He would not let mebear him company; but having given me the charge of some slightbusiness at Salona, left me to hasten hither, and wait his coming.""Let us return homeward, then, Theodore," said the matron, "and youshall tell us all the news wherewith your young and ever active mindis loaded. I am sure you have not yet learned, my son, to value allthe things of the world according to their real lightness, and tosuffer what the idle multitude call great events to pass you by asmatters which have been acted over and over again a thousand timesalready, and to be enacted still a million times more in the ages yetto come. Heaven forbid that you should have acquired, since you leftus, such sorrowful wisdom! though your father writes to me that youhave become a man, whereas you left us a boy. But you linger as if youwould fain stay here.""I ordered the boat to come round hither," replied the youth, "when Ifound you were all here; and I would willingly gaze again upon allthese lovely things. I have beheld many lands, dear Ildica," he added,turning naturally towards her with whom his heart held the nearestcommunion--"I have beheld many lands since I left you all on this veryspot; Athens, the city of Constantine, Ida, and Olympus. My feet haveeven trodden Tempe; and yet there is no scene so beautiful to my eyesas that lovely sea, with Bratia, and Bubua, and Olyntha, rising likeliving sapphires from its golden bosom, and those grand Autariatianhills, leading up the soul's flight to heaven."Without further question, they all once more laid themselves down uponthe turf; feeling that Theodore would gladly see the sun set in thatspot with which so many memories of early happiness were associated;and for a few minutes they left him in silence to enjoy the delight ofhis return. He gazed round the prospect; and it was easy to see thatit was not alone the loveliness that his eye rested on which busiedhis thoughts, but that remembrance was eagerly unclasping with herfairy touch the golden casket of the past, and displaying, one by one,the treasured and gemlike memories of many joyful hours. As he gazed,the last effulgent spot of the sun's orb sunk below the sea; and heturned his look upon Ildica, on whose hand his own had accidentallyfallen. Her eyes were full of liquid light; and her cheek was glowingas warmly as that sky from which the sun had just departed."And now, Theodore," said Flavia, with a smile, "tell us what tidingsyou bring; and first, before one word of the wide public news, say,what of your father? How is he in health? how fares he at the court?Is he as much loved as ever?""I had forgotten," replied Theodore, "in the joy of coming back--inthe dreamlike and scarcely certain feeling of being here once moreamong you all--I had forgotten everything else. Paulinus is well, mymother; and his favour with the emperor and empress higher than ever,though he is not loved by Chrysapheus; but he fears him not. Here,Zeno!" he continued, addressing one of the servants who had followedhim, and who had now mingled with the slaves of Flavia--"give me thecase which I bade you bring;" and from a richly-chased silver casketwhich the slave laid beside him he drew forth a string of large andperfect pearls. "These, Eudochia," he said, throwing them over hissister's neck, "these from the empress, for her goddaughter; andthis," he added, taking the rich collar of emeralds which laybelow--"and this from my father, Paulinus, for his dear Ildica. Manywere the messages of love," he continued, as he placed the splendidpresent sent by his father in the hand of the beautiful girl whom itwas to adorn, and, with the playfulness of boyhood not yet passedaway, twined, smiling, the links of emeralds round her arm--"many werethe messages of love my father bade me give to all; and to you, mymother, I bear this letter: but let me be the first to tell you thatyour possession of the palace is confirmed by the emperor, and thatthe estates withheld from you by an unjust judge are restored.""Thank you, my son, thank you," replied Flavia, opening the threadwith which the letter was bound round; "but this light is too faint toenable me to decipher your father's epistle. Let us to the boat, myTheodore, and so homeward; for I long to learn more of what has passedat Byzantium, and the twilight is every moment getting a grayer hue."The youth lingered no longer, but rose with all the rest; and whileFlavia, talking to Ammian, who often looked behind, led the way overthe upland and down the path towards the sea, Theodore followed, atsome little distance, with Eudochia clinging to his left arm, and withhis right hand clasping that of Ildica. As they went wandering onwardthrough the sweet-smelling copses of myrtle, which sheltered thegrounds of a neighbouring garden from the east wind, Eudochia asked athousand questions of her brother, and marvelled much that he hadgrown so tall and strong in the short absence of nine months. Ildicasaid not a word; but she listened to the tones of his voice as hereplied to his sister; she felt the touch of his hand as it held hers;she saw the brother of her love--the more than brother--returned froma far distance and a long absence; and a new happiness that she hadnever known before filled her heart with emotions too intense forspeech. Did she know what she felt? did she investigate the nature ofthe busy, tumultuous sensations that then possessed her bosom?Neither! the absence of one with whom she had dwelt in affection fromher infancy had, indeed, taught her that there were strange feelingsin her heart, different from any that she had ever experienced before;but, oh! sweet and happy skill of woman, she had closed her eyesagainst all investigation of what those feelings were, lest she shouldfind anything mingling with them which might render them less blessed.It was not for her to discover for herself that which was reserved foranother to explain.The considerate slaves lingered somewhat farther still behind, caringfor the cups and vessels which had served the evening meal, andlistening with the wondering ears of hermits to the news brought bytheir fellows from the capital of the Eastern world. Much, too, hadthose slaves to tell of all the splendid scenes which were hourlytaking place in Constantinople, and the high favour and honour oftheir master, Paulinus, at the imperial court. Each feeling hisimportance increased by the honours and virtues of his lord, exaltedin no measured terms the power and dignity of Paulinus; and to haveheard the praises of his menials, one might believe that he excelledin learning and in talents the greatest men of literature's mostgolden days, and rivalled in the field the most renowned warriors ofeither Greece or Rome. One thing, at all events, was to be gatheredfrom their discourse, and to be received without abatement; which was,that he possessed the great and happy talent of making himself lovedby those who served him. Such, indeed, was his character; dignified,but not haughty, to his equals; respectful, but not slavish, to hissuperiors, he had always a kindly word or a warm smile to give tothose whom fortune had placed beneath him. He did not courtpopularity; and the vulgar gratulations of the circus would have beenoffensive to his ear; but to a menial or to a woman he at once unbentthe calm and philosophic reserve of his demeanour for the time oftheir temporary communication; and, with a gleam of kindly warmth, hecheered all those who approached him, as weaker or less fortunate thanhimself. Such a tribute is due to a man whose innocence even was nothis friend, and who awakened jealousies even while he strove to disarmthem.Speaking thus of their well-loved lord, the slaves followed slowlytill they approached the shore; and then, running forward to make upfor their tardiness by momentary alacrity, they officiously aided theboatmen to push the boat close up to some gray rocks, which, shiningthrough the clear blue water for many a foot below the ripple thatcheckered the surface, afforded a sort of natural pier for the partyto embark. Flavia and her companions took their seats in the stern,and six or seven of the slaves placed themselves in the bow, the restproceeding along the shore towards the palace. Ammian, leaning overthe side in his fanciful mood, gazed down upon the small waves as theywere dashed from the path of the boat; and then, catching a ripplinggleam of yellow light tinging the crest of one of those tiny billows,he looked up to the heavens, where, just in that spot of deep skytowards which the streamer of the aplustrum turned, calm, and large,and bright, rose Hesperus above the world. He gazed upon it forseveral minutes with a look of rapt enjoyment, as if for the time hehad forgotten everything in the universe but that one bright solitarystar. Ildica had hitherto sat between her mother and Theodore,listening in silence to the brief and broken tales of his late travelswhich he was telling; but as a pause ensued, she fixed her eyes uponAmmian, and watched him with a soft smile, as if she knew what waspassing in his thoughts, and waited to see what turn the fancy wouldtake. From time to time her eyes appealed to Theodore, and then turnedagain to her brother, till at length her sweet musical voice, speakingher pure native tongue, but slightly touched and softened by the Greekaccent, was heard breaking the momentary silence-which had fallen uponthem all."Sing it, Ammian," she said, speaking to his unuttered thoughts, "singit! Theodore will hear it well pleased. It is my mother's poetry,written since you left us, Theodore: sing it, Ammian!"The boy looked up into his sister's eyes with a gay smile, and thenpoured suddenly forth in song a voice clear and melodious as her own.The first two stanzas he sung alone; but at the end of the second, andof each that succeeded, all those who knew the music took up the firstas a chorus, sending sweet harmony over the twilight waters, while therowers with their oars kept time to hisSONG TO THE EVENING STAR.I.Hesperus! Hesperus! in thy bright handBearing thy torch, lit at day's parting beams,Shed thy sweet influence o'er our dear land,Sooth thou our slumbers and brighten our dreams.II.Hesperus! Hesperus! each closing flowerYields thee the sigh of her odorous breath,Thine, too, the nightingale's musical hour,Thine be the offering of song and of wreath.Hesperus! Hesperus! &c.III.Hesperus! Hesperus! holding thy wayLone, but serene, 'tween the day and the night,Guide all our hearts with the same even sway,Soften each sorrow and calm each delight.Hesperus! Hesperus! &c.IV.Hesperus! Hesperus! star of repose!Herald of rest to the labours of day!Through worlds and through ages, where'er thy light glows,Honour and thanks shall attend on thy ray.Hesperus! Hesperus! &c.CHAPTER IV.THE YOUNG LOVERS.It was more than an hour after the boat had reached the landing-place,and, fatigued with a long, bright, happy day, Ammian and Eudochia hadsought the repose of hearts at ease; while Flavia, sitting with herdaughter and Theodore in the small chamber near the great Corinthianhall in the palace of Diocletian, busied herself with manifoldquestions in regard to those friends of other years, in Constantinopleand in Rome, from whom she had voluntarily separated herself, in orderto lead her children up to years of free agency, at a distance fromthe luxury and corruption of either great metropolis. The anecdoteswhich he had to relate, the little traits and rumours which he hadcollected concerning those whom she had once loved dearly, seemed ofgreater interest to the Lady Flavia than even the news of morepersonal importance which he had told her. Yet that news imported thatthe cession of a portion of Illyria by Valentinian to Theodosius wascompletely defined--that the dwelling in which she had found a home,by the interest of Paulinus, was now fully transferred from themonarch of the West, who had shown a strong disposition to despoil herof her lands in distant provinces, to the chief of the Eastern empire,who, on the contrary, had hitherto given her kindly aid andprotection; and that her possession of that sweet spot, near whichmany of the estates of her dead husband lay, was confirmed to her bythe hand of Theodosius himself.The lamp had been placed at her right hand, in order that she mightperuse the letter of Paulinus; but still she had not proceeded to thattask. What were the feelings which stayed her, it were difficult tosay; but the open pages lay unread by her side; and though she morethan once took them up, as if to begin, she laid them down again asoften, and asked some new question. At length, as the moonlight foundits way through the half-drawn curtains of the door, she once moreraised the letter, saying, "Well, I will read it now," and her eyeagain fixed upon the first few words."Notwithstanding, gentle Flavia," so the epistle ran, "the desire Ihad expressed to keep hidden from my son and our sweet Ildica ourhopes and purposes, yet feelings that I cannot well explain, but whichI will now attempt to depict, have induced me, sure of your consentand approbation, to tell him, ere he left me--perhaps for the lasttime--that it was my wish and hope, if his own heart seconded mydesire, that he should in his twentieth year choose the one we both sodearly love for his bride."Flavia raised her eyes to her daughter and the son of Paulinus, whohad, in the occupation which had just employed her, a fair excuse forspeaking in low and gentle murmurs. They had farther drawn back thecurtains, and were gazing from the door upon the moonbeams whichlighted up the great hall; and a bright, warm smile upon the mother'sface told that her own heart took kindly part in the fond feelingswhich were so busy in theirs. She turned to the letter again, however,without comment, and read on. "I am about," continued Paulinus, "totravel through the provinces, and the will of God may require that Ishall never return. I know not why, but I have a sadness upon me. Asthe sun goes down, small objects cast long shadows; and I have fanciedthat I once, and only once, beheld a cold look in the eye of theemperor towards me, a triumphant smile on the countenance ofChrysapheus; yet if ever omens were infallible, they would be thesmiles of our enemies and the coldness of our friends. Nevertheless,let me acknowledge all my weakness--weakness which philosophy cannotconquer, and which it were wisdom to conceal from any other eye thanthine, oh, thou that hast been as a sister to my widowed heart, as amother to my orphan children. Before any evil augury could be drawnfrom the looks of others, my own heart seemed to feel the coming on offate. There has been a shadow on my spirit, an apprehension of comingevil, a sensation of neighbouring danger, such as domestic animalsfeel when near a lion, even without seeing it."Flavia laid down the page, murmuring, "And is it so, Paulinus? alas,and is it so? Go forth, my children," she added, abruptly, seeing themstill standing in the doorway; "you seem as if you longed to taste themoonlight air. Go forth! It is a grand sight to gaze upon the watersof the Adriatic from that noble portico. It expands the heart, itelevates the mind, it raises the soul to the God who made all things.Go forth, then, my children, I would willingly be alone."They needed no second bidding; for she told them to do that which hadlain as a longing at their hearts ever since she had begun to read.Not a year before, when they had last parted, they would have waitedno command--nay, no permission; but would at once, in the unconsciousliberty of the young heart, bound forth to enjoy the scenes theyloved, in the society that they loved not less--that of each other.But a change had come over their feelings since then, rendering alltheir intercourse more sweet, a thousand times more sweet, but moretimid also. Theodore, indeed, knew why; for his father's partingwords--the solemn sanction which Paulinus had given to his futureunion with Ildica, in case death should prevent a father's lips frompronouncing the blessing at their marriage feast--had opened his eyesto the nature of his own sensations. No sooner had the few first wordsbeen uttered by Paulinus than he had felt at once that his love forIldica was more than fraternal affection; that it was different--howdifferent!--from that which he experienced towards Eudochia; howdifferent from that which he entertained towards any other humanbeing! With Ildica, the knowledge was more vague: it was more asensation than a certainty. So long as Theodore had been with her shehad gone on treating him as a brother; but with the feelings of herheart changing towards him still, as imperceptibly, but still ascompletely, as the green small berry changes to the purple grape, theverdant bud to the expanded and to the yellow leaf. So long as he hadbeen with her she had felt no alteration, though it took place; butduring his absence she meditated on those things long and deeply; andon his return she met him with not less affection, but with deep andtimid emotions, mingling a consciousness with her every look, whichwas sweet to the eye that saw it, and that wished it to be so.Theodore raised the curtain, and Ildica passed out; but ere she hadtaken two steps in that grand moonlight hall, Theodore's hand claspedhers, and he led her on through all those splendid apartments--whichhave been, even in ruins, the wonder and the admiration of all afterdays--to the vast colonnade, six hundred feet in length, which frontedand overlooked the beautiful Adriatic. As they passed, in the variousapartments of the slaves and domestics were to be seen lights, and tobe heard many a gay voice laughing; and at the end of the principalstreets of the palace, for it had its streets as well as corridors,two or three groups were seen playing in the moonlight with polishedpieces of bone, or, with loud and vehement gesticulations, disputingabout their game. Theodore almost feared that the portico itself mightbe tenanted by some such party; and his heart had anticipated an hourof lonely wandering with her he loved so eagerly, that he might nothave brooked disappointment with old and stoical patience. Thatportico, however, was considered by the general inhabitants of thepalace, and those also of the neighbouring village, as in some degreesacred ground. It was there that the great emperor, after havingconquered and reigned in glory through the prime of life, after havingsatisfied the vengeful zeal of his counsellors against the Christiansects, which now, in spite of all his persecutions, peopled the wholeland, after having made his name awful by deeds of blood not less thanby deeds of magnificence, had been accustomed to sit, self-stripped ofhis power, and to gaze out, after having been an emperor, uponnearly the same scene which his eyes beheld before he was anythingbut a slave. Although little more than a century had elapsed sincethe death of Diocletian, his fate and history, his acts and hischaracter, had been strangely distorted by tradition; and though thepeasantry had not learned to look upon him as a bad man, or toexecrate him as a tyrant, yet the extraordinary vicissitudes which hehad hewn out for himself, the vague legends of his acts during life,and the mystery attaching to his death, surrounded his memory with afearful awe, which held the people of the neighbourhood aloof from thespot for which he had shown such peculiar fondness, when night coveredthe world with her dim and fanciful shades.The portico was vacant; happy sounds rose up from the shore, where thefishermen were lingering beside their boats; and a merry laugh, orsnatches of some light song, were heard from the neighbouring village,sinking into the hearts of Ildica and Theodore with the power of acharm, waking associations of sweet domestic joy, dim and undefined,but thrilling--potent--overpowering. Oh! who can tell the many magicavenues through which all the external things of the wide universefind, at some time or other, means of communicating with the inmostheart--avenues, the gates of which are shut till, at some cabalisticword of grief, or joy, or hope, or fear, they suddenly fly open, andwe find in our bosom a thousand sweet and kindred fellowships, withthings which had never learned to touch or agitate us before.Glad and cheerful, yet calm, were the sounds that broke occasionallyupon the listening ear of night; and grand and solemn, but stillgentle, was the scene which lay stretched beneath the risen moon; butthe sensations which were in the breasts of the two rendered thosesounds and sights a thousand fold sweeter, a thousand fold more dear;and, in return, the gay, distant voices, and the calm, wide, moonlightsea, seemed to draw forth and render intense, even to overwhelming, inthe souls of Theodore and Ildica,"Into the mighty vision passing,"the inborn joy of all the new emotions to which that day had givenlife within their hearts. They paused and listened to the melody ofinnocent mirth, and paused and gazed upon the bright world beforethem. Ildica's hand trembled in that of Theodore, and her heart beatquick; but he felt that she was his, and that she was agitated; andwith the gentleness of true affection, though without any definiteplan for sparing her, he took the very means of telling his first taleof love so as to agitate as little as possible the young and tenderbeing, all whose deepest feelings were given to him alone."Hark!" he said, "hark, dear Ildica! how gay and sweet those merryvoices sound! Some lover come back from wandering like me, tells theglad story of his journey done to the ear of her who has watched forhim in absence."Ildica grew more calm, and raised her eyes, too, to Theodore, notwithout some feeling of surprise, so different was his tone, so muchmore manly were his words than when they had parted. There had been,up to that moment, one thing, perhaps, wanting in her love towardshim--the conscious feeling of man's ascendency: she had loved withpassion deep, sincere, and ardent; but she had loved as a girl, andlooked upon him still as the companion of her early sports. His wordsand tone--the words and tone of one who had mingled with, and takenhis place among men--put the last rose to the wreath. She felt thatthenceforth to him she could cling for protection--to him she couldturn for guidance and direction.But Theodore went on. "Some lover," he said, "or perhaps some husband,Ildica, returned from the labours of the day to home, and happiness,and sweet domestic love! Oh, dear Ildica, since I have been away,often have I, in wandering through different provinces, lodged in thedwellings of traders in the towns, or in the cottages of shepherds andlabourers in the mountains and the plains; and the most beautiful, themost blessed thing that I have ever seen has been found as often, ifnot oftener, in the hut of the herd, or the house of the commonmerchant, as in the marble palaces of the C[ae]sars, and withinthe walls of imperial cities. Oh, that sweet domestic love! thatblessing--that bright blessing! which, like the glorious light of thesun, shines alike on every condition and on every state, cheering,enlivening, enlightening, all who shut it not out from their own darkhearts by vices and by crimes. Hark, hark! dear Ildica, how those gayvoices seem to chime to my words, speaking of love, and joy, and hope!Oh, Ildica, dear Ildica! may not such things be also for you and me?"Ildica sunk down on the stone seat by which they had been standing,but she left her hand still in his, and he felt it tremble. Nor did hehimself speak unmoved; for his ardent nature, and the first breakingforth of those dear and treasured thoughts, shook his whole frame; andscarcely daring to trust his lips with further words, he placedhimself by her side, murmuring only, "Dearest Ildica!" She answeredonly with a long-drawn, agitated sigh; and, gliding his arm round hersoft waist, he drew her gently to his bosom."Oh, Theodore, is not this wrong?" she asked, but without attemptingto free herself from his embrace."Wrong, my Ildica? wrong, my beloved?" he exclaimed: "oh, no! Godforbid that I should ever seek to make you do or feel aught that isevil! No, no, dearest, my father's blessing will attend our union; hehas promised, he has given it: our dear mother's consent was spoken tohim long ago!""Indeed!" cried Ildica."Yes, indeed," he said, pressing her again closer to his bosom, fromwhich she had partly raised herself as she spoke. "Yes, indeed,Ildica! Joyful did my father's words sound in my ear, as he told methat, if I could win your love, I might hope for your hand. Nothingnow is wanting to my happiness but one dear word from my Ildica'ssweet lips. Oh, speak it, beloved! Speak it; and say you will bemine." She could not find voice to utter the deep feelings of herheart; but her cheek sunk glowing upon his shoulder, and their lipsmet in the first dear, long, thrilling kiss of happy and acknowledgedlove.CHAPTER V.THE DISASTER.From a dream of happiness such as mortal beings know but once on thisside of the grave--a dream of happiness in which all the brightest,noblest, most joyful feelings of the fresh, unsullied, unexhaustedheart of youth burst forth, like the streams of the Nile, from athousand beautiful sources, Ildica and Theodore woke at length, andprepared to return to the side of her mother, to make her a sharer intheir joy, and tell her how blessed, how supremely blessed they felt.Clinging close together in attitudes of tenderness, from which Atticsculptors might have learned yet another grace, they rose and movedalong the portico. They moved, however, but slowly, lingering stillfor some fond word, some affectionate caress, or pausing in the scene,hallowed for ever in their eyes by the first spoken words of love, togaze over it again and again between the colossal pillars of theportico. Over that scene, however, had by this time come a change--oneof those sudden, inexplicable alterations not uncommon in southernclimates. The moon, which by this time had wandered on far enough towarn them that the crowded moments had flown quickly away, was stillhanging over the Adriatic, and pouring forth that glorious flood oflight which makes the stars all "veil their ineffectual fires;" butthe sky was no longer without clouds, and catching the light upontheir rounded but not fleecy edges, the large heavy masses of electricvapour swept slow over the lower part of the sky, between the brightorb and the islands that slept beneath her beams. Theodore and Ildicapaused to mark them, as slowly contorting itself into hard andstruggling forms, one particular mass lay writhing upon the horizon,like some giant Titan wrestling with agony on his bed of torture. Atthe same time the breeze, which was balmy, though calm, during theevening, became oppressively hot, with a faint phosphoric smell in theair, and a deep silence seemed to spread over the whole world. Thecigala was still, the voices on the shore had ceased, the merry laughno longer resounded from the open cottage door, and the nightingale,which had prolonged her song after all the rest was silent, ceasedalso, and left a solemn hush over the whole universe."What strange forms that cloud is taking," said Theodore, called evenfrom the thoughts of his own happiness by the sudden alteration of thescene: "and how quiet everything is. Doubtless, there will be a stormto-night. Alas! for those who are upon the treacherous sea.""But your father," said Ildica; "he goes by land, Theodore. Is it notso?""Not so, dearest," replied Theodore; "he visits first Antioch, andthen proceeds by land; but it is not for him I fear, as I heard of hislanding while I was on the journey hither; but those strange cloudsand the heat of the air must surely augur thunder to-night; and I sawa whole fleet of boats this morning at Tragurium, ready to put tosea.""It is indeed warm," said Ildica; "I feel almost faint with the heat.Had we lived a few centuries ago, Theodore, we might have drawn evilauguries for ourselves and for the fate of our affections from thosehard clouds, and the dull and almost mournful silence which has fallenover the world.""Out upon auguries, my beloved," he replied; "we hold a better faith,and place our trust in God, who made our hearts and formed us for eachother. We will confide in him, my Ildica; and for those who do so,signs and portents are but proofs of his power, which shouldstrengthen, not shake our faith."As he spoke he turned to lead her into the palace; but at that momentthe low, sad howling of a dog broke the stillness of the night; and afigure, the face of which was turned from the moonlight, but whichIldica at once recognised as her mother, appeared at the end of thecolonnade, and advanced towards them. Ildica and Theodore hastened tomeet her, and each took and kissed one of her fair hands. "Give usyour blessing, oh my mother!" said the youth; "we have been veryhappy. I have told Ildica how I love her. I have told her what hopesmy father has given me; and she has promised to share my lot and makemy home joyful.""Bless you, my children, bless you!" replied Flavia, while Ildica hidher face on her mother's bosom, and Theodore again pressed his lipsupon her hand. "Ye are young lovers, indeed; but still my blessing beupon you; and oh! may God grant that in the course of that love whichis made to render us happy, you may be more fortunate than the parentsof either! Your father, Theodore, and I have both lost those we lovedas fondly as you love one another; but may better fate be yours, mychildren! may you never lose each other; but go on in the same warmaffections through a long life, and death scarcely separate you, tillwe all meet again in heaven."Flavia raised her eyes towards the sky, and for a moment remained insilence, though her lips still moved. The next instant, however, sheadded, "I came out to seek you, not because I thought you long absent,nor because I had any cause of fear; but I know not how or why it is Ihave a painful, apprehensive anxiety hangs upon me to-night, whichwill not let me rest. Perhaps it is the sultry heat of the atmosphere;the air has grown very oppressive; even the animals seem to feel it.Your sister's dog, Theodore, would not rest in her usual place by myfeet, but ran out through the curtains; and Aspar told me as I passedthat it had fled to the garden. How the cattle, too, are lowing in thevillage stalls! Do you not hear them? Does the wind come from Bratia?""Nearly," replied Theodore; "but cast away melancholy, my dear mother.Oh! that Ildica and I could give you a share of our happiness!""You do! you do, dear youth!" replied Flavia; "I do share in yourhappiness; and this melancholy will pass away again. Those who haveknown much grief are subject to such thick-coming fancies; and thefirst touch of deep sorrow brushes off the bloom of hope, crushes thefirm confidence of the heart, and leaves shrinking apprehension totremble at every breath; but let us in; there is a storm coming on."As she spoke there was a low melancholy sound came rushing over thewaters of the Adriatic; the clouds, which had before passed so slowand silently along, seemed now agitated by some unknown cause, andrushed in dark black volumes over the moon; while here and there, amidthe clefts and rents of their dark canopy, looked out a calm brightstar. But still the mourning sound increased; and the bending branchesof the olives down below told that the breath of the tempest wasalready felt. The next instant, ere the lovers and Flavia could escapefrom the colonnade, the blast of the hurricane struck the building andshook the massy structure to its foundations. Behind the shelter of apillar the two women escaped; but Theodore, strong and active as hewas, found himself dashed forward against the wall of the palace;while leaves, and flowers, and broken boughs of trees were whirledabout in the air, and strewed the marble pavement of the portico. Itlasted but for a moment, however, dying away as it came, with a lowmoan; while a few large drops of rain followed, as if the punisheddemon of the storm fulfilled his allotted task of destruction withtears and with regret."Flavia! Ildica! you are not hurt!" cried Theodore, springing towardsthem."No! no!" replied Flavia; "we are safe; though it was a fearful gale.But let us in, Theodore; it may return. Hark! Good God! what is this?"Well might she so exclaim. The wind had gone by; even its murmur hadceased; when suddenly there rose a roar from the earth as if tenthousand war-chariots had met in the shock of battle. The lightningburst forth from the clouds, and flashed along amid the innumerabledark gigantic pillars of the colonnade, lighting the whole of its vastextent with the blue and ghastly glare; the thunder rolled from thezenith to the horizon with a peal which would have deafened the ear tothe loudest voice. But the lightning flashed, and the thunder rolled,scarcely seen or heard; for below, around, was a more dreadfulvisitation still. The earth shook beneath their feet; the pavementrose and fell like the waves of the sea; the enormous columns totteredand reeled; the walls of massive stone bent to and fro; while the roarof the earthquake and the echoing of the thunder were rendered moreterrific by the crash of falling building, and the shrieks both fromthe interior of the palace and the more distant village. Theodore casthis arms round Ildica and her mother; and, staggering along, hurriedthem down the steps across the level in front of the palace, and outof danger of its shaken walls. It was the impulse of the moment whichmade him act, and Flavia yield; but she paused ere they were manysteps from the building, exclaiming, "My children! Theodore, mychildren! Your sister and Ammian! I must go back.""And I will go too!" said Ildica, in a voice so calm that it made herlover turn suddenly to gaze upon her, who seemed to have lost thetimid girl in the first moment of danger and horror."No, no!" he exclaimed. "Dear mother, hear me! There will be a secondshock doubtless, but it will be some minutes ere it comes. Hasten withIldica beyond the Golden Gate and up the side of the hill, out ofreach of all buildings! I will seek Ammian and Eudochia, and join youin a moment. Fly, fly, dear mother! I leave in your charge what Ivalue more than life. Save her!"Flavia hesitated; but that moment a slave with a torch rushed out intothe portico seeking them, while the motion of the ground subsided, andall became still. It was the swift runner, Aspar, who came up, crying,"Fly, lady! fly, dear mistress! the worst shock is never first; fly tothe hills, fly!""Away with them, Aspar, beyond the Golden Gate," cried Theodore,breaking from them; "I will join you instantly! Away, away!"Thus saying, he darted from them, rushed through the portico, andcrossed the side avenue, while the wild clamour from the principalstreet of the palace echoed through the long halls and galleries; andthe deep darkness in which that part of the building was plungedrendered the distant sound of wailing and of terror more frightful.On, on he went, though fragments of stone and cement obstructed hisway, and crumbled under his feet, showing that even the first shockhad been severe enough to shake that strong and massive fabric throughevery part. But Theodore still hurried forward, till, at length, inhis haste, as he passed the spot where he and Ildica had seen theslaves playing on the pavement, he stumbled over a large soft body,and, stooping down, he felt with horror beneath his touch the yet warmform of a man, with the newly-fallen capital of a neighbouring columnlying with crushing weight upon his loins. The long hair floating onhis shoulders showed Theodore that the unhappy being had been a slave;but still the instinctive benevolence of the youthful heart made himpause a moment to ascertain if life were extinct. He spoke, but not atone answered; he lifted the hand, in which life's soft warmth yetlingered; but not even a convulsive movement of the fingers told thatone spark of the immortal fire still glowed in the mortal body. Allwas motionless, insensible, lifeless; and Theodore hurried on.The gates of the Cyzicene hall were open; the glare of lights and thesound of voices came from within; and Theodore instantly entered, asthe shortest way to the apartments occupied by Flavia and herhousehold. Never, perhaps, did terror in all its forms present itselfmore awfully than in that grand and splendid chamber. There, as ageneral point of meeting, had collected eighty or ninety of the slavesand domestics of both sexes. Fear had not yet had time to subside; andwith pale and haggard faces, livid lips, and wide anxious eyes theyremained, some clinging to the columns which had so lately beenshaken like reeds; some kneeling in the midst, and uttering theconfused and terrified prayer; some cast down upon the pavement inutter self-abandonment; some hiding their eyes in their garments, asif they could shut out the approaching horrors that they feared towitness; some gazing wildly up to the roof, which they expectedmomently to fall upon them. Large fragments of the beautiful paintingswhich had covered the walls were now seen dashed about upon the floor;and a wide rent in the solid masonry over the door showed how insecurewas the shelter which those terrified beings had sought from the nightof the earthquake.In the midst stood, gathered together in the hour of danger, threedusky Numidians, with a servant from the neighbouring Pentopolis, who,in happier times, had been too near akin to the dark Africans to livewith them in amity, but who now clung to them for support; while agigantic slave from the Porphyry mountains, one of the few who lookedthe unusual dangers of the night in the face with calm determination,was seen in the front, crushing out under his large foot a torch whichone of his more terrified companions had let fall. There were two orthree others who stood near, and, with arms folded on their chests,and dark brows full of stern resolution, gazed towards the door, as ifwaiting what horror was to come next.In the hands of some of the bolder slaves were the torches which gavelight to the hall; and the moment Theodore entered, one started fromthe group, exclaiming, in tones of eager--ay, and affectionateinquiry--though they were but slaves, "The Lady Flavia? Where is theLady Flavia? Where is the Lady Flavia?"He spoke as an old servant might speak to a boy he had known frominfancy; but Theodore was no longer a boy; for the last nine monthsand the last few hours together had made him a man in mind as well asin body, and he replied with that prompt tone of commanding couragewhich won instant obedience."She is safe," he cried, gazing round him. "Up, up, all of you! Lienot there in prostrate terror, herding together like sheep beneath thelightning. Up, if you would save your lives! Up, and away! You withthe torches go before them! Out beyond the Golden Gate you will findyour mistress and Aspar. Keep close to the walls till you are in theopen field! Another shock is coming, and the parapets and capitalsfall first, but fall far out from the buildings. Crowd not togetherso, and crush each other in the doorway! Out, coward! would you killyour fellows to save your own miserable life? So! quietly--butspeedily. You, Cremera! and you, and you, Marton, come with me! Youare brave and honest, and love your lady. Snatch up whatever jewelsand valuable things you see, and follow quick! Where is Eudochia?Where my brother Ammian?"Her chamber is within the Lady Flavia's!" said the Arab Cremera; and,darting through the lesser doorway, Theodore hastened thither,followed by the three he had called, and one or two others, gatheringup caskets, and scrinia, and gold, and jewels, as they hurried throughthe more private apartments of the palace. A sound of murmuring voiceswas before him as he came near the chamber of Flavia; but, dashingaside the curtain, he rushed in.Kneeling upon the floor, as she had risen from her bed in terror, withher bright hair flowing in waving lines over her shoulders, her handsclasped, and her eyes raised to heaven as her lips trembled withprayer, was Eudochia; while beside her, fainting with terror, lay thenegro girl who had sat beside the Hyader, lately so gay andthoughtless. Near her stood Ammian, whose first impulse had been toseek her; but in whose dark imaginative eyes, instead of terror, shonea strange and almost sportive fire, as if his excited fancy felt adegree of pleasure even in a scene so full of danger and of horror.Nevertheless, he was eagerly entreating his fair sister, as hecalled her, to conquer her terrors, and to fly with him to seektheir mother, exclaiming, "Come, come, Eudochia, you shall prayto-morrow--or to-night, if you like it better, when once you aresomewhere safe. Your prayers will go to heaven in but tatteredgarments, if they have to force their way through yon rift in theroof. Come, come! Oh, here is Theodore! Where are my mother andIldica?""Both safe!" replied Theodore. "But this is no hour for sport,Ammian;" and, without question, he caught up his sister in his arms."You take the casket from Cremera, Ammian!" he continued. "Let himtake yon poor girl! Hark, there is a rushing sound! Quick, quick, itis coming again! On before, Ammian. On before, to the Golden Gate!"Eudochia clung to his breast, and, hurrying on with a step of light,he bore her through the many chambers of the building, till, turningthrough the great hall called the Atrium, he entered one of thetransverse streets, and paused a moment to listen if the soundcontinued. All, however, was still and dark, except where the murmurof voices and the rush of feet were heard from a distant spot, andwhere a number of torches appeared gathered together near thebeautiful octagonal temple of Jupiter, or where from the apartmentsoccupied by the old and incapable conservator of the palace were seenissuing forth two or three slaves with lights, and a solitary priestbearing the consecrated vessels of the temple, which had already beenconverted to a Christian church.Onward, in the same direction, Theodore now bore the fair light formof his sister; but ere he had reached the end of the street, anotherawful phenomenon took place. From the midst of the intense, deep,black expanse which the sky now presented, burst forth an immenseglobe of fire, lighting with a fearful splendour the gigantic masses,columns, and towers of the palace; showing the neighbouring hills andwoods beyond the gates, and even displaying the heavy piles ofmountains that lay towering up towards the north. No thunderaccompanied the meteor; and its progress through the sky was onlymarked by a sound as of a strong but equal wind, till suddenly itburst and dispersed with a tremendous crash, leaving all in deeperdarkness than before.The sight had made the multitude pause and fall upon their kneesbefore the church; and as Theodore approached he heard a voiceexclaiming, "Let us die here! We may as well end our days here as inthe open fields! Let us die here!"But, to his surprise, the next moment the calm sweet tones of the LadyFlavia struck his ear, replying to the words which she had heard too."No, my friends! no!" she said, in a voice which had no terror in itssound, but was all calm but energetic tenderness. "No! it is our dutyto God, to ourselves, to our brethren, to our children, to take themeans of safety which are at hand. Let us fly quick from among thesebuildings, which another shock may cast down to crush us. There may bedangers even beyond the walls, but here are certain perils. Let us goforth; I came back but to seek my children! Lo, they have come insafety, and let us now depart. Oh, delay not, pause not, for thehesitation of terror more often points the dart and sharpens the swordthat slays us, than the rashness of courage. Come, my friends, let uscome. God will protect us; let us take the means he gives. Come, myTheodore, come. Ammian, you look as your father used to look when hewent forth to battle. Should not such a face as that shame terror, myfriends? Come, I pray ye, come!"Even as she spoke, the same hollow rushing sound was again heard; thesteps on which she stood, above the rest, shook beneath her, andAmmian, seizing her hand, hurried forward. Clouds of dust rose up intothe air, shrieks of terror burst from the very lips that had so latelyproposed to remain and die there, and every one now rushed towards thegate. But their steps were staggering and unequal, for the solid earthwas again shaken, the buildings and the columns were seen totteringand bending by the light of the torches, the crash of falling massesblended with the roar of the earthquake, part of the frieze of thetemple was dashed into the midst of the group of slaves, who wereflying on before their mistress, and one among them was struck down."Stop!" said the voice of Flavia; "let us not leave any one we cansave. Hold the torch here!" But it was in vain. The man was crushedlike a trodden worm!"God receive thy spirit to his mercy, through Christ!" cried thepriest; and they rushed on, while still the earthquake seemed to rollthe ground in waves beneath their feet, and their eyes grew dim anddizzy with the drunken rocking of the enormous buildings, through themidst of which they passed. The gate, though not far, seemed to takean age to reach, and joyful was the heart of every one as they drewnear. But just as they were about to go forth, the struggling of thefeverish earth appeared to reach its height; and one of those colossalflanking towers, which seemed destined to outlast a thousandgenerations, swayed to and fro like a young heart sorely temptedbetween virtue and crime, and then fell overthrown, with a sound likethunder across the very path of the fugitives. It left a chasm whereit had stood, however; and through that rugged breach the terrifiedmultitude took their way, stumbling and falling over the convulsed andquivering masses of stone.Glad, glad were all bosoms when those walls were passed; and thoughstill the ground heaved beneath their feet, though the roar continued,and the very trees were heard to crack and shiver as they passedalong, yet all felt that some hope of safety was gained; though whenthey looked around, and saw the black and tangible darkness thatcovered the whole earth, and hid every object except that on which theoccasional torchlight fell--when they gazed, I say, into that dull andvacant, unreplying blank, and heard the hollow roaring voice of theearthquake around, below, above, well might their hearts still sink,and well might many a one among them think that the predicted day ofgeneral dissolution had at length arrived.Still carrying his sister in his arms, Theodore had followed Flaviaand Ammian through the broken walls; and it was not till their feettrod the more secure ground beyond that he asked, "Where is Ildica, mymother?""Here at hand, upon the hill, my noble Theodore," she answered."Eudochia now is safe," she added; "leave her with me, and give ourdear Ildica tidings of our escape, for she promised not to quit thespot where I left her till my return. Yon faint spot of light upon theold tumulus--that is Aspar's torch."Theodore placed his sister on her feet beside Flavia, and hurried on.He had no light with him; the heavens and the earth were all indarkness, and the roar of the last shock still rang, though morefaintly, in the air. Yet, ere he had arrived within the feeble andindistinct glare of the slave's torch, the quickened ear of love andapprehension had caught the sound, and recognised the tread of hiscoming feet; and in a moment Ildica was in his arms, and her fair faceburied on his throbbing bosom.[4]---------------[Footnote 4: In "The Story of Azimantium," which I published about sixyears ago in Blackwood's Magazine, and which has since beenre-published in "The Desultory Man," I gave very nearly the sameaccount of this great earthquake with that here given. The actors andthe scene are different; but the principal facts, being founded onhistorical truth, are the same.]---------------CHAPTER VI.THE EVIL TIDINGS.The horrors of that night had not yet ended; for from the third hourafter sunset till day had fully dawned, the fever of the earth ragedwith unabated fury. A melancholy and a ghastly group was it that sooncrowned the hill where Flavia had left her daughter, when at lengthall those who had escaped with her from the palace were collectedtogether round the torches. Not one half of those, indeed, who dweltin that magnificent building, to which the earthquake gave the firstsevere blow, had assembled in the train of the Roman lady; but duringthe pause of nearly an hour which succeeded the second shock, manypale and terrified beings, some wounded and bruised with the fallingmasses, some nearly deprived of reason by their fears, wandered upfrom the palace and the neighbouring village, guided by the lightsupon the hill, and with wild exclamations and bemoanings of their fateadded something to the horrors of the moment.Gradually the brief-spoken or almost silent awe subsided during thatlong interval of calm; and many who had been waiting with sinkinghearts for the coming of a third shock began to talk together in lowwhispers, and even to fancy that the hour of peril had passed by.Gradually, too, serving to encourage such thoughts, the clouds rolledaway; the stars looked out calm and bright, and the moon was seen justsinking into the Adriatic, but with a red and angry glow over herface, in general so calm and mild. Hope began to waken once again inall bosoms; and one, more rash than the rest, a fisherman fromAspalathus, ventured down the hill, declaring that he would go and seewhat had befallen his boat.The minutes seemed hours; but very few had elapsed after hisdeparture, ere the fierce rushing sound of the destroyer was againheard; again the earth reeled and shook, and yawned and heaved up, andburst like bubbles from a seething caldron; and lightning, without acloud, played round the hills and over the waves. The terrifiedmultitude clung together, and the sick faintness of despair seemed todefy all augmentation, when the voice of the fisherman was heard,exclaiming, as he hastened back up the hill, "Fly farther, to themountains! fly farther up! the sea is rising over the land; the boatsare driven into the market-place; the palace will soon be covered! Flyfarther, and fly quickly, if you would save your lives!""Why should we fly?" cried the same voice which had before urged themultitude to stay and await death below; and at the same time a tall,gaunt man, with long streaming gray hair, and large, wild, melancholyeyes, pushed himself forward into the torchlight. "Why should we fly?"he cried; "and whither can we go to hide us from the wrath of God? Lo,I tell you, and it shall come to pass, that no sun shall ever riseagain upon this earth, except the Sun of Righteousness. The last day,the last great day, is at hand, and in vain ye say to the mountains,'Fall upon us; and to the hills, Cover us, in the great and terribleday of the Lord.' Make ready your hearts, and prepare your souls, forverily ye are called to judgment, and the Son of Man is coming, inclouds and glory, to separate the sheep from the goats."His words, his solemn gestures, his wild and enthusiastic look,supported by his reputed sanctity of life, plunged the people indeeper despair; but Flavia again interposed, and with sweet andgentle, yet dignified and commanding eloquence, she won the people tohear, to yield, and to obey her. Lighted by a single torch, for thosethey had brought had burnt so far that it became necessary to sparethem, the melancholy procession wound up the road which led over themountains towards Titurum. After travelling for at least a mile, witha continual ascent, they again paused; and in order both to give newcourage to the sinking hearts of those who accompanied her, and toprevent the enthusiast Mizetus from adding to their terrors, the ladybesought the good priests of the palace church to guide them inpraying to the Almighty in their hour of peril.The old man had not spoken since they left the city; but the mildwords of the Roman lady seemed to wake him from the stupor of anguishand terror into which he had fallen. Called upon to find words ofconsolation for the flock committed to his charge, he applied themfirst to his own heart, and instantly remembering the hopes andpromises of a pure and exalted faith, he broke forth in a strain ofpowerful eloquence, now directing the people to put their trust inthat Almighty arm which can save in the time of the most awfuldanger; now raising his voice in prayer to God, mingling adorationwith petition, and offering at once the sacrifice of faith andsupplication.The people gathered round, slaves and freemen together, lifting theirpale faces and anxious eyes by the dull torchlight to the countenanceof the priest. They gained confidence and courage, however, at hiswords; and when he began his prayer, they kneeled around upon thestill shaking earth, and rose again with hearts full of trust, calmedand strengthened by devotion. None had stood aloof, not even those whohad hitherto remained firm to their ancient idolatry. In that hour ofhorror, they felt the need of some higher hope and more abiding trust,and they kneeled with the rest to that more mighty God whom hithertothey had not known.Ere they rose, a light and grateful wind sprang up from the mountains;and with hope once more awakened, in a still dark and superstitiousage, even so slight a change as that was received as a favourablepresage. Many there were who regarded it as a sign that their prayerswere heard; and when at length the calm gray dawn began to look fromthe eastern hills upon the wearied and anxious groups below, thoughthe earth still shook, from time to time, with a convulsive shudder,the sight of the blessed light of returning day seemed to take theworst apprehension from their overloaded hearts, and many an eye shedtears of joy to see again those rays which they had feared wereobscured for ever.Rashness generally follows terror allayed; and scarcely had the sunfully risen, when numbers, anxious for friends whom they saw not--or,perhaps, with more sordid motives--began to hasten away towards thevillage and the palace. But the earth still shook, and Flavia, withher family and servants, still remained upon the hill, after strivinganxiously to persuade the rest to wait till all was again completelystill. Her reasoning was in vain, however, and troop after troop wentoff; but scarcely was the day an hour old, when another severe shockwas felt, and many who had escaped the dangers of that fearful nightwere crushed or maimed in the ruins of the dwellings to which they hadreturned. That shock was the last, as it was the longest, which wasfelt; and when it subsided, all remained quiet; and though the groundwas seen yawning in various places, though parts even of the mountainshad slipped from their places, and rocks lay overthrown in thevalleys; though the courses of the streams had been altered, and thewhole face of the land was changed, yet it soon became evident thatthe earthquake was over, and mourning was all that remained--mourningunmingled with fear.There was mourning in the hearts of all; and yet how many a gladembrace, how many a tender and affectionate caress, how many a prayerand thanksgiving, expressed the gratitude, the joy, the love, whichfilled the bosoms of Flavia and her family. How many an earnest and awistful glance at the faces of each other told that, in the anguish ofthat long horrible night, selfish fear had been superseded byapprehensions of a nobler kind!Bright and beautiful, calm and serene the day rose up over that sceneof desolation and ruin, smiling as if to give comfort and consolationto the smitten earth; but still Flavia lingered on the hills,unwilling to trust her children or her domestics amid the ruins of thepalace till she should be well assured that safety might be foundwithin its walls. As the sun grew hot, however, she removed to theedge of a small wood of tall ilexes which hung upon the edge of themountain road, though many of the finest trees had been uprooted andthrown down either by the wind or the earthquake; and having placedherself beneath the shade, with her children round her, several of theslaves ran hither and thither, to seek some food whereof to offertheir well-loved mistress the morning's meal. Each returned withsomething; but each had some sad tale to tell of the ravages that wereto be traced in the direction in which he had gone. Milk, and wine,and early fruits had been found in abundance among the variouscottages in the neighbourhood, and a meal, plentiful, but simple asthat of the night before, was spread upon the grass beneath the trees.The earth was still, the air was fresh and sweet, and the birds hadbegun again their melody, forgetting in song, like the happy heart ofyouth, the blow of calamity as soon as it had passed away. All tendedto sooth and to reassure; and the heart of Ammian, which, even duringthe terrible scenes of the past night, had not lost its bold andfearless daring, now broke out in light and wild fancies. He wouldknow the causes of the earthquake; and when he found that neither hismother nor Theodore could give a satisfactory reply to all his manyquestions--as who in that age could have furnished any on such atheme?--he let his imagination run wild in conjectures; and many abright poetical theory he formed, and many a wild and baselesshypothesis he raised, sporting with all the dread images of the pastlike a child playing with the weapons of deadly strife gathered from afield of battle.Then he urged his mother to return quickly to the palace, in order, ashe said, to see what old Ocean had been doing there during theirabsence. With Theodore, Flavia held more rational intercourse, takingcounsel with him as to what course she had to pursue, and expressingan apprehension lest the palace, left totally unguarded, might beplundered during her absence and that of the old imperial conservator,who remained with them, his senses still bewildered with all theterrors he had gone through. Theodore, however, showed her that thefaithful slaves who had followed him through the building had broughtaway all the valuable jewels, caskets, and gold which they had found;and for the rest, he offered to return himself, with the conservatorand some of the slaves, and provide for the preservation of the palaceand all that it contained."Go you with the rest to Salona, dearest mother," he said; "somedwellings must there have been preserved; and among the merchants andtraders which it contains you will always find shelter and assistancefor gold. Shaken as the palace has been, many parts may yet bestanding which will soon fall, and your presence would only bedangerous, and embarrass us in ascertaining the state of the building.I will accompany you part of the way to Salona, and then turn round bythe heathen cemetery towards Aspalathus and the palace."Ildica listened, and her look seemed to say that she would fainaccompany him; for hers was one of those hearts which would rather,far rather, take part in the danger and the grief of those they lovethan share even their happiest hours. But she said nothing; for sheknew that her wishes ought not to be granted, and she would neitherput her mother nor her lover to the pain of opposing her even by aword.Eudochia, however, in the inconsiderate apprehensiveness of girlhood,clung to her brother, and besought him not to go; but Theodore soonpacified her, assuring her that he would not venture rashly wheredanger was apparent; and, after a few more words, orders were given tothe domestics, and Flavia rose to proceed towards Salona. Weariness,indeed, was in all limbs; and with slow and heavy steps, those who hadremained with Flavia on the uplands took their way along a road, whichwound for some distance over the ridge of hills nearest to the sea,and then descended, separating into two branches, the one leading tothe town of Salona, the other to Aspalathus and the neighbouringpalace. The latter branch, with a steep declivity, wound down thehill, bordered on either hand by a long row of tall dark cypresses,which reached from the northern gate of the palace to a cemetery onthe side of the hill. In that burial-ground, surrounded by a low wallnot two feet high--thus built that all who passed might gaze upon therecords of mortality within--lay crowded a multitude of tombs,checkered with groups of dull funereal trees. There reposed theremains of all who had died in the vicinity since Dalmatia had becomea Roman province, and the frequent Siste, viator! called the eye,and recorded the vain attempt to teach mankind wisdom and moderationfrom the common lot of all.It was near this burial-place, just where the roads parted, thatTheodore paused, and, after a few minutes' conference with the oldofficer of the palace, selected several of the slaves to accompany himon his way. But just as he was about to depart, the eye of Ildicarested upon a cloud of dust that rose from the point where the roadtowards Salona became first visible, emerging from a thick grove atthe distance of perhaps half a mile from the spot where they thenstood."Look! look!" she said; "here are people coming up from thecity--perhaps to give us assistance; and I trust they may bring achariot or a litter, for my mother is pale and weary, and Eudochia isfaint also.""And you are weary, too, my Ildica!" said her mother. "But look!Theodore, look! Do you not see armour and helmets glittering throughthe dust in the sun? It seems a turma of cavalry or more, for the lineis long. Stay with us, my dear son, till we see what we have here: letus turn into this field opposite the cemetery while they pass by."Her words were instantly obeyed as commands; and, winding on with aslow equal march, a small body of horse, followed by a number ofstragglers on foot, ascended the hill, and then, without pause orquestion, took the way on towards Aspalathus. In a moment after,however, at a quicker pace, as if to overtake them, and followed by anumber of soldiers and attendants, came a superior person, who pausedon seeing the group seated in the neighbouring meadow, and sent amessenger to ask if much mischief had occurred at the palace inconsequence of the earthquake, and whether the Lady Flavia were safe."She is well, and present," replied Flavia to the messenger: "who isit that sends?""The military tribune, Marcian," replied the attendant, and Theodoreinstantly sprang up, exclaiming, "My father's dear and noble friend!"and without other comment he ran down the field. As soon as thetribune beheld him he leaped from his horse and pressed him in hisarms, and after a few brief words gave some orders to his attendants,and advanced with Theodore to the spot where Flavia sat.He was a man already in the middle stage of life, tall and powerful inframe, and of mild, but firm and serious countenance. He was not,perhaps, what would generally be reputed handsome, but his featureswere good; and there was the fire of genius in his large dark eye, theconsciousness of energy on his broad square brow. Dignity was in hisaspect and his whole demeanour; and, as he saluted the Lady Flavia,lamented with her the events of the preceding night, and inquired intones of deep interest into all the perils through which she and herfamily had passed, there was that calm and graceful suavity in hisdeportment which inexpressibly won and struck every one who listened.Nevertheless, there was a cloud, as if of some deep melancholy, hungupon his brow; and when Flavia informed him of her purpose ofproceeding to Salona, he shook his head mournfully, saying, "You hadbetter not, lady! I think you had better not! It is a melancholyplace," he added, a moment after; "much shaken and ruined, and a greatnumber of people have lost their lives there. I fear that accountsfrom other parts of the empire will be sad indeed."There was something gloomy and thoughtful in the manner of the tribunethat surprised and somewhat alarmed the Roman lady; for so muchhabitual self-command had the soldiers of the empire, that it was rareto see any one, especially of such rank and renown as Marcian, displayupon the occasion of any misfortune like the earthquake, the naturalfeelings which were not the less busy at their hearts. The marbleexterior of the old republicans was much affected by all who sought todistinguish themselves in the Roman armies; and Marcian was famed fora temperate but unyielding firmness, which admitted not the semblanceof grief or apprehension."Think you, then," she asked, "that we had better return to thepalace? A report reached us in the night that the sea had nearlycovered it."Marcian paused for several minutes, as if meditating what were best todo, and then replied, "Lady, I will send to see the condition of thepalace, and in the mean time bid them pitch me a tent here to give youa shelter from the sun. We have provisions with us too, and can offeryou a meal, such as, perhaps, this great disaster may not have left atAspalathus.""I thank you," replied Flavia; "we have already eaten. We found nowant of food among the cottages upon the hills."But Marcian pressed upon them his hospitality so earnestly, thatFlavia yielded, feeling that there was something more beneath hisgrave and thoughtful air than he suffered at first to appear; andwhile the tent was being raised by his attendants, he sent a messengerto the palace, with orders for such minute examination as showed thatthe day would be high ere he could return. Food already dressed wassoon spread out under the tent; and one or two vessels of wine wereproduced, with several rich cups and vases, carved with the exquisiteworkmanship of an earlier age, and shining with many a precious stone.With grave suavity the tribune did the honours of the meal, and spokemuch, and of many things, but with a wandering and discursive spirit,as if his mind was forcing itself to the task, and seeking morelargely the aid of imagination than might have been the case had theheart been itself at ease."How magnificent are those cypresses!" he said, looking towards thelong avenue which led down the hill; "I never beheld finer, except,perhaps, some that grow on the hill above Byzantium. But those standsolitary, as if to mark the tomb of some warrior who has died afarfrom his own land; these sweep down in a long row, like a line ofdeparted monarchs seen in the shady grandeur of tradition. There theystood, centuries before Diocletian laid the first stone of his palace;there they stand now, when his history is almost forgotten; there theywill stand, when we are as he is. Well are they placed between thepalace and the sepulchre--those witnesses of the mortality of ages.The common lot of man! why should any one shrink from the common lotof man! Why should we look with hope to this world's future, or turnback our eyes with lingering grief to the past, or nurse bright hopesof such young beings as these," and he laid his hand upon the head ofAmmian, "or mourn with bitter regret for those who have changed thethorny couch of mortal life for the calm bed of the tomb? Give me acup of wine!""A prodigy! a prodigy!" cried one of the slaves, running into thetent; "an omen! an omen! Tribune, the eagle, which has hovered over usall the way from Salona, has settled on the pole of the tent!""Get ye gone!" replied Marcian; "what have I to do with omens? I mayhave the heart without the wings of the eagle. Out upon ambition! andyet this very Diocletian, who founded the palace hard by, was a slavebefore he was an emperor. But he loathed, resigned, and refused toresume the power which he had acquired and proved. That eagle hauntsme: twice has it hovered for hours over me while sleeping in the openfield, and now it settles on my tent. These are strange accidents, andyet nothing more than accidents. Who should dream of ambition withthose tombs before his eyes? Give me some wine!"The attendant who stood near handed the goblet, which he had heldready filled for some minutes, to his master; and Marcian,[5] yet buthalf a Christian, turned and poured some of the wine upon the ground."To the dead!" he said, looking mournfully round him, "to the dead!"and his eyes fixed full and sadly, upon Theodore.---------------[Footnote 5: He was at this time probably an Arian; but there isreason to believe that his family had long held their ancientreligion, against all the decrees of the Christian emperors.]---------------The youth started suddenly on his feet, and grasped the tribune'shand, exclaiming: "My father! I adjure thee tell me! What of myfather?"Marcian threw his arms round the slighter form of his young friend,speaking some words in a low tone. Flavia rose and gazed eagerly inthe face of the tribune, who shook his head mournfully as his reply;and Theodore hid his face in his mantle, while Eudochia burst intowild and weeping lamentations. Ildica's dark eyes overflowed insilence; and though Flavia let not one drop roll over the jettyfringes of her eyelids, her pale cheek grew paler, and her lipquivered with intense emotion. Marcian said no more, but gazed downsternly upon the hilt of his sword; and the only words that wereuttered for some time were: "Alas, Paulinus!" which broke from the lipof Ammian.CHAPTER VII.THE DEPARTURE.It was a long and dreary pause; but at length the stern and virtuoussoldier, who, ere many more years had passed, seated himself withoutcrime or bloodshed in the chair of the C[ae]sars, laid his hand uponthe arm of Theodore, with a firm but kindly pressure which spoke atonce to a heart full of high feelings and of noble energies, androused it from the dull stupor of sudden grief."Oh! Marcian," exclaimed the youth, "this is an unexpected stroke! Soshort a while since I saw him depart full of vigour, and life, andhappiness. So short, so common a journey--so easy--so safe! How, tellme how this has befallen? Was it by sickness, or accident, or war withsome rebel, or in the chase of some wild beast?""Alas, no!" replied Marcian; "it was by none of these, my son. Norwould I wound your young heart afresh by telling how it did takeplace, were it not absolutely necessary for you to know your father'sfate, in order that you may gain an augury or a warning of your own,and timely prevent it.""The emperor," cried Flavia, "the emperor has destroyed his faithfulfriend: Paulinus saw it before he went. Every line of his last letterbreathes the anticipation of his coming fate. He saw it in the gloomybrow of Theodosius; he saw it in the smile of Chrysapheus; he feltthat he was going, never to return. Say, tribune, say! was it not theemperor's deed?""Even so!" replied Marcian. "By the order of him whom he had servedwith unequalled fidelity and truth--the friend of his schoolboy hours,the companion of his high and noble studies--by the hands of those hethought his friends--hands that had been plighted to him in affection,and raised with his in battle--at his own social board, and in thehour of confiding tranquillity--was slain Paulinus, leaving not anobler or a better behind."Theodore again shed tears, but Flavia asked eagerly, "The cause,tribune! What was the cause--or rather, what the pretext forcause--reasonable cause there could be none for dooming to death oneof the purest, noblest, least ambitious men that the world has everyet seen.""The cause was jealousy, lady," replied Marcian; "a cause that leadsmen ever to wild and madlike actions. In the gardens of the C[ae]sars,near their eastern capital, is a solitary tree, which bears fruitrarely; but when it does, produces an apple like that which hung inthe garden of the children of Hesperus--small in size, golden incolour, and ambrosial to the taste. Paulinus had bestowed on Eudoxia abook, containing poems of Sappho, which no other manuscript canproduce; and the empress, in return, had sportively promised herhusband's friend the rarest thing that she could find to bestow. Thetree of which I spoke had in the past autumn produced but one apple,and that was sent, on the entrance of the new year, by Theodosius toEudoxia. She, in thoughtless innocence, sent it as the rarest of allthings to Paulinus, and Chrysapheus took good heed that the factshould reach the emperor's ears, distorted to his purpose. Fury seizedupon the heart of Theodosius; but the base eunuch had sufficient skilland power to make him conceal his suspicions and his hatred, forChrysapheus well knew that an open accusation might produce a bold andsuccessful defence. Paulinus was sent to C[ae]sarea; and there,unheard, without trial, and without justice, was put to death!""Tyrant!" muttered Theodore. "Base, ungrateful tyrant!""Let your indignation swallow up your grief, my Theodore!" repliedMarcian; "but let it not injure your country. Great as it is, great asit well may be, still greater will it become when you hear thatValens, your father's bosom friend, has been since sacrificed for noother crime than his love for Paulinus; that several of your householdslaves have been slain by the emperor's orders; and that all thewealth of Paulinus has been bestowed upon Chrysapheus!"Theodore again started up, exclaiming--"I swear by all my hopes, andby my father's spirit--"But Marcian caught his arm. "Swear nothing against your country, myson," he cried: "Theodore, we have need of every Roman!""Hear me! hear me!" cried Theodore. "Naught against my country. No,never, let the temptation be what it may, will I draw the swordagainst Rome. So help me the God in whom I trust! But should ever thetime come when this hand can reach a tyrant, or a tyrant's minister,it shall doom him to death as remorselessly as he has doomed my noblefather;" and having spoken, he cast himself down, and again coveredhis face in his mantle.Never, perhaps, through all the long tragic record of human woes andsuffering which the past, the sad and solemn past, holds in itsmelancholy treasury--never was there yet a scene in which the darkfeeling of desolation penetrated more deeply into every bosom, than inthe one which surrounded the tribune Marcian. The horrors, thefatigues, the destruction of the preceding night, had laid every heartprostrate in the general calamity; and when the blow of individualgrief fell heavy upon all alike, it seemed to crush and trample out inevery breast the last warm kindly hopes--the last bright delusions ofour phantasm-like existence.Flavia gazed on her children and on the orphans in deep melancholy;while Theodore, with his face buried in his robe, sat apart, andEudochia hid her streaming eyes upon her adoptive mother's lap.Ildica, with clasped hands, and cheeks down which the large brighttears rolled slow, now gazed upon her young and mourning lover; nowturned an inquiring, anxious, longing glance towards Marcian; who, onhis part, again, with knitted brow and downcast eyes, sat in themidst, stifling emotions which struggled hard against control. Eventhe slaves of Flavia and Paulinus, among whom the news had spread,gathered round the open tent, and, standing wrapped up in their darkpenul[ae], gazed with mournful and sympathizing looks upon the sadgroup beneath its shade; while, mingled among them, here and there,were seen some of the stout soldiers who had accompanied the tribune,evidently sharing, notwithstanding all their own habits of danger andsuffering, and their frequent familiarity with death itself, in thegrief of the young and hapless beings before them.One only of the party seemed occupied with other thoughts, and yet theseeming belied him. Ammian, reclining by the side of the little sandypath which crossed the meadow where they sat, seemed busy, in hisusual abstracted manner, in tracing figures on the dust. One of thesoldiers moved across to see what he was employed in, and by thataction drew the attention of Marcian, whose eyes turned thither too;when, to his surprise, he beheld written in the Greek character uponthe sand--"Death to all tyrants! The blood of the guilty for the blood of theinnocent! Vengeance for Paulinus!"Rising at once, he set his foot upon the writing ere the slowersoldier could decipher what it meant; and then, raising his finger toAmmian, he said, with emphasis, "Beware!"The boy looked up in his face, and answered calmly, "I will beware,most noble Marcian!" But there was meaning in his eyes, and Marcianchose not to urge his wild and daring spirit further.Seating himself again by Flavia's side, the tribune, with the calmgentleness of a compassionate heart, endeavoured to sooth the painwhich it had been his bitter task to inflict; and when he had, in adegree, succeeded in gaining attention, he gave some orders to thesoldiers, and spoke some words to the slaves, which caused them toretire from the vicinity of the tent."Listen to me, Theodore," he said; "listen to me, noble lady! Griefhas had its part; other duties call for your consideration. I wouldfain ask you, sweet Flavia, whither you now propose to turn yoursteps; what plan you now propose to follow?""We proposed," replied Flavia, after a moment's hesitation, "to goforward to Salona; there to wait, if we could find a refuge, till thepalace was again rendered habitable, or till we could send thosethings which may be necessary to our own villa upon the mountains. Ihave not dwelt in it since my husband's death, but if it be necessaryI can conquer memory.""To Salona!" replied Marcian, musing; "to Salona! It is true, youcould easily fly thence in case of necessity to Ravenna; butValentinian, if report has informed me rightly, loves you not, andmight avenge himself by giving you up to Theodosius!"Flavia gazed earnestly in the tribune's countenance, as the new andpainful conviction of fresh dangers broke upon her. "More sorrows!"she said, "more, more, to be endured! Think you, then, noble Marcian,that we are in danger at Salona? Think you, then, that Theodosius willextend his persecution even to us, innocent as we are?""He has already slain one as innocent as any of us, lady," replied thetribune, "and he has given up to the sword one friend and many of theslaves of him who is gone. Do you believe, then, that he will sparethe cousin of one whom he hated--a cousin who was loved as a sister?Can you trust to his stopping short with the father, and not carryingon his vengeance to the son?""Oh that I were in his palace!" cried Theodore: "oh that I were in hishall, and before his throne!"But Flavia answered more calmly: "Tell us all our danger, tribune.Give your kind and generous advice. You are known as wise and good, aswell as brave and skilful. We will give our actions into your handsfor guidance. You shall shape our course as you think fit.""Lady," replied Marcian in a tone which, notwithstanding all hiscommand over himself, showed how much his heart was moved,--"lady, Iloved Paulinus as a brother. He was wise and eloquent, learned andbrave, and I am but the son of a common soldier, nurtured in camps,and educated in the rude field. Yet between my heart and his therewere common feelings; and in the course of our various lives wechained our souls together by mutual benefits: may his shade findElysium! When I heard of what had befallen, my first thought was of myfriend's children. My cohort was in Dalmatia, my time of commandapproaching; and though I had been called to the capital by theimperial mandate, I prepared to come hither with all speed. While I soprepared, I heard of the death of Valens and his slaves, and doubtednot that the cup might next pass to me. I presented myself before theemperor to know at once my doom; but he contented himself withcommanding me to come hither, and lead the troops instantly intoThrace. Another cohort under the command of Strator, the bitter enemyof Paulinus, is ordered hither instantly to regulate--such is thepretext--the line of frontier with the messengers of Valentinian.Lady, I fear me there may be other purposes to execute; and I havehastened, without pause or rest, to bring you tidings which, sad asthey are, might have been crowned with bitterer still if I had notbeen the messenger--to bring you such tidings, and to take counselwith you for your safety. My opinion, indeed, my advice, is littleworthy of your having; but still, let us consult together, and--as faras my duty as a soldier and a Roman will permit--let me be a brotherto the Lady Flavia, a father to my dead friend's orphans.""Your advice will be as wise as your heart is kind," replied Flavia."Oh give it us, my friend! give it to us fully and openly. We will beguided by it, unless there be reasons against it, which even youyourself shall approve. If safety be not to be found in Illyricum,whither would you have us go?"To the extreme limits of the empire!" replied Marcian. "What mattersit to you what the land be called which you inhabit for a few shortyears? what matters it if the north wind blow somewhat more coldlythan in this golden land? if winter wear a ruder aspect, and theflowers and fruits linger for the summer sun ere they bloom andripen?""What matters it, indeed!" said Flavia. "We love this scene,tribune--well and dearly do we love this glorious scene--but we loveit more from the tender memories that have been attached to it, thaneven for its sunny splendour and its face of beauty. But now thethunder which has stricken us has turned the sweet and fruity winewhich filled our cup to sour and hateful dregs. Another land will bebrighter in our sight. Freedom from a tyrant's neighbourhood shallsupply the place of beauties that we leave behind; the absence ofobjects that recall our griefs shall compensate for those that onceawoke our joys; peace shall be our atmosphere of balm, security oursunshine. What say you, Theodore?"Let us go, my mother," replied the youth: "where you and Ildica,Ammian and Eudochia, are with me, shall be my country. The tyrant hassmitten down one object of my love, but he is powerless over mycapability of loving: that which was parted is now all concentrated.You will go with me, my Ildica, is it not so? and my father'sblessing--the blessing of the dead--shall follow, and comfort us inexile. But whither would you direct our course, noble Marcian?""Towards the banks of the Danube," he replied. "There, at the extremeverge of the imperial territory, the power of Theodosius waxes weak,and is exercised with difficulty. There, too, if mad and perseveringjealousy drive him still to seek your hurt, ten steps place you beyondhis reach, where the feeble and degenerate C[ae]sar dare not stretch ahand to grasp you: your father's brother dwells at Margus, bishop ofthe place."Theodore's countenance fell. "He was indeed the brother of my father'sblood," he answered, "but was never the brother of his love. Grasping,avaricious, crafty, I have heard my father say that Eugenius has thetalents, but not the virtues, of a Roman.""Yet with him," replied Marcian, "are you sure of a safer asylum thanwith any one else. Even at this moment he is at enmity with the courtof Theodosius, and bears a mortal hatred to Chrysapheus, who hadwronged him, abandoned him, and, notwithstanding the pleading of yourfather in his behalf, would have willingly given him up to thebarbarians. With him you will find safety, I must not say you willfind vengeance--but it may be so.""Let us go!" cried Theodore; "let us go, my mother! The gold andjewels which, unwitting of all this, I made the Numidians carry forthlast night, will render the journey lighter to you, dear mother; andif my uncle, careful of his wealth, refuse to give me support, I willfind means to win it for myself.""Fear not for that," replied Marcian; "your father's wealth, Theodore,is gone, but his estates are yours; and even Theodosius dares notopenly take from you that which no law has sentenced you to lose.Strange that he who unquestioned takes a life unjustly should not havepower to seize your land, and yet it is so. Now, lady, let me sendonce more to the palace, and bid them bring forth all that yourtreasury contains. Take with you all your moveable wealth; for if youdo not so guard yourself, it will fall into hands which render noaccount. I will bid them, too, bring forth whatever litters andcarriages they find, to bear you less weary on the way; and ere twodays be over, I will follow, and rejoining you, protect you from harm,till, on the frontiers of M[oe]sia, I must leave you and march on. Atall events, my presence and my troops will ensure your safety so far;and even after that, I shall be interposed between you and yourenemies, so that no messenger of evil can pass without my learning hispurpose, delaying his journey, and giving you timely tidings. Speed,however, matters much, and now I would have you set forth without aday's delay."Flavia sought not to procrastinate; for though many a clinging memoryattached her to those scenes by the fine filmy ties of associations,which even the sharp edge of grief could not cut, yet the safety ofTheodore, the happiness of her own child, the enfranchisement from astate of society, where virtue was no safeguard and justice affordedno shield, were objects too dear and high to be risked by delay. Fewand melancholy were the words that now passed, but the orders ofMarcian were promptly obeyed; and though he would suffer neitherFlavia nor Theodore to return, even for an hour, to the palace,knowing far more of the cruel orders which Theodosius had alreadygiven against them than he chose to communicate, yet a number of theirdomestics were sent thither with his soldiers to remove all thatbelonged to either family in the building.Ere the sun had passed the meridian more than an hour, all who hadbeen sent had returned, and many and curious were the objects whichnow surrounded that sad group by the side of the cemetery. A number ofmules and horses were there; the black charger which had carriedPaulinus in his last victory over the Alani, and which had never beenridden since by any one but himself; the white horses which drew thelow carriage called pilentum, wherein Flavia was accustomed to drivealong the margin of the sea; litters with their silver feet, andcovered chairs of gold and ivory; rich caskets; leathern bags of goldand silver coin; and large quantities of silks and fine linens (thenbecome general, but still considered costly,) made up into packages ofconvenient sizes for carrying on the shoulders of the slaves, orplacing on the beasts of burden, together with cups and vases of gold,silver, and precious stones; and slaves of all complexions and ofevery different feature. Everything, in short, which was usuallycollected in a wealthy and powerful Roman house, at that luxurious andextravagant period, was there scattered round in glittering profusion,giving that group the appearance of some caravan from Ophir or fromTyre reposing on its journey. Some confusion and some delay tookplace, though everything was arranged as quickly as possible, whileFlavia looked on in calm sadness, and Theodore gazed upon the scenewith burning indignation unquenched by grief, making his lip stillquiver and his bright eye flash.At length all was prepared, and, with a few words of heartfelt thanksto Marcian, the lady placed herself with Ildica in one of thelectul[ae] or litters, Eudochia and her chief attendant reclined inanother. Ammian sprang upon a small Thracian horse, and Theodoremounted his father's charger. The noble beast, wild with unweariedstrength, reared high and snorted fiercely, as he felt the lightweight of the young Roman; but Theodore with skill and power sooncurbed him to his will, and patted his proud neck, while a tear, givento the memory of him who was gone, wetted his eyelids. The whole partythen moved on, winding back again along the path which they hadtrodden that very morning.Their way lay over the hills, and for an hour they moved on, ascendinggently, but without stopping, till at length, on the highest spot ofthe inferior acclivity, which lies at the foot of the highermountains, Flavia bade the bearers stop, and gazed out of the litterupon the scene which she was quitting perhaps for ever. There it lay,robed in the same splendid sunshine which had adorned it on thepreceding day. To the eyes which looked upon it not a change was to beseen. The palace, the village, the distant town of Salona, thebeautiful bay, the golden islands which are scattered along the coast,the liquid sapphire in which they seemed to float, were all sleepingbeneath the wanderers' glance in the drowsy heat of midday, lookingcalm and tranquil, as if nature herself imitated the hypocrisy of man,and covered with deceitful smiles the desolation which reigned withinher bosom. The measured round of the sun had scarcely beenaccomplished, since those who now stood upon the hill-top, fugitivesfrom their dear domestic hearths, had met together after separation,and had gazed over that same lovely prospect from the clump ofcypresses which now lay beneath their eyes. Scarcely had one round ofthe sun been accomplished since, standing there, they had gazed uponthat pageant-like scene of beauty, and had felt all its fair featuresreflected from the clear bright mirror of the happy heart. Scarcelyhad one round been accomplished since every splendid object that theeye could find, and every sweet sound that the ear could catch, in aspot, and a moment when all was music and brightness, had seemed butan image, a type, a prophecy of joys, and happiness, and successes yetto come; and yet in that brief space an earthquake had rent and tornthat enchanted land, and had scattered ruin, desolation, and deathover its fair calm face: in that brief space, from the bosoms of thosewho gazed upon it had been torn the bright joys of youth andinexperience; had been scattered the dear hopes and warm imaginings ofinnocent expectation; had been riven one of the dearest ties of humanexistence, the great band of the loving and the loved; for not one inthat sad family but felt that the unjust fate of Paulinus had given achilly coldness to their hearts--no, not one from the youngest to theoldest. The young felt that the fresh bloom was gone for ever from theHesperian fruit; the elder that the cropped flower of hope, which hadagain been beginning to blossom, had been once more crushed down, andnever could bloom again.Between their fate and the scene they gazed upon there seemed somefanciful affinity; each felt it, each lingered with fond regret togather into one glance all the thousand lovely and beloved sights;each sighed as they gazed and thought of the "For ever!" and atlength, even from Flavia's eyes, broke forth the long-repressed tears.The slaves stood round and sympathized with those who mourned. Many adark eye and many a rough cheek was moistened with the drops of kindlyfeeling, till at length the lady wiped her tears away, and, waving herhand towards the valleys on the other side, said, "Let us go on!"Again they began to move, when the voices of two slaves broke forth ina mournful song, which they had probably often sung in their ownremote land.SLAVE'S SONG.I."We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth;Our life's but a race to the death from the birth;We pause not to gather the flowers as they grow,The goal is before us, and on we must go!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."II."Fair scenes of our childhood, dear homes of our youth,Memorials of innocence, virtue, and truth,The land of our birth, the dear mother that bore--We leave ye behind us, we see you no more!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."III."The joys that we tasted we taste not again;Each hour has its burden, each day has its pain;No moment in flying, but hurries us pastSome sight, sound, or feeling more dear than the last!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."IV."We leave ye behind us, and others shall comeTo tread in our footsteps, from cradle to tomb;Still gazing back fondly, with lingering eyes,Where behind them the bright land of memory lies!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."V."The sound of Time's pinion, as fast he doth fly,Is echoed from each mortal breast by a sigh;What if there be fruits? they ungather'd must grow,For fate is behind us, and on we must go!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."VI."We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth.Hopes, joys, and endearments, sport, pleasure, and mirth,Like a tempest-driven ship, sailing by some bright shore,Time hurries us onward--we see you no more!We leave ye behind us, sweet things of the earth."CHAPTER VIII.THE STRANGER.It was in the calends of June, and yet the day had very few of theattributes of summer. The grey rain came down heavily from the dullleaden sky, the wind rushed in fierce gusts from the northeast, thestream of the Danube rolled dark and rapidly, and a melancholy murmurrose up from its waters while they hurried on to the gloomy Euxine, asif in reply to the sad and wailing voice of the breeze. The only thingthat spoke the season of the year was the vivid verdure of the widegreen pastures, and the rich blossoms that hung upon the frequenttrees. Along the banks of the dark river, accompanied only by twofreedmen on horseback, rode Theodore, the son of Paulinus, dressed inthe deep mourning tunic and mantle of dark grey, with no ornament ofany kind upon his person except at the hilt of his sword. The sameblack charger bore him with which he had departed from Dalmatia; andpressing the noble beast onward, he cast his eyes frequently to theopposite bank of the river.At length he suddenly drew in his bridle, exclaiming: "There is araft, and if we can but make them hear we shall be secure. Dismount,Cremera; run to the margin, and shout loudly for the boatmen."The dark Arab, who, though rendered free by Flavia after theearthquake, at Theodore's request, still followed the fortunes of theyoung Roman with love elevated by liberty, sprang eagerly to theground to obey; but, to the surprise of all, ere he had led down hishorse to the shore, the raft, which they had seen moored to theopposite bank, was put in motion by two men who had been sitting near,under the shelter of the wood, that was there thick and tall. Onwardit came, skilfully piloted across the stream, till it approached theshore, on which Theodore and his two followers now stood ready toembark.At the distance of twenty or thirty cubits, however, the raft paused,and those who steered it gazed upon the young Roman and his attendantswith apparent doubt and surprise. Theodore pressed them to come on;and then, perceiving that they were barbarians from the north, hespoke to them in one of those dialects which feelings connected withhis mother's memory had made him learn and preserve, even amid the gayamusements and deeper studies which had since had their share of histime. She it was who had first taught his infant tongue to pronouncethose sounds so difficult for a Roman to utter: she it was who hadused those northern words towards her boy, in the early language ofaffection and tenderness; and though she had died at a period of hislife when the wax on the tablets of memory is soft, and impressionsare too easily effaced, he had never forgotten the accents that he hadso dearly loved. But now, that knowledge proved not a littleserviceable. The barbarians looked up in surprise; and when he toldthem, in a language they understood, to bring near their raft withspeed, as delay might be dangerous to him, they hastened to approachthe shore, and suffered him to lead his unwilling horse upon thefluctuating and unsteady raft.One of the attendants followed; but the boatmen seemed to doubtwhether their rude passage-boat would sustain the third man and horse;though the large trunks of trees whereof it was composed were furthersupported by skins blown out like bladders. Theodore, however, wouldnot leave one behind; and, though sinking deep in the water, the raftstill bore them all up.Floating heavily upon the rushing stream, it reached the other bank ofthe Danube, and a piece of gold repaid the service of the boatmen; butthough, when the foot of Theodore touched the barbaric land, he feltthe thrill of security and freedom at his heart, yet, as he mountedhis horse and gazed upon the scene before him, he paused with asensation of doubt and awe. The bank of the river where he stood wasclothed with smooth green turf; but both farther up and lower down thestream might be seen high rocks; and at the distance of about ahundred yards from the margin rose up dark, tall, and gloomy, theforest covering the primeval earth. The proximity of those mightytrees prevented the eye from discovering aught beyond them, exceptwhere the ground sloped down towards the west; but there, even, nopromise of a more open country was given: for over the first forestline, at its lowest point, might be seen a wide extent of dark graywood, rounded, and waving with an interminable ocean of leaves andbranches.The desolate aspect of the wilderness fell chill upon the heart of theyoung Roman; and though his resolution to pursue his way on that sideof the river was not to be shaken, yet many a difficulty and a danger,he too well knew, lay before him. Through some part of that wood, hewas aware, had been cut a military road, when the Romans had beenindeed the sovereigns of the world; but since that time centuries hadpassed, and the inhabitants of the country had changed: a thousanduncivilized tribes filled the land which the people of the imperialcity had once possessed; and all her magnificent works had beendestroyed or neglected beyond the mere frontier of the diminishedempire. Theodore paused, and gazed upon that dark and gloomy wood,uncertain by what path he should direct his steps, and withoutremarking the keen and eager eyes with which the two barbarianferrymen examined him from head to foot.At length, as he still stood scanning the forest, one of them askedsome question of the Arab Cremera; but it was couched in the languageof the Alani, and Cremera could neither comprehend nor answer. Thebarbarian then advanced to the side of the young Roman's horse, andsaid, in a mild and sympathizing voice, "Are you not he who wasexpected?""I am not," replied Theodore, in the same language. "I am a Roman; butI seek to go to Margus by the barbarian bank of the river.""You will find it both difficult and dangerous," answered the other,"even if you already know this land; and if you do not know it, thelizard which climbs the rocks and trees, and glides through thesmallest space upon its onward way, might as well try to travel uponthe water. Besides, you know not whether you are welcome in the land.""My mother was daughter of Evaric, king of the Alani of Gaul," repliedTheodore; "and wherever the land is tenanted by that nation I shall bewelcome."The man kissed the edge of his mantle, saying, "Be you welcome!" andTheodore continued: "Can you give me no one to guide me on my way?""I will see, I will see!" replied the other; and he ran swiftly upinto the wood.Ere he had been long absent he reappeared, followed by a young man,clad in coarse clothing and common fur, who expressed himself willing,for a small reward, to undertake the task of guiding the stranger onhis way; and though, by his stature and complexion, very differentfrom those of the tall and fair Alani, Theodore discovered at oncethat he was of some other tribe, and found, also, that he could onlyspeak a few brief sentences of their language, the young Roman was,nevertheless, glad to put himself under the guidance of any one whoknew the country well. With the few words that he could command of thelanguage which Theodore had been speaking, the guide told him that itwould be a journey of two days from that spot to Margus, and thathouses where they could find refreshment and repose would be few; butstill Theodore determined to pursue his way, and the guide was at oncepromised the hire that he demanded.He made the young Roman stay while he caught and mounted a smallshaggy horse which had been straying in the wood, round a hut whichwas just to be distinguished upon the upland, through the bolls of thetall trees. No sooner had he sprung upon his beast, however, than thewhole nature of the barbarian seemed changed. Where he had been slowand limping in his gait, he became quick and active; and setting offat full speed through the forest, he pursued paths along which it wasscarcely possible for Theodore and his companions to follow him; sonarrow were they, so tangled, so insecure for any horse unaccustomedto those intricate wilds.Still poured down the rain; and as they galloped on through those dimvistas and sudden breaks, the white mist rolled in volumes among thetrees, and each footfall of the horses produced a cloud from themarshy grass. At length, towards the evening, the sun, some threehours past his meridian, began to break through the heavy clouds, andstreamed down the glades of the forest, while the light vapours rolledaway, and the birds sang sweetly from the woody coverts around. Inanother hour three small tents of skins were seen; and, pausing therefor a short space, the guide procured some food for the horses andmilk for the riders. The people of the tents looked wild and fierce,and spoke the dialect of the Huns, which was unintelligible to allears but that of the guide. They showed no curiosity in regard to thestrangers' appearance, but they evinced that avidity which is thepeculiar vice of frontier tribes.At the end of less than an hour the guide pointed to the sun and tothe horses; and Theodore, mounting, once more followed him on his way.Night fell ere they again saw a human abode; but at length they haltedbefore a tall tower of hewn stone, which had, in former years, been aRoman fort, built as a defence against the very barbarians who nowpossessed the land. The guide tried the gateway; but finding it fast,shouted loudly for admission. He then paused to listen if any replywere made; and while he did so, Theodore heard afar the melancholyroaring of the Danube.At length some grim faces and wild fur-clad forms presented themselvesat the gate, and Theodore and his followers were led into what hadbeen the chamber of the guard. There was no want of hospitality--nay,nor of courtesy of heart--shown by the rude tenants of that halfruined building, to the young stranger who sought the shelter of theroof that had become theirs. They lighted a fire in the midst of thehall to dry his still damp garments; they brought forth their stock offruit and milk, and even some of the delicacies obtained from theneighbouring country. Broiled fish was speedily added; and while themen, by speaking gestures, pressed him to his food, the women touchedhis mantle, and seemed by their smiles to marvel at its fineness.Though their appearance was rude, and no comeliness of form or featurewon by external beauty that confidence which is so often refused tohomely truth, yet Theodore read in their looks that he was secure, andlay himself down upon a bed of skins to seek that repose which he somuch needed. The freedmen lay at his feet; and all was soon silencewithin those crumbling walls: but sleep, the bosom friend of youth andhappiness, grows timorous as a sacred bird after the first fell graspof grief. All that he had gone through within the last sad month, allthat weighed upon his mind even then, came back in the visions of thenight, and three times roused the young Roman from his light andtroubled slumbers. The first time all was still, and the light of theblazing fire of pine flickered over the dark forms that lay sleepingaround. The next time when he woke two figures were standing betweenhim and the light; but one soon turned away and left the chamber,while the other, who remained, cast some fagots on the embers, andagain lay himself down to rest. The slumber that succeeded was deeper,heavier, more tranquil; and when he again awoke, daylight wasstreaming in from above. Almost all the Huns whom he had seen thenight before had left the chamber, and one, whom he had not hithertobeheld, stood with his arms folded on his chest, gazing upon him as helay stretched in the morning light.Between Theodore and the barbarian, however, awakened, watchful, andprepared, with his spear grasped in his hand, sat the faithfulCremera, his giant limbs and swelling muscles all ready to start intodefence of his master on the slightest appearance of danger; but theeyes of the Hun seemed not even to see the slave, so intently werethose small but searching orbs turned upon the countenance of theyoung Roman. Even when he woke and looked up, the Hun withdrew notthat steadfast gaze; but seemed to contemplate, with eager curiosity,the same features which he had beheld silent and cold in sleep nowwakening up into warm and speaking life.Theodore returned the glance for a moment without rising, and, as helay, scanned the person of the Hun. He was shorter than the ordinaryheight of the Romans; but his breadth across the shoulders wasgigantic, with thin flanks and long muscular arms. His features wereby no means handsome, and his complexion was a pale dark brown; butyet there was something in that countenance remarkable, striking, notdispleasing. The small black eyes had an inexpressible brilliancy; theforehead, surmounted with thin gray hair, was broad, high, andmajestic; and the firm immoveable bend of the almost beardless lipsspoke that decision and strength of character which, when displayed,either in good or evil, commands a separate portion of respect. Hisdress was nearly the same as that of the other barbarians whomTheodore had already encountered, consisting of dark gray cloth andskins; but the cloth was somewhat finer in texture, and the skins hada smooth and glossy softness, which showed the young Roman that theman who stood before him was superior to the rest of those by whom hewas surrounded. Nor had it, indeed, required the slight superiority ofhis garb to teach Theodore that he beheld no ordinary man. It has beenasserted, and it may be so, that from some hidden source of sympathy,some instinctive prescience, we always feel peculiar sensations onfirst meeting with one who is destined greatly to influence or controlour fate through life; and whether such be the case or not, certain itis that through the breast of Theodore, the moment his eyes rested onthe Hun, passed a thrill, not of fear, nor of awe, nor even ofsurprise, but of strange and mingled emotions, such as he had neverknown before; and, as I have said, he continued in the same recumbentattitude, gazing firmly in the face of one who gazed so steadfastly athim.After a short pause, however, the Hun spoke, addressing him in thetongue of the Alani. "Though that bed," he said, in a low, deep-tonedvoice, every word of which was as distinct and clear as if spoken by aStentor--"though that bed must be but a hard one for the soft limbs ofa Roman, thou seemest too fond of it for such a youth as thou art.""Thou art mistaken, barbarian," replied Theodore, springing on hisfeet; "the Romans, who can lie on silken couches when they find them,do not think the ground neither too cold nor too hard when necessaryto use it for a bed. I was weary with long journeying for many days;otherwise the crowing cock is my awakener.""Thou speakest the Alan tongue well," said the Hun, gazing at him fromhead to foot; "and thou art in colour and in size like a northman.Say, art thou really a Roman?""I am," replied Theodore; "but my mother was the daughter of Evaric--""King of the Alani," interrupted the Hun: "then thy father wasPaulinus, count of the offices. We have met," he added, musing; "wehave met; he is a valiant man: where is he now?""In the grave," replied Theodore.The Hun started; and, after a moment's pause, replied, "I grieve forhim; he was a valiant man: how did he die?""It matters not," answered Theodore; "he is dead. And now, barbarian,I would fain speed on my way, for I would be at Margus as early as maybe. Where is my guide?""To Margus!" said the Hun: "know you that the priest of that city--thebishop as they call him--has offended Attila the King? know you thatAttila has demanded him from Theodosius as a slave, to set his footupon his neck, and trample on him?""I have heard such rumours as I came hither," replied Theodore; "butit matters not to me what quarrel there may be between my uncle andthe barbarian chief. Attila will find it hard to trample on thebrother of Paulinus.""Ay! so he is Paulinus' brother!" cried the Hun; "I do remember now heis his brother: but if thou bearest tidings from Theodosius to thineuncle, tell him to put no faith in the arms of men who know not how touse them; to trust not in those who daily break their promises. Tellhim that he who bade you thus speak knows full well Attila the King;and that he will as soon abandon his prey as the hungry vulture. Yourguide is gone; but follow me; I will show you the way to Margus."A number of barbarians were collected in the lower part of the towerand in the open space round it; but without a word they sufferedTheodore and his freedmen, with their new guide, to proceed to a treeunder which four horses stood prepared. All passed in silence; no onestood forward to assist; no one advanced to require recompense fromthe young stranger. The Hun who accompanied him sprang on his ownhorse at one bound, and then sat as if of a piece with the animal;while Theodore drew forth a coin of gold, and beckoned forward thebarbarian who had acted the foremost part, on the preceding night, inoffering him the rites of hospitality. The man looked wistfully at thegold piece which Theodore held out towards him, and then at the faceof his superior, who sat beside the young Roman. The horseman,however, bowed his head, and the other instantly took the money,uttering a number of words which Theodore did not understand, butconstrued into thanks. Turning their bridles then towards the Danube,the journey towards Margus was recommenced, the Hun leading the way ata slow pace."You ride not so swiftly as our guide of yesterday," said Theodore,after proceeding for a few minutes, with the impatience of youth andanxiety urging him on; "remember, I would be at Margus ere nightfall.""'Tis a three hours' journey," said the other, calmly: "you areimpatient, youth. I would fain spare the beast thou ridest; for, wereit as the gods willed it to be, it would be a noble creature, and thouhast ridden it too long and too hard yesterday for a creature so sleekand pampered.""Despise it not, Hun!" said Theodore, as he saw the keen bright eye ofhis companion running over the charger's limbs; "despise it not. Ithas carried my father through a bloody field of battle, and has borneme through a long and painful journey, after which it may well showsome signs of weariness; therefore despise it not, though it be unlikethe rugged brute which thou ridest thyself.""I do not despise it," rejoined the Hun. "In former times its soft andsilken coat, its delicate limbs and weighty body, might have provokedmy scorn; but I have learned to know that all things have their uses,and to despise nothing but vicious luxury, effeminacy, and cowardice.I see no reason why there should not be tribes who fight, and tribeswho cultivate the land: each may be useful; and so with your horse andmine. Mine will carry me with a swiftness, and to a distance, and fora length of time, impossible to yours; will bear weather, and food,and cold, under which yours would die; but, very likely, in the shockof battle yours would bear down mine--if I did not prevent it--and,perhaps, might perform feats that mine could never learn. It is onlywhen I see man debase himself to carve images, and paint pictures, andwork gold, and spend years in making a dwelling to cover his miserablehead, and lie upon the feathers of birds, and cover himself with thewoven excrements of a worm, that I now feel disgust. Gems, and jewels,and cups of gold and silver, may be wrought by other nations, and maybe used by us; but it is the part of bold and brave men to take themfrom those who are weak and effeminate enough to make them.""I cannot argue with you, barbarian," replied Theodore; "my mindwanders unto other things: but I have heard my father say that all thegraces and elegances of social life are the true touchstone of thenoble heart. Those who are inclined by nature to evil will becomeeffeminate and corrupt under their influence; while those who arebrave and virtuous only gain thence a higher point of virtue and anobler motive for daring. The diamond, when we throw it in the fire,loses nothing but the dirt and dust it may have gathered, and comesout clearer than before. A barbarian fights because he has nothing tolose but life, which has many miseries and few enjoyments; a Roman,because he has a duty to perform, although a thousand ties of refinedpleasures and multiplied enjoyments bind him to the life he risks.""Therefore is it that the Romans fight so feebly," replied the Hun;but as he saw the colour mounting in the cheek of Theodore, he added,"Be not angry, youth: my words shall not offend your ear in a landwhich thou hast sought, trusting to our hospitality. Thy father mightwell speak as thou sayst he did, for he was one of those that showedhis own words true.""Thou doest my father justice, my country wrong," replied Theodore;"but the day may come, Hun--the day may come when Romans, rousingthemselves from the sleep into which they have fallen, may teach thosewho now mistake idleness for cowardice, who take the love of reposeand peace for timidity, that the lion yet lives, though his roar hasnot been heard for years."A grim smile hung for a moment on the lip of the barbarian, and thenpassed away; but he replied nothing directly to the tart answer of hisyoung companion. At length, as they rode along by the rushing Danube,winding their way once more between the forests and the river, hepointed first to the one and then to the other bank, saying, "Lo,Roman civilization--Scythian rudeness! and yet, as thou sayst, thetime may come--nay, it may be near, when the trial will take place, ofwhich country produces, which habits nourish, the boldest hearts andstrongest hands. But setting that apart, I say, give me the forest andthe wild meadow, and the simple hut or tent of skins, truth, justice,freedom: for it is my belief that simplicity and honesty are one;luxury and falsehood are not to be divided. Look at this forest," hecontinued, after a brief pause; "it seems almost impervious, yet thouhast found a way through it; and at the foot of the hill which we arenow mounting you will find a paved road, leading into the heart of theland. It was constructed by thy ancestors, nearly in a line with thefamous vallum Romanum; and if at any time need or fancy should makethee wish to see the nations which live beyond this woody barrier,follow that road, and ask for Onegisus, the friend of Attila the King.Thou shalt find safety, friends, and protection. But see! we are atthe top of the hill, and I must leave thee. Yonder, on the other sideof the stream, where the blue mist is rolling up the mountain, liesMargus. Lo! its many towers! Thou canst not miss the way. Now Marsprotect thee!"CHAPTER IX.THE BISHOP OF MARGUS.The two sides of that mountain were like the prospect laid out beneaththe eyes of man when, in the midst of life, he pauses to survey thepast and to scrutinize the future. Dark and gloomy, on the one hand,stretched masses impervious to the eye, wrapped in uncertain mists andvague, undefined confusion, where nothing was known, nothing was sure,but that there lay ruin, chill neglect, and desolation, even untothose regions where the Cimmerian darkness of the grave covered andconfounded all. On the other hand, stretching out like the sweetmemories that lie along the path of youth, was seen a fair andbeautiful land, with the Danube rushing on through the midst towardsMargus: valley and hill, fragments of the Dacian forests, but brokenby broad cultivated plains, a watch-tower here and there; then, withintheir guardian line, a farm, a villa, gardens, and pasturages, withthe towers and walls of Margus at about eight miles' distance; andbeyond, but to the right, the Mons Aureus rising, like a pile of lapislazuli, in blue majestic splendour to the sky.Theodore paused to gaze; and feelings, mingled, intense, and evenpainful, woke in his bosom at the sight of those fair scenes fromwhich he might so soon be driven, contrasted with that dark and gloomyland which might prove his only refuge.He turned, however, after a moment's silence, to ask the Hun if hecould, in truth, prefer the one to the other; but the barbarian hadleft him without further leave-taking, and his dark form was seenriding rapidly towards the thickest part of the forest. Theodore stillremained gazing over the prospect; but, as he did so, he thought heheard a distant shout of many voices rising up from the woods behindhim; and, fearful of any interruption in his course, he hurried onupon the road which lay open before him.Increasing tokens of civilization now met his eye at every step as heproceeded; and shortly before he reached the shore, at the nearestpoint to the city, he beheld more than one ferryboat, no longer a mereraft, supported by inflated skins, but barks, provided expressly forthe purpose, and offering every convenience at which the mature art ofthe Romans had yet arrived. Without question, the young Roman and hisfollowers were admitted into one of the boats, and in a few minuteswere landed on the other side of the Danube, in the midst of all thathurry, bustle, and luxurious activity which marked the precincts of aRoman city, even in a remote province, and in the immediate vicinityof those barbarian allies who were soon destined to overwhelm allthose soft and splendid scenes in blood and ashes.The Roman dress and air of Theodore and his two freedmen enabled themto pass on unquestioned through the gates; where a few soldiers, withtheir spears cast idly down, their helmets laid aside, and theirswords unbraced, sat gaming in the sun, offering a sad but strikingpicture of the decay of that discipline which had once so speedilywon, and had so long preserved, the dominion of the world. Gayly andtunefully carolled the flower-girl, as she tripped along with herbasketful of wreaths and garlands for the festal hall or the flowingwine-cup; loudly shouted, with the ready cyathus in his hand, theseller of hot wine in the Thermopolium; eagerly argued the lawyer andthe suiter as they hurried along to the tribunal of the duumvir; gaylylaughed the boys, as, followed by a slave bearing their books, theyhastened homeward from the school. Splendid dresses, fair faces,magnificent shops, and chariots with tires of gold and silver, litterswith cushions stuffed with the flowers of the new-blown rose, met theeye of Theodore in every direction; and as he looked on all thisluxury and magnificence, and compared it with the scenes he had justquitted, he could not help asking himself, "And is this Margus? Isthis the city daily threatened by barbarian enemies? Is this theextreme point of civilization, upon the very verge of woods, andwilds, and hordes of savage Scythians?"At the end of a wide open space, towards the centre of the town, roseone of those beautiful peristyles--less light, but perhaps moreimposing, than the Greek--whereof so many had been constructed underHadrian. Within it appeared a massy temple, formerly dedicated toJupiter, but now consecrated to that purer faith destined to remainunsullied through everlasting ages, notwithstanding the faults, thefollies, and the vices of some of its ministers.At the moment that the young Roman entered the forum, the mingledcrowd of worshippers was descending the steps of the temple; and abovethem, between the two central pillars of the portico, clothed in hissacerdotal robes, and with his extended hands giving his blessing tothe people, stood a tall and princely form, in which Theodoreinstantly recognised the Bishop of Margus, the brother of his father.Dismounting from his horse, the young Roman waited for a moment, untilthe crowd had in some degree dispersed, and then, ascending the stepstowards the door through which his uncle had retired into the church,he asked a presbyter, who was still lingering on the threshold, if hecould speak with the bishop."You will find him at his dwelling, my son," replied the presbyter:"he has passed through the church, and has gone to his mansion, whichlies just behind it."Theodore took the direction in which the presbyter pointed with hishand; and, followed by Cremera and the other freedman, reached theentrance of a splendid dwelling, round the doors of which stood acrowd of poor clients, waiting for the daily dole of bread and wine.Theodore found some difficulty, however, in obtaining admission to hisuncle's presence. "He is gone to divest himself of his sacred robes,"one slave replied; "He is busy in private devotion," asserted another;a third plainly refused to admit the stranger, unless previouslyinformed of his name and purpose."Tell the bishop," said Theodore, "that it is a Roman fromConstantinople, who brings him tidings of his friends, which it muchimports him to hear as soon as may be."There was the accent of command in the young Roman's speech, whichmade the slave hasten to obey; and in a moment after the curtain,beneath which he had passed in order to communicate the message to thebishop, was drawn back, and Theodore found himself in the presence ofhis uncle.The prelate gazed upon him for a moment in silence. It is probablethat at first he did not recognise the boy, whom he had not seen forseveral years, in the young man that now stood before him; and yetthat faint and twilight recollection--more like the act of perceptionthan of remembrance--by which old impressions first break upon us,before memory has time distinctly to trace out the particulars, causedthe shades of manifold emotions to pass over his countenance, as hiseyes remained fixed on the face of his nephew."Theodore!" he exclaimed at length, "Theodore! what in the name ofHeaven has brought you here at this hour, and under thesecircumstances? Know you not that the barbarians demand my life toexpiate the sins of others? Know you not that they threaten to seek meeven here, and sate their vengeance in the blood of my flock, if I benot given up to them? Know you not that the weak emperor, after havingfaintly refused their horrible demand, now hesitates whether he shouldyield his innocent subject, and the teacher of his people, to thebarbarous hands of his enemies? What was your father thinking of tosend you here? unless, indeed, he be bringing six legions to my aid,and you be but the harbinger of the coming succour.""Alas, my uncle," replied Theodore, mournfully, "no such tidings haveI to tell; nevertheless, my tidings are not few nor of little import;but let us speak of them alone. Here there are many ears around us;and you may perchance find it expedient to consider well what I haveto say ere you make it public."As he spoke, he glanced his eye towards the crowd of slaves andofficers who filled the other end of the hall in which they stood; andthe bishop, who had been moved to indiscretion by the suddenappearance of his nephew, resumed the caution, which, though a bold,ambitious man, formed part of his natural character, and, making asign with his hand, said merely, "Follow me." As he spoke, he led theway through the great hall to a small room beyond, from which a flightof steps descended to a beautiful garden, laid out in slopes, andadorned with many a statue and many a fountain. The curtain, drawnback between it and the hall, exposed to the view any one whoapproached on that side, while on the other the terraces lay open tothe eye, so that naught with a step less stealthy than that of Timehimself could approach unperceived."Here, my nephew, here," said the bishop, "our secret words will notpass beyond our own bosoms. Tell me what brings you hither at a momentof such earnest difficulty--at a moment when I know not whether thebase emperor may not deliver me up to the barbarian Attila. I who haveabandoned all--state, dignity, the paths of ambition and of glory--todevote myself to the service of God and his holy church. Yet tell me,first, how fares your father, how fares my noble brother? Why wrote henot in answer to my letter beseeching him to use his power withTheodosius in my behalf?""I come," replied Theodore--who, judging that the bishop's questionsregarding Paulinus were but formal words of no deep meaning, proceededat once to the point on which his uncle's curiosity was reallyexcited--"I come, my uncle, to seek refuge and shelter with youagainst the anger of a base, weak monarch. Three days' journey behindme is your cousin, Julia Flavia, with her children and my sister.Persecuted by Theodosius for no fault committed, we thought that if wecould find shelter in the world it would be with my uncle at Margus.""Safety at Margus!" cried the prelate, in truth affected by theearnest and pleading tone in which his nephew spoke--"safety atMargus! Oh, Theodore, Theodore! is there safety to be found on board asinking ship? Is there safety to be found between the opposing spearsof two hostile armies met in battle? You come to me at a time when Iknow not whether the next moment may continue to afford security tomyself. You come to me at a moment when my soul is trembling--thoughnot with fear--no, but wavering with uncertain purposes, like aloosened sail quivering in the blast of the tempest, uncertain towhich side it may be driven, or whether it may not be torn infragments from the mast. You come to me in such a moment as this forrefuge? But could not your father protect you--my great, my warlike,my courtly, my all-powerful brother, who despised the poor-spiritedpriest, and thought the robe and stole the refuge of a low ambition?Oh, Paulinus, Paulinus! how I could have loved you! Yet what do I say,Theodore? your dark robe! your untrimmed hair! your jewellessgarments! Tell me, boy, tell me, where is your father?""Alas," replied Theodore, "I have no father. He who was my father isdead, murdered by the emperor!"The living lightnings of fierce indignation flashed from the priest'sproud eyes; and after pausing for a moment, as if unable to give voiceto the feelings that struggled in his breast for utterance, he shookhis hand towards the sky, to which his eyes were also raised,exclaiming, "Tyrant, thou hast sealed thy fate!" then, casting himselfdown upon a couch, he drew his robe over his head, and Theodore couldhear him weep. The youth was moved; and at length he took his uncle'shand in his, and pressed his lips upon it, saying, "I knew not thatyou loved him thus.""Yes, Theodore, yes!" replied the bishop; "I did love him, better thanhe knew, better than I knew myself till this very hour. We haddifferent tempers, we chose opposite paths, we held opposite opinions.That which I thought wisdom, he would misname craft; that which I heldas just, he would taunt as base. We were both, perhaps, ambitious, butin different ways; and his ambition led him to contemn mine; and yet,Theodore, and yet I loved him better than any other human being. WhenI strove for eminence in the state which I had chosen, when I raisedmy voice and made the proud to bow, the sinner to tremble, piety tokindle into enthusiasm, and devotion to reach its highest pitch, myfirst imagination was what Paulinus would think; my first hope totower above his low opinion. He was the object and the end of many ofmy best and greatest actions: almost every thought of my life has hadsome reference to him. I have disputed, opposed, quarrelled withhim--nay, even hated him, and yet belied my own heart by loving himstill!"The bishop paused, and, crossing his arms upon his broad chest, fixedhis eyes upon the sky, and remained for several minutes in gloomysilence, as if summoning up before the eye of memory all the visionsof the past. "Theodore," he continued at length, speaking in arambling, musing tone, "Theodore, I will be to you as a father. Whatmy fate may be, I know not; but my brother's murderer shall neverdeliver me up to the power of the barbarians. Do you mark me? He shalllearn that, deprived of the just defence of my sovereign, I can defendmyself. But it matters not! You are too young for such counsels!Paulinus, my brother, thou art dead; but thou shalt be avenged. Thecup of wrath wanted but one drop to make it overflow, and thy murderhas poured an ocean into it. Now tell me, Theodore--the Lady Flavia,where is she? She shall be welcome to Margus. Within these walls mypower is unlimited. The people and their magistrates are equally myflock and my servants; so that I can assure a welcome to those whoseek it. Where is Flavia? Why came she not with you?""Because tidings reached us every day," replied Theodore, "ofmessengers sent from Constantinople, bearing orders for ourarrest--perhaps for our death. Three of these messengers, we learned,had taken the way to Margus; and ere we could venture to trustourselves here, I came on to see whether the power of my uncle couldgive us shelter and security."A smile of bitter meaning gleamed over the countenance of the bishop."Three messengers!" he said--"three messengers, bearing orders foryour arrest or death! No later than yesterday morning, threeByzantines--for so part of their dress bespoke them--were found, slainby the Huns, as it appeared, near Tricornium, higher up the river.Perchance these have been the messengers, and have delivered theirjust and clement letters to the wrong hands.""It is not unlikely," replied Theodore. "They must have been near thattown early in the morning of yesterday; for I had news of theircourse, and crossed the Danube lest, with fresh horses, and perhaps aguard from that station, they might overtake and seize me.""They have been seized themselves," said the prelate, setting histeeth close. "The smiter has been smitten; the messenger of death hasfound death himself. But how escaped you the Huns yourself, boldyouth! For the last month they have made excursions across the river,destroying wherever they came. How was it that you, who withoutpermission entered their own land, passed through them in perfectsafety?""In truth I know not," replied Theodore, "unless it was that I beganby speaking to the ferrymen in the Alan tongue.""That has saved you," replied the prelate; "but now, my son, we mustnot lose time. These are days of danger, when the very air is full ofwinged death. We must not leave the Lady Flavia and her children onemoment longer unprotected than is needful. Tell me with what companyshe travels. Ye were not, I trust, obliged to fly in such haste as toleave all your domestics behind.""Oh no!" replied Theodore; "the tribune Marcian, who brought us thesad tidings of my father's fate, and warned us of our own danger, tookcare that all the slaves should accompany us; and saw that all thegold and jewels, either belonging to Flavia, or which my father hadleft in Illyria, should be borne with us, to escape the greedy handsof Theodosius. Thank God, we have enough to support us with dignitytill this storm be blown away, and the sun shines once more.""Alas, Theodore!" replied the priest, "seldom is it with man that thesun, once clouded, ever shines again. The bosom of nature, torn by thetempest, soon recovers its gayety and its beauty, or, swept by theshower, wakes up again in brighter loveliness; but the heart of man,beaten by the storms of fate, never regains its freshness, but isdulled and withered by every drop that falls, and revives not againtill his short day is closed. But I will send out to greet Flavia, andbid her welcome. Glad am I that she brings with her wealth andattendants. Not that I could not myself have supplied her with all shemight need; for, thanks be to Him who gave, my worldly wealth isgreat--greater than is perhaps good for securing the treasure inheaven. Nevertheless, all our wealth may not be more than sufficientfor the purpose that I have in view. I will send out to find her, andbring her hither.""Nay, my uncle," replied Theodore, "I will myself be the messenger.She will not give herself to the guidance of any one if I do notreturn. I am not weary; and an hour or two of rest would enable me,had I but fresh horses for myself and the freedmen, to seek her atonce. This bank of the river, by the death of these messengers, is nowfree, and the way is shorter."His uncle made some opposition on the plea of his nephew's youth andyet unconfirmed strength, but that opposition was slight, and soonovercome. There was, indeed, an eagerness, a haste, an impetuosity, inthe bishop's whole demeanour, which betokened a keen and ambitiousmind struggling with difficulties and dangers which he feared not, butestimated at their true value. He seemed, to the eyes of Theodore,like a skilful swordsman contending with a multitude of enemies, withall his energies awake and active to avoid every blow, to parry everythrust, and to return upon his assailants their strokes with usury.When at length he consented that his nephew should go, and gave himinto the hands of one of the officers, with directions to provide forhis repose and refreshment, what was the impression which his uncle'sconduct had made upon Theodore's mind? The bishop had been kinder thanhe expected; he had evinced more affection for his father, more deeplove for that dead parent whose memory was enshrined in the heart ofTheodore, and revered as the relics of some pure and sainted martyr;he had shown more depth of feeling, and more of the energy of talent,than the youth had been taught to believe he could display; and yetTheodore was not satisfied. The diamond touchstone of a pure andinnocent heart, without an analysis, without minute investigation,detected at once the alloy which ran through the seeming gold: he sawthat there was much of goodness, he saw that there was much of power,in his uncle's character; but there wanted the simplicity, themildness, the humility of the Christian priest: there were strongfeelings without strong principles, high talents without high honour,and through all his best and brightest qualities ran a vein ofbrilliant selfishness, stimulating nearly, in appearance, the moreprecious things with which it mixed; but, oh! how different inintrinsic value.CHAPTER X.THE TREASON.It was night; but no bright moon compensated for the absence of thegreater orb, and the air was dark, though the sky itself shone withall its innumerable sparks of golden light. It was one of those nightsin which the depth of the heavens becomes apparent, in which eachseparate star is seen hanging distinct and apart from all the rest, alamp of everlasting fire in the blue profound of space. The latelytroubled waters of the Danube had become clear; and, flowing morecalmly, though in a less volume, mirrored the splendid pageantry ofheaven's resplendent host.Within an hour, however, after the full setting of the sun had leftthe earth to the dominion of the night, another light than that of thestars was reflected from the waters of the rolling stream at thedistance of a few miles from the city of Margus. The glare of amultitude of torches flickered over the rolling stream, and cast ared, unpleasing light over the rocks and trees amid which the Romanroad was cut from Tricornium to Margus. That light, too, shone uponthe anxious and wearied countenances of those who, a little more thana month before, we have seen set out from the spot where all theirhappy memories were left behind them to wander forward towards landsand fortunes that they knew not.A change, however, had been effected in the appearance of many of thatparty. Young as he was, Theodore had shown a wisdom and prudencebeyond his years; and as soon as they had lost the escort of thetribune Marcian, on the frontiers of M[oe]sia, he had selected twentyof the most faithful slaves, and had besought Flavia to liberate andarm them. His pretext was that, in approaching the barbariancountries, many dangers lay upon the way; but he did not say that evenagainst the authority of the emperor himself those arms might not beused.Belated by the length and fatiguing nature of the way, many a timidglance was cast by Ildica and Eudochia towards the opposite bank ofthe stream, where lay, shrouded in its dark woods, the strange anddangerous country of the Huns. Many an apprehensive inquiry, too, wentfrom lip to lip among the women slaves that followed; and, though eachknew that the other was as ignorant of the land through which theywere passing as herself, many a time was the question asked, "How faris it now to Margus!" meeting still with the same unsatisfactoryreply. At length Theodore, riding up from the rear of the line, wherehe had remained to see that no one lingered behind, approached theside of the lectula in which Ildica was borne, and said, to the nosmall joy of all who heard him, "Lo! the arch of Trajan. To Margus isbut one short mile."That mile was soon accomplished; and at the gates of the city theywere met by persons sent on purpose to welcome them, both by themagistrates and by the bishop of the town. Such friendly greeting insuch a remote spot, the sight of a populous and wealthy city, thecheerful sounds and objects which met the ear and eye in the streets,served to revive hope in the bosoms of that weary and anxious train,and to recall the images of warm domestic tranquillity, which had beenbanished during their dreary journey of the last two days: a house hadbeen prepared for them not far from the dwelling of the bishop, andthey found, waiting their arrival, all those ready luxuries which theskill and ingenuity of the most pleasure-loving nation upon earth haddevised in the most voluptuous period of the world's history. Bathswere prepared; wine-cups crowned with garlands, and delicacies fromremote lands, waited for the lip; the softest triclinia surrounded thealready spread table; and the sound of sweet music was breathingthrough the atrium: odours floated on the air; lights blazed throughthe halls; and when at length Flavia, Ildica, Eudochia, Theodore, andAmmian stood in the midst of that enchanted scene--far from theirenemies, with a place of certain refuge close at hand, and the long,weary, perilous journey accomplished behind them--feelings of joy andthankfulness, great, irrepressible, overpowering, welled up from thedeep fountain of the heart, and, casting themselves into each other'sarms, they wept.Many moments passed in those entrancing feelings; but when, at length,the bishop appeared to bid them welcome to a city over which hiseloquence and powers of mind had given him greater influence than eventhe representative of the imperial authority possessed, Flavia hadagain resumed her calm and tranquil dignity. He would not sit down tomeat with the guests for whose entertainment he had provided sosumptuously, affecting an abstinence which might or might not behabitual; but he insisted upon waiting in a neighbouring chamber whilethey supped, declaring that he had matter of some moment tocommunicate to the Lady Flavia. Simple in her habits, and encouragingsimplicity in her children, Flavia was soon prepared to give theprelate that private hearing which he desired. He led her accordinglyinto another chamber, while Ammian sported with Eudochia; andTheodore, seated beside Ildica, tasted once more the sweet moments oflove.They were the only ones that they had known since the fatal night ofthe earthquake, since that night which had witnessed the first unionof their hearts in the bond of spoken affection. In all their othermeetings--in every other communication which they had yet had--dangerand terror, like the drawn sword in the eastern feast, had hung abovetheir heads, and marred the tranquillity of their mutual hearts. Now,however, when apprehension was drowned in hope, they felt, and oh, howdear was the feeling! that the love, which had grown up in joy andpeace, had been increased and strengthened, brightened and perfected,by dangers and misfortunes.Theodore held Ildica's graceful hand in his, and gazed into thosedark, dark lustrous eyes, reading therein a reply to all the intenseand passionate love of his own ardent heart; and Ildica, seated on thecouch beside him, lifted the long sweet curtains of those gemlike orbsto the countenance of her lover, and, with the mingled glance oftimidity and confidence, seemed to pour forth the thanks of herfervent spirit, not only for all that he had done to sooth, tocomfort, and to protect her, but for all the unspoken thoughts oflove, the anxieties and fears concealed, the constant remembrance byday, the frequent dreams by night, for all, in short, which her hearttold her that his had felt in the hours of pain and care through whichthey had so lately passed. Low and murmured words read a comment onthose looks, and Theodore and Ildica once more knew an hour of intensedelight.A large chamber intervened between that in which they sat and that towhich her mother had retired to hold conference with the prelate, andthe veils over both the doorways were drawn. For some time the voiceof neither speaker was heard, but at length the tones grew higher. Thelow sweet murmur even of Flavia's tongue found its way to the hallwhere her children waited her return, and the high but harmonioustones of the eloquent priest sounded loud, and sustained, as if hewere using all his powers of oratory upon some great and inspiringtheme. No distinct words, however, were heard, and then again, after atime, the voices once more sank low, and in a few minutes the bishopand the lady issued forth with hasty steps and agitated looks. Theprelate was passing rapidly on, without noticing his brother'schildren, as if carried forward by some strong excitement; but, ere hereached the doorway, his habitual self-command returned in a degree,and, turning round with a knitted brow but an air of dignity, heraised both his extended hands, saying, "Bless you, my children! theblessing of God be upon this house, and all that it contains." Thatdone, he again turned upon his way, and rapidly quitted the apartment.In the meanwhile, in the midst of that rich hall, stood Flavia, withher pale cheek flushed, her beautiful eyes wild and thoughtful, herfair hand pressed tight upon her broad, statue-like brow, and her lipmurmuring words which sounded vague and unmeaning, because the keyto their sad interpretation was in her own bosom. At length shespoke:--"Hie thee to repose, Eudochia," she said; "hie thee to repose,my sweet child, Ammian, too, seek rest, my boy, while thou mayst findit. Ye have had a weary journey, children, and God only knows when itmay be renewed."With some light and fanciful words from Ammian, breathing the spiritof bright untiring youth, some of the slaves were summoned, and thetwo younger members of that family, whose fate we have so longfollowed, retired to sleep. Flavia listened for their parting steps;but when all was quiet, she caught the hand of Theodore, exclaiming,"Oh, my son, have you known and consented to this?""Have I known what, dear mother?" demanded Theodore, who had hithertomastered his surprise. "I have consented to nothing which should movemy mother thus painfully.""I believed it, Theodore, I believed it," replied Flavia. "In yourveins and in mine flows the blood of those Romans who thought life alight sacrifice for their country, whose gore flowed like water forthe defence and preservation of their native land; and I am sure thatif you be your father's son, no danger, no injustice, will induce youto forget your duty, and bring upon the country of your birth the tideof barbarian warfare! Is it not so, my son?""It is!" answered Theodore; "but what mean you, my mother? Weunderstand not to what your words apply."But Flavia continued, turning to her daughter: "And you, Ildica," shesaid, "tell me that you are my child indeed--that you would sacrificelife, and all life's dearest interests, rather than take part, orbenefit by, or instigate the ruin of your country.""I would, my mother, I would," replied Ildica, while her person seemedto grow taller, and her resemblance to her mother increased under theexcitement of the moment. "I would sacrifice life, and, what is fardearer than life, I would sacrifice him," and she laid her hand uponthe arm of Theodore. "I would rather see him die in defence of hiscountry than live and prosper by its fall. Oh, my mother, you havejudged your child rightly; the blood of my father, spilled by theenemies of our native land, throbs in his daughter's heart; and eventhis weak hand, were there none other to assert our country, might yetstrike one blow in her defence.""My noble child," cried Flavia, throwing her arms around her daughter,"thou art worthy of thy race. Theodore, what think you that your uncleproposes to me to do? To throw wide the gates of Margus to thebarbarians, to open the way for the Huns into the heart of the empire,to buy revenge for your father's death and safety for ourselves by thedesolation of our native land, the destruction and ruin of ourfriends, and the massacre of our fellow-countrymen! Shame on suchdegenerate Romans! Shame, shame upon them to all eternity! Oh God, ohGod! where are thy thunderbolts?"Theodore stood, for a moment, as one stupified by the strange andfearful tidings he had heard; and fixing his eyes upon Flavia's face,he gazed upon her with an expression of inquiring doubt, which showedhow far he was from any participation in the schemes or feelings ofhis uncle. "My mother," he said at length, "let us go hence. This isno refuge for us. Did he think, by showing us here an image of thatsplendour and comfort which we so long possessed, and so latelylost--did he think to blind our eyes, and weaken our hearts, anddestroy our virtue? My choice, oh my mother, is made; give me honourand misery, if virtue cannot secure peace. Let us go hence.""At sunrise to-morrow," replied Flavia, "we will depart; for I muchfear that he told me not all; I doubt that his dealing with the Hunsis far advanced.""Why not at once, then?" demanded Theodore; "to-morrow's daylight maybe too late."Flavia turned her eyes upon her daughter, who understood the glance,and answered at once, "My mother, I can go, though I am wearied: wereit not better to drop by the wayside than risk our future peace?"But Theodore interposed: "No, no," he said; "an hour before daylightwill be time enough. The slaves are wearied beyond all endurance; andperhaps, also, were we to attempt it to-night, the guards might becomesuspicious, and stay us at the gates. To-morrow it will seem morenatural. The wearied soldiers, at that hour, will let us pass withoutinquiry, and, following the course of the river, we can pass throughNoricum, and take refuge either among my kindred of the Alani, orunder the strong shield of [AE]tius, in Gaul, from whose protectionneither weak emperor dare attempt to snatch us. Rest thee, Ildica!" headded, throwing his arms around her; "rest thee, my beloved; and restthee, too, dear mother! I will see all prepared, and ready to set outan hour before the dawning of the day.""And thou, my poor Theodore," said Flavia, "thou hast no rest!""Am I not a Roman?" was the youth's reply.On the next morning--while the city of Margus was still buried inslumber, and all vacant were those streets so lately thronged with thegay unthinking crowd pursuing with light heart the butterfly pleasure,and never dreaming that fate, like a lion, was following fast upon itstrack--the same train which the night before had entered the gate withjoy, now passed them again with sorrow, but without regret. Theodorehad first presented himself, and had held a momentary conversationwith a soldier on guard. The gates had then been opened by the janitorof the night, and the slaves, who led the train, passed out. Ildicaand Eudochia followed; but as the litter of Flavia was borne forward,Theodore approached its side, and said, in a low voice, "They demandthat one of us at least should stay to give account of our departureeither to the bishop or the magistrates; I will keep Cremera and someothers with me. In the meantime go you on, and I will join youspeedily."Flavia turned an anxious look upon him, but he added, in a still lowertone, "Fear not: they dare not detain me;" and, motioning to theslaves who bore the litter to proceed, he drew back under the archway.Their course lay to the westward; but as Theodore turned towards thecity, a faint gray light hung over the massy towers and columns ofMargus, showing that the dawn of day was fast approaching. With a slowpace, and a sad but resolute heart, Theodore returned to the housewhich had been assigned to them as their dwelling; and, after amomentary pause, turned his steps on foot to the mansion of thebishop. The gates were already open, some of the slaves at work, andthe light of the now dawning day was seen streaming faint and coldthrough the long range of vestibules and halls from an open archway,beyond which appeared various groups of statues, fountains, andpillars, ornamenting a courtyard. Like all dependants on the great andpowerful, keen to perceive who were in favour, who were influentialwith their lords, the slaves, who, a few days before, had obstructedthe access of Theodore to his uncle, hastened to pay their court toone whom they now knew, and besought him, with officious civility, torepose himself there till the bishop should have risen to receive him.The mind of Theodore, however, was not in a state to permit him totake even corporeal rest; and he replied that he would walk forth intothe court and amuse himself with the statues and fountains till hisuncle was prepared to receive him. The cold and absent tone in whichhe spoke checked all intrusion; and, meditating on his wayward fate,he walked forth alone, now pausing as if to contemplate some beautifulpiece of sculpture, now gazing, as if with pleased attention, on theclear waters that, welling from the rocky ground on which the city wasbuilt, sparkled round the court in innumerable graceful urns andvases, but with his mind, in fact, employed on matters far differentfrom the light elegances and calm pleasures of life.Thus absent and musing, he went on to a spot where a long flight ofsteps led down to the bottom of that terraced garden which he hadbeheld from above in his first conference with his uncle. Scarcelyconscious of what he did, Theodore slowly descended the steps, andentered one of the long paved walks at the very lowest part of thegarden. The right side was flanked by a strong wall, in which were twoor three doorways leading, as it would seem, to the pom[ae]rium, oropen space between the town and its fortified walls--for the houseitself was one of the farthest from the centre of Margus. Scarcely hadhe entered that path, however, when the sound of steps made him raisehis eyes, and he beheld before him four dark figures--to see which, inthat place, caused him suddenly to pause, and lay his hand upon hissword. Ere he could distinguish their faces, by the general aspect oftheir forms, he perceived that they were barbarians, free, and in aRoman city at that early hour. A moment more showed him that, whilethree of the party had mingled their barbarian dress of skins withjewels and ornaments of gold and silver, the fourth, who preceded theothers as they advanced, retained the original simple habit of hisnation, being clothed in plain but valuable furs and dark cloth, butof exceeding fineness. Those who followed bore about them many strangeand barbarian arms, but he who preceded had nothing but a broad andheavy sword, composed solely of iron from its hilt to its scabbard. Inhim Theodore instantly recognised the Hun who had been his guide onhis last day's journey through the Dacian territory, and the sameunaccountable feeling passed through his bosom which he hadexperienced on beholding him before. He saw too well, however, thatFlavia's suspicions were correct, and that his uncle had alreadyplunged irretrievably into those dangerous intrigues which weredestined to prove, not only the ruin of himself and of the city whichyielded itself so tamely and entirely to his government, but farbeyond that, to his whole native land, and indignation for a momentmastered all other sensations."What doest thou here, barbarian?" was his only greeting when theymet."What is that to thee, youth?" rejoined the Hun, with a calm, haughtysmile, such as may play upon a father's lip when he reproves--thoughamused thereby--the frowardness of some spoiled child. "But speakthine own language," he continued, in a corrupt dialect of the Latintongue; "speak thine own language: weak and insignificant as it is, itwill cover from the ears of those who hear us such light words asthose thou hast just spoken.""My words were not light, Hun," replied Theodore: "for every Roman maywell demand what thou doest here, when he meets with armed barbariansin the heart of a Roman city.""We are armed," said the Hun, "but we are few. What I do here isnaught to thee; but if thou wilt listen to me, my coming may do theeservice. I love thee for thy mother's father, and for her brother.They were my friends; and he who would be terrible to those who hatehim must do good deeds to those who love him. Know that the Romanempire trembles to its fall. Attila the King has said it, and it willcome to pass. He has said, 'I will sweep it as a cloud sweeps the topsof the forest. I will pass over it as a storm,' he has declared, 'fromone part even unto the other; and I will not leave it so long as oneRoman stands up before me to oppose me.' Attila the King has said it,and his words shall be made true. Nevertheless, as thou art one ofthose who think that there is yet vigour in weakness and strength inRome, I bid thee consider what will be thy fate even should thineemperor be successful in resistance. The blood of thy father is uponhis head; thou fleest from his vengeance, and he seeks thy life. Thusmuch have I learned from thee and from thine uncle. Should Attila besuccessful, and thou not of his friends, thou perishest. ShouldTheodosius triumph, thinkest thou that he who has trodden upon themighty will spare the weak?""Hun!" said Theodore, taking a step forward to pass him, "could myblood, poured forth on the banks of yonder river, like the dragon'steeth of Cadmus, raise up a host of armed men to defend my native landagainst thee and against thy king, I would hold my throat to theknife, and die with gratitude and joy! Thinkest thou that such a onecan be impelled by fear, or led by hope, to serve thee and to betrayhis native land?""I think," replied the Hun, "that thou mightst be a faithful friend toa worthier monarch than thine own. Fare thee well! and remember, as Itold thee when last we met: in future times, when the hands of fateshall have shaken from their places thrones and empires, and havechanged the fate of little as well as great, shouldst thou needprotection, thou wilt find it at the name of Onegisus. Now, forward tothine uncle; I must hence."Without returning to the court, Theodore sprang up the terraces of thegarden towards the chamber where he had before conferred with thebishop. His hurried step caught the prelate's attention; and, ereTheodore had reached the top, his uncle's majestic form, clothed inhis splendid robes, appeared in the doorway above, gazing down to seewho it was that approached so rapidly."Theodore," he exclaimed, while an expression of pleasure andexpectation lighted up his features, "I trust you are come to bear megood tidings, and that the Lady Flavia is not so rashly obstinate aswhen last I saw her.""Far from it!" said Theodore, gravely, "I have come but to tell youthat we remain Romans to our death. All who entered the gates lastnight, except myself and a few slaves, are by this time an hour'sjourney on their way to Noricum.""Rash woman! what has she done?" cried the bishop, clasping his hands;"she is lost, she is lost! Fly, Theodore, quick! Fly like thelightning! Bring her back hither; or, if she will not come, lead heron the road to the south, anywhere but the road she has taken."Theodore gazed upon the agitated countenance of his uncle inamazement; but the bishop continued, more vehemently than before,"Fly! do I not tell you to fly? Lose not a moment! breathe not a word!Away, as if a lion were behind you. The Huns are already across theriver, on the very road she has taken. If she will not return hither,seek for no highway, look for no easy path, but plunge at once intothe country, and hurry to the southward, making not a moment's pause!"Without a word of reply, the youth darted through the vacant rooms,passed the gates of the dwelling, the Basilica, and the Forum; reachedthe house where the horses and slaves remained, sprang upon hischarger's back, and, followed by the rest, dashed out towards thewalls of the city. The gates were open, but, to his surprise, nosoldiers, no gatekeepers were now there. The guard had been withdrawnfor purposes which he too well divined; and passing out unquestioned,he hurried on with the same frantic speed in search of those he loved.CHAPTER XI.THE SEARCH.Hurrying on without pause, and impressed with but the one overpoweringthought of the danger of all he loved on earth, Theodore soon reachedthe banks of the Danube, and gazed onward upon the road, which forseveral miles lay straight before him. But nothing met his sight,either to raise his hopes or increase his apprehensions; all was openand clear, and not even a cart or a beast of burden from the country,no, not a single peasant bringing in his basket of fruit or flowers,arrested the eye, as it wandered down the long, straight avenue. Apair of enormous eagles, whirling slowly round, high up in the bluemorning sky, was the only sight of animated being that presenteditself; the singing of a light bird, too lowly and insignificant tofear those majestic tyrants of the skies, and the dull roar of thegreat river, were the only sounds that broke upon the ear.Hope sets her quick foot wherever fear leaves the space vacant; andTheodore trusted that Ildica might have passed on ere the Huns hadcrossed the river. He paused not, however, at the voice of the siren,but still urged on his horse, gazing anxiously forward, and listeningfor every sound. The five freedmen who had remained with him followedas fast as they could, but the superior power and swiftness of theyoung Roman's charger left a short but increasing interval betweenthem. That interval was less, perhaps, than half a mile, when Theodorereached the wooded rocks, round whose immoveable bases the road wasforced to wind; but his faithful Cremera saw him disappear behind themwith apprehension, and urged on his horse with eager haste, till heand the rest had also turned the angle of the rocks, and once morebeheld his master.Theodore was now at less than a hundred yards' distance: he haddismounted, and, with the charger standing beside him, was kneelingover some object which had attracted his attention on the road. Whenthe freedmen came up, they too sprang to the ground to look upon thesight which had stopped him. It was the body of one of theircompanions, who had been selected, like themselves, to bear arms uponthe dangerous journey they had been forced to undertake. His spear wasin his hand, with the iron red with blood, and in his heart was fixeda reed arrow, such as some of the Scythian nations used in their wars.Theodore pointed in silence to the corpse, gazed for a moment round,and followed with his haggard eye the long track of the road,apparently to discover if any new object of horror lay before him; andthen, after once more looking sternly upon the dead man, he shook hissword from the sheath, sprang again upon his horse, and galloped onhis way. As he went, however, his eye searched anxiously on the groundfor further traces regarding the too evident fate which had befallenFlavia and her company; nor was he without finding such marks; theground was dented and beaten with horses' feet, and stains of bloodhere and there showed that there had been a contest of a fierce anddesperate kind on the spot over which he passed.Scarcely three hundred yards from the place where lay the body of thefreedman, a small road turned off to the left, leading down throughthe woods, with which that part of the country was thickly strewn,to the banks of the river Margus, higher up than the city. At thatpoint, too, the traces, which had hitherto marked so plainly thecourse which those he sought for had pursued, no longer affordedhim a clew; for, separating as it were into two distinct streams, thefootmarks of the horses went on in either track, leading, on the onehand, towards Tricornium, and, on the other, into the thinly-peopledand half-cultivated country towards Illyria.He paused in doubt; and the agony of impatience, even at a moment'sdelay, was only equalled by that of apprehension lest he shouldmistake the path, as he turned from one to the other. However, thesun, just rising above the trees that fringed the bank, suddenlypoured a stream of light upon the left-hand road, and the rays caughtand glittered on some shining substance, which lay at about a bowshotdistance. Theodore darted forward, and his doubts were removed atonce; for that which accidentally flashed back the sunshine to his eyewas the collar of emeralds which he himself had borne to Ildica fromhis father Paulinus. He hesitated no longer, but hurried on; and, erehe had proceeded more than a quarter of an hour, the sound of voicesand the neigh of horses told him that his speed had brought him nearto those he had pursued.What was his purpose? he himself scarcely knew: it was vague,undefined, uncertain: it might be to save, it might be to live or diewith those whom he loved.The spot where he then stood was a wooded covert, near the brow of ahigh hill, which, sloping down on the other side beyond him, left theforest on its summit, and stretched into natural meadows, covering thebottom of a sweet and tranquil valley. He knew not, however, what wasthe scene beyond the brow; but he heard voices and barbarian tongues,and was hurrying on to meet the fate in store for him, whatever thatstore might be, when the figure of a woman darted through the wood;and Flavia, pale and sad as a statue on a tomb, stood by his horse'sside, and threw her arms up to clasp him as he sat."My children! my children!" she cried; "oh, Theodore! my children arein the power of the Huns!""Where?" demanded Theodore; and his fierce and flashing eye, and knitdetermined brow, told that he was prepared to do those deeds whichwere once common among the children of his native land: "where?" hedemanded, and it was the only word he spoke."Down in yon meadow," replied Flavia, "over the brow of the hill. Butlisten: oh God! they might yet be saved if we had but fleet horses:there are few of the barbarians with them; those few are revelling attheir morning meal: the rest are gone to pursue the party fromTricornium.""What party?" cried Theodore: "is there a chance of any aid?""Alas, no! my son," she replied, in the same rapid tone; "alas, no! Wemet a centurion and his soldiers coming from Tricornium to Margus, andwhile we were in parley with him, the barbarians suddenly fell uponus, like a cloud of brown locusts upon the fertile land: there wasresistance and strife, and I sought to flee with the children. I knownot how it happened; for it was like struggling with the waves of atempestuous sea, all terrible, and nothing distinct; but at length,when I could discern anything, I found myself alone, defended by Acer,the freedman, against a single Hun, who lingered behind to seize uponme as his prey, while the greater body of his companions pursued thecenturion along the high road, and a few hurried down hither withtheir captives and plunder. Though wounded, the freedman defended meas if he had been a Roman, and struck the fierce barbarian with hisspear a blow that made him fly; but, as he galloped off, he drew hisbow, and in a moment an arrow was in Acer's heart. I was alone; mychildren were in captivity, and I followed hither; for I had onlysought to save myself with them, but not to live without them."Theodore sprang to the ground. "My mother," he said, "I will deliverthem or die;" and making the freedmen dismount, he chose four tofollow him, leaving the Arab Cremera to remain with Flavia. His orderswere few, but they were distinct. "When Eudochia, Ammian, Ildica, arehere," he said, addressing the freedman, "mount them and the LadyFlavia on the horses: speed back to Margus, and bid the bishop savethem at any price. Should you find the city in the hands of the Huns,pronounce the name of Onegisus; and when you have found him, tell himthat the youth Theodore, to whom he made a promise, claims hisprotection for those who are most dear to him on earth. Mother," hecontinued, embracing Flavia, "mother, I go!"Flavia gazed mournfully in that sad, firm countenance. "Theodore," shesaid, pressing him in her arms, "Theodore, thou goest to destruction!"He made no reply, but wrung her hand; and, waving to the slaves he hadchosen to follow, burst from her embrace and hurried over the hill.In another moment the resting-place of the Huns was before his eyes,though the branches of the trees still waved between him and them,affording concealment while he observed them. He paused but for aninstant, but that instant sufficed to show him the barbariansscattered on both sides of the stream, gathered in groups of eight orten, with their small rugged horses feeding beside them, and theirweapons cast upon the turf whereon they sat. The heart of Theodorerose to see that they were so few, for not more than two hundred werethere; and the number of the captives, who sat apart, with bendingheads, and the self-neglecting look of utter despair, had their armsbeen free, might have offered no slight support in the bold attempt hewas about to make. "Our object," he said, turning to those whofollowed him, "is to free Ildica, Eudochia, and Ammian. Let whoeverreaches them first cut their bonds, and bid them fly up the road overthe hill. Then free your fellows, and oppose the pursuit of thebarbarians! Thou art pale," he added, addressing one of the freedmen;"thy lips are bloodless; if thy heart be faint, turn back.""Thou goest to death," replied the man, firmly, "and I will go withthee. I feel that death is horrible; but it must be borne once, and Ican bear it now.""Follow, then!" said Theodore, "but cautiously, under the covering ofthe trees, till we are close upon them."It was a great, a mighty, a sublime thing, that determined resolutionunto death, which possessed the young enthusiastic Roman; which didaway boyhood, and made him at once a strong and valiant man, invigour, in powers, in intellect, in energy. To die for her he loved;to ransom her from the barbarians at the price of his own blood; tosee her for the last time as her deliverer, and to know, in dying,that his hand had freed her, was the last aspiration, the onlyremaining hope that rested with Theodore, of all the many sweet andprobable dreams of happiness which haunted his fancy but one shortmonth before.Calmly and deliberately he led the way through the trees to a spotwhere, with irregular sweeps, the forest met the meadow. Within fiftyyards sat Ildica and her companions, mourning, like the enslavedHebrews, their captivity, by the banks of the strange waters. Besidethem, as a sort of guard--though the bonds by which they were tiedrendered their unassisted escape impossible--lay spread upon the grasssome ten or twelve of the dark and filthy barbarians, with their rudeand frightful countenances, scarred with ancient gashes and sallowwith long-accustomed dirt, distorted by wild merriment, as theyfeasted near the first captives whom they had taken in their invasionof the Roman state. At the feet of one who sat closest to theprisoners lay a gory human head, the short cut hair and beard of whichshowed that it had belonged to no barbarian form; and--while Theodore,pausing behind the trees, let his eye run over the other groups ofHuns, as they were scattered about at a greater distance, someeating and drinking, some playing with their unbridled horses, someerecting tents of skins, as if their numbers were soon to be greatlyincreased--the fierce barbarian ended some speech in his own tongue bya wild and ringing laugh, and, with a stroke of his foot, kicked thetrunkless head into the river.It was the signal for his own destruction. "On!" cried Theodore, "on!"and, with the sudden stoop of the eagle on its prey, he boundedforward upon the barbarian. The Hun started on his feet, but thatinstant the sword of the young Roman cleft him to the eyes; androlling back in the convulsive agonies of death, he plunged into theriver, where he had so lately cast the head of his adversary.Scarcely was the blow struck when it was followed by another, whichlaid a second Hun prostrate and disabled at his feet: two more fellbefore the spears of the freedmen; and the rest, conceiving that muchgreater numbers of enemies must be approaching, fled to their comradesfarther down the stream. There was a thirst in Theodore's heart topursue and smite them still, but he remembered Ildica, and turned towhere she sat. A moment freed her from her bonds: Eudochia and Ammianwere set at liberty."Up! up! over the hill, beloved," cried Theodore: "quick as light,Ildica! No words! you will find horses ready. Cut their bonds quick,"he continued, mingling his orders to the freedmen who had accompaniedhim, and to the captives as they were liberated. "Snatch up what armsyou can find! There are the swords, and arrows, and javelins they haveleft behind. Fly, Ildica! I beseech you, fly! Ammian, hurry her andEudochia up the hill; your mother is there with horses; we follow in amoment. Quick! quick! see, the barbarians are pouring back upon us!form a phalanx across the road! Away, away! for God's sake! for mysake! Away, my Ildica!"There was no time for further words; the Huns were upon them; but,happily for Theodore, thirsty for immediate vengeance, they pouredupon him with the sword and spear, instead of trusting to the missileswhich they might have used with more fatal effect. Supported by twentyof the most resolute slaves and freedmen, some hastily equipped withthe arms they had snatched up, some heaving masses of stone, the youngRoman, active and skilful in the use of all the weapons of the day,barred the path between the Huns and their liberated captives, and metthem with a courage and a fierceness even superior to their own. Everytree, every broken mass of rock, formed a point of resistance; and,though hurled against him with still increasing rage and impetus, theHuns recoiled, like javelins cast against a rock, leaving some oftheir number dead or dying at his feet.Each moment, however, their numbers increased, as the scatteredparties from the different spots of that wide meadow hurried up to thescene of conflict; and Theodore, grim with the blood of many enemies,but, alas! not unstained with his own, slowly retired step by steptowards the spot where the road entered the wood. There he hadresolved to make his last stand and die; but, ere he reached it, abroad tremendous form, which had just come up from the farther part ofthe meadow, mingled with his assailants, and, armed like himself witha heavy sword, seemed to single him out for destruction. Hiscountenance, however, was nobler than that of the Huns in general, ashis height was greater; and when Theodore heard him exclaim, in atongue near akin to the Alan language, "Leave him to me! leave him tome!" he thought that, if he must die, it might be sweeter by his hand.Still, however, he contended with him with but little disadvantage;for, as a Roman, he had greater skill, if the barbarian had greaterstrength. Brow to brow, and hand to hand, blow following blow, andthrust succeeding thrust, they stood almost alone, while the youth'scompanions were driven back; and with flashing eyes and slow irregularbreath, pursued the lightning chances of the combat. Neither hadgained a step, though Theodore's blood was trickling fast away, when awild scream from the hill above caught his ear, unnerved his heart,and brought dim despair of his last dearest desire's result, like adark cloud before his eyes.He turned but for an instant to listen to that sound, but that instantwas enough. His guard was beaten down; he fell upon his knee: thoughhope had abandoned him, courage had not, and he strove to struggle up,but it was in vain; his mighty adversary poured blow after blow uponthe weak defence which his sword could now afford. He rose, fellagain, staggered even upon his knee; exposed the arm which held theweapon over his head to the descending stroke of his enemy; droppedthe sword itself from his disabled hand, and saw the shining steel,thirsting for his heart's last drop, raised high in air above hisdefenceless head. The hour he had expected had arrived, and he wasprepared to die!As with quick and heavy sweep the blow fell with a vehemence which hehimself who struck it could not restrain, another weapon interposed,caught the keen blade upon one no less strong, and turned the strokeaside."Spare him, Ardaric! spare him!" cried the deep tones of a voice thatTheodore had heard before. "Spare him, for love of me!"The young Roman started on his feet, and gazed wildly round upon thescene about him. When last he had time to look around, nothing hadbeen seen but some two hundred Huns contending with himself and hissmall faithful band. Now, sweeping round in a semicircle which hemmedhim in, down to the very river's brink, was seen an innumerablemultitude of those dark ferocious horsemen, while thousands onthousands more appeared streaming down from the road, and spreadingthemselves out over the whole meadow.The space for nearly forty cubits immediately about himself and hisadversary was clear, except where stood beside him the same dark chiefwho had been his guide on the other side of the Danube, and where, apace or two behind, a barbarian attendant held the powerful horse fromwhich he had just sprung. But as Theodore gazed along the dusky lineof savage foes around him, a sight more painful to his heart than theimpending death which had just hung over him struck his eyes. There,where a multitude of banners, rudely embroidered with a black eaglecrowned, marked a particular spot in their irregular line, stoodFlavia and her family, once more in the hands of the barbarians!But the hope of still purchasing their safety followed instantly uponthe agony of that sight. Theodore at once cast himself at the feet ofthe Hunnish chieftain. "Oh, Onegisus!" he exclaimed, "oh, nobleOnegisus! Thou hast promised me, unasked, thy favour and protection.Now, for the first time that I have ever required a boon at the handsof man, I beseech thee to grant me one. Let this brave man, from whosearm thou hast just saved me, plunge his sword into my heart! But letyon women and children, bound to me by the ties of blood and love, gofree! Send them, oh send them, to the dwellings of my mother's race,beneath the snowy Alps, where they may find safety and protection! Iadjure thee, by the God in whom I believe! I adjure thee, by the godswhom thou thyself worshippest! Spare them, oh spare them, and sendthem forth in peace!"The dark chieftain gazed upon him for a moment with an aspect sternbut not fierce."Ardaric," he said at length, "he is the captive of thy hand. Wiltthou give him unto me, and the first ten captives that I make theyshall be thine?"The other chieftain, whose brow had relaxed from the stern frown ofcontest, and on whose face was a mild and not unpleasing smile, thrusthis sword back into the scabbard, saying, "I give them to thee all, ohmighty king! I give them to thee, without recompense or bargain. Letthem be the first spoil taken in the land of the Romans, which Ardaricoffers to Attila the King."At that tremendous name, already shadowed over with a cloud of vaguebut fearful rumours of wide lands conquered, kings bent to homage, andnations, as savage as that over which he ruled, overthrown by thatmighty hand, Theodore drew a step back, and gazed with doubt andsurprise on the dark features and sinewy limbs of him who had justsaved his life; and if his feelings had been strange and mysteriouswhen he had first seen that powerful but ill-proportioned form, whatwere they now, when he heard the stranger called by that fearful name."I am Attila!" said the monarch, answering his wondering and inquiringlook. "What sayst thou now, young man? If I will send these women andslaves free, and on their way, wilt thou be the bondman of Attila?""Oh, not a bondman!" said Theodore, letting his head droop upon hisbosom: "I can die, oh monarch! but I cannot be a bondman! Let him slayme, and let them go free; but bind not the limbs of a free Roman!"Attila gazed on him a while with the same grave majestic air which hehad never lost even for a moment, and then added, "I understand thee:I will not bind thy hands; I will not demand thy service against thynative land--thou shalt draw no sword for Attila against Rome--thoushalt fill no servile employ--honoured and caressed, thou shalt be thefriend of Attila; and, if thou showest the same wisdom in othermatters as in this, thou shalt be his counsellor also. Not his firstfriend--not his first counsellor," he added, "for here stands Ardaric,whose place none can supply; and yonder is Onegisus, found faithful inall things--but thou shalt be among the first. Hearken, thou shaltpromise me for seven years to be to me a faithful friend andcounsellor--except in war or counsel against thy native land--and Iwill send these thy people upon their way, with the king's pledge fortheir safety till they reach the land of thy kindred.""Surely the king has some secret motive!" exclaimed Ardaric, king ofthe tributary, or rather subject, nation of the Gepid[ae]; "surelythe king has some secret motive for showing this favour to acaptive--though the boy is brave!""I have, Ardaric!" replied Attila, "I have! There is a strange bondbetween me and him--but that matters not. Wilt thou accept the offer,youth?""I will!" replied Theodore; "but cannot they go with me?" and hepointed with his hand to Flavia and her companions."Thou knowest not what thou askest!" cried the king, with a clouddarkening on his brow. "It were evil with them, and not good, to go. Iwill send them in safety and in honour to the land of the Alani, ifthou wilt be as obedient to my commands as a son to a father's duringseven years, except in the things which are against thy country; dostthou accept the terms?""I do," replied Theodore, "I do; and deep and heartfelt gratitude willI ever show to thee, oh monarch, for thus befriending me in my hour ofneed!""For seven years!" said the monarch, gazing up thoughtfully towardsthe sky, while the light of wild but mighty aspirations illuminatedhis harsh but striking features--"for seven years! Ere seven yearshave fled, I shall have conquered the whole earth!"CHAPTER XII.THE PARTING.A silent pause of several minutes ensued, while the terrible monarchof the Huns thus suffered to burst forth so clear an indication of hishopes and purposes; and as he stood in the midst, still gazing up tothe sky, with each firm and powerful limb in statue-like repose, hisfeet planted on the earth as if rooted to it, his broad chest thrownopen, and his wide square forehead lifted to the morning sun, therewas an air of might and majesty in his whole appearance whichimpressed those who beheld him with a belief in his power toaccomplish fully that which he so boldly planned. Though far less inheight than the chief of Gepid[ae], yet Ardaric gazed upon him withreverence and awe; and Theodore, as he beheld him, and traced thelight of potent intellect flashing from those dark eyes, while his lippronounced his vast designs, could not but feel that there stood themost dangerous enemy that Rome had ever known.At length Attila recalled his thoughts from those dreams of conquest,and, waving his hand towards the spot where the standards of hisnation were gathered together, he exclaimed, in a voice which, thoughnot apparently loud, came deep and distinct to every ear around,"Edicon! Edicon, come hither!"A tall, dark man, with the shrewd face of a Greek, but the air andexpression of a barbarian, sprang from his horse and advanced a paceor two into the open space around the king; but, as he came forward,Attila bade him bring the principal captives with him; and, pale,faint, and sick at heart, Flavia and her family, uncertain either oftheir own fate or of his, so closely, so dearly linked with them,approached the spot where the dark monarch stood with his naked swordstill clasped in his sinewy hand. As they came near, the joy of havingsaved them burst all restraint; and Theodore, though the blood wasstill dropping from his garments, clasped them one by one in a briefbut joyful embrace."You are safe, my mother!" he cried, "you are safe, my Ildica! Ammian,Eudochia, you are safe! you are safe, and at liberty! The king willsend you securely to the land of the Alani.""And you, my son, are a slave!" said Flavia. "You are a slave, and weshall never see you more!""Not so!" said Attila, gazing upon the group, and somewhat moved bytheir meeting. "He is no slave, but has bound himself to dwell withAttila not less than seven years. Neither do I ask him to war againsthis country, it would be doing wrong unto his nature; but I ask him tobe a faithful and true friend to him who has saved his life, in everyother thing. Edicon, thou art a scribe: write down this compactbetween Attila the King and Theodore the son of Paulinus, in orderthat no one may ever doubt that he did not betray his native land, orthat Attila could not be generous to his enemy."He spoke in the Latin tongue; and though he used not that languagewith ease, yet his meaning was distinct, and Flavia replied--"Act everthus, oh monarch! and thou shalt conquer more by thy generosity thanby the sword!" A hope might, perhaps, have crossed her mind, evenwhile she spoke, that in so free and kindly a mood the monarch of theHuns might be induced to suffer her and her children to take up theirabode in the same land with Theodore; but she thought of Ildica, ofher young blossoming beauty, of her tender nurture, and her gracefulmind, and she repressed the wish ere it was spoken; all she added was,"Oh, keep him not from us for ever!""I have pledged and plighted my word," replied the king, "that inseven years he shall be free to leave me if he will. More: if he showhimself as faithful to me as he has been to his country, he shall,from time to time, have leave and opportunity to visit those he loves.But I have mightier things to think of now," he continued: "wait yehere till I provide for your safety. Ardaric, come thou with me; I goto tread upon the necks of the Romans." Thus saying, he sprang uponhis horse, and issued a few brief commands in the Hunnic tongue. Thedark masses of the barbarian horse began to move on by the river-sideas if towards Idimum; and while they swept along, like the shadow of acloud over a field of green corn, the monarch continued conversingwith his attendant Edicon, without further notice of the captives. Atlength, when Theodore saw him about to depart, he ventured to ask,"Go you to Margus, oh king?"Attila looked upon him with a smile so slight that it scarcely curledhis lip, and replied, "Margus was mine ere I came hither! My peopleare skilful in dressing wounds," he added; "let them tend thine, forthou art bleeding still."As he spoke, he raised his hand slightly on the bridle of his horse;the beast sprang forward across the meadow, and, followed by a troopof Huns who had remained upon the left, Attila galloped on in the samedirection which his host had taken before him.Only two bodies of barbarians continued upon the field; one,consisting of perhaps a hundred men, remained with Edicon, near thespot where Theodore and his companions stood; the other, fewer innumber, were gathered farther down in the meadow, near which thestruggle between Theodore and the Huns for the deliverance of thecaptives had first commenced. A glance showed the young Roman thatthey were in the act of removing or burying the dead; but objects ofdeeper interest called his attention elsewhere, for Flavia, Eudochia,Ammian, Ildica, gathered round him, gazing in his face, pale as it waswith loss of blood, and looking upon him with the thankful eyes ofbeings whom he had delivered from bondage worse than death. How he haddelivered them, by what means, or by what motives in the breast of theHun that deliverance had been accomplished, was strange andincomprehensible to them all, even to Theodore himself; but that itwas by his agency, on account of his valour, constancy, andfaithfulness, none of them for a moment doubted; and as Ildica raisedher large dark eyes to his face, they were full at once of love, ofadmiration, and of gratitude.Oh, who can tell the mingled feelings of that hour, when sitting roundhim they loved--while one of the rude Huns, with the peculiarappliances of his nation, stanched the trickling blood and dressed hismany wounds--those who had lately given way to despair, now spoke toeach other the few glad words of reviving hope! Oh, who can tell thedeep and fervid yearnings of the heart towards God in thankfulness forthe mighty mercy just vouchsafed! Oh, who can tell the thrilling, theecstatic sense of security, of peace, and of happy expectation whichsucceeded, after having been plunged in such a depth of grief, ofcare, and agony!What though their thoughts might wander on into the vague future, andsad experience might cause a fear to cast its shadow over theprospect! What though Flavia's heart might feel a chilliness at theidea of strange lands, strange habits, and strange nations! Whatthough Ildica and Theodore might look upon a probable separation ofseven long years with grief and regret; yet oh, how such pitiful alloysunk into nothing when mingled with the golden happiness of knowingthat safety, liberty, and peace had been obtained after so fearful astruggle! Could Theodore gaze upon the lovely and beloved form of thesweet Dalmatian girl, and know how dreadful a fate might have befallenher, without feeling that life itself would have been a poor sacrificeto save her from such a doom? Could Ildica behold her lover, andrecall the moments when last she saw him surrounded by fierce foes,and determined to die, that he might give her a chance of liberty,without feeling that a seven years' absence was but a cheap price forthe life and safety of so noble, so devoted a being?To part--to part, perhaps, for seven long, solitary years--would, inhappier days, have seemed a fate too bitter for endurance; but now,the dark and fearful images from which that lot stood forth made itlook bright and smiling. The hour of horror and danger had passed by;despair had given way: and though fear still lived, yet hope, hope wasthe victor for the time.Their words were few but sweet, and they were uninterrupted; for theHuns, after the youth's wounds were dressed, pointed out to them someshady trees as a place to repose, and left them unrestrained, andalmost unwatched. The barbarians knew well that the whole land aroundwas in their king's possession, and feared not that any one couldescape. The words of the captives, I have said, were few, but stillthose words were not unimportant, for they went to regulate the futurefate of all. Each promised, when occasion served, to give tidings oftheir health and prospects, hopes and wishes, to a mutual relation inRome, the noble Julius Lentulus, and each unloaded the mind to theother of every feeling which, in a moment such as that, the heartcould experience, of every thought which the memory could recall.As they thus sat and conversed, the slaves and attendants who had beencaptured with them crept gradually nearer and nearer, not yetcomprehending fully the situation in which they were placed; feelingthemselves to be prisoners, and yet marvelling that their limbsremained untied, after such a bold effort to escape, when they hadbeen bound with leathern thongs before. Nearly one half, however, ofthe freedmen were absent; and painful sensations passed through thehearts of Theodore and Flavia when they looked around, and missed someold familiar face; but neither spoke their feelings on this point tothe other. As the sun passed the meridian, however, two or three Hunsfrom time to time came riding down the road, driving before them, withtheir short spears, several of the absent attendants; and while theday went on, a considerable part of the baggage, whereof Flavia'scompany had been pillaged on their first capture, was brought backwithout a word of explanation, and piled up round the trees underneathwhich she sat. Strange is it and unaccountable how the heart of man,which despises many a mighty warning, draws auguries for its hopes andfears from the pettiest occurrences that befall us in our coursethrough life. When Flavia, and Ildica, and Theodore saw the litters,and chairs, and chariots, and bales of goods restored, and laid downin silence, a well-pleased smile beamed upon the face of each; notthat either thought at that moment of comfort or convenience, or ofall the little luxuries which the glass of civilization magnifies intonecessaries; but that each one thence drew a renewed assurance thatthe barbarian monarch, into whose hands they had fallen, howeverfierce and bloodthirsty he might have shown himself to others, at allevents meant well and kindly towards them.Towards the third hour after noon, food rudely cooked, and a beveragepeculiar to the people of Dacia, were set before them; and Edicon,sitting down to meat with them, pressed them to their meal, using theLatin tongue as purely as if it had been his own. He spoke of theempire of the Huns, of their might, their conquests, and theirinnumerable hordes; he spoke even of Bleda, the brother of the king,and monarch of one part of the nation: but the name of Attila hepronounced not; and, when it was mentioned by Theodore, he turnedquickly to some other theme.The sun had lost much of its heat by the time the meal was concluded;and, shortly after, a Hunnish horseman came down the road with fieryspeed, and addressed a few quick words to Edicon.That chief instantly turned and addressed Flavia. "Tricornium andSingidunum have fallen," he said, "and the way is clear before you. Itis the will of the king that you commence your journey."Flavia gazed upon Theodore, and Theodore upon those he loved; and thebright drops clustered in the dark eyes of Ildica like dew in thehalf-closed leaves of the morning. Eudochia, too, hung upon herbrother's neck, and Ammian grasped his hand; but still the son ofFlavia, with wilder and less regulated feelings than the rest, couldnot yet understand or appreciate the grief of Theodore at that momentof parting. "Would I were you, Theodore!" he exclaimed. "Gladly wouldI see the country and manners of these wild Huns; and oh, if I had afather's murder to avenge as you have, I would march on with thatbrave and mighty Attila, and smite the tyrant, Theodosius, on histhrone.""Could it be without the ruin of my country," replied Theodore; "but,alas, Ammian, that cannot be. Weep not, dear Ildica! Sorrow not, mymother, that for a time you must leave me here. Let us remember ourcondition a few hours ago, and be thankful to God that it is as it iseven now. Far safer, too, are you under the guidance and protection ofthese powerful barbarians, than if, unaided and unguarded, we hadattempted to penetrate into Noricum: far safer am I left here, withthose who have spared me even when my sword was drawn against them,than if I were attempting to guide you through strange lands that Iknow not, and barbarian people who hate us for our very civilization.I trust implicitly to the word of Attila. He has promised us hisfavour and protection, and I fear not.""Thou judgest rightly, Roman," joined in Edicon, who still stood by."The word of Attila, whether for good or bad, has never yet beenbroken. His sentence is irreversible; his mind unchangeable. Fearnothing for the safety of your friends. Two hundred of our bravestwarriors guard them to Singidunum, whence a tribe of the Heruli, witha messenger from the king, convey them onward to their destination.They are safe wherever they go, for Attila has promised themprotection; and is not Attila lord of the earth?"Still Ildica clung to him; still Flavia gazed upon him with wistfulaffection; and the heart of Theodore, while they prepared once morefor their journey, swelled with feelings too painful for utterance.Weakened with loss of blood, wearied with terrible exertion, andforced to part for long, dim, uncertain years from those whom alone heloved on earth, his manly fortitude wavered; but the presence of theHuns and the pride of a Roman sustained him. He could not bear thatbarbarians should see him weep; and though he held them one by one tohis bosom in the warm embrace of passionate affection--though he spoketo the very slaves and freedmen with the tenderness of old and fondregard--though he looked upon each familiar face and long-rememberedfeature with the clinging earnestness of love--yet he mastered theemotions of his bosom, and saw them prepared to go without a tearmoistening his eye. One last kiss, one long, dear embrace, andTheodore turned away. Then came the sound of many feet, the neighingof horses, the cries of barbarian voices in the tone of command, therustling and the rush of a moving crowd. Gradually the noise becameless, the tongues sounded more faintly, the tramp of feet subsidedinto a lower and a lower murmur, and Theodore, looking round, foundhimself left alone, amid a small party of the Huns, with a feeling ofdeep desolation at his heart, such as he had never known before.CHAPTER XIII.THE DESOLATION.A long deep sigh was all that Theodore would now give to the pain ofparting. It was over, finished, and endured! and he stood there, calmbut grave, prepared for the long cold lapse of the next seven years.Oh, sad and sorrowful is it, more melancholy, if not more painful,than any other state of human being--fertile as existence is in woesand miseries--when over the summer and the sunshiny days of earlyyouth are brought the premature storms of manhood, the hurricane ofangry passions, or the deep and settled clouds of disappointment anddespair! Oh, sad and sorrowful is it, when the half-open flower of theheart is broken off by the rude footstep of adverse fate ere it hastime to expand into beauty! Oh, sad and sorrowful is it, when by therough hand of circumstance the fresh bloom is brushed from the fruitere it be ripe!Yet such was the fate of Theodore. Endowed with ardent feelings,strong passions, powerful energies both of mind and body, he had beencalled, while those feelings were in their first freshness, whilethose passions were in their early fervour, ere those energies hadbeen strengthened by time or instructed by experience, to mingle withscenes, and take part in events, which few even of the mightiest andmost mature minds of accomplished manhood could pass through, withoutbearing away the indelible stains left by feelings blighted, or therude scars inflicted by evil passions. He had loved, and he had beenbeloved. He had tasted once of the nectar cup of the gods, which,when pressed by a pure lip, instils into the heart a spirit ofimmortality--and his lip had pressed it purely. Then had been calledforth the exertion of that great attribute of manhood, the power ofprotecting, aiding, directing weaker beings in moments of terror anddanger. Then came the mingling of that most bitter draught, when griefand indignation are all that are offered to allay the thirst of a lipburning for revenge. Then came the ignominy of flight from an enemyalike hated and despised; then the temptation conquered, to pampervengeance by treason; and then the mighty struggle where life wasplayed for as a dicer's stake, and every energy of heart and brain wascalled into fierce activity, when human blood was spilt, and mortalbeing extinguished by his hand, to save from death, or worse thandeath, those he most loved on earth. And there he now stood, thatwayward, fated being, around whom within the last month so manylightnings had played, left alone amid men with whom he had nocommunity of feeling.Those hours of agony and excitement had indeed made him a man beforehis time, and well, well might they take the bloom off his youngheart; yet though the siren voice of expectation might have lost partof its sweetness; though the chord which once vibrated to every joymight now possess no longer its elastic tone; though there was thegray shade of doubt mingling with every bright colour which went topaint the future, and the enchanter could charm no more; still therewas within his bosom, in his love for Ildica, a sweet source ofunpolluted happiness, a well of youthful feelings undefined, afountain of bright clear waters, where wearied hope might come anddrink and be refreshed. As he stood there in his loneliness, the valueof that spring of secret enjoyment was displayed in all itsbrightness. He knew, he felt that there was his treasure; and, withthat support and conscious innocence alone, he prepared to face thefuture, be it what it might.The rapid process of thought had ran over in a few minutes all thevaried particulars of his situation, the much of gloomy and dark, andthe small but intense spot of guiding light; and, ere the few Huns whoremained with him showed any disposition to move, he himself turnedtowards their leader, and demanded what was to ensue."Are you able to sit a horse?" demanded Edicon, gazing on hisfeatures, still pale with loss of blood."I am," replied Theodore, "if the journey be not long.""Then we must follow the king," replied Edicon; "but I have hiscommands to make the stations suit your capability. There is yoursword," he continued, giving him the weapon which had dropped from hishand when the blow of Ardaric had for the time disabled his right arm."You are to be treated in no way as a bondman.""Keep it for me," replied Theodore, putting it aside with the back ofhis hand; "I will never go armed into my native land with the enemiesof my country."Edicon laughed aloud. "Is there anything else," he demanded, "thatyour fancy would have! I am ordered to humour thee to the utmost.""There was one faithful freedman," said Theodore, "whom I saw not withthe rest who departed just now. I would gladly hear of his fate: Ileft him with the horses on the hill.""What! a giant?" demanded Edicon. "I saw such a one contending like amadman with our whole army. If it be of him you speak, most probablyhe is dead. I saw him fall beneath a blow which would have slain abull. At all events, he is in the hands of Attila the King; for Iheard him bid his people see to the brave African. Is there aughtelse?""I would fain," said Theodore, with a sigh, "I would fain recover thehorse I rode. It was my father's charger: but I fear that it is vain,for I left it upon the hill.""What, the black horse with the white star on his forehead?" demandedEdicon."The same," answered Theodore, with some surprise. "Have you seenhim?""I saw him with you on the other side of the Danube, some four daysago," replied Edicon, "when Attila came down from the interior to meetyou.""To meet me!" exclaimed Theodore, with a faint smile; "he could notcome to meet me; for I crossed the Danube by accident, not from anylong-conceived purpose.""So it might be," answered the chief, "and yet the king knew that youwere coming, and went down to meet you. Do you not believe that thereare men who see the coming events as clearly as we see the past? Butit matters not," he added; "we left the tribe of Vultingours upon thehill. Perchance the horse may have fallen into their hands; if so,thou shalt have him."He then spoke a few words in their own tongue to some of the Hunsnear, two of whom instantly sprang upon their horses and galloped upthe hill. While they were gone, Theodore and Edicon lay down in theshade upon the grass; and the young Roman endeavoured to induce hiscompanion to pursue to some clearer point of explanation the vaguehints which had been given regarding his first meeting with Attila;but the wily barbarian was not to be led onward beyond the preciseline by which he chose to bound his communication; and as soon asTheodore attempted to gain further information, he started up, andbusied himself in giving orders to the wild warriors around him.In a few minutes the two Huns returned, leading down at a quick pacethe horse of the young Roman, which, snorting and rearing, resistedthe unfamiliar hands by which he was guided. In a moment, however, thevoice of his master rendered him tame and docile as a lamb; andTheodore could perceive, by the smiles and gestures of the barbarians,whose affection for, and command over, their own horses were even thenproverbial, that he had risen highly in their esteem by the love andobedience which the noble beast displayed towards him.When at length all was prepared, he mounted, though with much pain anddifficulty from his wounds; but when once on his horse's back heexperienced no further inconvenience, except from weakness; and,riding side by side with Edicon, he proceeded slowly on the same trackwhich Attila and his troops had previously taken.A little farther to the east, the woods again swept down to the verybanks, seeming to present an impervious barrier against their advancein that direction; but still the Scythian horsemen rode on directtowards the forest, and, separating on the very edge, each took hispath by himself, winding along with extraordinary skill and dexterity,and keeping up their communication with each other by shrill, sharpcries. They had apparently left the direction taken by Attila and hismyriads; for the grass of the forest bore no trace of having beentrodden down by the feet of those innumerable horsemen; and the greenboughs on either side, clad in the refreshing garmenture of the earlyyear, neither scorched by the summer's sun nor withered by theautumn's wind, were unbroken and undisturbed. With slow and heavy wingrose up the feathered tenants of the wood, on the passage of strangersthrough those spots of which they had held solitary possession for somany years: the beasts started away from their path, almost under thehorses' feet; and everything indicated that calm tranquillity hadreigned there for many a year, while the civilized world beyond hadbeen torn by faction, turbulence, and war.For nearly three miles the branch of the great Dacian forest, whichthey were now traversing, continued unbroken, but at the end of thatdistance it again suddenly ceased, and, issuing out upon a widesavanna, the little band of Huns reunited, and rode rapidly on.Another wood succeeded, but of less extent, and bearing evidenttraces, in many parts, of the destroying axe. It, too, was sooncrossed; and when Theodore had again reached its extreme limit,another scene, more gloomy, more painful, more terrible, broke uponhis eye.It was a cultivated land laid desolate! The corn, just losing itsfresh green, and touched with the golden hand of summer, was beatendown, and trodden into the very ground from which it grew; the fencesand partitions were swept away, and the scattered remnants thereof,mingled with the produce which they were intended to protect, spreadwide over the trampled and ruined country. The huts and cottages of alowly but industrious population were seen around; but the roof hadfallen in, and the blackened and smouldering rafters told the tale ofdestruction but too well. In the midst of the field lay a husbandmanwith a javelin wound in his throat, and at the door of one of thecottages, stretched across that threshold which her feet had so oftenpassed with joy and gladness, was the body of a young mother, with hergolden hair streaming on the ground, her white arms extendedmotionless above her head, now tranquil in death, but telling stillthe tale of agonized emotion past, of supplication urged in vain, andunanswered appeals unto mysterious Heaven; and there, beside her,seeking with plaintive cries its wonted food, crept on towards herbosom her infant child, its little hands dabbling in the stream ofgore that welled from the fond loved home of infancy, the dearmaternal breast now for ever cold and feelingless."Oh God, the child!" cried Theodore, as they rode by.Edicon gazed on it with a stern dark brow. "There will be many such,"he said, and it was all his reply.The young Roman's heart swelled within him with the choking agony offruitless indignation. He could do naught to succour, to save, or todefend; and bending down his eyes upon the arching neck of his proudcharger, he strove not to see the many miseries of the land throughwhich he passed. He could not shut his eyes to all, however. Every nowand then the horse would recoil from a corpse stretched across hisway. Every now and then the crashing fall of some burning cottage orRoman watch-tower, which were thick upon the road towards Viminacium,would make him start and look up, and behold new traces of ruin,slaughter, and desolation.They passed by a hamlet where once many happy hearths had gatheredround a small Christian church; but the hearths were strewed with therafters that had covered them; the voice of the pastor and the heartsof the congregation were now still in death; the church was void, itswalls smoking, its pavements stained with blood, and its altarprofaned; and silence reigned equally where the merry laugh and thegay song had rejoiced in the blessings of God, and where the voice ofsupplication or of gratitude had been raised to him in prayer oradoration.They passed by a villa built in the graceful and the mighty times ofTrajan, while the name of Rome was awful over all the earth; but itshalls and vestibules, its courts and gardens, were strewed with itsfragments of works of art, and blackened with the fire which haddestroyed its fair proportions.Oh how glad was Theodore, when the gray coming on of twilight gave himthe hope that night would soon shut out from his weary eyes the sightof such scenes of horror and devastation. But, alas! even whendarkness spread over the whole sky, the earth beneath--as he rodealong, across the high grounds which there sweep down to theDanube--seemed glowing in a thousand spots with the lurid light ofwide-spread conflagration; and Theodore beheld the destiny of hisnative land. Fire consumed each dwelling's roof-tree, and blooddrowned out the ashes.At length, at the bottom of the hills, where a small wood skirted oneof the little rivers they had to cross, they came suddenly upon anumber of fires, round which were seated some thousands of thebarbarians. On the approach of Edicon and his party, numbers of themstarted up, and, leaving the loud rude merry-making in which they wereengaged, gathered around the new comers, with wild gestures and quickvociferous tongues talking, laughing, shouting, and screaming, whilethe fitful gleams of the fire displayed, in strong, unpleasant lightand shade, their strange attire and harsh repulsive countenances. Foodof various kinds and in great abundance was set before Theodore andthose who escorted him; but the young Roman felt no power to eat, andonly quenched the burning of his lip, while he strove to drownremembrance of his griefs in two full cups of wine."We must on with the first light to-morrow morning," said Edicon, "andtherefore it were better for you to take what sleep you can, though,perhaps, being a Roman, you cannot find slumber on such a couch asnature provided for man, and under such a tent as the starry sky.""Sleep!" cried Theodore, "sleep! Do you expect me to sleep after sucha day as this? Such sleep, however, as I can gain may as well be takenhere as anywhere else," and, wrapping his mantle round his head, hecast himself down near one of the fires. For repose he sought not, forhe neither hoped nor expected to find it, but he sought to shut outfrom his sight the fierce forms and savage merriment of those who hadjust devastated his country. With his eyes closed, and his mantleround his head, he saw them not, it is true, but still the wild pealsof barbarian laughter rang in his ears, as they caroused around thefires; still imagination called up to his view the rude, ill-favouredcountenances of the Huns; still memory presented to his fevered brainall the sad and painful sights which he had beheld during the day.Thus passed by the greater part of the night; for, even when the Huns,giving themselves up to slumber, left silence to recover her empireover the scene from which their rude revels had banished her, bitterremembrance haunted the young Roman still, and drove far away from histroubled breast that soft and soothing guest which visits sounwillingly the couch of pain or wo. About an hour before dawn,exhaustion, however, conquered thought; and when Edicon roused him toproceed, he was sleeping, if the name of sleep could be applied tothat dull, unrefreshing want of consciousness into which he had fallenfor the time. He started up, however, ready to go on, ay, and willing;for although he could hope to find but little better or fairer in thethings before him, yet every scene in which he was placed was, for thetime, so hateful to him, that it was a relief and consolation even tochange.The road lay still by the side of the Danube; but, after leaving theirnight's resting-place, it was evident that they were coming fast uponthe great host of Attila himself. Multitudes of small wagons coveredthe way. Thousands of straggling parties were seen in every direction;and at length, after riding on for about two hours, they came in sightof the towers of a city, rising up from the banks of the river. At thesame moment, as they stood upon the hill above it, a shout came up tothe ear so loud, so fierce, so demoniacal, that it seemed to Theodorethat the very fiends of hell had burst forth to mingle with the darkinnumerable multitudes that he beheld whirling round that devoted townlike the waves of some mighty vortex in the stormy oceans of thenorth.Another and another yell succeeded; and as Edicon still led on downthe hill, screams of anguish could be distinguished mixing with theshout, and fire might be seen bursting forth from various parts of thecity."Viminacium is taken!" said the Hunnish leader: "we shall find theking in the market-place; ride close by me, and let us on."CHAPTER XIV.THE CAPTURED CITY.In one dark, close-rushing stream the Huns were pouring intoViminacium, when Theodore, with unutterable agony of heart, approachedthe gates with those who held him a prisoner. It was an hour in whichhe could full well have died with scarcely a regret, for every sightand every sound around him spoke nothing but despair.A few words from his conductor brought the barbarians who accompaniedthem pressing round the young Roman, so as to keep him distinct fromall the multitude which had followed Attila to his first actualconquest in the Roman territory. But so dense, so rapid, was thatliving torrent, that after they had once entered the gates no onecould move except in the same onward course; and, knee pressed againstknee, horse jostling horse, forward they rushed, while nothing couldbe seen in the dark long street but an ocean of human heads, exceptwhere the flames burst forth from dwellings, palaces, and temples, andformed a fiery canopy above them.To see beneath the horses' feet was not possible; but every now andthen some dreadful indications, on which it were needless to dwell,showed Theodore that his charger's feet were passing over a pile ofdead; and still, amid the clang and rush of those wild horsemen, burstforth from other parts of the city the same long, piercing, awfulshrieks, which told that the work of massacre had not yet ceasedwithin those ill-starred walls. Wherever, too, a street, branching toeither side, gave a momentary view of what was passing beyond, groupsof struggling forms were seen, with heaps of corpses, falling houses,and masterless horses galloping hither and thither, and rolling cloudsof smoke writhing in dark masses amid the building.Still, however, Edicon pursued his way straight on, though at everyturning some body of the Huns left the onward path, bent on plunder oron bloodshed. At length the way opened out into the forum, whose widespace was covered with scattered groups of the barbarian host,whirling here and there, in obedience to commands emanating from agroup who had forced their horses up the steps leading to the templeof Mars.Here, in the forum, the Roman legionaries had made their last stand;and here, thick and many, lay the bodies of those slain by hands thathad never learned to spare. Here, too, dismounted from their horses,and stripping the yet warm dead of their rich arms and vestments, werethousands of bloodstained groups of the conquerors: and here, pennedup, and dying man by man, was the last determined cohort whichresisted the barbarian force. Even at that very moment, as Edicon wasforcing his way onward, that last lingering spark of resistance wasextinguished; for Theodore could see one Hunnish horseman, followed byseveral others, urge his horse fiercely down the steep steps of thetemple, and plunge into the midst of the multitude which was pressinground the brave men of Viminacium. A loud shout burst from thebarbarians as that horseman hurled himself forward like a thunderboltagainst the front of the cohort. Its line, which had remained firmeven in despair, was rent in a moment, as an oak that has withstoodthe winds is rent by the lightning, and the Roman helmets disappearedin the dark mass of the Huns. Again that same horseman separatedhimself from the multitude, rode slowly back towards the temple, andurged his horse once more up the steep and slippery steps. Towards himEdicon pursued his way; and, as they came near, Theodore perceivedthat it was, indeed, towards him their journey had been directed.There, advanced before the rest, Attila sat gazing from hisbattle-horse's back over the awful scene before his eyes; while nearhim an equestrian statue of Trajan, with his calm, thoughtfulfeatures, and a bronze group of a lion tearing a bull, contrastedstrangely, and harmonized well with the fierce and heated aspect ofthe stern Hun, as, covered with blood and dust, he rolled his flashingdark eyes over that terrible scene of massacre, fire, and desolation."Oh," cried Theodore, as they came near the steps, "oh, beseech him tosheath the sword, and spare the unresisting!" and, as he spoke, henaturally urged on his horse, to plead the cause of his miserablecountrymen with one who had shown himself, in his own case, notinsensible to pity.But Edicon caught his bridle quickly, exclaiming, "Speak to him not!Speak to him not, if you value life! See you not that the mightyspirit of war is upon him. Speak to a hungry lion tasting the firstblood! Plead with the tiger for its prey! But cross not Attila in hishour of battle and victory! Bleda, his brother, might hear you, andspare you at the time to slay you for his pleasure after; but were youto cross Attila now, he might strike dead the man whom to-morrow hewould cherish as a son."At that moment, however, the eye of the monarch lighted on the garb ofTheodore. "A Roman!" he cried, "a Roman before my eyes! Smite him tothe ground! Give his heart to the vultures!"The youth understood not his words, which were spoken in the Hunnishtongue, but the fierce gestures of the barbarian king were enough; andat the same moment a hundred spears were raised around to drink theRoman's blood."Let them do their will," he said, calmly, "let them do their will.Who would love life after such sights as these?"But Edicon interposed. "Hold!" he cried, to those so prompt to obey inany work of blood--"hold! he is the king's friend. Attila knows himnot. Oh king!" he continued, raising his voice, "thou hast promisedthis youth protection: wilt thou break thy promise?"Attila rolled his eyes over the whole group in silence; and Edicon,with those who surrounded him, well knowing that the fierce and eagermood of their lord would pass away, retired slowly from his sight,leading Theodore with them. No tranquil spot, however, no place ofrefuge or repose, did that wide city now contain. Plunder was stillgoing on, though slaughter, insatiable still, even when gorging uponthousands, had exhausted nearly all, but only halted for want of food.Some wretched woman, indeed, or some helpless child, was dragged everynow and then from its ineffectual hiding-place, and a solitary screamor a dying groan marked the new victim. But the work of butchery wasnow wellnigh complete; and conflagration, spreading rapidly in everypart, threatened to consume the barbarian victors themselves, in theburning city which they had captured and destroyed.A small open space, near what was called Trajan's Gate, at lengthafforded a place of repose to Edicon and his party; and there,following the example of the Huns, Theodore alighted from his horse,and, sitting down upon one of the massy stone steps before a dwellingwhich had once belonged to some rich banker, and had been one of thefirst to be plundered by the barbarians, he covered his eyes with hishands, and tried to shut out even from memory the horrors which he hadjust beheld.In vain--it was vain! Confused, countless, terrible images andfeelings of destruction and despair rushed through his burning brainand his indignant heart, and drove him wellnigh to madness. At lengthtwo or three wild notes of some barbarian trumpet, loud, long, andmelancholy, sounded through the streets, and were heard above thegeneral roar of the Hunnish multitudes, coming from different quartersof the city. Edicon sprang up and mounted his horse; and, seeingTheodore remain in the same attitude of despair, he exclaimed, "Up,up, we must away! It is dangerous to linger."Theodore rose slowly; and though the curling flames which at oncestruck his eye, flickering above all the buildings around, togetherwith the shower of sparks and flakes of fire which were fallingincessantly from the dense and lurid clouds of smoke above, showedthat the words of Edicon were true, and that the warning voice of thetrumpet had only been sounded in time; yet slow and heavily did theyoung Roman rise, as if he would willingly have remained to die in theflames of that vast holocaust to the barbarian god of warfare. In vainthe Huns urged him to haste; he gazed upon them dark and gloomily, asif the bitterness of death itself were passed; and they, with alltheir power, could do no more.With strange and unusual gentleness for one of so fierce anduncontrollable a nation, Edicon endeavoured to persuade him to followthem from the captured city. He offered no violence, he used no rudecommand; but, after every other argument had failed to quicken themovements of the young Roman, he added, as if he could have divinedthe only chord which--left strung and resonant where so many werebroken--could still vibrate the touch, "Remember that there are othersin the world to whom your life is dear; beings kind, beautiful, andbeloved, who may need the protection of your arm, the consolation ofyour affection, and the shelter of your breast."The tears rose in Theodore's eyes: but the thrilling life of humanhopes and fears was once more kindled from among the dead ashes ofdespair; and, springing on his horse, he followed wherever they would.Wild, and terrible, and extraordinary was the scene of confusion anddisarray which followed, while the Huns, some fast and eagerly, somelingering with their appetite for plunder still unsated, poured forthfrom the gates of the burning city. Order and ranks were there none.Tumult and confusion, loud cries, wild laughter, shouts of triumph,and barbarous songs, dark masses whirling hither and thither, horses,which had lost their masters, seeking them familiarly through thecrowd, the rush of innumerable multitudes, and the mighty hum ofcongregated myriads, formed all that was seen and heard over the widegreen fields which surrounded what a few hours before had beenViminacium--except when, loud and slow, surmounting every other noise,were heard the long, melancholy notes of the barbarian trumpet,calling conquerors from the work of spoil and desolation.Sweeping round in a semicircle upon the declivity of the hills whichdomineered the city, the host of Attila was at length gatheredtogether, at the end of about two hours after Theodore had seen thebarbarian monarch in the forum. The youth had set apart upon the edgeof the hill gazing upon the dim multitudes, as they covered andstruggled up the intervening space between the walls and the spotwhere he was placed. The same party of Huns which had always hithertoaccompanied him, more to protect than to detain him, remained with himstill, except, indeed, Edicon, who had left him for the time. Atlength, however, he reappeared, and, sitting down beside the youth,addressed him kindly."The king," he said, "has asked for you. The fierce cloud of strifehas passed away from his heart, and the sun will shine upon those thatapproach him now. Let us draw near. Lo! yonder he stands, where yousee the crowd upon that high knoll. The warriors are going to bringtheir booty before him. If thou hast any boon to ask at his hands, askit now."Theodore rose, and followed on foot, though there was a feveredweariness in his blood, a confused giddiness in his brain, whichprevented him from clearly comprehending, or, indeed, from taking anyinterest in the words that were addressed to him. Even when he hadapproached the presence of him on whom his whole fate now depended,the objects passed before him as if in some unreal pageant, wherein hehad no feelings engaged, and by which curiosity and admiration werehardly excited.There sat Attila on horseback, and beside him a taller and a youngerchieftain, with keen sharp eyes, and a low fierce brow. In hiscountenance there might be more of cunning, but there was less ofpower and intellect than in that of Attila; and, as Edicon caught theeye of the young stranger wandering over his form, he whispered, "Thatis Bleda, the brother of the king."Theodore paused, where his companion paused, at no great distance fromthe spot where the two leaders stood, and looked on, while the wholehost passed in long line before the kings and their immediatefollowers, casting down in a pile all the rich and costly plunderwhich had been acquired in the first capture of a Roman city. Howoften, in the course of the succeeding months, was that scene to berepeated! There were the chased and jewelled cups and chalices whichhad graced the merry banquet, and poured the libation of hope orgratitude; there the sacred vessels of the church; there the gems andornaments torn from the neck of beauty, and from the violated limbs ofthe tender, the gentle, and the beloved. There was poured out themiser's long-accumulated store; there the early gift of youngaffection; there the inestimable product of ancient art; there theshining mass, only prized for its intrinsic value. Each object therecast down recorded some deed of profanation, either of sacred civilorder, or of holy piety, or of the sweet sanctity of calm domesticlife: each spoke trumpet-tongued against the horrid, the desolatingtrade of war; the honoured, lauded, and rewarded curse, parent ofmurder, violence, and wrong.Theodore scarcely remarked the division of the spoil, though heperceived that no voice, no, not even that of Bleda, was raisedagainst the stern but just allotment made by Attila. Each soldierreceived his share; and each seemed to hear with reverence the wordsof his leader, and to gaze with awe upon the countenance of him whosesteps seemed destined to crush thrones into the dust, and on whosebreath hung the fate of nations and of empires.When the division was over, Attila turned his eyes upon Theodore. "Bidthe Roman approach," he said; and the youth advanced to the spot wherehe sat on the same horse which had borne him through the sacking ofthe city. His countenance, however, was now mild and calm; and thetone in which he addressed to Theodore some simple words of greetingwas kind and father-like. Bleda said nothing; but he rolled his fierceeyes over the form of the young stranger, and his whole countenancespoke the unmitigated hate which he felt towards everything that borethe Roman name.Theodore listened to the words of the monarch calmly; and then at oncereplied, "Oh king! I have a boon to ask at thy hands; I beseech theeto grant it unto me.""Speak," said Attila, in the tongue of the Alani; but Bleda mutteredin the same language, "Dash his brains out with an axe! that were thebest boon to give him."Attila's brow darkened; but, without noticing further than by thatheavy frown his brother's words, he bade the youth proceed."Thou art mighty, oh king!" said Theodore, "alas! too mighty; and, itmay be, that, ere thou receivest defeat from the Roman arms" (Attilasmiled), "many such a city as this that thou hast to-day destroyed mayfall before thee--""Many shall fall!" interrupted Attila: "I will tread upon their towersfrom Margus to Byzantium. I will mow the land as with a scythe: I willshake the armies from before my path, as a lion shakes off the morningdew from his mane. The fortified cities will I lay low, and the openvillages I will burn, and my horses shall eat up the grass of thewhole land. There shall be no green thing, and no beautiful thing, andno living thing, left throughout the country, unless speedycompensation for the wrongs done to me and to my people avert thewrath, and turn away the storm: but yet, what wouldst thou?""This, oh king!" replied Theodore; "my eye cannot witness thedesolation of my native land. Either my heart will cease to beat, ormy brain will turn, if I behold more of such scenes as those which Ihave this day beheld. I am thine to do with as thou pleasest, and Iwill keep the promise I have made; but, I do beseech thee, send meafar from such sights. Let me go into thine own country; and I swear,by all that I hold sacred, to remain there tranquilly till thoureturnest.""I know not how that may be," replied the king: "thy life is dear tome, youth; and were a Roman now to show himself in the land of theHuns, without protection and support, except, indeed, as a captive,the stream of his days would soon fall into the great gulf of death.""If thou takest me on," cried Theodore, "to witness the murder of myfellow-countrymen, the ruin and devastation of my native land, thouslayest me by a worse death than any of thy people can inflict.""Well, thou shalt go back," replied Attila; "but I will send peoplewith thee, to protect thee in my name, till thou art known and insafety in the land. I cannot spare thee, Edicon; but he shall chooseothers who can speak some of the languages thou knowest: ours thouwilt soon learn. Follow me until this night be over; to-morrow thoushalt depart. See to his repose, Edicon, and find him wherewithal tocover him from the night air. These Romans are not, as we are,familiar with the elements."Edicon smiled; and Theodore felt the scorn which had fallen upon hisnation; but he replied not, for the reproach was too true; and,retiring from the presence of Attila, he felt his heart relieved atthe certainty of being no longer forced to contemplate with his owneyes all the horrors that awaited his native land.In their eager and fiery course towards the destruction of the Romanempire, the Huns knew no pause, lingered for no repose. Ere noon,Viminacium was a heap of ashes; ere two hours more had passed, thedivision of their plunder had taken place; and, ere another had goneby, the unwearied myriads were again upon their way, to repeat thesame scenes of slaughter and destruction. At nightfall they halted.The innumerable small wagons, which followed them with a celerityquite marvellous, formed at once the ramparts of their principal campand the abode of such as were affected by some touch of softermanners. In the centre of the camp was raised the standard of theking, the rude black eagle crowned;[6] and round it, at the distanceof about a hundred cubits, was drawn an inner circle of wagons; but inthe clear and starry nights of summer, no tent or awning covered thehead of Attila; and beneath that victorious banner, which he carriedunchecked from Caucasus to Gaul, he lay stretched upon the hide of awild bull, which his own hand had slain.---------------[Footnote 6: It was called Astur, and is supposed to have been the sameas the tributary bird of the Tartars named the Schongar.]---------------Round about the great camp were a number of smaller enclosures; someappropriated to different tribes and nations, who followed themultitude of the Huns in their career of victory and pillage; someassigned to various friends and officers of the great monarch himself.Nevertheless, the warrior horsemen of that innumerable host did notconfine themselves, where they feared no attack, to the circle oftheir encampment, but, spreading over the plain around, spent theearly hours of the night in feasting and revelry.Theodore, with Edicon, who showed for him on all occasions kindnessand consideration, which was little to be expected from one of sobarbarous a race, followed full half an hour behind the general marchof the army, in order to avoid those sights of occasional violence andcruelty which were sure to take place, even in the thinly-peopled partof the country which they now traversed. When they reached the spot,therefore, on which Attila had fixed for his encampment, night hadalready fallen; and for several miles around were to be seen blazingup a countless number of fires, with scarcely fifty yards from the oneto the other, and with a circle of those wild soldiers surrounding andcarousing about each. Little was the attention which they paid to thenew-comers, as they rode through the midst of them; and Edicon, byfrequently stopping to speak to those he knew, gave his companion afull insight into the habits of that roving people. We must not pausethereon, for this is not intended for a book of description; and yetit was a wild, strange scene that he beheld, full of matter of disgustand sorrow, and yet not without interest either. There all the vicesof a savage state were displayed; while some peculiar virtues, andsome of those strong enthusiasms which, though not virtues, findchords of sympathy in every noble heart, broke forth from time totime, and shed a lustre over the mingled whole.At some of the fires, reclining or sitting in grotesque or picturesqueattitudes, lay groups of the wild Scythians, in their strange butstriking dresses, drinking deep of various liquors, which they hadeither compounded or plundered; and in the eyes of many the fierygleam of intemperance was already shining, while with hoarse laughterand savage gesticulation they detailed the deeds of the day or mockedthe agonies of their victims. Round other fires, again, gaming, withthe same eagerness, the same loud words and fierce anxieties, so oftento be found disgracing the capitals of civilized lands, might beobserved other bodies of barbarians moved by another class ofpassions. Then, again, farther on, gazing with eager eyes, orlistening with acute ears, and answering with bursts of thoughtlessmerriment, sat other bodies of the Huns, around some buffoon orjester,[7] in whose tale, or whose joke, or whose antic contortionstheir whole thoughts seemed to be engaged, forgetful of the bloodyyesterday, unmindful of the bloody morrow. Farther still rose up thevoice of song; and, in notes not unmelodious, some native minstrelsung of love and war; praised the beauties of some honoured fair, orextolled the valour of some mighty chief. There, too, around him mightbe seen, the dark countenances of those swarthy children of the North,moved by all the deep emotions which his song touched through the finechords of association. There the youth leaned back; and, as helistened to the name of love, or heard the glowing words which paintedsome fair creation of the singer's mind, memory turned towards hisnative home, affection held up before his eyes the image of the onebeloved, and his heart beat with eager palpitations at the gentler andthe sweeter thoughts poured into his rude breast. There, too, might beseen the elder and the sterner soldier, who, when the song took up thetale of war, and told of things achieved by glorious courage, landsconquered, thrones acquired, and everlasting glory won, would halfstart from his grassy bed, and, resting on his arm, gaze with flashingeyes and stirred up enthusiasms upon the singer, and, with fondanticipations of the future, promise his own heart the glorious meedof deeds recorded in a song like that. Oh, beautiful, universalnature! noble feelings! touching harmonies of the musical heart ofman! why, why among you must be thrown so many discords to bring outyour sweetness? Why can we not have on earth the perfect harmony?where, from the lowest to the highest, from the most solemn to thegayest note, all may find place, and rise in one grand, all-comprisinganthem to the God of all?[7]---------------[Footnote 7: We find from all records that the Huns were peculiarlyfond of gaming and of buffoons.]---------------CHAPTER XV.THE PERIL AND ESCAPE.It was to one of those detached circles, which we have described asseparated from the general encampment, that Edicon led the way, afterspeaking with several of the chiefs, as they passed along. It had beenapparently reserved for himself and those who followed him, for theenclosure was nearly vacant, except where, before the entrance of atall but curiously-formed tent, which had probably been taken in warfrom some Eastern nation, blazed up a large and cheerful fire. Aroundwere seated about a dozen Huns, not less wild and fierce in theexpression of their faces than the rest of their nation; and yet therewas something about their dress and general appearance which struckTheodore as more familiar to his eye. As he approached, one of themrose and addressed him in the Latin language, and welcomed him to histent with great purity of speech and accent; and oh, how sweet andmusical did those sounds appear, after the strange, harsh tongueswhich had lately rung in his ear, amid scenes of ruin, bloodshed, andstrife!Sweet, sweet indeed it was, but overpowering. He felt the tears readyto gush from his eyes; a word would have made them overflow; and,without speaking, he entered the tent to which the man had pointed. Itcontained nothing in the outer chamber of the two, into which it wasdivided by a curtain, but a lighted lamp upon a small table; and inthe inner a bed, piled up of skins, with a single wooden settle. Ithad an air, however, of civilization and comfort; and how often is itin this life that the air has more influence upon our happiness thaneven the reality? We are the slaves of association, and, as such,truly but children of a larger growth, to whom the paint and tinsel ofappearances render the toy valuable, whatever be its intrinsic worth.Theodore cared little for the comfort, and thought Roman civilizationhad fallen into effeminacy; and yet the sight of that tent, like thesound of Roman words, sent a thrill through his heart, and made himhappier. Edicon saw his emotion, and seemed to understand its cause,at least in part."You are surprised," he said, "to hear the Latin tongue; but you willbe more so to know that there are several thousands in our host whocan use it fluently.""I have heard," replied Theodore, "when I was in Rome, that [AE]tius,the great general in Gaul, has several bodies of Huns among hismercenaries."[8]---------------[Footnote 8: Not only was such the case, but in various contentions inthe empire, hired bodies of the Huns were frequently found fighting onboth sides, and doing their duty faithfully.]---------------"Ay, and Valentinian also," rejoined Edicon. "Not two years since fullten thousand of our nation were engaged in defence of the Westernempire. We are too near neighbours to the East to have such friendlycommerce with her. Besides, Theodosius is unworthy the defence ofbrave men--a mere weak coward, a flimsy knave, whose only means ofproving his manhood is by murdering with hired steel the only honestand noble men left to save his empire."Edicon struck the chord aright, and Theodore's heart replied, thoughhis lips were silent. "These men," continued the Hunnish chief,pointing to the barbarians, who were again seated round the fire, andtook but little notice either of Theodore or their newly-arrivedcompanions, who had followed him with Edicon--"these men have beenchosen by the king himself, not because they speak thy language betterthan others in the camp, but because they are known as faithful andjust. They will accompany thee back into our land; and, though they gowith regret, thou wilt find them true and trustworthy. Ten more willbe added, whom thou mayst choose either from among the Huns who havelived with the Romans, or from among thy kinsmen the Alani.""I will choose the Alani," answered Theodore, quickly; and heobserved, as he spoke, the brow of his companion contract as if hewere offended--"I will choose the Alani--not, noble Edicon," he added,"that I doubt or distrust the Huns, for to me they have been merciful,kind, and generous, whatever violence and cruelty they may have shownin dealing with my native land. But remember that those I love thebest have gone to seek a refuge with the Alan tribes; and perchance,by having some of them near me, I may learn, as I go, tidings whichwill cheer and console me to hear.""Not only as you go," answered Edicon, with a smile, "but afterwardalso; for those who are now chosen to accompany you are not onlydirected to be your guard by the way, but are also given you--not asservants to a lord, but as followers to a leader, and will obey you inall things, as far as our customs permit, so long as you remain withus.""It is strange," answered Theodore, thoughtfully; "your king, so harshand fierce towards others, is so gentle and merciful to me--considersmy wants, provides for my security, and cares for my comfort as if hewere a father.""Receive it all with gratitude," replied Edicon, "and he may prove afather to you. Nor must you think Attila harsh and fierce towards any,except in the hour of battle, when the spirit of war is upon him, andwith the powers of a god he claims the attribute of vengeance. No!though grave and stern, he is just and humane towards his people.Determined in his purposes, inflexible in his judgments, his purposestowards those who obey him are mild, his judgments even againsthimself are equitable. It is only the traitor among his own people,the aggressor among foreign nations, that he treats with rigour.""Think me not ungrateful," said Theodore; "I meant not to accuse thymonarch; and while I felt thankful for the tenderness he hath shown tome and mine--thankful for life and liberty preserved, and for thesafety of those who are dearer to me than life itself--I have beenforced to marvel that he has dealt so different a measure to me and toothers. There is something strange in it.""There may be so," replied Edicon; "but think you there are no suchthings as sudden intimations given us from Heaven of those with whomour fate is to be linked for good or evil? Think you that thoseprepossessions for or against, which we feel so suddenly, sounaccountably, in rare and extraordinary cases, are mere fancies,passing whims, which have no reference to after events?"Theodore made no reply, for he remembered well his own peculiarfeelings when he had first seen that powerful monarch with whom hisown destiny had since been so completely mingled. He remembered itwell, but he answered not, for the Hun seemed to have seen hisfeelings, or at least divined them; and at length Edicon wenton:--"Such may have been the prepossession of Attila towards you; andwe know, or at least believe, that the feelings I have mentioned aregiven us by the gods, to let us know our friends and enemies. Does notthe horse tremble when the unseen lion is near? Do not the bleatingsof the sheep warn the shepherd to watch even while the wolf is yetafar off?"He paused a moment for reply, and then added--"But I will leave youto repose; and yet, ere you seek sleep, take some food, for your eyesare haggard and hollow, your cheek burning as if this tent were afurnace, and you have neither drunk mead nor broken bread during thewhole day. Bid a slave bring food," he continued, speaking to thosewithout; and then, taking from one of his own followers the sword whichTheodore had left in his hands, he laid it down on the small table bythe lamp, saying, "You are now turning to another land. Keep yourweapon, for, whether you need it or not, it is always well to beprepared. Add to it a javelin and a bow; for, as you go through ourcountry, you may strike a stag or a wild bull, and gain honours in thechase, which we hold next to war. I will now leave you, and see youto-morrow ere you depart."Thus saying, his conductor left him, and a frightful negro slave,precious in the eyes of the Huns from the hideousness of his face andfigure, brought him cooked meat and thin cakes of flour, with a strongdrink composed of honey. Theodore tried to eat, but only few were themouthfuls he could swallow, though the meat was not unsavoury. Hetried, too, to drink; but there was a burning heat in his throat andmouth, and the sweet liquor was revolting to his taste."I will bring wine," said the negro slave, in tolerable Greek; "I am apresent from Attila the King to his Roman son, and he is henceforth mylord. Wilt thou have wine? for it shall go hard but, with mine own witand Attila's name to bear me out, I will find you as pure wine in theHunnish camp as ever you tasted in the city of Constantine.""I would rather have pure water," answered Theodore; "I have a painfulthirst upon me; and heart and tongue feel burning as if with fire."The slave sprang away, and returned in a few moments with both waterand wine; and mingling them together, Theodore drank with delightwhich he had not known for long."I thank thee, friend," he said, giving his hand to the slave ingratitude for the blessed draught: "it is exquisite, and I thankthee."The slave took his hand and kissed it, gazing intently on his face;and then, seeing by the calm and grateful sincerity of the youngRoman's look that no scorn existed in his bosom towards that deformedand frightful shape which crouched at his feet, he sprang up, saying,"I have deceived you, but I will not betray you. I am not sent byAttila, but by Bleda, his brother. Beware of him! Roman, beware ofhim!""I have no cause to fear him," answered Theodore: "I have done naughtto injure him."The slave shook his head mournfully. "Are we only injured by thosewhom we have injured?" he demanded. "Alas! were it so, I should not bewhat I am. But I must speed hence, and not talk with thee too long,lest he hear that I have done so, and think I have betrayed him.""But tell me, what is thy name?" demanded Theodore. "I have naught togive thee as a reward, but some day, perchance, I may have, and I willnot fail.""My name is Zercon," answered the slave; "and I am the crooked andmutilated jester of Bleda, the brother of Attila. Thou hast lookedupon me with eyes of feeling and compassion, and I am rewarded enough;but I will serve thee further still."Thus saying, he left the tent, and drew the external curtain closelyafter him. Theodore paused to think over what he had heard; but, as hereflected, he could find in all the wide range of probability no causewhy Bleda should seek to injure him--"There must be some mistake," hethought; and, overpowered with weariness and exhaustion, he laid hissword close beside the bed of skins, and casting himself down,endeavoured to forget his cares in slumber. Restless, unhappy,fevered, long and painfully he tossed upon that lowly couch, courtingin vain the blessed influence which opens for us, for a while, thosegates of care, that shut us in the dreary prison of ourself. Thefaintly-burning lamp stood beside him; and by its pale light, as hiseye roved round, the dark hangings of the tent became peopled with thespectres of imagination. His father passed before him, as he last hadseen him at Byzantium; but his garments were spotted and dabbled withblood, and his countenance was pale with the ashy hue of death. Thencame Flavia, with a crown upon her head, and a shroud about herperson. Then he beheld Eudochia struggling in the arms of a fierce andeager form, and then Ildica glided across the scene, clothed in bridalrobes, and with her left hand clasped in that of a wild, shadowyshape, which led her slowly forward, while in her right she carried anaked dagger, dropping as she went large gouts of crimson blood.He knew, he felt, that it was all delusion, but yet he could notbanish the swarming fancies that disturbed his brain, and evendeceived the organ of sight itself. He closed his eyes, and resolutelyturned his face to the wall of the tent, near which he lay, andemployed himself in listening to the various sounds which rose up fromthe myriads spread over that wide plain. Although there were somenoises which might be distinguished from the rest, an occasional burstof laughter, the loud and measured tones of some singer or reciter, orthe wild notes of various rude instruments of music, yet the generalbuzz of all the many voices far and near came upon his ear with adrowsy and lulling hum, which gradually brought on an inclination tosleep. As time passed, too, the louder and more distinct sounds diedaway, and the whole subsided into a low and whispering rustle, whichwas like the noise of the sea upon a pebbly shore, only that it wantedthe regular intermission of the successive waves. Forgetfulness fellupon him; but in a moment he awoke again with a quick start, gazedround to see where he was, felt the load of care pressed back uponmemory, and hastened again to close his eyes, and cast it off oncemore.He slept again, and this time more profoundly than the last, thoughhis breathing was short and thick, and his limbs tossed to and fro.The lamp burnt more and more dimly. The sounds in the camp fell intosilence, only broken now and then by the wild neighing of a war-horse.At length, a little before midnight, the curtain, which separated thetent into two chambers, and which he had let drop when he lay down torest, trembled as with a slight wind--was slowly moved--was drawnback; and a tall, powerful form took a step within, and let itquietly fall again. Two more paces brought him to the side of thecouch where the young Roman lay, and, with arms folded on his chest,the giant-like intruder gazed upon the sleeping youth, and then lookedcautiously round the tent. When he had done so twice, he blew out thelamp, and drawing over his tall form the mantle which Theodore hadcast off, he crouched himself down at the foot of his bed. All wasstill and silent but the quick, heavy breathing of the Roman youth,and the rustling of his clothes, as he turned from time to time uponhis uneasy couch. In less than half an hour, however, the curtainagain moved, and a listening head was advanced within it."The lamp has gone out," said a whispering voice, speaking to some onein the outer chamber, in the lowest tone that the human tongue canassume; "lift up the curtain of the door, lest I miss my blow."The curtain was lifted up, the inner one pushed back, and in streamedthe pale, calm moonlight, showing Bleda, the brother of Attila, partlyadvanced within the inner chamber. He took another step forward, andlistened, grasping tight the shining blade which he carried in hishand. Another step brought him within arm's length of the Roman'scouch, and his hand was raised to strike, when, bounding like a lionon his prey, up started from his master's feet Cremera, the Arabfreedman, and seized the murderer in his gigantic grasp.An instant struggle took place; but the Hun was no match for hisantagonist, who cast him down upon the ground, shaken, and nearlystunned. Another barbarian, however, rushed in, sword in hand, from theouter tent; but Theodore was now upon his feet, and, springing acrossthe prostrate body of Bleda, interposed between the armed Hun and hisgallant freedman. Another barbarian appeared at the door of the tent,and how the struggle might have gone, who shall say? but then therecame a cry of Attila the King! Attila the King! and, with a torchbefore him, the dark monarch of the Huns advanced slowly into thetent. He gazed round upon the faces of all present with that stern,calm, unmoved look which never changed but in the fury of the battle.Bleda, who had risen, answered his brother's glance with a look offierce and fiery impatience, and planted his foot upon his sword,which had fallen from his hand in the struggle, as if he feared thatsome one should snatch it up. The companion who had followed him, withhis naked blade still in his hand, stood trembling before the face ofAttila with a pale and changing countenance.To Bleda the great monarch said nothing; but slowly drawing his heavysword from the sheath, he raised it over his head, and at a singleblow cleft through the scull of his brother's follower, till thetrenchant blade stopped at his teeth and jaws.Bleda sprang forward with wrath flaming from his eyes. "How darestthou," he cried, "slay my servant?""How darest thou," said Attila, in a voice of thunder, "lift thy handagainst my friend? Thinkest thou that Attila can be deceived? Thinkestthou that Attila will not punish? Bleda, Bleda! Once, twice, thricehave I warned thee! The measure is full! See that it run not over. Iam neither blind to thine ambition nor thy purposes. Beware while itis yet time, and be yet my brother.""Why, what have I to fear from thee?" demanded Bleda, haughtily; "am Inot a king as thou art? Did not the same father beget us, the samemother bear us? Was not the dominion left to us equally divided? Whatart thou that thou shouldst judge me? Am I not a king as thou art?""Our portion was once equal," answered Attila; "but though I have notrobbed thee of one tribe or of one charger, what are my dominions nowand thine? I have added nation unto nation, and kingdom unto kingdom,while thou hast held thine own only beneath the protection of thybrother's shield. Bleda, I have trod upon the necks if fifteen kings,each greater than thou art. Force me not to tread upon thine. Oncemore, beware! I tell thee, the cup is full! Thou knowest Attila; nowget thee gone, and leave me."Bleda paused a moment, as if he would fain have given voice to therage that swelled within his heart. But there was a strange andoverwhelming power in his brother's presence, which even he, who hadstruggled with him from infancy up to manhood, could not resist. Heremained silent then, not finding words to answer; and taking up hissword, he shook it with a bent brow at Cremera, and quitted the tent."Take away, yon carrion, and give it to the vultures," said Attila,pointing to the body of him he had slain.--"Brave man," he continued,turning to Cremera, "well hast thou done what I gave thee incharge--thou hast saved thy master's life; now leave us, but wait withthe men without, to whom I gave the task of guarding him from evil.Bid them be more cautious for the future and tell them, that thepresence of the king's brother--nay, of his son himself can never morebe an excuse to Attila for failing in obedience unto him. For thepresent, they are pardoned; get ye gone."Cremera retired; and Attila motioning his own attendants to withdraw,made them drop the curtain of the tent, and then sat down upon thecouch of skins. Theodore stood for a moment by his side, but the Kingmade him be seated, calling him by the gentle name of my son."Thou art surprised," he said, "to see thy faithful freedman hereamongst us; but when I found thee first, sleeping in the watch-towerbeyond the Danube, he sat between thee and me with his spear in hishand, glaring upon me as I have seen in Eastern lands the lionessglare upon the hunters, who would take her young; and I said to mineown heart, 'If this youth should ever want a faithful guard, here isone who could spill his own heart's blood rather than a drop of hislord's should flow.' When I followed thee from Margus, too, I foundhim almost alone, struggling with some of my warriors who had gone onbefore, in defence of the women, for whom, as well as for thyself, Ihad promised thine uncle my protection. He would not yield till aheavy blow on the head had stunned him, but I gave him in charge tothose who are skilled in the secret virtue of herbs and flowers, withcommands to bring him after me, and to cure him. They promised me heshould be soon well; and when I heard of thy danger, and that he hadrecovered, I sent him hither to guard thee, till I could come myself,not choosing to oppose any of my own nation to the hand of my brother;and I knew that that brother would do the deed he meditated with hisown arm.""Then I have once more to thank thee, mighty Attila, for life," saidTheodore; "to thank thee, the enemy of my native land, the destroyerof my countrymen.""Not so," replied the monarch: "I have once saved thy life, I grant,when thou wert in the power of Ardaric; but for the deed of to-nightthou owest me nothing. I promised thee protection, and had I not givenit when I could, I should have been myself thy murderer. Butto-morrow thou seekest to depart and leave me. Is it not so?""It is," answered Theodore; "not that I am ungrateful for thy favours,oh king! nor insensible to the distinction which thou makest betweenme and others of my race; but the scenes I have beheld, the grief andbitterness of heart that I have endured, since the morning sun ofyesterday, would soon terminate my existence, were they often to berenewed. Did your nation wage warfare like a civilised people, I mightendure though I might grieve; but now the sight of the utterextermination and devastation which thy tribes inflict wherever theypass is death, is worse than death to me likewise."Attila fixed his eyes upon the ground, and remained for a momentsilent:--"I will reason with thee, my son," he said at length; "for,though I disdain the art of the idle and subtle fools, who wrangle, asI hear, for an empty word in the schools of thy capital, yet Attila isnot without reasons for anything he does, and when needful, can givethose reasons, if it so please him. Thou talkest of the hostilities ofcivilised nations, and speakest with anger and fear of our more justand reasonable dealings in our warfare. But we make war upon ourenemies, not upon our friends. We either go to subdue and bring underour dominion other nations, or to avenge ourselves upon a foreign foe.If the first be our object, and resistance is offered to us, howfoolish to leave our enemies the means of resisting us with success?how weak to spare men who have done all they could to slay us, orwomen and children, by which the race of our adversaries may be keptup and increased? No; it behoves us to smite with the arrow and thesword, so long as there is any power of resistance in the land, andnever sheathe the blade; or unstring the bow, till we are undisputedmasters of the whole race and region. Then again, if we go forvengeance, what vengeance do we gain by suffering our own warriors tobe slain without slaying our enemies? The more that die, the more isvengeance satisfied, and if we purchase it with our own blood, we mustdrink the blood of our enemies. What you call civilised warfare is amere folly, which protracts the attainment of the end it seeks, andoften loses it altogether--which, instead of blazing like a brightfire, and consuming rapidly a small quantity of fuel, lingerslong, and burns a thousand-fold as much. No, no, my son, the mostmerciful warfare is that which is the shortest; and that in which nocompassion is shown or asked, is always sure to be the soonest over.Nevertheless," continued Attila, "I seek not to make thee witness theruin of thy native land, though, methinks, the destruction of thyfather's murderer might well repay the sight; but thou shalt go hence.The men I have chosen to accompany thee are under thy command, andthou shalt have cattle, and woods, and pasturage assigned thee from myown herds and lands; ay, even gold shalt thou have, and, what isbetter, security and peace; for whosoever lifts his hand against theeshall have Attila for his foe; and now fare thee well, till we meetagain on my return."CHAPTER XVI.THE COUNTRY OF THE HUNS.Theodore was left alone once more, and weariness was more than everupon him; but yet the busy, untiring course of thought went on forlong after he had again lain down to rest. Thought's insidious enemy,sleep, at length crept upon him; but, ere calm forgetfulness hadcomplete dominion, Cremera once more stole into the tent, and againlay down at his feet. The lamp, however, had been lighted by thefollowers of the monarch; and Theodore, recognising the form of hisfaithful attendant, merely spoke a few words of thanks and greeting,and let his heavy eyelids fall.Broad daylight was shining through the chinks of the tent when heawoke; and Cremera was sitting in the outer chamber, polishing with aknife a strong ashen staff, to which he had fitted the iron head of aspear. Theodore saw that the day must be far advanced, and rising, heoffered prayers and thanks to God; and then, while speaking manykindly words to the freedman, he advanced and pushed back the loosehangings that closed the interior of the tent from the view of theouter world.How changed was the scene which met his eye from that which he hadpassed through on the preceding night! The Huns were gone; scarcely avestige of them remained; not a wagon, not a group was to be seen overall that wide plain, except where, before the door of the tent, ten ortwelve of the Huns, and an equal number of the Alani, taller,stronger, and fairer to look upon than their dark companions, employedthe vacant hours in packing a number of small and strangely-assortedarticles into two of the low wagons which had formed part of thenight's circle round the tent. The sun was not very far from itsmeridian, and Theodore saw that he must have slept long andprofoundly, but yet he was not refreshed. There was a weariness, aheaviness upon his limbs that he had never felt before--a burning heatupon his skin, that the cooler climate in which he now was placedcould not have produced.Nevertheless, he gladly prepared to depart, and bade the attendantswho had been assigned to him make all things ready, while he went tobathe his feverish body in a small stream that his eye caughtglistening on at a short distance upon its way to join the rushingwaters of the Danube. The cool wave, however, proved no refreshment,and only caused a chilly shudder to pass over his limbs, succeededquickly by the same heat as before. On his return he found foodprepared, but he could not eat; and though his lip loathed the winethey offered, he drank a deep draught from the horn of a urus, for thesake of gaining that temporary strength of which he felt himself tostand in need.His own horse, fresh as the early morning from a night of repose,stood near, but the horses of the barbarians were still straying overthe plain. A shrill, long whistle, however, brought them in a momentto their masters' sides, and small grooming did the rude riders of theDacian wilds bestow upon their swift but rugged beasts. The tent wasby this time struck and placed upon the wagons; and Theodore, with oneof the Huns beside him to guide him as he went, led the way onwardtowards that strange land which seemed thenceforward destined to behis home for many a long year. Of his guide he asked variousquestions, and was answered fluently in his own language; but atlength Cremera, who followed, pointed towards the towers of a fardistant city, saying, "Is not that Margus?""It is," answered the Hun. "We can go thither if thou wilt," hecontinued, addressing Theodore. "We can repose there to-morrow night.It is now a city belonging to Attila the King.""No, no," replied Theodore, with many a painful feeling at the verythought finding expression on his countenance--"no, no, not in thecity for a thousand worlds; rather let us lodge in the open field.""Thou art wise, young chief," replied the Hun. "Cities are hatefulplaces: Attila loves them not any more than thou dost; and, thoughMargus is his, he will not keep it long, but will either sell it backto the Romans or destroy it."Theodore replied not; and they rode on till at length, towardseventide, they came near the banks of the Danube, and, after half anhour's riding within sight of the river, halted for the night on aspot near the old Roman way from M[oe]sia into Dacia. Theodore wasfatigued, but yet he could not rest; and while they were engaged insetting up his tent, he wandered forward to drink of the great river.It was a sweet, bright, tranquil afternoon. The sun was just dippingbeneath the wood-covered hills upon the opposite bank of the river,but the air was still full of his light; and the forests andmountains, the soft green slopes, the blue sky, and the light passingcloud, were mirrored in the swift waters of the mighty stream, as itflowed on towards the ocean. The air, too, was calm; and silence hungabove the world, except when the laughing note of the woodpecker, orthe melody of the thrush, broke the silence for a moment, to render itmore calm and sweet. Theodore gazed up the stream, and beheld afargigantic masses of masonry, rifted and broken, projecting from eitherbank, while here and there, from the broad sealike bosom of theDanube, rose up massy piers and woodwork, the fragments of some vastfabric swept away.It was evidently the famous bridge of Trajan that stood before him,just as the destroying hand of his envious successor had left it; andas Theodore gazed upon the remnants of that stupendous work, as theystood in the clear light and shade of evening, he could not butmeditate upon the change of dynasties, the vanity of human hopes, thefruitlessness of earthly endeavours, and all the many and melancholythemes on which poet and philosopher have sung and moralized, hoping,even while they did so, for that earthly immortality which they knewand proved to be a bubble. There before his eyes stood one of thegreatest works of one of the greatest men that the human race, in allits vast succession of beings, in all its complexity of characters, inall its variety of qualities, has ever produced, from the creationtill to-day; and yet a mean follower, unable to compete with him inintellect, in feeling, in effort, or in success, had possessed thepower to sweep away from off the earth that majestic monument of agrand and creative mind, to cast down what the good and wise hadraised up, to destroy what the noble and energetic had created."Oh, wonderful frailty of man's most lasting works!" thought the youngRoman; "that nothing can give them certain existence, no, not for acentury. That which the earthquake spares, the hand of war andviolence pulls down; that which hostile armies have respected, themean envy of inferior genius will destroy. Alas! when we look around,and think of the work of but a few short lustres upon man's noblestefforts and his brightest productions, well, well may we ask, What islasting upon earth?"He paused--"Yes, yes!" he thought again; "virtue is lasting! virtue isimmortal even here! Rarely as it is seen, often as it iscounterfeited, shunning publicity, hating pomp, virtue, indestructiblelike gold, even in the fire of time and amid the trial ofcircumstances, comes out pure and passes on uninjured, accumulatingslowly, but brightly, in the treasuries of the past, and forming aninexhaustible store of example and encouragement for all who choose totake it. Yes, yes, virtue is lasting! One may produce, and anothermay destroy; but Trajan shall be remembered when Hadrian is forgottenor contemned."Theodore, as the confidence in some great principle of stabilityreturned to his heart, set his foot more firmly upon the earth, which,to his imagination, had seemed crumbling beneath him like a pile ofdust and ashes, while he had only remembered how brief, how transitoryis the existence of the noblest fabrics that it bears.He would fain have gone on to examine more nearly the mighty fragmentsof what had once been the celebrated bridge of Trajan; but the ruinswere farther than they seemed: he was weary and languid; and ever andanon urged by the burning thirst upon him, he paused to drink again ofthe waters of the Danube. At length he gave up his purpose andreturned to the tent, where the Huns were broiling, on a wood fire, alarge fish which they had caught in the neighbouring river. At thevery sight of food a sickening disgust came over the young Roman; buthis faithful Cremera pressed him so anxiously to eat, that he forcedhimself to swallow a few mouthfuls. But it was in vain: he could notgo on; and soon retiring to his tent, he endeavoured to find repose.No sounds disturbed his rest, for nothing was to be heard but therushing of the Danube and the sighing of the wind through the talltrees. No human being had been seen through all that morning'sjourney; no voice of salutation had welcomed them as they passed,showing too well how desolate the land had been made; and after theyouth's attendants had laid themselves down to sleep, not a tone butone solitary scream from some flitting bird of night broke the silenceof the world around: and yet Theodore courted slumber in vain. Hetossed his weary limbs upon the couch of skins which had again becomehis bed, and counted the heavy minutes from night till morning.Frequently, through all the violent heat that burned in his wholeframe, a cold chilly shudder would pass over him, and he felt that thehand of sickness was upon him.Nevertheless, he started up with the dawn, bent with feverisheagerness upon pursuing his journey as quickly as possible, while yetthe last efforts of his remaining strength could be exerted to opposethe overpowering weight that pressed him down. Looking out from thetent, he saw the Huns and the Alani already busy in preparing fordeparture; and, in a few minutes, one who seemed to have beendespatched to seek for a means of transport came back to say that theraft had already come down to the shore. Cremera gazed anxiously onthe changed and ashy countenance of his lord; but he spoke not, andled the war-horse, who knew his hand better than that of any of theHuns, down to the bank of the river. A raft, such as had borneTheodore across once before, was waiting with some of the rude boatmenof the Danube, and in two voyages the whole party which accompaniedthe young Roman was borne across and landed on the other side of theriver.Dacia was now before his steps; and although he could not but feel achilly coldness at the thought that he had passed, perhaps for ever,the boundary of his native land; had left behind him, for an unlimitedspace of years, all those scenes and objects linked to the brightestmemories of his heart; had entered upon a course where all was new andstrange, where much was dark and doubtful, and much distinctlypainful; and that he had nothing in prospect, at the very best, but along, dull lapse of years, among nations inferior to his own in everypoint of intellect and every art of social life; yet there was afeeling of joy broke across the gloom of such anticipations when heremembered the sights of horror which he had just beheld on the Romanfrontier, and felt that he would be called to mingle in such scenes nomore. The very feeling gave him new energy; the morning air seemed torevive him; and he spurred on with the rest through the wide forestthat lay before their steps, and across which a grass-grown trackafforded them a way into the interior of the country.In less than three hours, at the rapid rate at which they travelled,they had crossed the belt of wood which for a considerable waybordered the Danube. Beyond that belt stretched out a plain, whichwould have seemed interminable had not the blue lines of some distantmountains, rising up against the far horizon, marked its boundary.Except where, here and there, was seen a line of forest ground,looking like a group of bushes in the vast extent over which the eyecould stretch, the whole plain seemed covered with long green grass,waving like a mighty lake as a light wind bent it to and fro in themorning sunshine.There was something grand and expansive in the view, notwithstandingits vast monotony; and as Theodore paused for a moment, and let hishorse breathe upon the edge of the slight slope on which the forestended, he gazed with some feelings of surprise and admiration upon thenew world which was henceforth to be his habitation. That feelingagain refreshed him; but much need had he indeed of refreshment, andof anything which could give even a momentary support to that strengthwhich was failing fast under the pressure of fatigue and illness."Let your horse pause for a moment and eat," said the Hun who rode byhis side. "We are a long way from a resting-place: under those woodsis our first village."Theodore did as the other advised, but his heart grew faint at such anotification of the length of way; for though he would not pause noryield so long as any powers of life were left, yet he felt that thepowers of life were waning, and that, if he reached not soon someplace where he could obtain refreshment and repose, he should neverreach it at all, but sink of unwonted weariness by the way.In a few minutes they again began their journey through the plain,riding up to their horses' chests in the long rich grass, which,though it proved no obstacle to the small, quick horses of the Huns,impeded and irritated at every step the fiery charger which hadcarried the young Roman. In the meanwhile the summer sun got high, andpoured its burning rays upon Theodore's unsheltered head; a white,filmy, and oppressive mist rose up from the moist plain, not thickenough to impede the sight, but tinging every object with a peculiarhue. For a long time nothing diversified the scene, nothinginterrupted the monotony of their progress; out at length an immensebird sprang up almost from under their horses' feet, and spreading itswings, without rising from the ground, ran on with extraordinary speedbefore them."An ostrich! an ostrich!" cried Cremera, forgetting the distancebetween the spot where he then stood and his own porphyrymountains--"an ostrich! a young ostrich!"But the Hun who was by his side paused for a moment without speaking,poised the javelin he carried in his hand, and launched it with astrong arm in the air. Falling with unerring aim, it struck the greatbustard between the wings; and, riding on, the Hun took it up andslung it over his shoulders, saying, "This will secure our eveningmeal."Still they rode on, and more and more terrible grew the lassitude ofthe Roman youth; the heat was overpowering; the way seemedinterminable, and that distant line of wood towards which their stepswere bent, though appearing certainly to grow larger, yet wasapproached so slowly that Theodore, as he gazed upon it, felt hisheart grow faint with the despair of ever arriving at the calm shelterwhich he vainly hoped there to find. With his lip parched, with hiseye glazed, with his cheek pale yet burning, and with his handsscarcely able to hold the reins, still he rode on, looking forwardwith an anxious, straining gaze upon those woods, thinking they neverwould be reached. Wider and wider they stretched out before him. Theplain on which he had seen them stand alone, like a group of bushes,when he had gazed on them from the distant heights, now seemed boundedby them entirely on that side. As he came nearer he could distinguishthe vast rolling masses of forest, the dark, deep brakes where gladesor savannas intervened; and at length, while with his dim and dizzysight he scanned eagerly the scene before him, he thought he couldperceive some low, wooden cottages, crouching, as if for shelter,beneath the wide-extended arms of the tall trees upon the edge. Thatsight again gave him a momentary impulse; he urged his horse on; hesaw the cottages more distinctly; but, as with that last effort heattempted to reach them, strength, and hope, and thought all gave wayat once, and, with just the consciousness of utter exhaustion, he fellfainting from his horse.A lapse of time succeeded, over which Theodore's memory had no power.He had talked, he had suffered, he had raved, he had struggled duringthe interval; he had named names which those around him did not know;he had spoken a thousand things which they could not comprehend, whilefor fourteen days he had lain tossed between life and death, andtended by the hands of strangers. But of all that he had norecollection when at length reasoning consciousness had returned.It was the evening of a sweet summer's day, when, opening his eyes, helooked around and wondered where he was. There was a small chamber,lined with smooth and fragrant pine wood, from the cracks and crevicesof which the fresh resin was yet oozing. On the walls hung, infantastic garlands, many a barbarian instrument of war, spears andswords, the quiver of arrows and the unstrung bow, the buckler, theclub, and the far-slaying sling. There, too, beneath, on stands andtables of wood, might be seen a number of strange idols, wild,unseemly shapes, such as a child might carve for sport out of a blockof wood. Settles and tables were there also, of the same plainmaterial, but on some of them appeared objects of a more valuable kindand a richer workmanship. There lay, even in abundance, gems and gold,bearing evident marks of cultivated taste and skilful art; but therewere two things more sweet than any other could have been toTheodore's senses at that moment, which called all attention fromevery other object.The first was the calm, sweet breath of the summer evening, bornelight and fragrant through the open window; the other was the sweet,melodious voice of a woman singing.He turned his eyes to where the singer sat beside the bed on which hewas stretched, and saw a girl of some seventeen years of age, withbright brown hair, worn not as Roman women wore it, but parted on thefair forehead, and thrust in clustering ringlets behind her ears. Theface was very sweet and beautiful, and everything would have beensoft--perhaps too soft for great interest--had it not been for thedeep, devoted blue eyes. They were somewhat darker in hue than the skyby day; but yet, as they gazed forth from the long dark lashes, theylooked like that same azure heaven at the moment when its colour ismost deep, yet most pure, just ere the curtain of the night falls overits expanse. She saw the youth turn his eyes upon her; but, thinkingonly that sleep had fled again from his still fevered brain, sherecommenced the song she had been singing, while her small white handscontinued to ply the light labour of the distaff. Theodore, however,could now hear and understand; and he listened with delight thatcannot be told, while, in the Alan tongue, the language of his owndear mother, she sang, with a sweet, soft, rounded voice--THE SONG OF SLEEP."Come, gentle sleep, to the couch of the stranger,From thought's weary burden, oh give him relief!Take mem'ries of anguish and prospects of danger,The future's dull care and the past's heavy grief."Sweet friend of our childhood, thou strewest with flowersThe pillow where infancy rests her calm head,When weary with sporting through long happy hours,With thee for her angel, she seeks the soft bed."Coy visitant, come! We prize thee more highly,In years more mature when we've tried the world's truth;Why com'st thou so rarely? why fly'st thou so shyly?Oh what thus estranges the friend of our youth?"We've been false to thy friendship, despised thy caresses;For pleasures we've left thee, and even for cares;The faithful, the tranquil, the humble, sleep blesses,But flies from the couch that one wild passion shares."Yet, balm-giver, yet, for the sick and the weary,Thy merciful gifts we implore as a boon;Oh give us thine aid, on our way long and dreary--Aid, tardily valued, and lost all too soon!"CHAPTER XVII.NEVA.It is a strange and awful sensation, when, after having enjoyed to thefull the powers and energies of manhood, we find ourselves suddenlyreduced by the unnerving hand of sickness to the feebleness ofinfancy: when giant strength lies prostrate and busy activity ischained to the weary bed. It is strange and it is awful, for it showsus most sensibly how frail a thing is that vigour which, in ourboisterous days of health, we madly think an adamantine armour againstall adversity. It is strange and awful, for it leads us to the brinkof that fatal precipice over which all must fall, and displays, as iffrom the very verge, the inside of our future grave.From a stupor, in which all memory and every power of thought had beenat an end, Theodore woke as feeble and incapable as when, in thenurse's arms, he moved his mother's heart by his first infant cry. Thesame feelings of tenderness; the same mingled emotions, where pity,and hope, and the pleasure of protecting, all unite; the samesensations of affectionate interest for the thing we rear, and guard,and watch for, as those which fill the breast of a mother towards herchild, affected, though in a less degree, those who attended the couchof the young Roman during his illness and convalescence. It was butslowly he recovered: for the fever which had seized upon him had beenfierce and powerful; and it had been only unfaded youth's tenacity oflife and the natural vigour of his frame which had finally conqueredthat terrible assailant.The persons who attended him were entirely women, except when hisfaithful Cremera took his daily turn to watch by his bedside; andthough an elder and more matronly dame came in and out, and frequentlyremained in his chamber for an hour or more, still his principalattendant was the lovely girl whom he at first had seen, or a maidenwho seemed to be her sister, still younger than herself.Often would he keep his eyes closed, to listen, uninterrupted, to thesweet singing of the barbarian girl; often when he woke would he findthat graceful form bending over him, and those deep, intense blue eyesgazing upon his countenance, as if to mark the outposts of victorioushealth, spreading life's rosy banner where the pale flag of sicknesshad been advanced so lately. As he recovered strength also, and histongue became more capable of its office, he would converse with herfrom time to time in the language which she had used in singing andthough she spoke it not as her native dialect, yet they could thusconverse fluently.With the matron it was different: she was kind, but not conversable;yet, when she did speak, it was always in the pure Alan tongue; andTheodore could almost have fancied that he heard once more the voiceof his mother. Under kind care and skilful management he at lengthreached that point where his recovery became certain; and from thatmoment his convalescence proceeded rapidly. He was soon able to quithis chamber; and going forth, though with wavering and unsteady steps,he walked along, enjoying the fresh air of the morning, beneath therude portico of unshaped stems of trees which shaded one side of thatlong low dwelling, while his heart was raised with fresh gratitude toHeaven at every sweet sound and sight that he was permitted again toenjoy. There had been a time, not very long before, when life hadseemed to him a weary burden, which he desired not to retain; theearth a dreary and a desert dwelling-place, in which he was but littleanxious to remain. But such feelings had only existed while the bodyremained in strength and vigour, oppressed and impatient under a mindovercharged with sorrows, anxieties, and cares. Now, however, thecorporeal frame had been weakened and cast down; the body as well asthe mind had been humbled and chastised; the blessings of life weremore valued, the past could be regarded with resignation, and thefuture looked forward to with hope.As he walked forth one day under the shadow of that portico, his eyewandered over the whole plain, on which, at a little distance,appeared some horsemen, whom he afterward found to be those who hadattended him thither. In the shade, however, were collected a numberof women, comprising all those whom he had hitherto seen; and Neva,the blue-eyed daughter of the house, smiled gayly to see his waveringsteps. The next moment she greeted him with, "Come, sit you with thewomen till you have strength enough to join the men;" and she maderoom for him on the bench on which she sat between herself and hermother.All were employed in some domestic occupation; and the distaff, andthe spindle, and the wheel went on, while Theodore, sitting besidethem, began to ask the first questions which he had hitherto ventured,regarding the place and the family in which he then was. He found thatthe village which he saw stretching along under the forest containednot less than two or three hundred wooden cottages; and his eye atonce showed him that the one in which he had found shelter andreceived so much true kindness was by far the most extensive and mostornamented of the whole. When he came to ask, however, whose was thehouse in which he dwelt, and whose the family that tended him socarefully, they answered him at once that it was that of Bleda, thebrother of Attila.His countenance changed, and he asked no more questions. Ere he hadsat long there the horsemen returned from the field, bringing withthem some game which they had procured; and eagerly, and with signs ofmuch regard, they gathered round Theodore, and wished him joy on hisrecovered health. Towards evening two herdsmen drove home from adistance a large flock of diminutive cattle, and a shepherd broughtsome sheep into the fold. Two or three other lesser flocks were drivenslowly across the plain to different houses in the village; but themen who drove them formed the only male population, with the exceptionof his own attendants, which Theodore had yet seen since he enteredDacia.As the days passed on, and he mingled more with the people, he foundthat this first view was fully confirmed, and that almost all the menof the land, except such as were too old or too young to bear arms,had gone forth with Attila in his invasion of the Roman empire."Were Rome now," thought Theodore, "what Rome once was, while thisbarbarian monarch invades and ravages the East, the legions of theWest would pour across Pannonia, and, sweeping the whole land, take ashostages the women and children here left unprotected. But alas! Ifear me that neither the legions of the East will have power towithstand the myriads of Attila, nor the West have energy to hastenhis return, by invading his territories, and taking hostages for hisfuture tranquillity. 'Tis true they may not know that the land is leftin such a state; but, alas! I must not point out its weakness. Even tosave my country, I must not return the mercy shown me, and the kindhospitality received, by base ingratitude. Doubtless, when strengthreturns, I could escape; doubtless I could bear to Valentinian, or,better still, to [AE]tius, tidings of the condition in which this landis left, and thereby, perchance, deliver the empire itself. But itmust not be! No, no! such a task must not be mine."The situation, however, was a painful one; and the knowledge, too,that he was dwelling in the house of Bleda, of the man who had strivento take his life, and whose enmity--though he knew not why--wasevidently fiercely raised against him, added to the gloom he felt, andmade him anxious to proceed farther into the country.Ruga, the wife of Bleda, however, was herself one of the Alani, from atribe which had remained amid their original valleys on the Georgianside of Caucasus. She had by this time learned that the mother of theyoung stranger had been a daughter of the same nation, though sprungfrom a different tribe; and, little aware of the enmity of her husbandtowards him, she now pressed Theodore anxiously to stay with them tillthe armies of the Huns returned. Her daughter, too, urged the samerequest with all the native simplicity of a guileless heart; andTheodore himself, as innocent in thought and purpose, believed that hecould there remain happily, without risk or danger to the peace of anyone, were it not for the enmity of Neva's father. He made inquiries,however, and he found that no chance existed of any of the Hunsreturning for several months; and he determined to remain for a time,hoping that, if he could win the regard of the chieftain's family, thecauseless animosity of Bleda himself might by their report be doneaway.There, then, he stayed, increasing in the love of all, and habituatinghimself to the language, the sports, and the manners of the people. Hehad found, on his recovery, that the purse of gold pieces which he hadborne with him from Dalmatia, and which had been but little diminishedon the journey, had been carefully preserved during his sickness; and,though the amount was not very large, yet the difference in the valueof everything among the Huns and among the Romans was so great, thathis small store seemed grown into an inexhaustible treasure. Theattendants whom Attila had given him would receive no recompense fortheir services; and the sports of the chase, which he pursued incompany with them and Cremera, afforded more than sufficient provisionfor his followers and for himself. Ruga declared that her house hadnever been so bountifully supplied, even when Bleda himself waspresent; and the simpler food, to which the women of the Huns wereaccustomed, received no slight additions from the hunter skill andbold activity of their guest.For several weeks Theodore pursued this course in peace, proceeding tothe woods or plains, or to the mountains, early in the morning withhis followers, and retuning ere nightfall to the village. To thosefollowers, indeed, the young Roman endeared himself every day more andmore. His courage, and the dexterity with which he acquired all theirwild art in the chase and in the management of the horse, won theirreverence; while his kindness, his gentleness, and his easy suavity,touched another chord, and gained their hearts. If stag, or wolf, orbear turned upon him, every one was ready to defend him; and Theodoresoon found that on any enterprise which he chose to undertake, except,indeed, where some higher duty forbade, he might lead those men todanger, or to death itself. Nor did he make less progress in theregard of the villagers. The old men took a pleasure in teaching himtheir language, and in telling him wild tales of other days, and otherlands; the children clung to him, and gathered round his knee; theshepherds brought him whatever they found in their wanderings, whichseemed to their rude eyes either rare or valuable. To, his cultivatedopinion all questions were referred; and when they found that, ere twomonths were over, he could wield their arms, and speak their language,with as much facility as they could themselves, adding to theirbarbarian dexterity all the arts and knowledge of a civilised nation,they seemed to think him something more than mortal.The wife of the chieftain forgot her matronly state, so far as to holdlong conversations with him on the nation whose blood flowed in boththeir veins; and her fair daughter sprang forth with eager gladness towelcome him back from the chase, or if he went not thither, wanderedwith him in the mornings to show him fair paths through the wood, andteach him what fruits were hurtful, what beneficial to man, in thosewild solitudes; or sat near him in the evenings, and, with her longlashes veiling her cast down blue eyes, sang all the songs which sheknew he loved to hear.It was those deep blue eyes, and their look of devoted tenderness,which first woke Theodore from his dream of peace. Neva was lovely,gentle, kind, noble in all her feelings, graceful in all hermovements, frank, simple, and sincere. Pure in heart and mind, theelegancies of polished life seemed scarcely needful to her nativegrace. In whatever task employed, she looked, she acted, as--and noone could doubt she was--the daughter of a king: and yet Theodore'sthoughts were seldom upon her. Sometimes, indeed, when he saw a flowerof peculiar beauty, or when his arrows struck some bird of rareplumage, or some beast of a finer fur, he thought, "I will take thishome for Neva;" but his fancy never strayed amiss to warmer feelingsor more dangerous themes than those.Oh, no! his thoughts were far away! The one deep-rooted passion,strong and intense as life itself--that one bright passion, as pure,when it is noble, in man as in woman, as incapable of falsehood eitherby thought or act--left not one fond fancy free for any other thanher, his first, young, early, only love. When the sun in floods ofglory went down beyond the western hills, he thought of her lonely inthat distant land, and willingly believed that with her, too, memoryturned to him. When the bright moon wandered through the sky, andpoured her silver flood of light over those wide plains, he would gazeforth, and call to mind that first peculiar night when he heard thedear lips he loved breathe answering vows to his beneath the palaceportico on the Dalmatian shore; he would call up again before his eyesthe scene in all its loveliness; he would fancy he could feel thatsoft, dear form pressed gently to his bosom; he would seem to tastethe breath of those sweet lips as they met his in the kiss of firstacknowledged love; and he would imagine--justly, truly imagine--thatat that hour the same treasured remembrances might fill the bosom ofIldica with visions as entrancing, and that memory might with her,too, give to hope a basis whereon to raise her brightest architecture.When the morning woke in the skies, and when, ere he went forth totaste the joys of renewed existence, he knelt down to offer to the Godof his pure faith adoration, and thanks, and prayer, the name ofIldica would first rise with his petitions to Heaven, and herhappiness would be the subject of his first aspirations.Could he think, then, of any other I could he dream that it waspossible to love any one but her? No! he did not, he could not; but,as time wore on, and summer sunk glowing into the arms of autumn,there came a deep light into the eyes of Neva, which pained, whichalarmed him. He would sometimes, when he suddenly turned towards her,find her gazing upon him with a look of intense, thoughtful affection,which was followed by a warm and rapid blush; and, without one feelingof empty vanity, Theodore began to see that his stay might produceevil to her who had so kindly tended him.Still, however, Neva's regard assumed that air of simple, unrestrainedfrankness, which is less frequently the token of love than offriendship. In her pure mind, and in her uncultivated land, all seemedclear and open before her. She felt no shame in the sensations whichshe knew and encouraged towards the young stranger. She saw noobstacle to prevent her from becoming his bride. She was the daughterof a king, but she knew him to be worthy of her love; and as that lovebecame apparent to her own eyes also, she only felt proud of herchoice. The sole difference which that knowledge of her own heart'sfeelings wrought in Neva was, that with her bright brown hair she nowbegan to mingle gold and gems, and that, from time to time, a brightbut transient glow would tinge her cheek when her eyes and Theodore'smet. Far from shrinking from his society, far from trembling at hisapproach, she gave way at once to all the feelings of her heart asthey arose; greeted him with glad smiles in the morning; sprang forthto meet him when he returned from the chase; sat by him in thelengthening evenings; and, feeling the deep earnest love of firstaffection burning at her heart, she took no means to hide or toconceal it from others or herself.Theodore had pondered over these things for some days, and consideredhow it were best to act; but he deceived himself in regard to Neva;and the very openness with which she suffered her passion to appearmade him believe that it was as yet unconfirmed. He compared it withthe shy and trembling love of Ildica. He remembered the same kindaffection in her, too, when a girl, ere their feelings took a warmertone than brotherly regard; the candid display of preference for hissociety, and the interest in all his pursuits which she had thenevinced. He recollected, also, the change that had taken place assimple affection grew into intense love--how timid, how retiring, howapprehensive that love had been! and by comparing those two stages ofa passion he had known and marked, with the conduct of the lovely girlunder whose father's roof he had dwelt--as pure, as innocent, as fullof real modesty as Ildica herself--he judged, that whatever herfeelings might become, they were not yet such as might ever renderthem painful to herself.As the period for which he had promised to remain had not yet expired,and he could assign no cause for suddenly absenting himself, hedetermined to seek the first opportunity of speaking, in the presenceof Neva, of the ties which bound him to her he loved. Little mentionhad hitherto been made of his family or his circumstances in his ownland. The wife of Bleda seemed to take no further interest in hisformer life than was connected with his mother and her nation; andNeva herself, in the present happiness which she derived from his stayamong them, appeared never to remember that there was such a thing asa past, affecting him in a way she knew not--though that past wasunfortunately destined to affect all the future for herself. She askednothing, she thought of nothing but of the present; and thus Theodorefelt that he would have to commence the subject himself. Though it wasone he loved not to speak on upon every light occasion, yet heresolved to do so. But still, after long hesitation, he determined notto tell the tale of his early days, when, sitting in the family ofBleda, every eye might be ready to mark his own emotions--or, indeed,those of others; for although to his own heart he put forward themotive of concealing the expression of his feelings, his realinducement was consideration for the fair girl, who might be moremoved, he feared, by the words he had to speak, than he was willing toadmit even to himself.After two long days of unsuccessful hunting, having found nothingwithin several miles of the village, he threw down his spear andarrows, declaring he would go no more; and on the following morning,while the dew was still upon the grass, Neva offered to lead him up tothe fall of a river in the woods, whose roar he had often heard at adistance, but which he had never seen, so deeply was it buried in theintricacies of the forest. He gladly followed, resolved to seize thatmoment to tell her all. And yet Theodore was agitated, for he wishednot to pain or grieve her; but still he feared, from her whole manner,and from the tender light which poured from her blue eyes, that thewords he had to speak would be displeasing to her ear. It was a brightmorning, and between the tall trunks of the trees, over bush, andunderwood, and mossy turf, the slanting sun poured his golden light,in the first bright freshness of the rising day."What a lovely morning is this!" said Theodore, after they had walkedon some way, for Neva had remained silent under emotions of her own."What a lovely morning!--how clear, how beautiful!""Have you not such in your own land?" demanded Neva."Oh yes," answered Theodore, "we have many; and these mornings and theevenings are our chief hours of delight, for the heat of the risen dayis oppressive. I remember such a morning as this," he added, willingto lead the conversation to the matter on which he desired tospeak--"I remember such a morning, some four or five months ago, sobright, so beautiful, shining upon my path as I returned fromConstantinople towards what I have always called my home.""And was it not your home?" demanded Neva. "Did no one wait you thereto welcome you?""Oh, several," answered Theodore--"several that I loved, and stilllove more dearly than anything else on earth." Neva cast down hereyes, and her cheek grew deadly pale. "There was my mother," continuedTheodore--"I mean the mother who has adopted me, and ever treated me asone of her own children." The colour came again into Neva's cheek."Then there was my sister," he went on. "And last," he added, in alower tone, "there was my promised bride, my Ildica, who will one daybe my wife."Neva spoke not, but the rose again left her cheek. That, however, wasthe only sign of emotion she displayed, except, perhaps, that shewalked on more rapidly, and that her small feet brushed the dew fromthe grass on either side of the path, wavering, as she went, with anunsteady pace. Theodore followed close to her side, scarce knowing howto break that painful silence. It had continued so long, that, ere aword was uttered, he heard the roar of the waterfall, and he resolvedto speak, let it be on what it would. But at the first word hebreathed, the fair girl pressed her right hand upon her heart with aconvulsive sob, and fell fainting at his feet.Theodore caught her up in his arms, and ran on upon the path. He couldnot find the cataract, but the stream which formed it soon caught hiseye; and, laying Neva on the bank, he bathed her brow with water fromthe river, and strove to recall her to herself by words of comfort andconsolation.At length she opened her eyes; and finding herself lying in the armsof the man she loved, with her head supported on his shoulder, sheturned her face to his bosom, and wept long and bitterly. Theodoresaid little, but all he did say were words of kindness and of comfort;and Neva seemed to feel them as such, and thanked him by a gentlepressure of the hand. At length she spoke. "I had thought," she said,in the undisguised simplicity of her heart, "I had thought to be yourfirst and only wife. I was foolish to think that others would not loveyou as well as I."Theodore had now the harder task of explaining to her, and making hercomprehend, that in his land and with his religion, polygamy, socommon among her people, could not exist; but the effect produced wasmore gratifying than he could have expected."Better, far better that it should not," cried the girl, raising herhead, and gazing full in his face with those earnest, devoted eyes."Better, far better that it should not. Had you asked me, I could nothave refused, feeling as I feel; but I should have been miserable tobe the second to any one. To have seen you caress her, to have knownthat you loved her better, and had loved her earlier than you lovedme, would have been daily misery; but now I can love you as a thingapart. You will marry her, and I will have no jealousy, for I have noshare: I will think of you every hour and every moment, and pray toall the gods to make you happy with her you love. But oh, stranger, itwere better, till I can rule my feelings and my words, and gain fullcommand over every thought, that you should leave me.""Would to God!" said Theodore, "that I had never beheld you, or thatyou could forget all such feelings, and look on me as a merestranger.""Not for worlds," she exclaimed, "not for all the empire of my uncleAttila. I would not lose the remembrance of thee if I could win thelove of the brightest and the best on earth. I would not change theprivilege of having seen, and known, and loved thee, for the happiestfate that fancy could devise. Oh, Theodore, would you take from me mylast treasure? But perchance you think me bold and impudent in thusspeaking all that is at my heart; but if you do so, you do not knowme.""I do, I do indeed," cried Theodore--"I do know, I do admire, I doesteem you; and had not every feeling of my heart been bound toanother ere I saw you, I could not have failed to love one sobeautiful, so excellent, so kind. Nay, I do love you, Neva, though itmust be as a brother loves a sister.""Hush, hush!" she said. "Make me not regret--and yet love me so still.Forget, too, that I love you better, but oh, believe that no sisterever yet lived that will do for you what Neva will; and in the momentof danger, in the hour of sickness, in the time of wo, if you needaid, or tendance, or consolation, send for me; and though my unskilfulhand and tongue may be little able to serve, the deep affection of myheart shall find means, if they be bought with my life's blood, tocompensate for my weakness and my want of knowledge;" and, carriedaway by the intensity of her feelings, she once more cast herself onhis bosom and wept. "But you must leave me," she continued, "you mustleave me. Yes, and when I see you again, I will see you calmly--not asyou now see me. Yet you must have some excuse for going, and whitherwill you go?""When your uncle Attila bade me come into Dacia till his return,"replied Theodore, "Edicon, who remained with me, affirmed that it wasthe monarch's will I should proceed to his own usual dwelling-place,on the banks of the Tibiscus."Neva thought for a moment as if she did not remember the name; butthen exclaimed, "Ha! the Teyssa--what you call the Tibiscus we namethe Teyssa. That is much farther on; but let my mother know that suchwere the directions of Attila, and she will herself hasten yourdeparture; for my father and my uncle often jar, and my mother wouldfain remove all cause of strife. Or I will tell her," she added, witha faint smile, "I will tell her; and you shall see how calmly I cantalk of your departure."She then spoke for some time longer, in a tranquil tone, of all thearrangements that were to be made; and as she did so, still, from timeto time, her eyes were raised to the young Roman's face with a long,earnest glance, as if she would fain have fixed his image upon memory,so that no years could blot it out. Then in the stream she bathed thetraces of the tears from her eyes; and looking up calmly, thoughsadly, said, "Let us go, my brother. It is sweet, but it must end."They took some steps homeward; but, ere they had gone far, she paused,and laying her hands upon his, she said, "Oh, Theodore! promise me,that if ever, while you are in your land, you need help or aid, youwill send to me. Send me this trinket back by a messenger;" and shegave him one of the small golden ornaments which she wore in her hair;"send it me back, and I will come to you, be it wheresoever it may.Deeply as I love thee, I would not wed thee now for worlds; but, oh! Iwould give life itself to render thee some service, which should makethee say in after years, 'Alas! poor Neva! she loved me well indeed!'"Thus wandered they homeward; and often did she pause to add somethingmore, and to give some new token of that deep and all unconcealed, butpure affection, which had taken so firm a hold of her young heart.Theodore, too, strove to sooth and to comfort her; and all that waskind, all that was tender--except such words as only the ear of thebeloved should ever hear--he said, to give her consolation. As theycame near the village, however, she spoke less, for she seemed to fearthat her emotions might leave traces behind for other eyes than his;but she gained courage as they went on; and, to Theodore's surprise,when they joined the household, no sign of all the busy feelings whichhe knew to be active in her breast was in the slightest degreeapparent, except, indeed, in a shade of grave melancholy, which wasnot natural to her.She chose the moment while all were assembled at the morning meal toannounce to her mother the necessity of Theodore's departure. Thematron had made some observation upon the young Roman's recoveredhealth, when she replied, "We shall lose him soon, my mother. He hasbeen telling me that the commands of Attila the King were strict, thathe should go on to the king's own dwelling by the Teyssa."She spoke calmly; so calmly, indeed, that there were but two personsamong all the many who seemed to notice that she touched on thingsmore interesting than ordinary. Theodore could not but know all theemotions which that calm tone concealed; and her mother, as soon asshe heard the subject of her discourse, fixed her eyes upon her with alook of mingled wonder, tenderness, and surprise, as if she, too,could see into her daughter's heart, and asked, by that glance, "Canyou, my child, talk thus calmly of his going?"After that momentary pause, however, she replied aloud, "If Attilabade him go forward, the king must be obeyed. My son, you should havetold us this before; for though my husband is also a king, yet Attilais his elder brother, and we wish not to offend him.""If fault there be," replied Theodore, "the fault is mine. Thecommands of the king affixed me no certain time; and I do, indeed,believe that he named his own residence as my dwelling-place only formy greater safety.""'Tis not unlikely," said the wife of Bleda; "but still, my son, youmust obey: tarry not here more days than needful; for we know not whenAttila or Bleda may return."Theodore, too, knew that it was needful he should go, and yet he feltregret at leaving those who had treated him with so much kindness andtenderness; at leaving scenes in which he had known a brief intervalof tranquillity and peace, after having undergone so long a period ofgrief, of horror, and of danger. He gave himself but the interval ofone day, however; and then, in the early morning, his horse and hisfollowers stood prepared at the door. The wife of Bleda gave him herblessing as he departed with motherly tenderness; and Neva herselfstood by, and saw him mount without a tear wetting the dark lashes ofher tender blue eyes, without a sigh escaping from her lip. All shesaid was, "Farewell, my brother: remember us."Theodore himself could have wept; and as he saw her stand there in herbeauty, her innocence, and her devoted love, deeply and bitterly didhe regret--ay, and reproach himself, for having, however unwittingly,brought a cloud over her sunshine, and first dulled the fine metal ofher bright and affectionate heart. He sprang upon his horse and rodeaway, turning back more than once to gaze upon them as they stoodgathered round the door of their dwelling, and to wave his hand intoken of adieu.CHAPTER XVIII.THE HERMITS.The life of man is a series of scenes, generally connected with eachother, often by the strong bond of cause and effect, but often linkedtogether by some fine accidental tie, having no reference to theprincipal events. Each day may be considered as one act in life'sdrama; and sleep comes with night to change the scenes, and give theweary actors a moment of repose. Sometimes, however, there breaks inamong the rest--but detached from all those that surround it--a scenein which we live, and act, and interest ourselves for a limited anddefined space of time, but which, when it is over, produces no effectupon our general fate, acts as no cause in the complicated machineryof our fortunes. Sometimes the scene maybe fair and sweet, a solitarywell in the desert, which cools our lip and quenches our thirst, butsupplies no river, waters no distant land. Sometimes it is terribleand dangerous, a thunder-storm suddenly sweeping over the summer sky,coming when all is brightness, reigning an hour in awful majesty, andthen passing away, and leaving the world as tranquil as it was before.Theodore rode on, taking his way across the woods, and asking hisheart what was to come next; what, in all the vast, vague variety ofearthly chances, was the next thing that was to befall him on hisonward way. When, but a few short months before, he had stood upon themount of cypresses with those he loved, and had gazed over the calmsplendour of the Adriatic Sea, with life all before him, and hope tolead him on, he had fancied that his fate would be as fair and brightas the glowing scene beneath his eyes; his future had promised to beas calm and unbroken by a storm as those tranquil waters, sleeping,unruffled, beneath the setting sun. Had any one less than a prophetthen told him all that the next two months should behold, he wouldhave laughed the prediction to scorn, in the full confiding hope ofundisappointed youth. But now that for many a week every hour hadbrought its change, that he had seen the expectations of to-day,to-morrow trampled under foot, and the sunshine of the morningdarkened ere the evening's close, he had learned still to ask himself,"What next?" with every day that rose, and every change of scene thatcame upon him. That blessed reliance on the dear deluding tales ofhope, which is youth's peculiar power, had left him for ever; andthough the "What next?" might be asked, with the determination ofbearing all worthily, yet apprehension had always its share in thequestion too.The woods were wide and intricate; and, as Theodore and his companionsrode on, the trees and shrubs began to change their character:enormous birches tossed about upon the rocks and rising grounds,succeeded to the beech and oak; and after them again came the tenderlarch, and the dark pine, as the road began to wind up into themountains. It was a sultry autumn day; and the misty haze that hungabout the world, with the close electric air of the forest, wereominous of a thunderstorm; and at length the clouds, gathering roundthe summits of the higher hills, burst upon the heads of Theodore andhis followers, just as they had reached a spot, where, from the top ofthe first range of eminences, they could gaze over a wide extent offorest ground. The rain poured down in torrents, the lightningflickered through the sky; but neither of those would have preventedTheodore from pursuing his way, had not the mountain paths theyfollowed become so slippery with the rain that his horse could notadvance, and even the lighter and more sure-footed beasts of the Hunscould make no progress.They were debating as to where they could find shelter, when suddenlythey beheld, standing on the rock above, a tall thin human form,scantily covered by its tattered robes from the wind or storm. He wasgazing down upon them without speaking; but Theodore, as soon as heturned his eyes that way, recollected the enthusiast Mizetus, who hadattempted to persuade the people, during the earthquake in Dalmatia,to stay and perish amidst the ruins of the falling palace. He hadheard long before that the enthusiast had wandered over many parts ofthe earth, and had dwelt long in deserts and barren places as ahermit, according to the prevailing superstitions of the day; and theyoung Roman doubted not, that since he had been driven forth by thepartial destruction of Aspalathos, Mizetus had again returned to hiserratic life, and found his way to the frontiers of Pannonia. "Go upto him, Cremera," said Theodore--"go up to him, and, telling him whowe are, ask him where we can find shelter, for he must surely havesome cave or hut wherein to dwell himself."The Arab obeyed, leaving his horse below; but the enthusiast made himno reply, gazing sternly, and even fiercely at him, till the freedmanused some angry words to drive him to an answer. He then exclaimedaloud, "Get ye gone! get ye gone from me, ye miserable, worldly,self-seeking generation! get ye gone! Ye shall not pollute mydwelling. Farther on ye will find one who will give welcome alike tothe lustful Roman and the bloody, barbarous Hun. Get ye gone! I willhave naught to do with ye. On, on upon the path, I say: ye will findshelter onward to cover your heads from the earthly storm, though notfrom the tempest of God's indignation."Cremera reported to his master the reply he had received, for thethunder prevented it from reaching, at once, any ears but his own; andTheodore, as the only course, slowly pursued the path along whichMizetus had pointed, looking anxiously, as he proceeded over the wetand slippery rocks, surrounded by precipices and impeded by scatteredfragments, for some sign of human habitation. It was long ere hediscovered any, however; and was indeed passing on, when Cremeraexclaimed, "There is a cave! there is a cave! and something standingtherein like the figure of a man."Theodore hesitated not; but leading his horse towards the narrow mouthof a cavern which he now beheld, ascended the steep path with risk anddifficulty. The Huns followed; and though, on entering, theydiscovered that the object which Cremera had taken for a man was infact a large crucifix, they found seated within the cave one of thosemany devout but enthusiastic beings, thousands of whom in that agedevoted their lives to solitude and privation, on a mistaken principleof religion. Some subjected themselves to the most tremendousinflictions, thinking thereby to please God; and the pillar and thechain still find their place in history as illustrations of humanfanaticism. But the hermit here was of a different character: hisenthusiasm had taken a different form; and though not less wild,perhaps we might say not less diseased, prompted him not to theseverer sufferings which were indispensable to obtain the reputationof sanctity among the anchorites of the Thebais. He dwelt, it is true,but in a cavern of the rock; but that cavern, high up on the mountainside, was dry, and not unwholesome: his dress was indeed composed ofnothing but skins, yet the inhabitants of the country were principallyclothed with the same materials, though arranged in a more convenientand agreeable form: his bed, which was raised high with rushes andforest hay, was piled up above that with soft and warm skins; and thecontributions not only of some neighbouring villages on the other sideof the hills, but of many distant towns (for the whole land regardedhim as a holy being), supplied him plentifully with good and variedfood. His appearance, however, was venerable; and his countenance,half covered as it was with a long white beard and a profusion ofsilvery hair, was calm, peaceful, and mild, and well calculated toobtain both reverence and love. There was, indeed, an occasional lookof worldly shrewdness seen upon those high but withered features,which might have made many a suspicious man doubt the sincerity of hisvocation; but there came also from his eyes, from time to time, gleamsof quick uncertain light: whenever he approached particular subjects,too, his whole air and manner changed, his colour mounted, his eyeflashed, his lip quivered; and Theodore could not gaze upon thatcountenance, under all its frequent changes, without believing thatsome slight touch of insanity had warped an intellect originallyfitted for high and noble things. When he rose to welcome thestrangers, his beard fell down below his girdle, and his long nails,untrimmed for many a year, were exposed in all their deformity. Hismanners, however, were noble, one might say courtly, for there wasgrace as well as dignity, and polished terms as well as mild andbenevolent ideas. He asked no questions, neither whence the strangerscame nor whither they were going; but gladly gave them shelter fromthe storm, and spread before them such viands as his cell contained,pressing them to partake with hospitable care, and blessing, in thename of God, the food to which he invited them. His eye, however,rested upon Theodore; and though the youth had by this time adopted ina great degree the dress of the Huns, yet his air and countenance werenot to be mistaken, and the hermit addressed him at once in Latin."There is a hermit from our native land," he said, after someconversation upon other subjects, "living near, and doubtless a holyand religious man he is; but the Almighty has not endued him with thespirit of sufferance towards his fellow-creatures, and he thinks thathe cannot serve God without abhorring men. He was sent hither unto mesome months ago by Eugenius, bishop of Margus, to ask mine aid andcounsel in dealing with the Huns; but, when he had received hisanswer, he would not depart, and has remained here ever since,doubtless sent as another thorn in my flesh."Theodore very well conceived how the wild enthusiast might become athorn in the flesh of any one less fanatical than himself, and hereplied, "He refused us shelter but now, reverend father; and sent uson to thee in the midst of the storm, although I know him well. Hedwelt for some two years at Aspalathos, on the Illyrian coast, andgained high repute for sanctity among the common people; but in theterrible earthquake in which we had all nearly perished some five orsix months since, he strove to persuade the people to remain insteadof leaving the falling buildings, prophesying that the last day wasabout to appear.""He prophesy! my son," cried the hermit, with a wild look of scorn;"no, no; the gift of prophecy has not fallen upon him. It is for thathe hates me: and because I impart, as I am directed, the knowledge ofthose things that are revealed unto me to all who ask it, he abhorsand reviles me."Theodore made no reply; for the spirit of prophecy was claimed by manya one in those days: and though their predictions had often provedfalse and worthless, yet that extraordinary endowment had been toorecently exercised and confirmed by facts for any one in that age tosay that the purpose was accomplished and the power withdrawn from thechildren of men. Theodore had learned, however, to doubt; and,therefore, he paused ere he gave credit to the gift which the hermitevidently wished to insinuate that he possessed."During the whole of this day," continued the old man, when he sawthat the young Roman did not answer, "I have been waiting anxiously,looking for the approach of some stranger from distant lands. Therehas been a knowledge of the coming of some one upon me since the firstdawn of day; but it was not thee I expected, my son. It was some onemore powerful, some one more terrible, with whom I might have towrestle and contend. I know not--I cannot have deceived myself. Still,it is now past the third hour, and no one has yet come.""I should think," replied Theodore, "that it were not likely any onewould come; for all the great and powerful of the land are absent withAttila, and we have made a long journey this morning withoutencountering a living creature.""But have you had no tidings of Attila's return?" demanded the hermit."Some messengers, who passed by this place but two days ago, spoke ofit as likely, and brought me presents from the king."Theodore would not suffer himself to smile, although he thought thatthe hermit, like many another man, might deceive himself in regard tohis own powers, and confound shrewd calculations with presages. Theold man had heard, it seemed, that Attila was likely to return; themessengers might very probably have dropped some hint as to the time;and the mind of the hermit himself having calculated theprobabilities, the impression that it would be as he anticipated hadbecome so strong that he looked upon that impression as a certainpresage; and, if fulfilled, would consider it thenceforth as a newinstance of his prophetical inspiration.Theodore restrained all expression of such thoughts, however, andmerely replied, "Then, by his sending you presents, you already knowAttila, and are protected by him.""I know him, my son," replied the old man, "but I am protected by ahigher king than he is. He rather may call himself protected by me,or, at the least, directed, though he, as I am, is but an instrumentin the hands of God. The sins of those who call themselves Christianshave gone up on high," he continued, while a wild and wandering gleamof light glistened in his eyes, and his pale cheek flushed--"the sinsof those who call themselves Christians have gone up on high, and thevices of the east and the west have risen up to heaven as foul andfilthy as the smoke of a heathen sacrifice. They have called downjudgments upon the earth; lightnings, and tempests, and earthquakes,and sickness, and pestilence, and warfare; and, lo! among thevisitations of God, I tell thee, young man, this Attila the King isone of the greatest--an appointed instrument to punish the iniquitiesof the land! So long as he shall do exactly the work assigned him, andnot disobey the word that is spoken, he shall prosper on his way, andshall sweep the lands from the east to the west, and from the north tothe south: he shall stretch out one hand, and it shall touch thePropontic Gulf; and he shall stretch out the other, and dip it in theGerman Ocean; but neither the city of Romulus nor the palace ofConstantine shall he see or injure. He shall pull down the cities, heshall destroy the nations, he shall trample under foot the yellowcorn, and the purple fig, and the sweet grape. Of their olive-trees heshall light fires to warm him in the night; and with their flocks andherds he shall feed the myriads that follow him to victory and spoil.Armies shall not stand before him for an hour, and fenced cities shallnot keep him out; he shall destroy wherever he cometh, and behind himhe shall leave a bare plain; but the life of not one of thoseappointed to be saved shall he take; and if he touch but a hair oftheir heads, the power shall pass away from him, and he shall die adeath pitiful and despised. Lo! he comes, he comes!" and spreadingwide his arms, with a wild but striking gesture he advanced to themouth of the cavern, and gazed out upon the road below.Theodore, who had also heard the sound of horses' feet apparentlyapproaching up from below, followed the hermit, and gazed forthlikewise. The thunder had ceased, and the rain was falling but slowly,yet the ground was not less slippery and dangerous than when hehimself had passed. Nevertheless, coming almost at full speed was seena horseman, followed by two others at some short distance behind. Nota false step, not a stumble did the charger make; and Theodore at onceperceived that the announcement of the hermit was correct, and that itwas Attila himself who approached to within a yard of the spot wherethey stood. He came at the same headlong speed; and then, alightingfrom his horse, he threw the bridle over its neck, and entered thecavern with a slow, calm, and tranquil step. The monarch gazed atTheodore for a moment, as if surprised at beholding him there; but noslight emotions ever found their way to the countenance of Attila; andhis only observation was, "Ha! my son, art thou here?"Theodore bent his head, and the monarch turned to the hermit, whopronounced in his favour a singular prayer, one indeed which Theodoreimagined might give no light offence to the stern chieftain of theHuns. "May God enlighten thine eyes," he said, "and purify thy spirit,and soften thy hard heart, and make thee leave the abomination ofthine idols, so that thou mayst become a servant of the true God, andnot merely an instrument of his vengeance!"But Attila merely bowed his head, saying, "May the truth shine uponme, whatsoever it is!""Have I not told thee the truth?" demanded the hermit; "did I not tellthee thou shouldst conquer? Did I not say that no one should be ableto oppose thee, if thou didst follow the words that were spoken untothee?""I did follow those words," said Attila: "I spared Margus, as thoubadest me, and I gave protection, as thou seest, to the first personwho crossed the river to meet me;" and he turned his eyes uponTheodore."Ha!" cried the hermit, "and was this youth he? I spoke but the wordsthat were appointed me to speak," he added; "but I had fancied thatthey had applied to another--not to him. God rules all these thingsaccording to his own wise will. Say, where met you the youth?"Ere Attila could reply, the sunshine, which was now beginning to pourinto the mouth of the cavern, was darkened by a tall form, whichadvanced with wild gestures, and placed itself directly before themonarch of the Huns. It was that of the enthusiastic Mizetus; who, inthe exalted and menacing tone in which he usually spoke, now addressedthe king, exclaiming, "Wo, wo unto the nations that thou wert everborn! Wo, wo unto the world, far and near, oh son of Belial, that thoudidst ever see the light! Thou art died in blood, thou dost ride ingore. The earthquake precedes thee; blue lightnings march with thyhost; famine goes forth on thy right hand, and pestilence on thyleft.""Shall I slay him, oh mighty king?" cried one of the attendants ofTheodore, who had unsheathed his sword, and held it ready to strikethe enthusiast to the earth."Slay him not," said Attila, calmly, "slay him not; the man is mad,and speaks the truth. What hast thou more to say, my brother? Thouhast but said what is true.""I have said what is true," continued the enthusiast, "and there ismore truth to be said. Wo unto thee if thou doest not the will of God!I say, wo unto thee! for, if thou failest to do his will, all theevils that thou pourest forth upon the nations shall, in return, bepoured forth upon thee; nor shalt thou raise thyself up in the prideof thine heart and say, 'It is I who do all these things!' Neithershalt thou suffer thyself to be puffed up by the praises of the weakbeings who now surround thee. Know that thou art no more than a swordin the hands of the slayer; a rod in the hands of Him who is appointedto chastise. Henceforth and forever cast away thy vain titles, andabandon thine idle pretences. Thy name is THE SCOURGE OF GOD; andthrough all nations, and unto all ages, by that name shalt thou beknown.""I will fulfil thy words, and do accept the name," replied Attila,calmly; "yes, I will be called the Scourge of God; and truly," headded, with a dark smile, "I have already scourged the land from theDanube to the sea. But now, my friend, hast thou more to say t forthough we reverence madmen, and those whose intellects the gods havetaken into their own keeping, still my time is precious, and I wouldbe alone.""I am not mad, oh king," replied the enthusiast; "but I tell theetruth, and yet I leave thee, having given thee a name by which to knowthyself, and by which thou shalt be known when thou and I shall havegone to our separate places;" and thus saying he turned and left thecave.[9]---------------[Footnote 9: It would appear, from various accounts, that thetremendous title by which Attila was well pleased to be known, wasgiven to him as stated above, though some lay the scene of hisinterview with the hermit in Gaul.]---------------"I will also go, oh king," said Theodore, "and will proceed upon theway towards thy royal dwelling.""Do so," said Attila: "go not too fast, and I will overtake you soon."Theodore craved a blessing of the hermit, and then departed. The roadstill mounted for some way; but by this time the rain was over, and,as a drying wind rose up, the horses could better keep their feet uponthe steep and rocky ground. Passing over the ridge of the mountain,the road, in about half an hour, began to descend through woody glensand wild rocky ravines, similar to those which they had passed inascending; and as Theodore slowly pursued his way, he revolved in hisown mind that part of the conversation between the hermit and themighty monarch of the Huns which referred more particularly tohimself. It was not difficult to discover that, actuated bysuperstitious feeling, Attila had, in consequence of some vaguewarning of the hermit, spared the young Roman, not from anyprepossession in his favour, but solely because he thought it thecommand of Heaven, and a condition on which the success of hisenterprise depended. Since those first events, however, the monarchhad shown him kindness of an extraordinary character; and either fromsome vague notion of their fate being linked together by someunexplained and mysterious tie, or from natural feeling of favourtowards him, had evinced an interest in his fate and happiness whichdemanded gratitude. Theodore was not one to reason very nicely as tohow far the motives of a benefactor lessen the obligation imposed byhis kindness; and he only remembered that Attila had twice saved hislife, as well as spared him where any other Roman would have fallen,when he intruded uncalled into the Dacian territory; that he hadrescued from worse than death those he most loved, and had shown akindly sympathy with feelings that few supposed him to possess. Thus,though he revolved the means of learning more of what were the firstmotives of the king in giving him such protection, he determined, ashe rode on with his followers, to seek every opportunity of showinghis just gratitude towards Attila.They had not gone far, however, ere the sound of horses' feet washeard echoing among the crags; and in a moment after Attila was by theyoung Roman's side. A slight shade of triumphant pleasure--enough uponthe countenance of Attila to tell that he was moved internally by noslight feelings of satisfaction--met the eye of Theodore as he turnedto answer the monarch's greeting."Art thou quite recovered, my son?" demanded the king. "We heard thouhadst been ill, and likely to die; but the gods protect those whomthey love.""I am now quite recovered," replied Theodore; "but I was very ill, andshould have died, had it not been for the care and tenderness of thybrother's wife and children.""Let the good acts of the wife," replied Attila, "counterpoise the badacts of the husband. But Bleda will not seek thy death now, I trust.We have made war in company; we have conquered together; and he hashad a plentiful, a more than plentiful share of the spoil. It was mehe sought to injure more than thee; and now that his appetite for preyand power seems satisfied, he may heed the suggestion of prudence, andforget the ambition for which he has neither talent nor energysufficient."Though the words of the king might have led to a fuller explanation ofthe mysterious tie by which he seemed to feel himself bound toTheodore, yet the young Roman was more strongly excited by the mentionof barbarian triumphs in his native land than by anything which couldpersonally affect himself; and he replied with an inquiring tone, "Ihave heard nothing, oh Attila! of thy progress since I left thee. Ihave received no tidings even of how the war has gone.""War!" said Attila, proudly; "I call that war where brave menencounter one another, and fight till one surrenders or dies: but suchis not that which the Romans have offered to Attila. Wouldst thouknow, youth, how my march through M[oe]sia and Thrace has gone? Thushas it happened; but call it not a warfare, for warfare there has beennone. I have marched upon the necks of conquered enemies to the[AE]gean Sea. H[oe]mus and Rhodope have not stayed me; seventyfortified cities have fallen before me; and the last Roman army whichdared to look me in the face lies rotting in the Thracian Chersonese,as thou dost call it, or feeds the vultures from Mount Ada. I foundthe land a garden, and I left it a desert, even as I promised to do;but I say unto the weak thing that sits upon the Eastern throne, 'Whyhast thou made me do this? Why hast thou called me to slay thysubjects and lay waste thy cities? I slept in peace till I was wakenedby thine injustice. My sword grew unto its scabbard; my people kepttheir flocks, and were turning tillers of the ground: the Danubeflowed between calm and peaceful banks, and my people held out thehand of amity unto thine. I gave thee leave to trade within my land,and at the first mart where thy subjects appeared they plundered mine,and scoffed at the claims of justice. I demanded that he who, as I wastold, had concerted the deed with others, Eugenius, the bishop ofMargus, should be given up to me; or some one, proved to be therobber, in his stead. Thou wouldst give me no justice, and I havetaken vengeance; but the deed is thine, oh weak man, for thou wert theaggressor. Thou hast lighted the fire that has consumed thy land, andthe punishment is not yet complete.'""And did none resist thee?" demanded Theodore, sorrowfully. "Did noneshow that the spirit of our fathers still lives at least in some ofthe children?""Yes, yes," replied Attila. "There was one small city, called Azimus,whose children showed me what ancient Romans may perhaps have been.They were worthy to have fought beneath my standard, for they repelledthat standard from their walls. They fought as thou wouldst havefought, my son, and they won the reverence and the love of Attila. Ifound that they might be slain, but could not be conquered; and Ivalued my own glory too much to risk it by crushing a race that Iacknowledged to be worthy of life. All the rest fought, if they didfight, like cowards and like slaves, and I slew them without remorse;but I would not have destroyed those Azimuntines to have saved myright hand. Bear witness, youth, of what I tell you. My people havebeen robbed and plundered by the creatures of Theodosius; I demandedjustice; it was refused; I took revenge. Thine emperor now seeks totreat, because he thinks he can deceive Attila; thou shalt witness hisproceedings, and shall judge whether I strike again without justcause. Attila slays not without cause; but thine is a lettered nation,and they will transmit a false tale of these deeds unto after times.We Huns write not our own histories."CHAPTER XIX.THE CHASE OF THE URUS.Theodore pursued his way with his own followers only after the kinghad left him to return to his host; and less than two days morebrought him to the banks of the Tibiscus. At the third hour aftersunrise, on the second day after meeting with Attila, he came in sightof one of the few fixed habitations of the wandering Scythians--theordinary dwelling of the king. It was all unlike a Roman capital, andyet it was not an unpleasing scene.Upon a wide plain, broken by some tracts of wood, and skirted by somerich sloping hills, at the foot of which it rested, stood acongregation of several thousands of low wooden dwellings, eachseparated from the other, and covering a large space of ground; butwith all their lowliness, those houses were not without ornament--of adifferent kind, it is true, from that which decked the statelymansions of Rome or Constantinople, but suited to the buildings, thepeople, and the scene. Before each ran along the same long portico,supported by the trunks of trees, which Theodore had remarked inthe dwelling of Bleda; and many an ornamental screen and piece oftrellis-work gave lightness and beauty to various parts of thebuilding. Trees were scattered here and there among the houses, givingshade to their high-peaked roofs; and flowers and shrubs were notwanting, such as the infant art of the age and country could produce.Many a busy group was there, engaged in all the peaceful occupationsof pastoral life; and though here, as before, women and childrenformed the greater part of the population, a number of men--minglingwith the other groups--showed Theodore that the land had not been soentirely left without defenders as he had imagined. As he rode on andentered the streets--if by such name we can designate the wide openspaces between the houses--the population became more dense; and heobserved among them every shade of complexion and every line offeature that it is possible to conceive. The colour and cast ofcountenance of the Huns was certainly more general than any other; butthere also might be seen the Roman and the Greek, the beautiful tribesof Caucasus, the fair-haired children of the North, the Goth, theVandal, and the Helvetian. Nor was this mixture merely apparent, but,on the contrary, it was borne out by the many tongues which struck theear of Theodore as he rode along. There his own language wasfrequently heard; there the tongue of his mother's land was common;and not only did Theodore recognise Greeks and Romans as captives orbondmen, but many walked free and armed among the rest of thepopulation, as if holding rank and authority among them. The youngRoman now began to perceive that Attila, with wise policy, had leftthe guardianship of his land during his absence to persons whosesituation, as fugitives or exiles from their native country, wouldrender their resistance to any invading force desperate, determined,and unconquerable. He himself, as he passed, excited no greatattention, for the Roman features with the Hunnish dress was toocommon among them to call forth much remark. Cremera the Arab,however, by his powerful limbs and gigantic height, drew all eyes uponthe little troop as it advanced towards the mansion of the king; andTheodore heard many an observation made upon him and his, in tongueswhich the speakers thought he could not understand, but which werefamiliar to his ear.At length they reached the open space in which the dwelling of Attilawas placed. It was merely a wooden building like the rest, but farmore extended; and though as simple as any in some respects, yet muchmore ornamented and tasteful in others. Besides the principal mansion,a number of smaller houses were congregated in the same space,probably destined for the reception of his immediate officers andfriends; but the whole mass of buildings thus collected was separatedfrom the rest by a piece of open ground, spreading on all sides to theextent of several acres. In this space several horsemen wereexercising themselves with various arms, poising the spear, castingthe javelin, drawing the bow, or urging the mock contest with thesword. Under the porticoes and within the low screens groups of womenand children were seen employed in various household occupations andjuvenile amusements; and the whole presented a picture of cheerful,active, and happy life, which might have taught an inexperienced heartto believe that among that people was to be found the wished-forstate, where busy life proceeded in peaceful tranquillity, without thecares, the anxieties, the jealousies, the strifes of more civilizedand more corrupt society.Theodore rode on, as he had been directed, towards the gate of theprincipal dwelling; but he was surprised, and somewhat offended, as hecame near, by one of the horsemen, who was careering in the openspace, hurling a javelin right across his path so as to pass within afoot of his head. Theodore's nerves, however, were too strongly strungto give way even to the slightest appearance of emotion; and urgingforward his horse rather than checking it, he passed on withoutnoticing a loud and scornful laugh which burst from the young man whohad cast the dart. Cremera, who rode a little behind his master,turned and gazed fiercely round, while the Hunnish youth and those whowere sporting with him dashed in among the followers of Theodore, asif on purpose to disturb him, separating a part of them from the rest.Theodore was now turning to remonstrate; but he heard the chief of hisattendants already in sharp discussion with his fellow-countrymen; andthe first words that caught his ear made him resolve to abstain fromeven remonstrance, in a case which might add new causes of anxiety andcircumstances of difficulty to his long and painful exile among theHuns."Know you who I am?" cried the youth who had hurled the javelin."Well!" answered Theodore's attendant. "You are Ellac, the son of theking, yourself a monarch; but we are here under the shield of Attila,where his son himself dare not strike us; for Attila is just, andkindred blood shields no one from the stroke of his equity." Some morewords ensued, and Ellac at length said, "Is not this he who has daredmy uncle Bleda, and provoked him to anger?""We know naught of that, oh king!" replied the attendant; "all we knowis, that we are given to this young leader by Attila the King, as truesoldiers to their chief. We are commanded and are willing to die inhis defence, and will guard him against any one and every one with ourlives.""Have ye no tribe and chieftain of your own?" demanded Ellac,scornfully. "Where is the head of your own race, that ye have the basetask of following a stranger?""The head of our race died upon the plains of Gaul, with fifty of ourbrethren," replied the attendant; "and it is not a base task to followa sword which has drank deep even of the blood of our own nation.""If it have drank the blood of our nation," replied Ellac, "he thatwields it should be slain.""Such is not the will of the king," replied the attendant; and he thenadded, "Stop us not, oh king, for we do our duty."The young chieftain sullenly drew back his horse, and turning with alook of angry comment to his own followers, he suffered those ofTheodore to proceed. They accordingly rode on and overtook the youngRoman, who had preceded them by a few paces, just as he reached thelight screens of woodwork which separated the palace of Attila fromthe open space around it.There Theodore dismounted from his horse, and in a moment wassurrounded by a number of those who were spending their idleness underthe shade of the portico. A mixed and motley group they were,comprising old warriors, unfit any longer to draw the sword, beautifulgirls of various ages--from that at which the future loveliness burstsforth from the green film of childhood like the first opening of therose, to that at which charms that have seen the fulness of the summerday spread out in their last unfaded hours like the same rose when itsleaves are first ready to fall. Children, too, were there, and many aslave from every distant land, with mutes and dwarfs, singers,jesters, and buffoons.[10]---------------[Footnote 10: Both the Greek and Roman historians strive to impresstheir readers with the idea that the Huns were mere Scythian savages;but at every line they let fall something which impugns thisassertion. We find that gold, gems, silver, tables, various kinds ofdrinks of their own manufacture, firearms and equipments, jesters,dwarfs, singing, and several games of chance, were common among them:and, in short, that there was an extraordinary mixture of civilizedarts with barbarian habits.]---------------A number of these, as we have said, now crowded round Theodore withlooks of interest and expectation, while others, listless andunheeding, lay quietly in the sun, casting their eyes with idlecarelessness upon the stranger, without thinking it worth their whileto move. Many was the question that was now asked, and many was thecurious trait which struck the sight of Theodore. But we must notpause to paint minutely the life and manners of the Huns. That Attilawas on his march homeward was already known at the royal village, andorders had been received regarding the treatment of the youngstranger. One of the houses in the same enclosure as that of themonarch had been appointed him for a dwelling; and having taken up hisabode therein, he found himself served and supplied as if he had beenone of the barbarian king's own children.Although the scene which now passed daily before his eye was verydifferent from that which he had beheld at the dwelling of Bleda, andhe found it more difficult to enter into the kindly intimacy of any ofthe barbarian families than he had done there, yet the same simplemanners were to be seen. Large flocks and herds were daily driven outto pasture; from every dwelling poured forth the drove in the morning,and to every dwelling returned the well-fed cattle in the evening,with him who had been their guardian during the day singing his rudesong to cheer the empty hours.The women, too, whatever their rank or station among the people, wereseen sitting before their dwellings, twirling the spindle in the sun,or occupied in other domestic cares which had long since beenabandoned by the polished and luxurious dames of Rome.The mixture of foreign nations with the Hunnish population had indeedproduced a sort of mockery of the vices and luxuries of civilizedcapitals; and Theodore saw that simple fare, and coarse, unornamentedgarments were by no means universal among the Huns. Gold, and silver,and precious stones appeared upon the persons and in the dwellings ofmany, and even the silken vestures of the East were seen among thefemale part of the inhabitants.For several days Theodore remained almost totally without society;for, after the first movement of curiosity, the inhabitants of thepalace took no further notice of him, and no one else sought for hisacquaintance, except, indeed, some of those Romans who had abandonedtheir country and assumed the appearance of the Huns. Several ofthese, it is true, presented themselves at his dwelling, and wouldfain have looked upon him as one of themselves; but Theodore was onhis guard, and he received their advances somewhat coldly. He wasready, indeed, to meet with kindly friendship any one whom the arm ofinjustice had driven from their native land, and who preserved puretheir faith and honour, but unwilling to hold an hour's companionshipwith men who had been scourged forth by their own vices, or hadbetrayed their native land for the gratification of any passion,whether the sordid hope of gain, the wild thirst of ambition, or theburning fury of revenge. Of all who thus came to him he wassuspicious, and his doubts were not removed by their manners; for allmore or less affected to graft upon the polish of the Roman the rudeand barbarian fierceness of the Hun. Though accustomed to a morerefined, though perhaps not a better, state of society, theyendeavoured to assume the manners of the nation among whom they dwelt;and the mixture thus produced was both painful and disgusting to thefeelings of the young Roman, whose character was too decided in itsnature ever to change by its contact with others, and possessed toomuch dignity to affect manners of any kind but those which sprang fromhis own heart, tutored as it had been from youth in habits of gracefulease.In all the visits of this kind that he received, and they were many, atopic of conversation soon presented itself which acted as atouchstone upon the exiles. This was the comparative excellence of theRoman and barbarian mode of life. Almost every one broke forth on thefirst mention of such a subject into wild and vague praises of thesimplicity, the freedom, the purity of the most unrestrained anduncivilized nation into whose arms either fortune or folly had driventhem; and all the commonplaces against luxury and effeminacy had beenconned and noted down to justify as a choice that which was in fact anecessity--their abode among the Huns. But Theodore thoughtdifferently, and he expressed strongly his opinion.No man hated more effeminacy, no one more despised sensual luxury; buthe thought that refined manners and refined taste might exist withvirtue, purity, even simplicity; and he thought, also, that as themost precious substances, the hardest metals, and the brightest stonestake the finest polish, so the most generous heart, the firmest andthe most exalted mind, are those most capable of receiving the highestdegree of civilization. At all events, he felt sure that no one whohad tasted the refinements of cultivated life could lose their tastefor what was graceful and elegant; and that if, from any hatred of thevices or follies which had crept into a decaying empire, they fled toa more simple and less corrupted state, they would still prize highly,and maintain in themselves that noble suavity, that generous urbanity,which springs from the feelings of a kind, a self-possessed, and adignified mind.These opinions, as I have said, he did not scruple to express boldlyand distinctly; and he soon found that such notions, together withthose he entertained regarding patriotism and the duty of every mantowards his country, were not pleasant to the ears of his visiters.Some slunk away with feelings of shame, not altogether extinct intheir bosoms. Some boldly scoffed at such prejudiced ideas; and onlyone or two, with calm expressions of regret, acknowledged that theyfelt as he did, and only lamented that injustice and oppression haddriven them from the society in which they had been accustomed todwell, and the refined pleasures which they were capable of enjoying,to the wilds of Dacia and the company of barbarians. With theseTheodore would not have been unwilling to associate: but, ere he didso, he sought to see more of them, and to hear their history fromother lips than their own; and, therefore, with a coldness ofdemeanour which was not natural to him, he received all advances fromhis fellow-countrymen.Ellac, the son of Attila, he saw no more; and he was glad to be sparedfresh collision with one who was evidently ill disposed towards him,and who was so dangerous an enemy. He strove not to avoid any one,however, but walked forth alone among the houses of the Huns with thatfearless calmness which is generally its own safeguard. Still he saw,without choosing to remark it, that Cremera's apprehensions for hissafety were greater than his own; and that, though he ventured not toremonstrate against any part of his master's behaviour, yet wheneverthe young Roman went forth on foot towards the close of the day toenjoy the calm hour of evening in that tranquil meditation with whichit seems to sympathize, he caught a glance here and there of the tall,dusky form of the Arab following his footsteps with watchful care.Sometimes the young Roman would ride out on horseback, followed by hisattendants, to hunt in the neighbouring woods; and if any of the idlerHuns followed their troop to join in the amusement or to share theirgame, the skill and activity which Theodore had acquired excited theirwonder and admiration.Early on the morning of the seventh day after his arrival at theresidence of Attila he thus went forth, accompanied both by the Alaniand the Huns who had been given to him, and rode along by the banks ofTibiscus to the wide deep woods which, at the distance of about fivemiles from the village, swept up from the river, and covered thesides, nearly to the top, of a lateral shoot of those high mountainswhich crossed the country to the eastward.He followed the side of the river as closely as the nature of theground permitted, even after he had entered the woods; for he knewthat about that hour the stags and the elks, then so common in theDacian and Pannonian forests, came down to drink at the largerstreams, seeming to disdain the bright but pretty rivulets thatsparkled down the sides of the mountains. He had heard, too, that suchwas the case with the urus, or wild bull; but the animal was scarceeven in those northern solitudes, and he had not any personalknowledge of its habits.Remarking the course of the stream when first he entered the wood, heordered his attendants to spread out at some distance from himself,and drive the game towards the river, the banks of which he himselfproposed to follow. Little appeared, however, and that of a kind notworthy of pursuit. A wolf, indeed, crossed his path, and, casting hisjavelin at it, he struck the grim robber of the fold down to theground; but, shaking it quickly from his weapon, he passed on, and fornear an hour followed the side of the stream, hearing from time totime the cries of his attendants, as they shouted, both to give noticeto their companions of the course they were pursuing and to scare thegame from the lair.Mingling other thoughts of a more heartfelt and interesting kind withthe alternate expectations and disappointments--trifling, indeed, butstill exciting--of the chase, he did not remark that after a time thevoices of his followers sounded less and less loud, and that the riverswept away more than he had calculated towards the west. Cremera,indeed, he saw from time to time emerge from the deeper parts of thewood to catch a glance of him, and he fancied that the others were notfar distant. But at length all the sounds ceased, and after some timehe became aware that he had strayed considerably from the directionwhich he had proposed to take. He heeded it not much, however, sayingto himself, "They will soon rejoin me: the river sweeps round againnot far on."As he thus thought, he heard the distant cry of dogs; and putting hishorse into a quicker pace, he hurried on towards the spot from whichthe sounds proceeded. They were faint and far off, however; but, as herode forward, they seemed to advance upon him, winding hither andthither in the wood; and he thought, as his practised ear caught thesounds, "It must be an elk they are upon; they cry more eagerly thanon a stag."There were some high grounds above him, but covered with deep wood;and though, soon after, Theodore could hear the musical voices of thehounds pass across the upland, and could even catch the rushing andcrashing sound of some large beast passing through the underwood, hecould neither see dogs nor game. He thought, however, "That is no elk!It does not bound like an elk--most probably a wild boar; and, if so,one of enormous size."Then, giving a hasty glance to the river, he exclaimed, "It turnsthere: the brute must either take the water, face the dogs, or comeback hither by the open ground;" and urging his horse as close aspossible to the stream, he rode on to meet the animal, whatever itwas, just as it burst from the wood. As he approached, he heard thathe had calculated rightly by the turn which the dogs took; and hepaused that he might fling his javelin with a surer aim.At that moment, however, a cry like that of a human being in pain orfear caught his ear, proceeding from among the trees just before him;and dashing on to give aid if the beast were brought to bay, heplunged his horse in among the brushwood, passed in a moment a narrowslip of forest that impeded his sight, and found himself in a smallopen space, round three sides of which the river bent like a sickle.One object, however, in that space occupied all his attention, onefeeling took possession of his heart, and but one course was left himto pursue. In the midst, clothed in a shaggy mane, with foam coveringits black nostrils and fury flashing from its dark sinister eyes, itsfoot planted on a hound that it had just killed, and its enormous neckbent and head drawn back, in act to strike again with the short butpointed horns upon its wide square brow, stood the urus which the dogshad driven from its mountain solitudes.Before it, prostrate on the earth, and panting in the agonies ofdeath, lay one of the small horses of the Huns, with streams of bloodpouring forth from a tremendous gore in its side. Fallen with thefallen horse lay a boy of about twelve years of age, splendidlyapparelled after the barbarian fashion, and with one small hand raisedand grasping a sword, he made a vain effort to strike the felladversary that was rushing upon him.On one moment hung life or death; and, even while his horse wasclearing the last brushwood, Theodore, with all the strength andswiftness of youth and vigour, hurled his unerring javelin at themonster. It struck him but slightly, for the youth's hand was shakenby the spring of his horse; but it flew so swiftly, that the sharpsteel cut through the tough hide upon his back just as he was dashingforward to crush the boy to atoms. It shook and turned him; and as theyoung Hun writhed partly on one side, the fury of the animal's strokewas spent upon the dying horse. Mad, however, with pain, he now turnedupon his new assailant; but Theodore, active as well as strong,snatched the second javelin from his saddle bow, sprang from hishorse, and met the brute as he rushed upon him.With his head down and his eyes closed, the urus rushed on; butTheodore, though knowing his danger, was neither fearful norunprepared; and when the animal was within two steps of where hestood, he darted on one side, and then plunged the spear into itsback. The weapon struck against the bone, however--stopped--brokeshort off; and, but little injured, the bull turned upon him again.There were now the cries of coming huntsmen, but no time was left fordistant succour to arrive. On himself, on himself alone, the youngRoman was forced to depend; and, drawing his short sword, he againstood prepared to meet the assault of his adversary. With his eyes notnow closed as before, but keenly watching his prey, the urus againrushed upon him; and Theodore, knowing that, though his sword wassharp and his arm was strong, it was in vain to strike at that bonyhead or that thick and heavy mane, again sprang on one side, butfarther than before, more to avoid the first rush than to strike theanimal as he passed.The bull, however, was not again deceived, but followed him likelightning; as he did so, however, the coming huntsmen and dogs rushingthrough the trees met his ferocious eye. He wavered for a momentbetween flight and vengeance--exposed, as he turned, his side to thearm of the young Roman--and Theodore, seizing the moment, plunged thekeen blade into his chest up to the hilt, casting himself forward uponthe beast with such force that they both fell and rolled upon theground together.The weapon had found the heart of the fierce animal; and after but onefaint effort to rise, his head and hoofs beat the ground in the bitterstruggle of the fiery and tenacious life parting from the powerfulbody, till with a low bellowing groan he expired.Theodore raised himself from the ground, and drawing his sword fromthe carcass of the urus, he gazed round upon the scene in which thestrife had taken place. Greatly was it altered since he had lastlooked about him, for it was filled with a multitude; and whenTheodore turned his eyes towards the spot where had lately lain theboy he had just saved from death, he saw him raised up from his deadhorse, and clasped in the arms of Attila himself.CHAPTER XX.THE NEW FRIENDS AND NEW ENEMIES.Theodore stood bewildered in the midst of the strange scene which nowsurrounded him, his thoughts all hurried and confused from the fiercestrife and imminent peril into which he had been so suddenly hurried.At first, when he had turned to follow the cry of the dogs, he hadforgotten--in the eagerness of the noble sport, the primeval pastimeof earth's giant sons--that his own attendants were now unaccompaniedby the hounds with which he had been accustomed to hunt in the forestnear Bleda's dwelling; and, from the moment he had first seen thatnoble-looking boy, to that in which he rose from the prostrate carcassof the ferocious beast that had so nearly destroyed him, there hadbeen no time for any other thoughts but those connected with thefierce combat in which he was engaged.Now, however, as he looked round, he divined the whole, well knowingthe custom of those barbarian chiefs to pursue the chase as eagerlywhile marching along with hostile armies as when it served to solacethe vacant hours of peace. That he had fallen in with the hunt ofAttila he clearly perceived; but who the boy was that he had saved, hecould only gather from the fond embrace with which the dark monarchheld him in his powerful arms. Fond and tender, no one who saw itcould doubt what that embrace really was; and yet scarce any sign ofemotion could be discovered on the iron countenance which so often ledthe slaughter in the fiercest fields of barbarian war.The boy was talking eagerly and rapidly, and pointing to Theodore ashe rose; and the moment after, while the young Roman drew forth hissword from the side of the mighty beast that lay cumbering the earthlike a huge gray mound, the king set his son down, and, after restinghis broad hand on his head for a moment, strode across the open spaceand stood by the side of the boy's deliverer.For an instant his eyes ran over the tremendous limbs of the urus, thebroad square head, the tangled mane, from amid the thick coarse hairof which the dark blood was pouring out in streams, and upon thesharp-pointed horns, one of which had burrowed in the earth as he hadrolled over in the agonies of death--and then he turned his look uponhis boy. The next instant he held out his hand to Theodore, saying,"Thou hast saved my child! Well and truly did yon holy man declarethat the safety of myself and of my race depended upon him whom Ishould first meet as I marched against the Romans; and that the firstact of forbearance and mercy which I showed should be followed bybenefits that I could never repay. Nor was that all. When you met meon the mountain, young Roman, scarce a week since, that same old man,gazing from the brink of the everlasting, and beholding the futurelike a valley at his feet, traced out the after life of this myyoungest son. He should escape from mighty perils, the prophet said,and be the last who should survive to carry on my race. Has he not nowescaped from mighty peril by thine aid? and though it was foredoomed,deep and heartfelt is the gratitude which I owe thee for saving thelife of this my boy at the immediate hazard of thine own. Attilathanks thee, and will keep the memory of this deed in his heart. Ihave called thee my son, oh Theodore, and shalt thou not be unto me ason indeed? Ay, and a well-beloved son too, only next in place to himwhom thou hast rescued from untimely death.""I am still thy debtor, oh Attila," replied Theodore: "once hast thouspared me when I intruded on thy territories; twice hast thou saved mylife, knowing me to be a Roman and an enemy; and I have only rescuedthis fair boy, whom I would have saved as unhesitatingly if he hadbeen the son of the poorest warrior in the Hunnish ranks;" and, as hespoke, he held out his hand towards the youth, who had advanced nearlyto his father's side, and who seized it eagerly, and clasped it with agrateful gesture to his heart."Let mutual benefits bind us to each other, my son," said Attila. "Iloved thee from the moment my eyes lighted upon thee. Whether it was afeeling sent by the gods to tell me that I should owe thee much, Iknow not; but I loved thee then, and how much more do I love thee now?Thou shalt find that though those, who unjustly oppose the will ofAttila, injure his friends, or insult his people, die by the deaththey merit, yet those who risk their lives in the defence of him orhis are not forgotten in the time of gratitude--but come thou with me.We march by slow journeys, that the host may diminish as we cross theland; to-morrow, however, I shall sit once more in mine own seat.Come, then, with me, and spend this night in our camp; to-morrow wewill find another place of repose."Thus saying, the monarch dismounted; a fresh horse was soon found forthe boy Ernac; and Theodore followed by the side of the youth, who,talking to him eagerly in the Hunnish tongue, thanked him over andover again with simple sincerity for the service which had beenrendered to him. There was something noble and frank in the manners ofthe boy; and, as they went, he told his deliverer how the whole ofthat day's adventure had come about; how he had gone forth from thepalace four or five days before to meet his father on his marchhomeward; and how, in that day's hunting, he had been stationed nearthe river's brink to watch for the smaller game as it was driven downto the water; and then, when the urus appeared, how he had fancied hewould please Attila by killing such a gigantic beast as that. Hedwelt, too, on all he felt when he found his horse slain and himselfat the mercy of the enraged monster, and Theodore experienced a doublepride and pleasure in having saved so promising a child.From time to time, as they rode on, the young Roman cast his eyesaround, and listened somewhat anxiously for the coming of his ownattendants, fearing that they might seek for him long in those darkwoods. Cremera, however, he had seen among those who stood around whenhe rose from his contest with the wild bull; and he doubted not thatthe others would soon gain some knowledge of the path he had takenfrom those who had been left to bring away the body of his hugeantagonist, as a trophy of the sylvan war.He mentioned that he had missed his attendants, however, to his youngcompanion Ernac, who laughed with boyish glee at his apprehensions,adding, "Oh, they will find you ere an hour be over. We Huns have waysof tracing our way through the thickest forests that you Romans do notunderstand;" and the proud emphasis which a mere boy laid upon "WeHuns," showed Theodore how strong had become the national pride of thepeople under the victorious reign of Attila, though he could not butfeel painfully, at the same time, the deep contempt which had fallenupon the once tremendous name of Rome. Ernac's anticipations, however,in regard to the attendants, did not prove false; for as the huntingtrain of the dark monarch rode through on the wilds, every now andthen Theodore perceived the person of one of his own followersappearing between the trees, and taking their place among the rest.Attila proceeded slowly, and, as he rode on, spoke to no one, exceptwhen he turned, and with an unwonted smile of fond, paternal love,addressed a few words to his rescued boy.At length, towards evening, they emerged from the forest; and enteringone of the plains which here and there diversified the country, theyapproached once more the wild and extraordinary scene presented by aHunnish camp. At a considerable distance Theodore could see it as itlay upon the slope of one of the uplands, with the dusky millionsmoving about in their various occupations, with a bustling, whirlingactivity, like ants in one of the large ant-hills of that very land.As they approached nearer the different masses seemed to separate; andthe camp assumed the same appearance--with its fires and circles ofwagons--that it had presented when Theodore before beheld it in theRoman territory.Approaching the central circle which formed the abode of Attila, themonarch turned towards the young Roman, saying, "You follow me!" andpassing on, he led the way within the boundary.The space enclosed for the monarch's own dwelling was large, andfilled with a number of Huns, busy in various preparations. A change,however, seemed to have come over the tastes of Attila since hissuccessful invasion of the Roman territory, for many more of theexternal marks of dignity of station surrounded his abode. In themidst of the circle, too, stood a magnificent tent, which hadevidently once belonged to one of the luxurious generals of theEastern empire, but which was now surmounted by the same black eaglethat ornamented the standards of the Huns. Thither Attila himselfproceeded, while all made way for his footsteps with looks of awe andrespect, not servile, not timid, but seeming only the expression ofheartfelt reverence for the daring courage, the powerful genius, themighty mind, which nature had implanted in the breast of him whom theaccident of birth had made a king.Theodore paused, and looked to the boy Ernac, who seemed to understandhis doubts at once, and replied to them by saying, "Yes, stay youhere, and make your people get you provisions! I will go in to myfather, and see what is his will with regard to you; but I must waittill he speaks to me, for I dare not address him first."The young Roman was by this time sufficiently accustomed to the Hunsto make himself at home among them without uneasiness or restraint;and proceeding nearly to the verge of the circle, he lay down upon theground, while the Huns who accompanied him, and who had by this timeseparated themselves from the followers of the monarch, lighted afire, and sought for provisions in the camp.He gave himself up to a fit of musing, regarding the events of the dayand the difference of his own feelings now, compared with what theyhad been but a few months before. At that time, when he at first metAttila--though he had experienced on beholding him, even beforehe was aware of his name and station, sensations which he could notdefine--he had regarded the monarch of the Huns but as the talentedchief of numerous barbarian hordes. Now he felt hourly creeping overhim more and more of that same kind of awe with which the variousnations under his command seemed uniformly to regard their chief; andTheodore tried to investigate in what consisted that peculiar powerwhich was producing such an impression, gaining such an ascendencyover a mind not unconscious of vigour, activity, and brightness. Herevolved the words, the conduct of Attila in every respect, and hecould attribute this effect to nothing, were it not to the combinationof many great and powerful qualities, seldom united in one man, but,as it were, all cemented together in the mind of Attila by a certaincalm, deliberate sternness, which never left him except in thefiercest fury of the sanguinary strife. His every thought seemedstern; and the unshaken and extraordinary calmness which he displayedon all occasions appeared to give him instant and perfect command overall the powerful talents which he inherited. There could be no suchthing as doubt or hesitation in his nature; and to that godlikecertainty of purpose Theodore attributed the power over the minds ofothers which he so singularly possessed.While he thus lay musing, forgetful of the scene around him, a suddenstep woke him from his revery; and the next moment his formerantagonist, Ardaric, king of the Gepid[ae], cast his huge bulk downupon the ground beside him. "Well, my friend," he said, looking uponthe countenance of Theodore, and running his eye over the limbs of theyouth, manly and strong as they were, but still infinitely inferior inmuscular strength to his own, "well, my friend, when last we met itwas in deadly strife; and now, in calm friendship, after our contestis over. I love the brave, whether they be enemies or not: and whenthe boy Ernac, who is not unlike thee in face and manners, told methou wert here, I resolved to come and see thee, that I mightdiscover, if I could, how one who seemed to me but a stripling couldgive me more trouble in the combat than a whole cohort of hiscountrymen. I cannot understand it even now, for thou art very young,and certainly not yet in strength mine equal. Thou art more active,perhaps; but that will not do everything. However, let us not talk ofstrife! I come to eat and drink with thee, that the bond of hospitableunion may be strong between us.""Gladly will I make it so, noble Ardaric," replied Theodore. "Thegenerous and noble soon become friends whenever they cease to beenemies. You spared my life when you might have taken it, and I willlove you not a bit the less because you vanquished me.""I spared you not, good youth, for your own sake," replied Ardaric,frankly; "I spared you for the sake of Attila, my friend. I would haveslain you at the next blow had it not been for him; for at that momentmy blood was heated. You had, with your own hand, killed three of mypeople, and I had not time nor coolness to think, just then, that youwere a brave youth, and a noble spirit, and that it were a pity to cutyou off so soon. I may have thought so since; and from my heart Iforgive you for thinning our ranks of two or three of those startledfoxes, who fled before you when you burst among them as if theythought you must be some evil demon, to dare, with but two comrades,to attack a whole tribe.""You held as prisoners, noble Ardaric," replied Theodore, "those whomI valued far more than life itself; and my only calculation was howlong I could bar the way against your warriors, while those I soughtto save effected their escape.""I thought so," rejoined the King of the Gepid[ae], "I thought so: andnow I hear that your mother and that fair girl--who is not yoursister--are among your kinsmen of the Alani. Why go you not to seethem?""Because," replied Theodore, "I have promised to stay with Attila forfull seven years.""Oh, he will give you leave to go," replied Ardaric. "Use him butnobly, and Attila is ever kind and generous. He will give you leave togo. When first he speaks to you, lead you the conversation to yourwishes; and besides," added the chief, with a grave and warning look,"I think it may be better for you to be absent from this land for abrief space. Bleda, the brother of the monarch, loves you not. He isambitious; and men scruple not to say, among the leaders of nationswho obey and accompany the great king, that his hatred towards youproceeds from some idle prophecy which combines the safety of Attilawith thine. I say not that he would slay his brother; but he wouldlittle scruple, men affirm, to take away the life of one whoseexistence was important to the monarch's safety. I believe not in suchprophecies," added Ardaric, after a pause of thought--"I believe notin such prophecies, but Attila, and Bleda, and many others do. Theythink that a man's destiny is fixed and known long before his birth;that every little act which he performs is but one part of a greatnecessity; and that, such being the case, the gods give intimation ofwhat they have already determined to certain men peculiarly chosen forthat purpose. I believe, on the contrary, that everything takes placeby accident; and that, if the gods interfere at all with what we do,it is but to drive us on again upon our way, as a herd does to a straybull that wanders from the drove. I put no faith in such prophecies;and I see that even those who do strive as much to have their own wayagainst destiny as those who think that there is no such thing. NowBleda would take your head to-morrow, in order to put his brother'sfate out of joint; and Ellac, they say, has no great love for you,though he be Attila's son. But his hatred proceeds merely fromoverbearing pride. He loves his father, and would not injure him; buthe likes not that Attila should favour or promote any one buthimself.""I will take care to give him no offence," replied Theodore. "I seekno promotion at Attila's hands, because, as a Roman, I can receivenone. His love, I believe, I already possess; but Ellac will not envyme that, when he finds that it is followed by no benefits demanded orconferred.""It is therefore, I say," answered Ardaric, "that it would be well foryou to be absent from this land for a short space. Bleda's ambitionwill not let him rest, though Attila thinks that he has sated him withhonours and with spoil. But the grave, and ambition, and avarice areinsatiable. Bleda's ambition will not let him rest, I say; and thesethings will come to an end ere many months be over! But here comethine attendants and mine, loaded with food far more than we need, yetlet us partake."There was something so frank and noble in the bearing of Ardaric, thatTheodore was not unwilling to possess his friendship; but scarcely hadthey tasted the meal placed before them, when a messenger from Attilacalled the young Roman to his presence. Without delay, he followed theHun to the tent of the monarch, whom he found with Ernac, his youngestson, alone.Attila was seated on a rude bench, and clothed in the simplestgarments of his race; but yet there was still that indescribable calmdignity, which, perhaps, had greater and more extraordinary effectfrom the harshness of his features and the want of accurate proportionin his limbs. He greeted Theodore kindly, and made him sit down besidehim; and once more touching upon the events of the morning, he spokeof the skill and dexterity, as well as strength and courage, whichwere required in hunting the wild bull, saying that few but the mostpowerful and the most daring of their own practised hunters were atall competent to meet that ferocious beast when brought to bay. Heasked where Theodore had learned his skill in the chase; and theyouth's answer, informing him how long he had remained with the familyof his brother Bleda, threw the monarch into a fit of musing."Then thou hast never quitted the territory of the Huns since thoudidst first enter it?" demanded Attila."Never, oh king," replied the young Roman. "I plighted my word to theethat I would not.""Not in a direct manner," answered Attila; "and I thought that strongtemptation might have led thee to the land of the Alani. I would notinquire: it sufficed me that thou hadst returned.""My word, oh king," answered Theodore, "whether directly or indirectlygiven, is never violated. That which I have knowingly implied, thatwill I execute, as willingly and punctually as if I had sworn toperform it. Many a time did I inquire for tidings from the land of theAlani; but though I gained none, I never dreamed of going. I would noteven write, though I thought once of doing so, and sending it by oneof those who followed me.""And why not write?" demanded Attila."Because," replied Theodore, "coming as I did, a stranger to thyland, and seeing, as I did see, that it was left without defence, thatthere were few but old men, or women, or children remaining in thecountry--for I had not yet come on hither. Seeing all this, I wouldnot, even by sending a messenger from thy territories to a nationwhich has daily communication with the Gauls, give thee just cause tosay that thou hadst trusted me, and I had betrayed thy undefendedcountry to [AE]tius and his legions.""Thou art wise and honest," rejoined Attila; "and thine honesty shallwin full reliance. Hast thou never longed to see those once more whomthou didst part from so sadly between the Margus and the Danube?""Have I longed?" exclaimed Theodore. "Oh king! many and many has beenthe night that, after the hardest day's hunting, I have passed withoutthe soft finger of sleep touching mine eyelids, thinking deeply ofthose dear friends of mine early youth, and thirsting to behold themagain, as the weary traveller in the desert thirsts for a draught ofwater from the well-remembered fountain in his own domestic hall. Ithas been my dream by night, when slumber has shut out the world'srealities. It has been my dream by day, when thought has wandered onfrom objects present to a world of her own, with hope and imaginationfor her guides. Oh, how I have longed to see them once again!" and,clasping his hands together, the youth fixed his eyes upon the ground,and seemed to plunge into the visions of happiness which his wordscalled up."Thou shalt go," said Attila, "and taste the joy for which thou hastpined. Yet rest with me two days, in order that my brother Bleda maybetake himself to his own abode, and leave the path open to theewithout danger. Not that I think he would hurt thee now: he is satedwith plunder and with conquest. Nevertheless, it were as well for theeto wait; for though he left the camp this morning to bend his stepshomeward, yet he goes but slowly, and his followers are not safe.Still thou shalt go after two days are at an end. Go, Ernac, my son,and learn from Onegisus if any of the followers of thine uncle Bledaare still in the camp."The boy departed without a word, and Theodore remained with Attila,who proceeded to fix the time within which he bound Theodore to limithis absence. "The full moon will see thy departure," he said, "and sheshall once fill up her crescent during thine absence; but ere thesecond time of her fulness thou shalt return, or thou art false toAttila. Wert thou to stay longer, the snows would impede thy return;and in the long evenings of the winter I would have thee here, for Imight seek to hold discourse with thee upon the state and changes ofthy native land. Thou art one who, having guarded his honesty indishonest times and amid dishonest people, deserve that thy wordsshould find attention."Almost as he spoke, his son Ernac returned, saying, "Bleda is gone, myfather, and all his followers, except his household slaves, who followby daybreak in the morning, with Zercon his black jester. I saw thefoul slave myself; and he said his master had gone away so quickly,because, having taken so much plunder from those who were weaker thanhimself, he feared to be left with those who were stronger, lest theyshould begin the game again.""Thou saidst nothing of this youth's journey, I trust," said Attila."Nothing," replied the boy. "But when Zercon asked me if the Romanyouth were still here, I answered yes, but that he would not be herelong.""Unwisely answered, my son," said Attila; "but it matters not; I willsend those with him who can protect him. Thou shalt lead back a troopof the Alani to their own land," he continued, turning to Theodore;"and in the meanwhile keep near my person. Take thy place besideEdicon as we march to-morrow, and now sleep you well. Ernac, where isthine eldest brother? Has he left the camp already, after having solately joined it?"Theodore was departing as the monarch spoke; but, ere he had left thetent, he had heard the boy's reply. "No, my father," answered Ernac;"he has gone a short way on the road with my uncle Bleda."A slight shade came over Attila's brow; but Theodore was not sorry tohear that two men, who were certainly his enemies, were absent for atime from the camp; and rejoining his own followers, he lay down tosleep in peace, followed by the happy hope of soon seeing again thosewhom he loved best on earth.CHAPTER XXI.THE BITTER WRONG.In the audience hall of the rustic palace of Attila, towards themiddle of the subsequent day, were assembled the chiefs of all thedifferent nations he commanded; and at once strange and brilliant wasthe display of wild, but rich and picturesque attire which therepresented itself. The gold and silver of conquered nations, thetrinkets and precious stones of many a plundered palace, were mingledwith the shining steel and rich furs of the conquerors; and scarcelycould the luxurious courts of those famed Eastern monarchs, whoseeffeminate splendour had become a by-word in the world, exceed in theblaze of gems and gold the hall of the dark monarch of the Huns. Butin the midst of all, and distinguished from all by the perfectsimplicity of his garb, sat Attila himself, with his large handresting on the iron hilt of his broad heavy sword. Kings of a hundreddifferent nations stood around, gazing with awe and veneration uponthat dark plain man, and acknowledging in every look and gesture themighty influence of superior intellect. Beside these, on either hand,were placed the many sons and the favourite friends of the monarch;among the last appeared Onegisus, Edicon, and Theodore; and a numberof slaves and attendants, covered with barbarian ornaments, filled upthe rest of the wide space.What had passed before needs not description; but at the moment we nowspeak of a messenger from the weak Theodosius was brought into thepresence of the king, with the aspect of a trembling slave approachingan offended master. Attila gazed upon him sternly as he came near; andTheodore felt the indignant blood rush up into his cheeks as he beheldthe degradation of his country."Art thou of what thy nation calls of patrician rank?" demandedAttila, when the ambassador, with his forehead almost bending to theground, had approached within two steps of the monarch."Alas, no," he answered; "lam but the humblest slave of Attila theKing.""If thou art my slave, thou art happier than I believed thee to be,"replied Attila; "for to be the slave of a slave is a humbler rank thanany that we know on this side of the Danube. Yet such thou art, ifthou art the servant of Theodosius. How dares he," continued the king,fixing his keen black eyes fiercely upon him, "how dares he to sendany but the noblest in his land to treat with him who sets his footupon his neck? 'Tis well for thee that thou art but a servant, andthat therefore we pardon thee, otherwise hadst thou died the death fordaring to present thyself before me. But now get thee gone! Yet stay!Edicon, we will that thou shouldst accompany him back to the viciouscity of Theodosius, the womanly king of an effeminate nation. Thoushalt go into his presence and say unto him, 'How is it that thou hastbeen so insolent as to send any of blood less noble than thine own,even to lick the dust beneath the feet of Attila? As thou hast sodone, thou shalt be exiled again by the same hand that has smittenthee; for Attila the King, thy master and mine, bids thee prepare aplace for him.' Thus shalt thou speak--in these words and no others?""Oh king! I will obey thee to a word," replied Edicon. "When wilt thouthat I set out?""Ere the earth be three days older," answered Attila: "take that Romanslave from my presence; to see him offends mine eye. Now, what tidingsfrom my brother Bleda?" he continued, turning to a warrior who stoodnear, dressed in glittering apparel."He greets thee well, oh king! and bids me tell thee that, afterresting in his own dwelling for a space, he will lead his warriorstowards the banks of the Aluta, if thou dost not need his servicesagainst thine enemies."Attila turned his eyes towards Ardaric, who cast his down, andsmoothed back the beard from his upper lip."Fortune attend him," said the monarch; "and thou mayst tell him, myfriend, that as he will be in the neighbourhood of the revoltedGet[ae], he had better, if his time permit, reduce them to a wise andbloodless submission, otherwise Attila must march against themhimself, and this hand strikes but once. Bid good fortune attend him,and wisdom guide him in all his actions!"Attila placed a peculiar emphasis on his words, but his countenanceunderwent no variation. Such, however, was not the case with thechiefs who stood around, on the brows of many of whom Theodore hadremarked a cloud gather at the announcement of Bleda's purposes; andthey now heard the reply of their great leader with a grim but notinsignificant smile. The young Roman could not, it is true, divine thesecret causes of all that he saw; but the conversation of Ardaric onthe preceding evening led him to believe that Bleda was hurrying onhis hopeless schemes of ambition, and that he would soon be plungedinto open contention with his far more powerful brother. With all thefeelings of a Roman yet strong within him, Theodore could hardlyregret the prospect of a struggle which might divide and occupy theenemies of his native country; but still he felt a degree of sorrowfulregret that all the high and noble qualities of the barbarian kingshould not have been enough to win the love or overawe the ambition ofhis inferior brother.When the messenger of Bleda had departed, Theodore himself was calledbefore the king. The object of Attila was but to give him permissionto begin his journey on the following morning; but as this was thefirst time that the young Roman, whose undaunted bearing had busiedthe tongue of rumour in the camp, had appeared before the monarch inthe presence of the Hunnish chiefs, many an eye was turned to watchhis demeanour, some of the leaders looking upon him with jealousy, ashaving suddenly started into a place in Attila's favour, some gazingwith ready admiration upon one who had so early obtained that renownwhich is dear to every noble heart.Whatever might be the feelings with which Theodore approached thepowerful chief on whom his fate so entirely depended, he would not foran empire have shown before the eyes of the barbarians the slightestsign of fear or awe. Grave and respectful his demeanour certainly was;but when he had advanced before the seat of Attila, and bowed his headas a token of reverence due to his power and station, he raised hiseyes full to the dusky countenance of him who spoke, and endured thegaze of those eyes before which so many mighty quailed, withoutwithdrawing his own. When the monarch had concluded his commands,Theodore again bowed his head and withdrew; and though, as he passed,he heard Ellac, the eldest son of Attila, who had by this timereturned, say something concerning "the crafty Roman," he sufferednot the insulting word to disturb the joy which his approachingjourney already bestowed.Hope, like a kind parent, reaches up the cliff and gathers for us theflowers long ere our own slow childish efforts can attain them; andTheodore was already revelling in joys which were yet afar in thatvague uncertain future. He spent the day in happiness; and after anight given up to waking dreams, far brighter than even the fairmagician, Fancy, could have called up in the phantasmagoria of sleep,he rose with the first gray streak of dawn, and set out to realize thevisions.It was a dull and heavy morning, with the white veil of clouds rolledround the summits of the distant mountains, and flying showers passingfrequently over the plains; but as the young Roman proceeded at thehead of near two hundred of the Alan horsemen, whom Attila, on thepretence of sending them to their own homes, had given him in fact asa guard, his heart was too light and joyful to feel or know that thebrow of nature was overcast. His eye might roll over the mountainsplunged in mists; or over the forests, where the pattering rain wasseen falling amid the autumnal leaves; or over the plain and along themeadows, where a hazy whiteness rested a few feet above the generallevel: but the mind's eye was in other lands and on other scenes; and,for the time, even his corporeal faculties seemed to correspond withthe mental vision alone. It is scarcely too much to say that he knewnot the morning was not fine.Following on the banks of the Tibiscus for a long way, Theodore andhis companions sought in vain for fords; for the heavy rain which hadfallen during the preceding night had swelled the river which rushedon in haste, a brown, discoloured mass of hurried waters, towards theDanube. Night fell ere they had succeeded, and the early moon burstout and swept the clouds away. Choosing some sandy soil for theirnight's encampment, Theodore and his own immediate attendants satround one fire, while the Alans, following the practice of the Huns,lighted several others; and, though the young Roman was again long erehe slept, yet at length pleasant dreams blessed his eyes, and daylightwas already pouring on the world when he awoke. It was the bustle ofpreparation which aroused him, and he found all nearly ready todepart.Looking round as he was about to spring upon his horse, he missed aface that was seldom absent from his side. "Where is Cremera!" hedemanded of those who stood near."He went at daybreak," they replied, "to see if he could find a fordfarther down the river. He said that he would not be long, but he hasnot yet returned.""Then we must trace down the river till we find him," repliedTheodore; and, mounting his horse, he led the way slowly along thebanks of the Tibiscus. An hour went by, and then another, but Cremeradid not appear. The woods which swept over the neighbouring country,and which every here and there approached within a few hundred yardsof the river, though not thick, afforded quite sufficient coveringto have concealed the Arab, if he had taken his way back to thesleeping-place by some of the forest paths; and such, Theodore becameconvinced, had been the case, as the third hour went by, and thefreedman had not rejoined them. Towards the end of that period,however, they found a ford, and halted on the margin in expectation ofhis coming; for his young master could not help feeling itextraordinary, that one so quick and rapid in all his decisions as theArab was should not long before have discovered that the whole troophad gone on, and overtaken them as they rode.As more time passed and he appeared not, Theodore became uneasy, andthe memory of the faithful African's zeal, and affection, and servicescame in full stream upon his heart. At length, bidding the Alani crossthe ford and wait for him at the other side, he turned back with hislittle troop of Huns, and rode swiftly along, spreading out his menthrough the woods on the right, and, as was customary among them,keeping up his communication with them by cries of variousconventional import.Thus they had proceeded for more than an hour and a half, though theyrode much more quickly than before, and they had nearly reached thespot whence they set forth in the morning, when Theodore heard one ofhis followers in the wood give the peculiar shout which was understoodto express a desire for all the companions of him who uttered it tohalt. The next instant the man appeared at the verge of the wood,beckoning eagerly to the young Roman.Riding up with a sinking heart, Theodore eagerly asked what he hadfound. The man made no other reply than, "Come hither! come hither!"with an expression of countenance which did not serve to allay theRoman's apprehensions. Ten steps brought him into a little gap in thewood; and what was his horror to behold the gigantic form of thefaithful African stretched out between two trees, with one hand nailedto each, so as to keep him in an erect position.[11] His head, fallenforward on his chest, showed that life was quite extinct, and a numberof arrows left in the body spoke the cruel and painful death which hemust have died.---------------[Footnote 11: Crucifixion, which we have reason to believe one of themost agonizing kinds of death, was one of the common punishments amongthe Huns.]---------------With a heart full of grief and indignation, Theodore approached thebody with his companion; but while they gazed upon it, wondering whocould have committed so horrible a deed, another of the young Roman'sfollowers came up, galloping through the trees at full speed. Ere hecould speak distinctly, however, the cause of his quick approachbecame evident. Other Hunnish horsemen appeared whose faces wereunknown to the young Roman; men on foot came gliding through the wood,and Theodore, with his two followers, found themselves surrounded byat least a hundred fierce-looking strangers, whose purpose wasscarcely doubtful.They rushed in upon him suddenly and without speaking; and as he drewhis sword to take some vengeance at least before he died the samedeath as the unhappy freedman, one of those on foot sprang upon hishorse's back behind, and embarrassed his arm by clinging closely tohim. He was then overpowered in a moment. His two Hunnish followersmade no resistance to the overwhelming force which surrounded them,but only remonstrated loudly and rapidly, threatening the vengeance ofAttila. Their captors, however, answered only by a scoff: and Theodorecould hear the name of Bleda pronounced as authority sufficient forthe act they had committed.At that name, the prospect of immediate death presented itself morestrongly than ever; and though he nerved his mind to bear withunshrinking fortitude the same dreadful lot which had fallen to theunfortunate Cremera, yet even then, in the dark moment of approachingfate, the memory of those he loved--whom he might never see again, andwhom he left all alone and unprotected in the wide and perilousworld--came thrilling through his heart, inflicting, by anticipation,the worst of all death's pangs. When once he found that he could notresist effectually, he suffered his captors to do with him whatsoeverthey pleased; but he found to his surprise that they did not take himfrom his horse, contenting themselves with tying his hands and armstightly behind his back with thick thongs of leather; and it soonbecame evident, that, if their intention still was to put him todeath, they would choose another hour.Hitherto the young Roman had not spoken; but when at length they tookthe bridle of his horse, and were about to lead him away, he turnedhis eyes upon the body of Cremera, saying to one who seemed the leaderof the troop, "Will ye not give him burial at least?""No!" replied the Hun, fiercely. "No! Did he not dare to raise hishand against our lord and king? No! There shall he stay, till from hisbones the vultures and the crows have picked away his flesh: the toad,and the lizard, and the snail shall crawl over his feet, while thecarrion-eater comes down from the heavens, and takes its daily mealupon his carcass. Such, too, shall be thy fate; but it is firstneedful that Bleda the King should see thee, that he may devise how topunish thee as thou meritest.""I fear not death," replied Theodore, "and can bear pain; but of thisI am sure, I shall not die unavenged. Attila will avenge me even ofhis brother.""If he can," replied the Hun; "but perchance the day of Attila's poweris gone by."Theodore replied not, but suffered them to lead him whithersoever theypleased. At first they proceeded slowly, looking to the young Romanfrom time to time; but seeing that he sat his horse as well as before,although his hands were tied, they soon got into a quicker pace, whichincreased to a gallop when they reached the open plains. Aftercrossing one of these, they again came to a large tract of wood; andwhen they issued forth once more, the sun, in setting, was pouring aflood of light upon the blue eastern mountains, towards which theircourse seemed bent. Theodore thought the features of the scene werefamiliar to his eye; and, as they rode on, he felt sure that a distantwood which he saw stretching out into the plain was that on the vergeof which was situated the dwelling of Bleda. Night, however, came onrapidly; and, ere they came near the wood, the whole world wasinvolved in darkness.At length they began to pass among the houses, and Theodore becameconvinced that he had not been mistaken. All was quiet as they rodeon, for the early Huns had betaken themselves to their dwellings; andit was only as he passed along before the wide rambling building whichformed the dwelling of Bleda, that Theodore heard the sounds of mirthand rude revelry proceeding from that apartment which he knew to bethe hall of the banquet. He was led along to the farther extremity ofthe building, and thrust into a chamber which had evidently beendestined for a place of confinement. It, like the house, was all ofwood, but no windows, except a row of small apertures near the roof,appeared to admit air or light; and across the outside of the doorthrough which the prisoner had entered was cast, as his captorsdeparted, a huge beam of wood, which would have defied the strength ofa Hercules to shake it from within.Theodore was left alone; for the two Huns who had been captured withhim, and had been brought there at the same time, were placed in someother chamber, perhaps from a fear that they might assist him inescaping. All was darkness, for neither food nor lamp was given to theprisoner; and, seating himself upon the rude bench which he found atone side of the room, Theodore spent the succeeding hours in momentaryanticipation of death, and in thoughts and regrets which added freshgall to the cup of bitterness.Few were the sounds which disturbed his painful reveries; for thoughfrom time to time the roar of barbarian merriment echoed through thelong passages, and found its way even to the lonely chamber in whichhe was immersed, yet it came faint and softened to his ear, and atlength, after rising to a louder pitch than before, suddenly ceased,and all was still. Theodore listened to hear if those sounds would berenewed; but deep silence seemed to reign over all the household, andfor two hours everything remained perfectly quiet.At length a streak of light appeared above and below the door, and alow murmuring sound reached the sharpened ear of the prisoner. "It isa fit hour for death," he thought; and the next moment he heard theheavy beam grate slowly and gently against the walls as it was removedfrom across the door. The door itself was opened cautiously, and thedeformed head and shoulders of the negro jester, Zercon, were thrustinto the room. In one hand he held a lamp, and with the forefinger ofthe other, raised to his lips, seemed to enjoin perfect silence.He held up the lamp ere he entered fully, and looked round the roomwith careful attention, as if he expected to see some other tenantbesides Theodore. Then, advancing rapidly, he whispered in Greek, "TheLady Neva knows of your being here; I heard that you were taken whileI was in the hall, where her fierce father was drinking; and as I hadfound out by her face, when he talked of waylaying you yesterday, howit went with her young heart, I told her all directly, and she iscoming to save you: but she sent me first to see if any of the guardsremained with you, for the poor buffoon can venture, in his folly,upon things that the clumsy wise man would spoil if he touched--Hush!I hear her in the passage, or somebody else;" and he advanced andlooked out at the door, which he had closed behind him as he hadentered.The next moment he made a sign with his hand--there was a lightfootfall--the door was pushed farther open, and with an eager step thebeautiful daughter of Bleda entered the room, and stood before him sheloved. She was very pale, but that might proceed from apprehension;and yet there was a devoted determination in those tender eyes whichtold that death itself would have no terrors if it lay in the path tosave the young Roman. She also carried a lamp in one hand, but in theother she bore a naked dagger. Ere she spoke a word, she set down thelamp upon the ground, and cut with a rapid hand the thongs which boundthe prisoner's arms."I knew," she said at length, "I knew that the time would come when Ishould save you. Oh, Theodore! how I have prayed for this hour! But Imust not waste it now it has arrived. Zercon! quick! see why thattardy slave, Ahac, has not brought a horse. He would not betray me,surely. But sooner than that he should deliver the Roman again todeath, drive thy dagger into his heart. I bid thee do it, and I willabide what comes!"The negro hastened to obey; and Neva gazed upon the countenance of himwhom she was risking so much to save with one of those looks of deep,unutterable affection, which the very hopelessness of the passion fromwhich it sprung purified, dignified, sanctified even in its strongintensity. The next moment, as Theodore was pouring forth his thanksto an ear that seemed scarcely to hear them--so deeply was sheoccupied with the emotions of her own bosom--the sound of a horse'sfeet was heard, led gently forward; and a smile of triumphant pleasureplayed upon Neva's lip.In another instant, however, it changed, as she thought that horse wasto bear him away, perhaps for ever. The tears rose in her blue eyes,ran shining through the black lashes that fringed them, and fell uponher cheek; and for one moment she hid her face upon the young Roman'sbosom, and he pressed her gently, gratefully in his arms, whisperingwords of comfort and of thanks. But, suddenly raising her head, sheturned it away, while her hand still lingered in his, saying, "Go! go!Tarry not longer. I have saved you--that is enough--I am happy. Toknow that I have saved you is enough happiness for me through life.Go! go! every moment is precious!"Theodore raised the hand he held to his lips, pressed upon it one kissof deep gratitude, dropped it, and left the chamber which had been hisprison. At the door stood Zercon, who led him quickly forth to a spotwhere, among the grass, so that his feet might not be heard, stood ahorse, held by one of the slaves whom Theodore had seen when he wasthere before."I could have wished it had been my own horse," he said, speaking toZercon."Your own horse will never bear any one more," replied the negro:"they slew him within an hour after they had brought him hither."Theodore could have wept; but, without reply, he sprang upon thehorse, and shook his hand towards the dwelling of Bleda."Follow yon star," continued Zercon, pointing to one near the pole,"and ere morning thou shalt be among the mountains that overhang thedwelling of Attila.""I thank thee," replied Theodore, speaking to the negro--"I thankthee, my friend: the time may come when I can show thee my gratitude."Thus saying, he shook the bridle, and urged the horse on at fullspeed, following exactly the course which had been pointed out to him.Ere morning, he beheld the waters of the Mariscus stretching outbefore him; but knowing that the horses of the Huns possessed, eitherby natural instinct, or had acquired by constant habit, the power ofdistinguishing what rivers and what places they could swim across, herode the beast rapidly to the bank, and then left the bridle upon hisneck, in order that he might take to the stream or not, as he pleased.The horse, however, without any sign of disinclination, ran down thebank and waded into the water. After pausing for a moment to drink, headvanced still farther, and then, with a sudden plunge, began to swim,though the stream was running somewhat rapidly. The deep water was ofno great extent, and the horse's hoofs soon struck the ground. Thebank was soon gained, and, apparently refreshed with the cool wave,the swift horse bore the young Roman rapidly on his way.The dawn was just breaking when he arrived at the foot of the hills,and by the time he had reached the top the broad light of day wasshining over all the world. He saw, by one of the peaks to the south,that he was several miles farther up in the chain than the spot wherehe had before passed in the neighbourhood of the two hermits. Pausingto breathe his horse, he looked over the plain behind him, and couldsee, at the distance of several leagues, what appeared to be a strongbody of horsemen following rapidly on the very track he had taken.There was no time to be lost; and, hurrying on, he reached the plainsat the foot of the hill, nor paused again till the flagging powers ofhis horse obliged him to stop in order to give the animal food andrepose.He could well afford to rest, however; for even if the horsemen he hadseen were really in pursuit of him, yet the distance at which they hadappeared from the foot of the mountains, and the difficulty ofclimbing those mountains themselves, promised to afford him at leastfour hours of open time. His horse fed, and then lay down to restamong the long grass; and Theodore, in the latter respect at least,followed its example; knowing how small an object might be discernedfrom the tops of the mountains in that wide uncovered plain, andtrusting that, while hidden by the grass, his enemies, if they camesooner than he expected, might miss his track, and perhaps turn backdisappointed. He kept his eye fixed, however, upon the ridge of thehills; and well it was he did so, for, having taken, perhaps, aneasier path than he had done, his enemies did begin to appear upon thesummits in less than two hours after he had reached the base.At first they could scarcely be distinguished from the rocks amidwhich they came forth on the top of the hills; but soon the number ofmoving objects which he beheld at one particular point showed theyoung Roman that as yet they had followed but too successfully. For atime the pursuers seemed to hesitate whether they should proceed anyfarther, and he could see them lingering during several minutes,hanging like a dark cloud upon the ridge of the mountain. At lengththey began evidently to descend, and that moment. Theodore sprang uponhis feet, roused his horse, which seemed to have fallen asleep, and,leaping into the saddle, galloped on towards a wood that lay at thedistance of three or four miles before him.As he came near, he beheld several small huts gathered together; and,approaching them, he resolved to see if he could procure a fresh horsein exchange for the weary one which bore him. The name of Attilaobtained what no bribe could have gained. The head of the littletribe, leading out his own horse, placed the rude bridle in Theodore'shand; and, once more hurrying on his way, the young Roman, ere nightfell, saw the mountains and the woods that swept round the dwelling ofthe king, and heard the rushing sound of the near Tibiscus.It was night when he arrived at the widespread village; but all waspeaceful within, and no guard or sentinel impeded his way, even to theporticoes of the monarch's lowly abode. As he alighted and approachedthe inner gates of the building, he was met by one of Attila's slaves,whom he had seen more than once before, and who now told him that theking had gone to rest."He feared that you were slain," continued the man; "for many of thosewho went hence with you but a few days ago returned with speed thisday, and declared that you had been put to death. They are now at thedwelling where you were lodged before, and will gladly see you living,for they thought you dead."The young Roman took his way to the house he had formerly inhabited;and the unaffected joy displayed by the rude Huns who had been givenhim as attendants, on seeing him again in life, compensated for somebitter pangs. Attila's slaves brought him provisions and wine, but hewas too weary to enjoy food, and, after a short and slight repast, hecast himself down to rest.The image of his faithful Cremera, however, rose up before his eyes,and for some time banished sleep. His noble horse, too, though less inthe scale of regret, was not without its share of painfulrecollection. "The two last friends," he thought, "who accompanied mefrom my native home to this barbarian land, have in one day been takenfrom me, and I am alone--without one being near me who has anymemories in common with mine own." Fatigue at length prevailed, and heslept. Early on the following morning he was roused by a summons tothe presence of the king, and at the gate of the palace he beheld anumerous train of horsemen, waiting as if prepared for a journey.Attila himself was seated beneath the porch, and beside him stoodArdaric and another kingly leader, whom Theodore afterward learned tobe Valamir, king of the Ostrogoths, with several other chiefs ofinferior power. The brows of all were clouded, with the exception ofthat of Attila, which wore the same stern, calm aspect that so seldomleft it."Thou hast been impeded on thy way, my son," said the monarch, slowly;"one of thy faithful followers slain, and thou thyself carried away tothe dwelling of my unwise brother Bleda; so some who returned hitherreported to me yesterday. Did he set thee free, after having, as hethought, sufficiently insulted his brother? Or didst thou escape?""I escaped, oh king! during the night," replied Theodore; but notknowing what might be the conduct of Attila, he refrained from tellinghow his escape had been accomplished, lest the share which Neva andZercon had had therein might reach the ears of Bleda. "I escapedduring the night, and have been keenly pursued, even across themountains."Attila rolled his dark eyes round to the faces of all the differentleaders near, with a slight compression of the lips, which marked thathe was moved more than usual."And thy faithful Arab is dead, then; is it not so?" demanded theking."Alas! so it is, oh king!" replied Theodore: "nailed by the two handsto two separate trees, I found him pierced with arrows by the banks ofthe river, some two hours' journey on this side of the first ford.There any one may see him, for they have denied him even the shelterof the grave."Attila folded his arms upon his wide chest, and gazed for a momentupon Theodore in silence. "Wouldst thou still pursue thy journey," heasked at length, "after such misfortunes on the way?""If it may be pursued at all with life, I would fain pursue it,"answered Theodore."It may be pursued with safety," said the monarch. "In thy case,Attila's protection has been twice insulted--it shall not be so athird time: None but a brother dared do what has been done; but even abrother has gone too far. If thou wouldst go on thy way, join with thyfollowers, in less than an hour, those warriors who stand around thegate. They will conduct thee by the higher country to the land of thykindred; and I swear by mine own heart that those who stay you, goingor returning, were it even by a willow wand across thy path, I willsmite from the face of the earth, and lay their dwellings level withthe sand, and sell their wives and children unto slavery. Now makeready quickly, and proceed!"Theodore failed not to obey; and in as short a space of time aspossible he was once more upon horseback, and on his way towards thewest.CHAPTER XXII.THE MEETING OF THE PARTED.Across wide plains, through deep solitudes, amid dim woods, overgigantic mountains, by the banks of the stream, and the torrent, andthe lake, among the occasional ruins left upon the footsteps ofancient civilization and the scattered villages of barbarian hordes,Theodore once more pursued his way. Every kind of scene but that ofthe cultivated city met his eye, and every kind of weather that thechangeful autumn of a northern land can display accompanied him on hispath. The splendid October sunshine, beaming clear and kind upon theearth, like the tempered smile of a father looking in mellow ripenessof years upon his rising offspring; the flitting shadows of the heavyclouds, as they swept by over the landscape, resembling the gloomycares and apprehensions which sometimes cross the brightest moments ofenjoyment; the dull misty deluge, pouring down from morning untilnight, without interval or cessation, shutting out all prospects, andpromising no brighter time, like the hopeless existence of but toomany of the sons of toil; the brief and angry thunder-storm, rendingthe stoutest trees, like the fierce passing of war or civilcontention, all visited him by turns, as he journeyed onward from thebanks of the Tibiscus, till he once more joined the Danube, at a spotwhere, shrunk to a comparatively insignificant stream, it flowed onbetween the countries now called Bavaria and Austria.It was on one of those dim uncertain days, when all distant objectsare shut out from the sight, that he crossed the river a little aboveits junction with the Inn, and entered upon the open country ofBavaria. Nothing was to be seen but the flat plain which stretchesonward along the banks of the Inn; and when, after halting for thenight amid some rude huts, where the people seemed to speak thelanguage of the Goths, he recommenced his journey on the followingmorning, the same dull cheerless prospect was all that presenteditself, stretched upon the gray back-ground of broad unvaried cloud.His companions had now been reduced to twenty, by the larger partyhaving left him as soon as he was free from danger; and none but hisown peculiar attendants accompanied him, except three officers of thehousehold of Attila, sent with authority from that mighty andfar-feared monarch to demand a free passage for the young Romanthrough whatever countries he might have to traverse. It was one ofthese officers--who took care to show all kindly reverence towards ayouth who stood so high in the favour of the king--that now, pointingforward to a little stream which flowed on to join the Inn, informedthe young Roman that along its banks was settled the nation which hecame to seek."And is this," thought Theodore, "this bleak wilderness the destinedhabitation of my Ildica, nurtured in the lap of ease and civilization?Is this flat, unmeaning plain, bounded by a gray cloud, all that is togreet her eyes after the splendours of the Adriatic shore and themarvellous beauty of Salona?" And with a deep sigh he thought of theregretted past.Ere he had ridden on a quarter of an hour longer, however, a lightwind sprung up; and rising, like a curtain drawn slowly up from somepicture of surpassing beauty, the veil of clouds was lifted to thesouth, displaying as it rose, robed in the magic purple of themountain air, the wild but splendid scenery of the Bavarian Tyrol.A few moments more brought the young Roman to a congregation of smallwooden houses, not far from the first gentle slopes that served toblend the plain with the highlands. A fair girl, with whose faceTheodore felt as if he could claim kindred, paused, with a basket ofmilk in her hand, to gaze upon the troop of horsemen who were passingby, but without any sign of fear. Theodore asked her some questionconcerning the road, and she replied lightly and gayly, with themilkmaid's careless glee, speaking the pure Alan tongue in accentsthat made the young Roman's heart thrill again to hear. He rode gladlyon his way, assured by those tones that he was at length once more inthe same land with her he loved. That land, he knew, was of no verygreat extent, and therefore he had not any cause to anticipate a longand painful search; but still the eager thirst with which youngaffection pants towards its object made him anxious not to lose asingle moment in any unnecessary delay; and he determined, as theywound onward towards the little capital of the mountain tribe, toinquire, wherever he came, for the dwelling of the Roman family, whosearrival in the land, he doubted not, had excited no small rumour andattention.There remained yet two hours to sunset, when, passing through somegentle hills, Theodore suddenly found himself on the banks of a smallbut beautiful lake, surrounded on three sides by the mountains. Theshore, at the spot where he stood, was low and sandy, with here andthere a fringe of long reeds, mingling the water with the land, but onall the other sides the banks were more abrupt. From the lake up tothe very sky on those three sides stretched the upland, rising indifferent ranges, like Titan steps whereby to scale the heavens, butdivided at different angles by intervening valleys, up which was seenthe long blue perspective of interminable hills beyond. The first stepof that mountain throne, carpeted as if with green velvet, by pasturesstill unimbrowned and rich, was covered with sheep and cattle feedingin peace. Beyond that appeared a range, clothed with glowing woods ofoak, and elm, and beech, filled with the more timid and gentleinhabitants of the sylvan world; while above, tenanted by the wolf,the fox, and other beasts of prey, stretched wide the region of thepine and fir; and, towering over all, gray, cold, and awful, rose thepeaks of primeval granite, with nothing but the proud eagle soaringbetween them and heaven. Below, the lake, unruffled by a breeze, laycalm and still, offering a mirror to the beauty of the scene, whereevery line of picturesque loveliness was reflected without a change,and every hue of all the varied colouring around, from the rich brownof the autumnal woods to the purple of the distant mountains, and thefloods of amber and of rose that evening was pouring along the glowingsky.Upon the lower range of hills many a wooden cottage, neat and clean,was to be seen; and several villages, peeping from the first woods,varied the scene with the pleasant aspect of intelligent life; and as,winding round the left shore, the young Roman and his companionsadvanced towards a spot at the other end of the lake where theyproposed to pass the night, a thousand new beauties opened out upontheir sight. Theodore gazed around, thinking that here indeed he couldspend his days in peace; and, perhaps, he might envy the shepherd-boysthat looked down upon him from low flat-topped hills under which hepassed, or the women and girls who, sitting by the cattle at pasture,roused themselves for a moment from their pleasant idleness to markthe troop of horsemen passing by.At length, upon the verge of a smooth meadow, which covered the summitof a steep green hill at the foot of the higher mountains--jutting outin the form of a small promontory above the road he was pursuing, withthe green edge cutting sharp upon the blue mountain air beyond--hebeheld a group of people gathered together, apparently enjoying theevening sunshine. Neither sheep nor cattle were near; and though thedark line of the figures, diminished by distance, were all thatTheodore could see as they stood on the clear, bright back-ground, yetin those very lines, and in the graceful attitudes which the figuresassumed as they stood or sat, there was something so Grecian andclassical, so unlike the forms offered by a group of barbarians, thatthe heart of the young Roman felt a thrill of hope which made it beathigh.Suddenly reining in his horse, he stopped to gaze; the glad hope grewinto more joyful certainty; and, without further thought orhesitation, carried away by feelings which refused control, he urgedhis horse at the gallop up the steep side of the hill, nor paused,even for a moment, till he had reached the summit. The Huns gazed withsurprise from below, and beheld him, when he had arrived at the top,spring from his horse in the midst of the group which had caught hisattention, and, with many an embrace and many a speaking gesture,receive his welcome to the bosom of ancient affection."He has found his home!" they said to one another as they saw hisreception; and, winding round by a more secure path, they followed upto the summit of the hill, perceiving, as they ascended, a number ofbeautiful mountain dwellings congregated in the gorge of a ravinebehind.Oh who can tell what were in the mean time the emotions which agitatedthe group above! To Theodore it was the fruition of a long-cherishedhope. He held his Ildica in his arms, he pressed her to his heart, hesaw those dark and lustrous eyes, swimming in the light of love'sdelicious tears, gaze at him with the full, passionate earnestness ofunimpaired affection; he tasted once more the breath of those sweetlips, he felt once more the thrilling touch of that soft hand. She waspaler than when he had left her, but in her countenance there was--orseemed in his eyes to be--a crowning charm gained since he last hadseen it. There was in its expression a depth of feeling, an intensityof thought, which, though softened and sweetened by the most womanlytenderness and youthful innocence which human heart ever possessed,added much to the transcendent beauty that memory had so oftenrecalled. In her form, too, there had been a slight change, which hadrendered the symmetry perfect without brushing away one girlish grace.Flavia, too, had a part in his glad feelings, as with the full measureof maternal tenderness she held him in her arms, and blessed the daywhich gave him back to those who loved him. Eudochia also, over whosehead the passing months had fled, maturing her youthful beauty, clunground her brother, and with eyes of joyful welcome gazed silently upin his face.Ammian was not there: gone, they said, to hunt the izzard andwild-goat among the highest peaks of the mountain; but the slaves andfreedmen who had followed Flavia still, through every change offortune, drew closer round, and with smiling lips and sparkling eyesgreeted the young Roman on his return among them. It was not long erehis attendants joined him; and as there was much to be inquired andmuch to be told on all parts, Flavia speedily led the way to thedwelling which she had obtained in the land of the Alani; andTheodore, with Ildica's hand clasped in his, and Eudochia hanging tohis arm, followed to the little group of houses which filled the gorgeabove.Oh what a change from the palace of Diocletian! the marble columns,the resplendent walls, the sculptured friezes, the rich-wroughtcapitals! All was of woodwork, neat, clean, and picturesque: spaciouswithal, and convenient, though simple and unassuming. Within, Flavia,and her children and attendants, had laboured hard to give it theappearance of a Roman dwelling, trying, by the presence of oldaccustomed objects, to cheat memory and banish some of her sad trainof regrets; nor had they been unsuccessful in producing the appearancethey desired, for all that they had brought from Salona, and which,under the safe escort of the Huns, had been conveyed from theneighbourhood of Margus thither, enabled them to give an air of Romansplendour to the interior of their rude habitation.In the village Theodore's attendants found an abode, while he himself,once more in the midst of all he now loved on earth, if we exceptAmmian, sat down to the evening meal, and listened eagerly to thedetails of everything that had occurred to Flavia and her family sincehe parted with them on the verge of the barbarian territory. Theirjourney had been long and fatiguing, the matron said, but safe anduninterrupted, and their reception among the simple mountaineers hadbeen kind and tender. The choice of a dwelling had been left tothemselves; and though the capital of the tribe was situated in thevalley of the Inn, they had fixed upon the spot where they now werefor their abode as one less subject to the passage of strangers or tothe inroads of inimical neighbours.The most important part of the tale, however, was to come: scarcely amonth ere Theodore had arrived, ambassadors from Valentinian hadpresented themselves at the court of the King of the Alani, and Flaviaand her family had held themselves for a time in even deeperretirement than before; but, to their surprise, one morning the envoysappeared at their dwelling by the lake, and the Roman lady found, withno slight astonishment, that Valentinian was already aware of herresidence among the Alani. The mission of the ambassadors to thebarbarian chief was one of small import, but to Flavia they bore amessage from the emperor of unwonted gentleness. He invited her to fixher abode in the Western empire; promised her protection against allher enemies, and full justice in regard to all her claims; nor couldshe doubt, from the whole tenour of his message, that, with the usualenmity of rival power, even when lodged in kindred hands, whoever waslooked upon as an enemy by Theodosius, was regarded as a friend byValentinian. Flavia, however, without absolutely refusing to acceptthe fair offers of the emperor, had assigned as a motive for delayingto reply, that she expected daily to receive tidings from the son ofPaulinus.Theodore mused at these tidings; but Eudochia, who with childlessthoughtlessness looked upon all that happened to themselves as of verylittle import whenever it was over, now pressed eagerly to hear theadventures of her brother since they had parted; and Ildica also, witha deeper interest than common curiosity, looked up in his face witheyes that seemed to say, "I have waited long, beloved, that you mightbe satisfied first, but oh, make me a sharer now in all that hasoccurred to one far dearer than myself."Theodore needed no entreaty, but began his story, and with minutedetail related all that had occurred to him during the last fewmonths. Was there any part of that history which he did not tell, anyof the events that had checkered his fate which he omitted in hisnarration? There were! A feeling of tenderness, of interest, ofgratitude, kept him silent upon some points of the history of Bleda'sdaughter. He spoke of Neva, indeed; he told how she had nursed him insickness, and how she had delivered him from captivity; but he couldnot, and he did not tell, while many an ear was listening, that shehad bestowed the first love of her young heart upon one who could notreturn it.Flavia hearkened to the tale, and at that part of it which related toBleda's daughter her eyelids fell a little over her eyes. It was notthat she doubted Theodore, for there was a simplicity and candour inall he said which admitted no suspicion; but she deemed how it was,and for the sake of the poor girl she was grieved that it should beso. Ildica, possessed but by one feeling, suspected and divinednothing; her only comment was, as she heard of his danger and escape,"Oh, why was it not I to whom the means of saving you were given?""Thank God, my Ildica," replied Theodore, "that you were far from suchscenes and such dangers." But, as he was proceeding to conclude histale, there were quick steps heard without, and the voice of Ammiansinging gayly as he returned successful from his mountain sport.CHAPTER XXIII.THE INTERVAL OF HAPPINESS.Hitherto we have given nearly a connected narrative; but now it maybecome necessary to proceed sometimes in detached scenes, leaving themind of the reader to fill up the obvious chain of intervening facts.Theodore and Ildica sat alone by the banks of the lake, with theireyes fixed upon the rippling waters that came whispering up nearly totheir feet; and they gained, without knowing it, a tone of calmrepose, in the midst of their hearts' thrilling enjoyment, from thetranquillity of the scene around, and the bright, untroubled softnessof a fine autumn day. If, when they met on the preceding evening,Theodore had been moved by joy, such as his heart had never knownbefore, Ildica's had been still more agitated, for delight had beencarried to its fullest height by surprise. Theodore had come thitherwith expectation and hope as the harbingers of gratification; but toIldica, the joy of his coming had burst suddenly forth, like theMay-day sun when he scatters the clouds of morning from his path.Neither, however, the youth nor the maiden had been able to pause,and--if I may use so strange a term--enjoy their joy during thefirst evening after his arrival. The mind of each had been full ofwhirling images of pleasure, but with forms scarcely definite. Now,however, as they sat by the side of that calm lake, amid thoseglorious mountains, with a sky clear, but not burning, above theirheads, and the fresh stillness of the early morning pervading all theair, the solemn tranquillity of the scene sunk into their souls, andbade their mutual thoughts flow on in peace.The history of all external events which had befallen them had beentold, it is true, by Flavia and Theodore, and many a little trait hadbeen added by Eudochia, Ammian, and Ildica herself; but still she andher lover had both a long history to tell of thoughts and feelings,hopes and fears, of far deeper interest to each other than things thatmight seem of greater importance. Ildica towards Theodore had nothought concealed. No idle fear of lessening the value of her love bydisplaying it put an unnatural bar upon the pure feelings of herheart: not a doubt of his generous construction of all that she saidfettered her words or embarrassed the expression of her thoughts; andshe poured forth, without fear or hesitation, the tale of all she hadfelt since she left him in the hands of the Huns; how she had wept,and how she had feared; how she had daily looked for some tidings fromhim, or some change in her own fate; and how she had consoled herselfwith the remembrance of the extraordinary power he seemed to haveobtained over the barbarian king.The telling of that tale, now that the dangers were over and the fearsgone by, was in itself a happiness; and, mingled with many a look oflove and accent of affection, and many a tender caress, Ildica'snarrative of all that she had felt proceeded, till, in the end, shehad to relate how, on the very preceding night, while sitting on thelittle promontory with Eudochia, and her mother, and the slaves, therehad been something in the situation which--though unlike in all thefeatures of the landscape, though the air was colder, and themountains nearer, and the sky of a paler hue--recalled the lovelyDalmatian shore to her mind; and how in the magic glass of memory hadrisen up the mound of cypresses, and the bay of Salona, and theglorious sunset, and all the objects and all the feelings of thatwell-remembered evening when her lover had last returned from the cityof the emperors; and how, at those thoughts, the unbidden tears wererising even to overflowing in her eyes, when she saw a horsemansuddenly gallop up the hill, and wild hopes and joyful presentimentshad rushed through her heart, and taken from her all power of speechor motion, till she was once more clasped in his arms.Theodore, too, had his tale to tell; and now, to the ear of her heloved, it was not less full or less candid than her own had been. Hegave her a picture of all his thoughts in every situation throughwhich he had passed, and her own unconscious questions soon broughtthe narrative towards Neva. But Theodore felt that he could trust inIldica, and he told her all; and, with his arm circling her waist, hepressed her more tenderly, more closely to his bosom while he spoke ofthe love of another, as if he sought thereby to express how much moredear she had become to his heart under every change and everycircumstance.Neither did he do the daughter of the barbarian chief the injustice ofbreathing the tale of her unhappy love, without adding every pure andnoble trait which had shone out in her conduct; and Ildica, who hadlistened with a beating heart but not a doubting mind, pressed hereyes, in which were some tears, upon Theodore's bosom, saying, "Poorgirl, I am sorry for her! I wonder not at her loving you, Theodore. Itis but too natural she should; and oh, I am sure that her love for oneso much above any being that she ever saw before will last, unhappilyfor herself, through all her life. She will compare every one withyou, and every one will fall short. I am sorry for her, beloved; andyet, Theodore, yet I could not share your love with any one; I couldnot part with the smallest portion of that treasure for a world. Seehow selfish and miserly I have become!""None can ever take the slightest portion from thee, my Ildica,"replied Theodore; "from infancy to death there shall be but one imagewhich shall fill my heart. But to do poor Neva justice, she seeks notto rob my Ildica of that which is Ildica's own. She would not share ina heart that is given to another, Ildica, even if she could; and as,from all that has passed from her father's hatred towards me, and theinjuries he has done me, it is impossible that Neva and I should evermeet again, I trust that she will forget feelings which were suddenlyraised, checked almost in their birth, and have no food on which tofeed and prolong their existence--I trust she will forget--""Never, Theodore! never!" cried Ildica; "such feelings are not to beforgotten. She will see none like you; but, even if she did, she wouldfancy none she saw your equal. The memory of having saved you fromdeath, too, will perpetuate her love--ay, the memory of that action,and the memory of her love, will go down together with her to thetomb, embalming and preserving each other.""I trust not, my Ildica, I trust not," he replied."Oh, Theodore," she answered, "were I absent from you for long years,separated from you even by impassable barriers, would you love meless? could you forget our love?""No, certainly not," replied Theodore; "but our love is mutual andfull of mutual hopes. Her love is hopeless and unreturned; and I trustshe will forget it.""Such may be the case with man," answered Ildica. "Hopeless andunreturned, his love may, perhaps, seek another object. Woman lovesbut once, and never forgets, my Theodore. My heart tells it me evennow; and though in such things I have, of course, but little skill,yet I feel and know that time, absence, despair itself, could nevermake me forget my love for thee. The time must come when remembranceshall be extinguished in the grave, and the fine lines traced by thediamond style of love on the tablets of the spirit may be hidden for awhile beneath the dust of the tomb; but to that cold dwelling-houseshall the unfaded recollection go down with me; and when I waken againfrom the sleep of death, the memory of my love shall waken with me--Ifeel--I know it will;" and, as she spoke, she raised her eyes toheaven, while the rays of the morning light danced in their liquidlustre, as if they, too, were of kindred with the sky.Theodore pressed her to his heart, and long and sweet was thecommunion that followed; but we cannot, we will not further dwell uponthings that those who have loved truly will understand without ourtelling, and that those who have never so loved cannot comprehend atall. Let them be sacred! those holy feelings of the pure andhigh-toned heart; those sweet, ennobling emotions of the unpollutedsoul. Let them be sacred! those sensations, intense yet timid, pureand unalloyable as the diamond, as firm, as bright, as unspotted; butwhich, like a precious jewel that baser minds would ever fain takefrom us, are wisely concealed by those who possess them from the gazeof the low and the unfeeling. We seek not to display--we would not ifwe could--all the finer shades, the tenderer emotions, of the love ofTheodore and Ildica. We have raised the veil enough to show how theydid love, and we will raise it no further.The days of his stay passed in visions of happiness to Ildica andhimself, a long, dreamy lapse of exquisite delight. Beyond each other,and the few dear beings around them, what was the world to them I Thelimits of that valley were the limits of their thoughts; and, whetherthey sailed on the bosom of the lake, or climbed the giant mountainsround about, or wandered through the rustling woods, or sat upon theshore and watched the tiny billows of that miniature sea, the thoughtsof the two lovers were only of each other, though the lovely scene,mountain, and stream, and woods, and lakes, and meadows, mingledinsensibly with their own dream of happiness, heightened the colouringof their hopes, and, in return, received a brighter hue itself. Sweet,oh, how sweet! were the hours, and yet how rapidly they flew; till atlength, when they rose one morning and gazed forth, a wreath of snowwas seen hanging upon the peaks of the mountains--not alone upon thosehigher summits, on whose everlasting ice the summer sun shone vainlythrough his longest, brightest hours, but on those lower hills whichthe day before had risen up in the brown veil of the autumnal forest,or the green covering of grass, or the gray nakedness of the nativestone. It was the signal for Theodore to depart; and then came thehours, ere he set out, of melancholy and of gloom.Those hours, however, were broken by many a long and anxiousconsultation. The offered hospitality and protection of Valentinianhad yet to be considered, for it was a proposal which, if even notaccepted at once, both Theodore and Flavia judged might prove of greatutility at an after period. No one could tell either what changesmight take place in the positions of the barbarian nations, or whatmight be the final result of the victories and successes of Attilahimself. Where he might next turn his arms was a question which noneeven of his own court could solve; and while it was evident to allthat a victorious and devastating excursion against the Eastern empirewas by no means the ulterior purpose of his powerful and ambitiousmind, yet no one could divine what was the end proposed, or whitherthe pursuit might lead. Under these circumstances, to have a place ofrefuge open against the storm of war was always a blessing; andTheodore strongly counselled Flavia to despatch messengers to theemperor, charged with thanks, and such presents as circumstancespermitted her to send; not exactly accepting the offer of asylum hehad made, but expressing a purpose of taking advantage thereof at novery distant period."Were you to go thither even next year," Theodore observed, whilespeaking on the subject with Flavia alone, "Ammian would be someprotection to you all; for I remark that his bold spirit and hismountain sports are every day giving greater vigour to his limbs, andhis frame is towering up towards manhood. A year will do much in suchpastimes as these, while the free and wild simplicity of the barbarianhabits will secure him against the weak and effeminate manners ofRome; and, at the same time, it were but right and necessary that bothhe and Eudochia should receive that civilized education which can beobtained nowhere but in the empire.""Alas! my son," replied Flavia, "I fear that it will be long ereAmmian can give us that protection which thou mightst do; for, thoughcourageous to a fault, and resolute, yet there is a wild and heedlessspirit in his breast which often prevents his nobler qualities fromacting as they might. His heart is kind and generous, his mind uprightand noble; but in the exuberance of his youthful daring, and thewanderings of a wild imagination, he forgets too often, Theodore, thatthere is such a thing as danger to himself or others. He wantsprudence, he wants consideration, he wants that calm presence of mindwhich sees under all circumstances that which is best to do, and isever ready to do it.""But, my mother, he is yet but a boy," replied Theodore: "time willgive prudence, experience will give judgment, and age will tamequickly the wildest and most wandering fancy. At all events, I onlydesire that you should have a refuge prepared. Doubtless--both becausethis mighty barbarian does really, I believe, regard me withaffection, and because he has been taught to imagine that there issome mysterious connexion between his fate and mine--doubtless, I say,he will allow me from time to lime to renew the visit he has nowpermitted; at all events, I will find means to send, both to give youmy tidings and to gain news from you. If there be danger, I will letyou know, and be ready ever, upon but a short warning, to fly to thecourt of Valentinian. As I go hence, I shall visit the capital of theAlani by the banks of the Inn; for the kindred that I have among themmight think it strange and wrong were I to pass through the landwithout seeing them; and, when there, of course I will do all I can toensure that the refuge which you have here received shall be as safe,as peaceful, and as happy as it can be made. There is much in the tiesof blood, even between a Roman and barbarian, and I think that myrequests will find favour among the Alani."Theodore would fain have lingered and protracted the hours; foralthough he knew that he soon must go, and the thought of partingsadly imbittered even the present, yet around Ildica there was to himan atmosphere of light and happiness, which banished all that was darkand gloomy from his heart. But he had made a promise to Attila, andwith Theodore a promise was inviolable. Ildica, too, would fain havedetained him, would have fain drank slowly out the last sweet drops ofthe cup of happiness which had been offered to her lip: they were butthe dregs, it is true, and bitter was mixed with them, but yet thetaste of joy remained; and if she could not have it pure andunalloyed, she yet lingered over the last portion, however sadlymingled. But Theodore had given a promise; and Theodore's unstainedintegrity and unvarying truth were as dear to Ildica as tohimself--were dearer, far dearer, than any personal enjoyment. Shewould not have him forfeit his word to Attila, in order to remain withher, for all that the world could give; and she herself bade him gowhenever she learned that he had barely time to accomplish his journeyby the path that it was necessary for him to follow. They parted--notnow, however, as when last they parted; for then before them hadstretched out nothing but one vague and indefinite expanse--the graycloud of the future! on which even the eye of fancy could scarcelytrace one likely form, through which the star of hope shone faint andpowerless. Now, after all those fearful scenes and that dreadfulseparation--scenes and circumstances which had benumbed theirfeelings, and, like some crashing wound, which by its very severitydeprives the sufferer of his sense of pain, had left them bewilderedand almost unconscious, till time had shown them the deprivation theyhad undergone. Now they had met again; hopes that they had scarcelydared to entertain had been realized ere the heart grew weary withdelay. They had known a longer and more tranquil period of happinessthan they had ever tasted since first the mutual love of their younghearts had been spoken to each other; and hope, the sweet sophist,skilful in turning to her purpose all things that befall, drewarguments from past joy in order to prove her promises for the futuretrue.They parted then: Ildica declared that she wished him to go, andTheodore strengthened himself in the remembrance of his promise. Yet,nevertheless, let no one think that their parting was not bitter:Theodore struggled even against a sigh; and over the cheeks of Ildicarolled no tear, though on the dark long lashes that fringed hereyelids would sparkle like a crushed diamond the irrepressible dew ofgrief. Yet, nevertheless, let no one think the parting is ever lessthan bitter, when, even in the brightest day of youth, two heartsunited by the great master bond which God assigned to man to bind himin the grievous pilgrimage of life to one chosen from all his kind,are separated from one another for long indefinite hours, withloneliness of feeling and the dim uncertainty of human fate hangingover them like a dark cloud. Who shall say, when thus they part, thatthey shall ever meet again? Who shall say with what dark barrier themighty hand of destiny may not close the way? whether death, ormisfortune, or interminable difficulty may not cut short hope or wearyout the spirit in the bondage of circumstance, till expectation isvain of reunion on this side the tomb?They parted firmly: but such partings are ever bitter; and whenTheodore was gone, Ildica wept for long hours in silence; while he, ashe rode on, beheld nothing of all that surrounded him; for the soulwas then in the secret chamber of the heart, communing sternly withher own grief.END OF VOL. I.CHAPTER I.THE RETRIBUTION.Shift we the scene, and return to the kingdom of Attila! It was thefourth day after Theodore had left the country of the Huns for thatsweet distant land where happiness, as we have seen, awaited him, anda bright gleam of sunshine was destined to checker his dark fate,when, at a short distance from the bank of the Tibiscus, twobarbarians, who had left their horses with their followers by thestream, walked slowly on among the trees, wading through the longgrass and tangled bushes. At length, suddenly, from a spot beforethem, came the flapping of heavy wings and a hoarse arid scream frommany a foul beak, while five or six large vultures rose up, crashingthrough the branches above, and leaving open to the sight all thatremained of the unfortunate Arab, Cremera. From some cause, a nail,which had fixed one of the hands, had fallen out, and the skeleton,for to such a thing was the corpse now nearly reduced, hung by theother palm; but two arrows were still seen hanging amid the fleshlessribs, and telling the manner of the freedman's death."Lo!" said the shorter of the two strangers--"lo! I have now seen itwith mine own eyes! And this man's crime was but that he had obeyed mycommands, and saved the life of the man that I loved! Shall this besuffered, Ardaric? Shall it last another hour, to ring in the ears ofmy people, to sound in their inmost hearts, that Attila avenges nothis own, that Attila cannot protect those who perform his bidding?Think you it was really Bleda's doing?""Doubt it not, oh king!" answered Ardaric. "Was not the Roman carriedto his village? Would not death have been the stranger's portion, too,had he not escaped? Some one bore thy brother the tidings of theyouth's journey, and they waylaid him, to cut the thread of life onwhich they fancied thine depended.""Ay! It is even so!" answered Attila. "Therein is it that the Romansinned in their eyes. But they shall find that I can rid me of mineenemies and avenge my friends! To horse, Ardaric! we will to ourhorses quick. The cup of vengeance is full and flowing over. He whomno warning could deter shall drink it to the dregs. The leaders weordered must by this time have crossed the mountains.""They must have done so, oh Attila!" replied the King of theGepid[ae]; "but what is thy will to do now? Thou wilt not surelyravage a part of thine own people's lands; or, by waging war againstthy brother, give new heart to the pale Romans!"Attila stopped as he was advancing, and fixed his dark eyes full uponthe countenance of Ardaric. "Hast thou known me so long," he said,"and canst not yet guess what Attila will do? Am I not king over thisman also, to punish him for his evil deeds when they are directedagainst myself. No, no! I will not ravage mine own land, nor slay mineown people. But the son of Paulinus will I protect, and even yonfreedman will I avenge; and I will crush the worm that raises its headagainst me, even though it call me brother. Ardaric, dost thou notknow what I will do? Bleda and I are no more for the same earth: Ihave borne with him long, but I bear with him no longer, and he dies!now thou understandest!" and, with a quick, firm pace, every footfallof which seemed to crush the earth it trod upon, he returned to thespot where the horses had been left.About five hundred horsemen waited him there, and, at their head,Attila took his way towards the east. After two hours' riding, somethree thousand more joined him on the road; and at the end of twohours more he paused, and sent messengers in different directions tochieftains whom he named. Night fell, and with the first star ofevening the monarch resumed his way.The autumn moon rose large and full, pouring over the wide plain inwhich the dwelling of Bleda was placed with a yellow, tranquil light:the voice of nature was all still; and not a sound was heard but thesighing of the wind through the branches, or the falling of a witheredleaf amid those that had gone down before it. A shooting startraversed the blue fields above, outshining, for the brief moment ofits being, the moon herself, and then ending in emptiness. A heavybird of night glanced across the moonlight, and, with a faint scream,disappeared.It was about midnight, and then from the neighbouring woods cameforth, in dead, deep silence, troop after troop of shadowy forms; and,leaving the village on one side, they drew a circle, fatal and sure asthe unerring bowstring of a kindred race, around the dwelling ofBleda. They were all now on foot; and when they had reached thedistance of about two hundred yards from the building, the circle wascomplete, and they paused."Now, Onegisus!" said Attila, "what hast thou to tell of the inquiriesthou hast made. Speak, and if thou hast aught to say which shouldinduce the king to spare his kindred blood, I will take thee to myheart, and give thee kingdoms! Speak!" and he clasped his handstogether, and wrung the sinewy fingers hard, under emotions that evenhis iron soul could not restrain."Alas! oh king!" replied Onegisus, "I have naught to say which maymitigate thy wrath. I had hoped that it would be otherwise; but Ifind--and I must speak truth unto the king--that even across themountains the followers of thy brother pursued the Roman youth, andravaged a village, killing several and driving away the herds of all,because they lent the son of Paulinus a horse to fly when he demandedit in thy name. Their dwellings are in the dust, and their bloodstains the grass, and the widows and the children cry to Attila forvengeance.""They shall have it!" replied Attila. "Let those appointed follow me!"and he advanced to the portico of Bleda's house.The chief door opened at once to the monarch's hand--"And can treasonand treachery sleep so securely?" demanded Attila, in a sad tone, ashe turned through the first passage of the noiseless dwelling to thelarge hall in which banquets were usually held. It still smelt strongof the feast; and the monarch paused in the midst, folding his armsupon his chest, and gazing bitterly upon the ground."Uldric," he said at length, "Uldric, where art thou?"A man of powerful frame, and countenance more than usually ferocious,advanced before the king, saying, "I am here, oh Attila, and ready.""Is thy sword sharp, and thy heart strong?" demanded Attila. The chiefbent his head in token of assent, and the monarch went on: "Go, then,"he said, "and do the deed which none but a noble and brave hand shoulddo! But slay him not in his sleep, for that would seem as if thou werta murderer, and he a coward afraid to die. Wake him! Tell him hisdoom! Tell him the cause! Say he was warned, and would not hear; andthat the cup has overflowed! Ardaric, do thou see it done! Takewarriors enough with thee that there be no resistance. Go! go! Yetstay!" continued Attila: "stay! Oh ye gods! why have ye put this uponme? Is there none here who can speak a word in favour of my brother?none who can say aught to stay the anger of the king? All silent? Go,then! go, Ardaric! It is time that it were done."Attila waved his hand; then, bending down his eyes again, he remainedmotionless in the midst of those who stayed with him. But the onlymoment of indecision that he had ever shown throughout his life hadpassed away; and, as the moonlight streamed on his dark countenance,no trait of wavering doubt could there be seen. All was firm and calm,though stern and gloomy; and the knitted brow, the compressed lip, theclinched hand, told that there were pangs, but no hesitation within.The last of those sent upon the mission of death left the hall, andwith steps which were scarce heard even by waking ears, they went upontheir errand. A minute elapsed, and then there came a murmur ofvoices, and then two or three loud shrieks from a woman's voice,mingled with sobbing, prayers, and sad entreaties: then a dead heavyfall--and then the tones of lamentation. Distant sounds succeeded, andthe noise of steps in various parts of the building; cries of griefand terror followed, and some signs of contention were distinguished."Bid them shed no more blood!" said Attila, turning to one who stoodnear: "cut off the head, but mangle not the body!"Almost as he spoke, however, a slave rushed in with a lighted torch ofpine in one hand, and a drawn sword in the other; but when the lightglared upon Attila, he stood suddenly motionless before the king, asif petrified with fear and astonishment. "Oh king, they have slain thybrother!" he cried at length."It is well!" answered Attila: "get thee on one side, so shall no harmbefall thee." The next instant there came the sound of footstepsrunning quickly; and Neva, with her hair dishevelled, and her feetuncovered, ran into the hall, and cast herself at the feet of Attila."Oh, spare him! spare him!" she cried; "spare him for the memory ofthy father! Spare him for the remembered days of infancy! Spare him,because of his weakness and thy strength! Pour not out thy kindredblood upon the dust! Remember that thou wert a brother ere thou wert aking! Spare him; forgive him if he have offended thee! But it cannotbe! They have lied unto me; thou canst not seek thy brother's life!Thou wouldst never slay him who has slept in the same cradle, eatenthe same food, and stood by thy side in battle! Yet what dost thouhere? Oh, spare him! spare him!" and she clasped the knees of the darkmonarch in the agony of apprehension.Others had followed her, women, and children, and slaves; and atnearly the same time the chieftain called Uldric stood in the doorway,and held up before the eyes of Attila a naked sword, along the bladeof which a drop or two of a dark red hue was seen to trickle in thetorchlight."Maiden!" said Attila, laying his hand on Neva's head, "cease thineentreaties; they are now vain. Yet have not I done this thing. His ownhand it was that pulled the ruin on his head. He it was that casthimself upon my sword, knowing that it was drawn, and that the handwas firm that held it. Weep, if thou wilt! Go to thy chamber and weep!it is the right and the weakness of woman. Go! but entreat no longer;thou hast none now to save!"She heard not, or heeded not his words, but still clasped his knees,and with wild looks and streaming eyes she poured forth hersupplications. They were interrupted, however, by her mother's voice,who passed through the crowd like a spectre, and, with spots of bloodupon her garments, stood before the king. "Ask him not to spare, mychild," she said, in a voice as calm as death; "ask him not to spare!He knows no mercy! Ask him rather to give us our own doom quickly. Thyfather is dead already; why should we be left alive? Or is it thywill, oh king, that we be sold as slaves? We are ready; but we wouldrather die if the choice were left to such as us. We are but thybrother Bleda's widow and children, and therefore have no claim uponthe conqueror of the world: no, not even to choose between death andbondage. He that spared not his own brother will not spare the womenand the babes.""Woman, I did spare him!" answered Attila, solemnly: "three times didI spare, when any other man on earth, had he been monarch or slave,had died for so offending Attila. Woman, I spared him so long as hisdeeds affected but myself; but when he forgot all law and justice tomy people, when he made ready the spear and sword to raise upcontention in the land, when he slew the innocent and the noble,Attila forgot he had a brother. Neither bondage nor death await theeand thy children; thy husband's crimes have not affected thee; honour,and wealth, and peaceful possession of all that he possessed shall bethine; thy children shall be as my children, and I will defend themagainst their enemies. Attila sought not his brother's wealth; hesought but to do justice, and justice has been done. Take them hence,Ardaric! take them hence! she is privileged to reproach and murmur;but Attila would not that his ear should have any words that mightoffend him. Take them hence!"They were removed without resistance; and, after pausing for a momentin thought, Attila demanded of those who had been present at hisbrother's death, "What men have ye found in the house?""But few," was the reply; "and they were slaves.""Was the deformed negro, Zercon, among them?" asked the monarch again."No," replied the Hun to whom he spoke; "we found him not.""Let him be sought," said Attila, sternly. "He it was, he it must havebeen who betrayed to Bleda the young Roman's journey. Accursed be allthey who supply to kings the means of gratifying bad desires! Let himbe sought, and, when found, scourge him from hence to Margus, and givehim up to the chief whom they call bishop of that town. I promised himto love, defend, avenge his nephew; and I would that he should know Ikeep my word. Onegisus, thou shalt remain here. Keep the land inpeace; assuage the grief that thou findest; and see that no evilspirit rise among the tribes, to call for the hand of Attila, anddivide the power of the Huns. Ardaric," he continued, turning to theKing of the Gepid[ae], "I could wish, too, that messengers were sentto meet the son of Paulinus as he returns from the banks of theJuvavus: let them be despatched, and tell him to return by Margus.That good priest of the new God of the Christians will see himjoyfully, as this matter may have reached his ears, and he may befearful for his nephew's safety. I would," he added, laying his handupon the sleeve of Ardaric's tunic, "I would that friends and enemiesshould see and know that the word of Attila, be it for good or be itfor evil, is never broken; and that any one who finds a promise of theking unfulfilled, should boldly say, Attila is dead."Thus speaking, he turned, and leaving the hall, issued out into theportico before the house of Bleda, over which the same calm moon wasstill shining; while round about, in awful silence, stood the darkcircle of the Hunnish troops, waiting the conclusion of the fataldeeds enacting within that low and quiet-looking abode. Attila pausedfor a moment, and raised his hand to his eyes as if the moonlightoffended his sight. Then, striding forth into the open space, heturned and gazed for a few moments on the dwelling of Bleda. Thatcontemplation was probably bitter, for as it ended he exclaimed,"Alas, my brother!" And that was the only regret to which, throughouthis life, the lips of Attila gave voice.There were old men who had known him as a boy, and who lived to seehis death, but they declared that within that one night was comprisedthe whole that Attila had ever felt, either of indecision or regret.CHAPTER II.THE NEGRO.The wind blew keen over the plains through which the Danube wanders,ere, in approaching Orsova, it rushes between the giant mountains,through which it seems to have rent its onward course. Barbed withsleet, that cold wind dashed in the faces of the young Roman and hisfollowers as he led them onward towards the city of Margus, accordingto the directions which he had received from Attila by the way. Hepassed by Singidunum, and he rode through Tricornium. When last he hadseen them, they were full of busy life, garrisoned with numeroustroops, splendid with all the profuse luxury of old and corruptedcivilization. There was now a broken wall, a pile of ashes, solitude,silence, and the whispering grass--already, like the world'sforgetfulness, grown up upon the grave of things once bright. From thegate of Singidunum started away a wolf as the young Roman passed; butunder the wall of Tricornium, a solitary hovel, raised from the massyruins of a gate, and thatched with the branches and the leaves oftrees, showed that either accident or old attachment had brought backsome human being to dwell in that place of desolation. Theodoreapproached, but he found it was no other than an old half-crazy woman,who, when she saw him, shrieked forth, "The Huns! the Huns!" and fled,stumbling and tottering amid the piles of ruins.What a strange contrast was it when, the next day, he approached thegates of Margus! Gradually the desolation ceased; the country resumedits appearance of fertility; cultivated fields and rich gardensappeared; the villa, the palace, and the church crowned the summits ofthe gentle hills; and everything betokened uninterrupted peace, and aplace of splendour, luxury, and repose. As he entered the gates wereseen the Roman soldiers, fully armed and equipped; but his Hunnishgarb, and the barbarian features of those who accompanied him, seemedrather as passports to secure his entrance than impediments in hisway. No opposition was offered, and the soldiers gazed upon him with asmile.In the market-place, which was crowded with people as gay, as lively,as splendid as any city of the empire could display, a number of Hunswere loitering about among the rest; and a Greek flower-girl,mistaking him for one of the barbarians, ran up, and while she fixed agarland of myrtle, mingled with some of the latest flowers of autumn,to his saddle-bow, addressed him in a few broken, mispronouncedsentences in the Hunnish dialect, desiring him to buy her flowers withsome of the spoils of the enemy he had slain in battle.Theodore could have wept; but he answered the girl in Greek, tellingher to place her wreaths on the tombs of those who had died in defenceof their country; and he was riding on, when suddenly his eye wascaught by a train crossing the market-place, and his ear almostdeafened by the acclamations of the people. While slaves andattendants, in extraordinary numbers, both followed and succeeded, inthe middle of the group which attracted so much attention was seen achariot of ivory and gold, drawn by four white horses; and in it sat,bowing his head to the people, and scattering benedictions as hepassed with his hands extended wide in graceful dignity, Eugenius,bishop of Margus.Loud and repeated were the vivats of the multitude; and Theodore heardnothing on every side but warm and joyful praises of his kinsman. "Ourgood bishop," cried one. "Bless him for ever," exclaimed another. "Healone saved us in peace and prosperity, when all was death anddesolation round," said a third. "Ay," rejoined his neighbour, "andTheodosius himself, who would have given him up to death, is nowthankful enough to him for having saved the town of Margus." "And wellhe may be," said a fifth, who overheard what was proceeding; "well hemay be thankful to him for saving the finest, if not the largest cityof his empire." "I have heard," said another, "that Theodosius hasvowed to put him to death, but that he is forced to dissemble for fearof Attila." "He had better dissemble," answered one of those who hadspoken before; "put to death! we would sooner give ourselvesaltogether up to the Huns." "The Huns are very good people," continuedanother, seeing Theodore and his followers endeavouring to make theirway past them. "I love the Huns; they are honest, and keep their word,and are only terrible to their enemies."Theodore could not but smile, although his heart was full ofbitterness; but he thought, at the same time, "If all these peoplejudge thus of the bishop's conduct, how many arguments may he not findin his own bosom to justify the acts he has committed." Thus thinking,he pushed on his horse, and made his way through the crowd towards thedwelling of the bishop, whither the chariot of the prelate seemed tohave proceeded before him; for a crowd of men and boys, who hadaccompanied it with loud acclamations, were now gathered togetherround the gates, the janitor of which had much ado to keep them frompushing their way into the building. Theodore demanded to see hisuncle, and told his name, on which he and all his followers wereinstantly admitted.He found the bishop seated near the centre of the hall, with a crowdof attendants near him, while before him stood several Huns in theirbarbarian garb, one of whom had his hand upon a chain, which wasattached to the neck and hands of the miserable, deformed, andmutilated negro, Zercon. He was nearly stripped of his fantasticclothing, and with bare feet, bloody with long journeying, he stoodwith a haggard but a tearless eye, venting, even at that hour ofmisery, one of those wild jests which had procured him favour with hisformer lord."Faith, sir," he said, speaking apparently to the bishop, "you hadbetter order me death if you intend to punish me properly; I havetried all other punishments but that, and therefore you have no choiceleft; as for the horrid prison that you talk of, I once inhabited forfifty years a prison more horrible than any you can devise.""For fifty years!" exclaimed the bishop, "for fifty years! Say, wherewas that?""Here!" said the negro, striking his hand upon his breast; "here!Match me that, if you can. Let the greatest tyrant that ever cumberedearth show me a prison that will equal this; and herein has dwelt, forfifty years, a being not less sensible of pain, not less alive tokindness, not less capable of gratitude than any; but more patient,more enduring, more courageous than you all. Here, in this loathsomeand abhorred prison, has he dwelt, scorned, buffeted, contemned,accused, condemned, and punished without guilt, the sport of fools,and scapegoat of the bad. Everything has been tried upon me that humanwickedness could frame or man's endurance bear. Try death, at last! Icannot lose by the exchange."The eye of the bishop had remained fixed upon the deformed negro,while he poured forth, in an eloquent tone, the words which we haverepeated, and only wandered for a moment to the group of strangers whoentered the atrium, observing nothing more than that they wore thecommon garb of the Huns. He was evidently moved by the man's speech,and was about to reply, when Theodore advanced, addressing him by hisname. The bishop started up, and, after gazing at him for a moment,folded him in his arms."Theodore!" he exclaimed, "now can I welcome you to Margus; a Tadmorin the wilderness; a prosperous city in a land of desolation. But howcame you hither?""I will tell you shortly, sir," replied Theodore; "but, in the firstplace, let me ask you, why stands this poor man before you thus?""He was sent hither," replied the bishop, "by Attila, that great andmighty king, whose words are as true as his arm is powerful. Hepromised me long ago to protect and defend you; and this slave, itseems, betrayed your purposed journey into the mountains to the ear ofBleda, your enemy. Therefore is it that Attila sends him hither, toreceive what punishment I will. I doom no man to death; but I wasabout to sentence him to solitude and chains, in the tower by thewater side.""God has spared you a great crime," replied Theodore. "This manbetrayed me not. Far from it. He aided to save my life, when, ereanother evening sun had set, my fate would have been sealed. Twice hashe contributed to deliver me from danger. Oh! set him free, my uncle.Take off that chain! it is not fitting for him. His mind is noble andgenerous, though his body is as thou seest. But what have we to dowith that? God, wise and mysterious, has made him as he is; let us nottrample on God's handiwork."The negro sprang forward, dragging his chain after him; and castinghimself at the feet of the young Roman, he dewed his hand with tears."It is not," he cried, "it is not that you come to save me, but it isthat you speak as if I were your fellow-man.""Far be it from me, my son," said the bishop, "to treat any onepossessed of our common nature otherwise than a Christian should do.We are all worms in the eyes of God, the greatest, the proudest, themost beautiful, as well as the lowly and the distorted. Take the chainfrom him, and let him go free. Now, tell me truly, man, I adjure thee,by whatever thou holdest sacred, tell me, was it thou who bore toBleda the tidings of this youth's journey, and if so--""There is no if!" interrupted the negro, with solemn vehemence: "Iopened not my lips. Was I not the first to warn him that Bleda hatedhim? Did I not convey to the ears of Attila himself timely notice ofhis brother's purpose, when Bleda whetted the sword against himbetween Viminacium and Cupp[ae]? Did I not hear Bleda vow, that, tillage palsied his arm, or death closed his eyes, he would pursue thatyouth with vengeance, and seek the destruction of that bold Arab whodared to struggle with and overthrow him? Did I know all this, and doall this, and yet betray to the tiger thirsting for blood the track ofthe deer that he sought to overtake? Did I know all this, and do allthis, and yet tell to Bleda that he who had shown me pity andsympathy, came, as it were, to offer his throat to the knife withineight hours of that fierce man's dwelling-place? Oh no! I opened notmy lips. There were whole tribes of Bleda's people round when the boyErnac told me that the Roman was about to depart from the land. Theybore the tidings to the king; and he gained from Ellac, the eldestson, the course of his whole journey, and the number of people whomthey supposed would follow him. The number proved ten times more thanthey expected, and Bleda had too few with him to attack them all. Hetook vengeance on the Arab, however: and the Roman youth, afterBleda's departure, fell into a trap baited with his freedman's blood.I betrayed him not, but I aided to save him, and he knows it.""I do," answered Theodore; "had it not been for thee, and for one whomI will not name, I had ended my life long ere now. But say, how am Ito return to the dwelling of Attila when the tribes of Bleda lieacross my way?""Did not those who told thee to come hither tell thee more?" demandedthe negro."They told me nothing," answered Theodore, "but that it was the willof Attila I should pass by Margus as I returned. Of Bleda they saidnothing.""Bleda, oh Roman," replied the negro, "the powerful, the revengeful,the unforgiving, is like a dry stramonium bush in the desert, whosebitterness is parched up and gone, whose very thorns are withered andpowerless. His name, his mighty name, is like the whisper of the windamong the rocks, speaking of tempests that we feel no more, of blastsfrom which we are sheltered! Bleda is dead, oh Roman; his arm is inthe dust.""Dead!" said Theodore, a presentiment of the dark truth coming overhim, even before it was spoken; "dead! How did he die?""Those who told thee to come hither," said the negro, "were right totell thee no more. Over the name of Bleda, and over his fate, therehangs a cloud: the Huns speak of it not, and are wisely silent; but ofthis I am sure, that there are not twenty men throughout all the landwho do not feel that they are more at ease since there has been onegreat and unquiet spirit less in the world.""But his children!" exclaimed Theodore, now fully convinced by thedark hints of the negro that the death of Bleda had been of an unusualand a bloody kind. "His family? his children? what has become ofthem?""They are safe," replied the negro, "they are safe and well; and onefair maiden, good, and gentle, and kindly as thou art, would fain havesaved even me, lowly as I am, from a fate that she knew I deservednot. But her intercession was of no avail; and to say the truth, for Iam wellnigh wearied out with this sad life, I grieved more that sheshould plead in vain than that I should be the object for which shevainly pleaded.""My nephew shall try to make life more supportable to thee," repliedthe bishop. "Thou shalt go back with him, and he shall clear theebefore the king. For well thou knowest, that when Attila has resolvedthe destruction of any one, no land can prove a shelter, no distance abarrier, no time an impediment, till he be avenged or appeased.""I know it well," replied the negro; "and I know also, and willinglywill say it, that fierce and stern as that great king is sometimescalled, no one is more easily appeased for personal offences, no onemore attentive to justice where truth can be made plain. Even with hisbrother Bleda, did he not forbear to the very last, though he wellknew that his designs were pointed against Attila, not against the sonof Paulinus?""How so?" demanded the bishop; "thy words are dark, my brother; I knownot, and cannot even divine the cause of Bleda's hatred to my nephew.He injured him not.""I could make my dark words clear," answered the negro in Greek. "ButI love not to talk of things that do not concern me when there aremany ears around."The bishop paused for a moment, and giving the attendants of Theodoreand the Huns who had brought the negro thither into the hands of oneof his own officers, he bade him entertain them well, and return toconduct the unhappy Zercon thence in a few minutes. The attendants ofthe bishop easily divined his wishes, and the hall being instantlycleared, the negro was left alone with Eugenius and Theodore."Now," said the bishop, "now explain this mystery, why a man incommand of reason should hate and seek the death of another who hadnever injured or offended him, and that, too, at first sight.""Speak, Zercon," added Theodore, "and let us know the whole, for Ihave heard from Ardaric and others a part of the story, yet muchremains unexplained. Was it not some prophecy that--""Listen, and you shall hear," said Zercon. "When Attila first heardthat this noble bishop had carried off some treasures--""I carried off no treasures!" exclaimed the prelate, "and so I provedunto the king.""But he heard that you had," answered the negro, "and that cause--withmany another offence committed by the Romans, together with someidle time on his part, and no other object of conquest before hiseyes--made him resolve to pour the tide of war upon the Easternempire. When Attila, then, first determined upon war, he gathered hismyriads together on the first plain beyond the mountains; and whilemessengers came to and fro, in order to avert hostilities which werealready resolved, the king went up to the mountains to ask a holy man,who dwells there, the issue of his enterprise. So has he done in allthe wars of the last five years, and the words of the hermit have everproved true; for he promised Attila victory, and to those who know himit needs not be a prophet to foresee that. Now, also, he assured himof success, but upon one condition. He told him that if he would ridedown towards the Danube with but few followers, he would meet a Romanon the Hunnish bank of the river, whom he should spare, and protect,and love. If wrong befell that Roman, or any of his family, the oldman told him, either from the hand of Attila himself or any of hispeople, and if, for seven years, he, Attila, did not secure andprotect him against all his enemies, not only his course of victorywould cease, but death itself would cut him off in his return to hisown hearth. 'His fate,' said the hermit to the king when he told thistale, 'his fate is bound up with yours! See that no evil happen tohim, for worse will instantly fall upon yourself. You shall do him nowrong--you shall show him all favour. Go now and seek him!' Such werethe old man's words."The Bishop of Margus smiled as the negro proceeded, but Zercon went onwith his tale: "Attila rode on from that spot; but, ere he had reachedthe banks of the great river he was met by some people posting inlandto say that a Roman had ventured across the stream but slenderlyattended, notwithstanding the daily feuds that already gave notice ofthe coming war, and to ask what they should do with him. At thosetidings, Attila and Bleda both saw the first part of the old man'sprophecy fulfilled, and from that moment they doubted not one word ofthe rest. Attila went on without his brother, and found this youth. Yeyourselves know all the rest.""Still we see not why Bleda should seek his life," replied the bishop,"unless, indeed, he sought to take his brother's also; and then hemight have taken it at once.""He sought not to take his brother's life," replied Zercon: "he darednot, or he would; but he believed the prophecy, and thought that ifthis young Roman, on whom his brother's life and fortunes depended,were away, a hundred accidents in the course of war might lay the headof Attila in the dust. Ever through life did he covet whatever Attilapossessed, and therefore was it that he sought at first to take a lifeon which that of his brother depended. Afterward revenge was added tothe same ambition; but his plans had gone still farther. His daringhad increased with impunity; and day by day he was nerving his heartto contend with Attila himself, vainly hoping that many of the greatking's chiefs--perhaps even some of the monarch's children--would joinhim. But his life and his plots ended together.""Wert thou with Bleda?" demanded Theodore, to whose ear the prophecyof the old man, and its partial accomplishment, appeared strange andinteresting; "wert thou with Bleda and Attila when the hermit told himto go down to meet me?""I was!" replied Zercon, showing his white teeth with a wildlaugh--"I was! Attila, when he set out, chose Ardaric and Onegisus togo with him; and Bleda asked the King of the Gepid[ae] whom he hadbetter choose, for they made a solemn ceremony of it. Ardaric, whobelieves in no such things, replied, 'Why, take your black jester!'and whether Bleda thought that too a prophecy or not, I cannot tell;but certainly he took me, and I stood in the mouth of the cave whilethey conversed within."He was interrupted by a woman entering to draw water from the tank inthe midst of the hall; and, ere she was gone, the bishop's officerreturned to conduct Zercon from his presence."Use him well," said the bishop, "and kindly. Put him among the mostfavoured slaves; give him water to wash his feet, and food, and wine.Nor must any one make a jest of him. It is forbidden in my dwelling tomock any of God's works."The slave and the negro retired, and Theodore was left alone with hisuncle, round whose lip a somewhat doubtful smile had hung during thewhole of Zercon's account of that prediction which had obtained forhis nephew security in some respects, and brought him into danger inothers."The words of the good hermit, I rather think," he said, as soon asthe negro departed, "have led even the mighty and clear-sighted Attilainto error.""Indeed!" exclaimed Theodore, in some surprise; "then you do notcredit his pretensions to be a prophet?""He is better than a prophet, my son; he is a wise man," replied thesomewhat worldly prelate; but instantly seeing, by the mounting colourin his nephew's cheek, that his profane words had shocked thesensitive mind of the youth, he added, "Far be it from me to say thatthe gift of prophecy is not excellent; but it is better to be a goodman, and wise unto God, than to be a prophet and offend. This hermitis a man of all great qualities and Christian virtues; austere untohimself, charitable towards others; holy in life, spending his yearsin meditation and constant prayer! There is much reason to believethat to such a one the gift of prophecy might be extended. So much didI think of his wisdom, and so far did I trust in his advice being holyand good, that, ere the Huns poured down upon the Roman empire, I sentmessengers to ask his counsel as to mine own conduct in such a momentof trial. He loves me well; and for many years I have profited by hiswisdom and experience, till I am what I am. To show him and all menthat personal fear was unknown to the bosom of Eugenius, I told himthat on a certain day I would cross the Danube myself, and advancetowards the mountains, if he would come down to meet me; and I doubtnot that his prophecy referred to me and not to thee. Attila came downsooner than was expected, and encountered thee on the way: thy suddencoming delayed me for a day; and, ere I crossed the river, the myriadsof the Huns were pouring down from the mountains. I obtained a promiseof security, however, from Attila himself; saw him, found him mild totreat with, and easily appeased. The wiles of the Byzantine court heabhorred: but I told him truth. I offered to show him mine owntreasury and the treasury of the city, and that we should purgeourselves by the most solemn oath of all share in taking that treasurewhich his people declared they had lost; but at the same time Iproposed to repay it with fourfold its value as amends. He receivedthe proposal well; swore to me, solemnly, that he would protect theeand Flavia, and all her household; and, upon some other conditionswhich he made, he promised to give the citizens of Margus peace. Thouseest how he has fulfilled his word.""I see it, indeed, my uncle," answered Theodore; "I see that Margus,like an oasis in the Libyan sands, is fresh, and bright, andluxuriant, in the midst of ruin and desolation. But, alas! alas! wouldit have been so if Margus had not opened her gates to the invader? Ifthe first city of the Roman empire had made a stand against thebarbarians as they poured upon the frontier?""The only difference would have been," replied the bishop, his browgrowing dark, "that Margus would now be in the same situation as therest. What troops had we to resist? What means of defence hadTheodosius given us? None! He thought but to appease the evil spiritof the war by drawing a line in my blood between himself and the wrathof Attila; and he took no measure to defend his territories, made noeffort to protect his people. How did Viminacium stand, which had tencenturies within its walls? how did Tricornium resist? how Singidunum,how Naissus, Sardica, Ratiaria, and all the cities of the Illyrianborder? Singidunum resisted for a day; Viminacium saw the Hunnishmyriads with the dawning light, and was a heap of ashes ere nightfall.So was it with all the rest! Theodore, I am satisfied. In the midst ofthe desolation of the land, where many hundreds of thousands havefallen, where every trace of cultivation and of sweet domestic peacehas been swept away, I have saved a Christian people in peace andprosperity, without one drop of blood shed, either of our own orothers."Theodore thought that this was one of those few accidental cases wheregood had sprung from evil; but his heart, as a Roman and a man, toldhim that his uncle's reasoning was false. He replied not, however, andthe prelate went on. "I have done all this, Theodore, and I amsatisfied. Is it not enough for the shepherd to save his sheep fromthe wolf, though the monster be obliged to seek his prey in some otherflock? Would it not be enough for me to have delivered from peril anddeath those whom God has given to me, without any consideration ofothers? But when I know, and did know, that nothing I could have donewould have saved myself or benefited them who have since fallen, oughtI not to be satisfied? Whenever in my own heart a weak doubt arises,one shout of the glad multitude who owe their lives to me issufficient to put all at peace within my breast. Yes, I can look backto every circumstance, and say, this have I done, and I am satisfied!But I have done more, oh Theodore?" he added, his mind seemingsuddenly to turn into another path, and a different expression comingover his countenance--"I have done more! The weak, pale, cowardlyTheodosius, who, trembling on his throne, would have spilt my blood,out of the true tyrant's vice of terror--the heretical wretch, led bythe subtle Eutyches to persecute all those who hold the pure andorthodox faith--dare no longer wag a finger at Eugenius, or talk ofpunishing the citizens of Margus for submitting to an enemy they couldnot resist, and from whom he refused to defend them. He dare not dreamof striking a hair from the head of one of the citizens of Margus.Nor, since Attila is thy protector, would he dare to lay handsupon thee, even if thou wert to cross the courts of his palaceto-morrow--no, not for his very throne!"Theodore was unconvinced; but he refrained from reply, and turned theconversation to another part of the same subject, by relating to thebishop the kindly offers of protection which Flavia had received fromValentinian."He has kept his word," replied the bishop, "for such was the tenourof a promise that he made to me. Think not that I went rashly andhastily into even that act which I knew would save Margus. ToTheodosius I had applied for aid in vain, and I then applied toValentinian. He could not aid me, but he justified my conduct, andpromised me personal protection in case of need. I sent him messengerswhen all was secure, and he engaged to give both to Flavia andyourself justice, protection, and support, in the empire of the West."Theodore felt that his uncle was kind, far more kind than he couldhave expected or hoped; he felt, too, that his mind was powerful, andhis heart not without high and noble feelings; but, alas! the threadsof cunning selfishness ran hither and thither through the whole, and,like the veins of some inferior substance in a precious stone,rendered nearly valueless the better part. Theodore felt that he couldlove Eugenius; but he would not have been Eugenius for the world.Thus passed the day; but the next morning, as Theodore sat at meatwith his uncle, it was announced that Edicon, one of the favouriteofficers of Attila, together with Maximin, ambassador from Theodosius,approached the city of Margus in their way from Constantinople to thecountry of the Huns; and when Theodore beheld the reverence andrespect which the ambassador himself, and those who accompanied him,evinced towards the prelate who had first received the barbarians intothe empire, he could not help feeling how brilliant a thing in theeyes of man is successful evil. During a whole day the ambassador andhis train sought repose in Margus--and Theodore determined toaccompany him on his onward journey. His uncle forced upon him acasket of gold ere he departed, conquering his aversion to receive itby declaring that it was a debt he had owed Paulinus; and Theodore,feeling that it might be needful, made no further resistance.CHAPTER III.THE WIDOW'S DWELLING.Near a bend of the Tibiscus, on a meadow that might have refreshed theweary eye in summer by its beautiful verdure, the Romans pitched theirtents at the close of their first day's journey in the land of theHuns. The night was dark and gloomy; no golden sunset had cheered theworld on the departure of the light; and covering all the heavens, inlong wavy lines from the horizon to the zenith, stretched out a canopyof heavy clouds, like waves of molten lead rolled over the sky.Maximin, struck and pleased with Theodore, had invited him to histent; and there, by skilful and kindly inquiries, he won from the sonof Paulinus a sketch of all the events which had affected himpersonally since the death of his father. There was much that Theodoreomitted, because he trifled not with the confidence of others; butMaximin learned enough to show him that the youth was held by Attilain a state of honourable, but unwilling captivity; and he resolved touse his best efforts to redeem him from such a situation.While they thus conversed by the dull lamplight, the pattering of someheavy drops of rain was heard upon the tent, and, mingled with therushing murmur of the Tibiscus, came the low sobbing of the risingwind. Their conversation, however, was too interesting to allow themto give much attention to the storm without; for, besides the feelingsof sympathy which Theodore had excited in the bosom of the nobleMaximin, he had much information to communicate concerning the mannersand habits of the Huns, and the character of Attila himself; all whichthe ambassador knew might prove most valuable to him at an afterperiod.The rain increased while they talked; the river roared and raged; thewind rose into fierce gusts, and the poles of the tent were seen toquiver under the violent blasts, while the trickling drops began towelter through the tent, and threatened to extinguish the light. Atlength, after a long moaning sound, a fiercer gust than all the restswept the sky; the tent-poles shook, bent, gave way, tearing up theearth into which they were driven; the cords and pegs which stretchedout the covering were broken or loosened in a moment, and the tent,with all that it contained, was dashed with fury to the ground.As soon as Maximin and Theodore could disentangle themselves from thefallen mass, they found that the whole of their little encampment hadshared the same fate. All was confusion and disarray. Every light hadbeen extinguished: the torches, drenched with the fallen deluge, couldnot be lighted. The night was as black as the jaws of Acheron; and allthat could be distinguished was a glistering line of water, everymoment approaching nearer, as the Tibiscus, filled by a thousandmountain-torrents, began to overflow the meadow in which the Romantents had been pitched.While engaged in removing, with difficulty and haste, the horses andbaggage to a more elevated situation, a number of lights were seencoming over the nearest hill; and in a few moments forty or fiftyHuns, bearing torches of resinous pine, which neither the rainextinguished nor the wind blew out, came down to render assistance tothe party of whose encampment in the neighbourhood they had heardbefore the storm. While some remained to aid in saving the baggagefrom the encroaching Tibiscus, others led Maximin, Theodore, and theircompanions towards the village, which they said was not far off; andas they went, Theodore saw several of the new-comers sporting, as anold acquaintance, with the negro Zercon, who had returned with him.Calling the unhappy jester to him, Theodore asked who were to be theirentertainers; and a feeling of pain, as well as interest, passedthrough his bosom, when he heard that their steps were bent towardsthe dwelling of Bleda's widow."I knew not that the village was so near the river," said Theodore,"and yet I know the country well.""She dwells not where she did dwell," replied Zercon. "When gall ismingled with hydromel, we abhor the sweet drink that we used to love,and its very sweetness makes the bitter more nauseous. Scenes that wehave loved, when associated with painful memories, like honey mixedwith gall, are more repugnant to us from the remains of sweetness. Shehas never dwelt where she did dwell since her husband's death. It wasin visiting that spot, after having been hidden for many weeks, that Iwas found by the soldiers of Attila, and driven on foot to Margus."Theodore made no reply, but walked on thoughtfully by the side ofMaximin. In a few minutes they saw before them the village towardswhich their steps were bent, and the porch of the widow's dwelling,from the windows of which streamed forth many a light to guide them onthe way; and gladly the Romans approached the hospitable walls whichpromised them shelter from the inclemency of the weather.As they entered the wooden portico, the widow of Bleda, and a numberof other women, came forth to meet them, but Neva was not among therest. With a calm but somewhat sad demeanour, the widow welcomedMaximin, and his companion Priscus, and Edicon, who followed next. Butwhen her eyes fell upon Theodore she paused for a moment, and gazed onhim with a dark and melancholy look. At length the tears burst forthin large drops from her eyes; and, casting her arms round the youngRoman, whom in his illness she attended as her own child, sheexclaimed, "It was not your fault, my son! it was not your fault! Beyou welcome also!"The table was already spread for a banquet in the great hall. Threeblazing fires of odorous pine were lighted to dry the garments of theguests, and everything bespoke rapid preparations made to exercise thekindest rites of hospitality. No sooner were their vestments dry, thanlarge portions of venison, and various kinds of game from theneighbouring woods, were set before them; and while the widow stood byto see that nothing was wanting to their comfort a fair train ofgirls, followed by several slaves, came in to hand the cups of richand excellent wine, which flowed abundantly around. At their headappeared Neva, the daughter of the house. She was clad in deep graycloth, with broad furs of sable bordering her robe. Her arms, up tothe shoulders, were bare, and the snowy whiteness of her skin, besidethose dark furs, looked like Indian ivory contrasted with ebony.Theodore saw her enter with feelings of deep agitation, for he fearedlest she should be pained and grieved by the sight of him for whom shehad done and suffered so much. It would appear, however, that some onehad prepared her for his presence, for she looked not upon him whenfirst she entered, but went round with the rest, and only raised hereyes once to his countenance ere she approached him in turn. That oneglance showed Theodore that she recognised him, but was neverthelessquite calm; and when she approached him, and took a cup of wine fromone of the attendants to give it to him, she stood by his side, andlooking in his face with a melancholy smile, she said aloud, "How artthou, my brother? Art thou well after thy long journey? And hast thouseen the friends thou lovest? And are they happy?"Theodore could have wept; there was something so sad, and yet soresigned under her grief, in the tone of that fair young creature,who, if ever sorrow spared a human breast, should surely have beensheltered from the arrows of adversity. He strove against hisfeelings, however, and replied calmly, thanking her for all herkindness and all her generosity. Maximin gazed with some surprise tosee the tender interest which the family of the dead king seemed totake in his countryman, but he made no remark aloud; and retiring soonfrom the banquet, the whole party of journeyers sought repose.Weariness made most of them sleep long; but Theodore was awake and upby the dawning day. Sleep would not visit him in that dwelling; andwith the first gray light of the morning he left the chamber which hadbeen assigned him. He found Zercon the jester stretched, sleeping, ona skin at his door; and the moment the passing of the young Roman wokehim, he started up, and ran away through some of the passages of thehouse. Theodore went on into the porch and gazed out, and in a momentafter Neva was by his side."I bade poor Zercon watch for you, Theodore," she said, "because Iwished to ask you, ere you went, to wander for an hour once more withNeva in the morning woods. Will you not, my brother? I have many aquestion to ask you, and I cannot ask them here, where everybody mayhear them or interrupt them. Will you not come, my brother?""Willingly, sweet Neva," replied Theodore, still holding the hand shehad given him in his. "Let us go." And they wandered forth togetheralong a path which, winding in among the trees, turned at each step ofthe hill, showing the woody world below under some new aspect everymoment. The wind had cleared the sky, and the day was fine; but Nevaseemed more sad than on the night before. She said but little for someway as they wandered on, but asked him questions about his journey ina wild, rambling way. At length, however, with a forced smile but atrembling tone, she said, "And of course you saw your promised bride?""I did," said Theodore, "and I told her that I twice owed my life toyou, in sickness and in danger."Neva, however, seemed to take but little notice of his reply.Continuing, apparently in the same train of thought in which she hadbegun, "And did you think her very beautiful?" she said--"as beautifulas ever?""More so," answered Theodore, "far more so."Neva smiled. "May you be happy!" she said; "may you be happy!Doubtless the time since I saw you last has been a happy time to youand her, but it has been a terrible time to me and mine. You know thatthey came and slew my father, even on his couch of rest?" and shefixed her full bright eyes upon him with a look of painfulearnestness.Theodore saw that she waited his answer, and replied, "I heard so, forthe first time, three days ago, at Margus.""Did you not know it before?" she cried, eagerly. "Did no one tell ityou? Did you not know that it would be so?""Never!" answered Theodore. "How could I guess that so fearful, soterrible a deed was so near its accomplishment?""Thank God for that!" she cried; "thank God for that! That is peaceand balm indeed. But let us sit down here," she added, pausing at arocky bank, where a break in the woods snowed the country stretchedbeneath their feet, and the Tibiscus wandering in the distance--"letus sit down here, and talk over it all. Oh, Theodore! my heart hasbeen sad since I saw you. They came and slew my father in the night,and I knelt at the feet of his terrible brother and begged for hislife in vain; and afterward they said that it was for what he had doneagainst you that he was slain. I feared and fancied that you hadstirred up Attila against him, and I remembered that I had set youfree, and that I--I might thus have had a share in my father's death."She paused for a moment, terribly agitated; but, ere Theodore couldfind words to comfort her, she went on rapidly: "But think not," shesaid, "think not, for one moment, that, even had it been so, I wouldhave wished what I had done undone. I saved the innocent from thecruel death they meditated against him. I saved the good and theinnocent, and I had naught to do with the rest. Yet it was terrible,Theodore--oh how terrible!--to think that I had aided to spill myfather's blood, by saving him that I love;" and, leaning her head uponhis shoulder, she wept long and bitterly."Weep not, Neva!" said Theodore, "weep not, my sister! You did butwhat was generous and noble, and that deed had no share in yourfather's death. All my own followers but one or two had escaped when Iwas taken, and they, not I, bore to the ears of the king the tidingsof what had happened. I did nothing to provoke him against thy father;but, had I been slain, the wrath of Attila would have been stillgreater. Weep not, dear Neva!" he continued, as her tears, having oncemore burst forth, flowed on apace; "weep not!" And, holding her in hisarms, he called up every argument to console her. He held her in hisarms; he used many a tender and endearing epithet; he even pressed hislips upon her cheek; and yet no feeling but one, pure, noble, andgenerous, was in his heart at that moment. There was a being thatloved him with the most devoted affection which the human heart canfeel, clinging to him in her deep distress, weeping on his bosom,pouring out her griefs and apprehensions to his ear; and though hecould not return her love as love, yet his heart told him that hewould be ungrateful if he felt towards her otherwise than as abrother. The kiss that he pressed upon her cheek was not cold, becauseit was kindly; and the arms which encircled her held her tenderly,because gratefully: but it was with the embrace of fraternalprotection. Shame upon those who cannot comprehend such feelings! Thatkiss and that embrace seemed but to say, "Neva, you have lost yourfather, but you have yet one in the world who, if he cannot, if heought not to feel for you as you feel for him, will protect, willconsole, will sympathize with you--nay, will love you dearly,tenderly, though with but a brother's love."Neva felt that it was so. She would have started from his arms withfear had there been aught of passion in their touch; she would havefled from him for ever had there been aught of fire on his lips; butit was all kindly tenderness, and she laid her head upon his shoulderto weep as she would have done upon a brother's.After a while her tears ceased, and she looked up. "You have taken thethorn from my heart, Theodore," she said; "I shall now sleep atnights. My fancy had conjured up many strange things; for though Iknew you to be kind and generous, yet I knew you had been greatlywronged, and that the poor Arab, who had watched you with me through along, sad sickness, had been slain by my father's commands; and Ithought that, in your anger, you might have gone back to Attila anddemanded blood for blood. Then I, by saving you, might have slain myown father; and I was afraid to ask my own heart if I would not havedone so even if I had known how it was all to end. But you give mepeace by telling me that the end would have been the same, even hadyou been slain.""The end might have been worse, my sister," replied Theodore, "forAttila's wrath might have known no bounds; and besides, his angeragainst your father was of no new date. I heard him warn him monthsbefore, that the cup of his indignation was full, and that anotherdrop would make it run over. That drop was certainly the death of thepoor Arab, Cremera, but of that Attila was aware ere I reached hisdwelling after my escape, and the vengeance he took was all unasked byme.""Oh, thanks be to the gods!" replied Neva, gladly, "for I have felt asif a rock had fallen upon my heart and crushed it ever since thatthought crossed my mind. But now, Theodore, now I am happy.""And happy, entirely happy, should I too be, dear Neva," repliedTheodore, "if I could find any way of showing to you my deep gratitudeand regard. Oh, Neva, that I could be a brother to you, and protectyou against danger and sorrow, and wipe every tear away from youreyes!""And so you shall," she answered, with a smile which had still itsshare of sadness; though, as soon as the bitterness of her tears wasover, she had withdrawn herself gently from the young Roman's arms,and now sat apart. "And so you shall. You shall wed your fair bride,and I will come and dwell near you, and see your happiness, and findpleasure in it too, Theodore, and never be envious; and you will bekind to me; and she will too, I am sure, for your sake. All the timetoo, that you dwell among the Huns, I will watch for moments to helpand befriend you, so that I shall have a right to share in your regardand in hers too; and then, perhaps, the end of our days may glide byin peace. Oh, how gladly will I devote a whole life to guard and carefor you! Remember, too, your promise! Send to Neva when you need aidor counsel. Aid, strong and powerful, she can procure you even yet;counsel, if she cannot give it wisely, she can obtain from those whocan. And now let us return, my brother. You will be glad to know thatyou have made poor Neva as happy as it is possible for her to be."Thus saying, and with one of those blander and more beaming smileswhich Theodore had often seen upon her face, ere yet a grief hadshaded it, she turned and led the way down the hill. The world werenow all abroad; but she took her way on through the midst by the youngRoman's side, seemingly careless of all attempt to conceal anattachment for which she felt no shame.CHAPTER IV.THE FEAST OF ATTILA.Splendour and feasting reigned in the halls of Attila. Round theimmense hall of his cottage palace were spread tables on every side;and the wooden walls, quaintly carved and ornamented, were furtherdecorated for the festal day by large green boughs torn from the fir,the laurel, and the ilex. These, gathered together in a knot withcords of woven rushes, were fixed against the panels as high up as aman could reach; and, bending over like a plume of feathers, eachnodded above some trophy of barbarian arms, the shield, the bow, thespear, the corslet, which, tastefully grouped together, hung, notwithout poetic meaning, in the midst of the evergreens. Above allwaved a thousand banners, and between the trophies enormous torchesshed a light redder than that of day, but scarcely less bright thannoon.Below, six long tables were covered with an immense mass of gold andsilver. Cups, vases, bekers, of every form and shape, glittered onthose boards; while round about, seated at easy distances, appearedall those bold and ruthless chiefs who, under the command of a greatermind, led on the myriads of Attila to battle. There might be seenevery garb, from the furs of the extreme North to the silks and linenof the far East; and there, upon the persons of those daring leaders,blazed gems and precious stones of which the voluptuous monarchs ofPersia and of India might have been envious. There, too, were allfaces, forms, and complexions, from the small-eyed Tartar of remoteThibet to the fair-haired Northman and the blue-eyed Goth. There werethe splendid features of the Georgian and Circassian hordes; thebeautiful Alani, who brought a race of loveliness from the side of theCaucasus and the shores of the Caspian, and the hard-featured Hun, orthe frightful Ougour, glittering with jewels and precious stones abovethe unwashed filth of his native barbarism.All was splendour and pomp: cushions, of which luxurious Rome itselfmight have been proud, covered with crimson and lined with down, werespread over the seats and supported the arms of the guests; and thebright gleam of the torches was flashed back on every side from someprecious or some glittering object.In the middle of the side opposite to the windows was placed a smallwooden table bearing a single dish, formed of oak, and a cup ofwild-bull's horn: a dagger, that served for a knife, lay beside thedish, and a drawn sword of enormous weight stretched across the table.That table, with a seat of plain, unadorned whitewood, was placed forthe use of the lord of all those around; and there he sat, the plaindark Hun, covered with no jewels, robed in no splendour, clad in thesimple habit of the Scythian shepherds, but with more of the monarchin his looks than gems or diadems could have given, and with theconsciousness of indisputable power sitting proud upon his toweringbrow. What were rubies or diadems to Attila? They were parcels of thedust on which he trod!At the tables on either hand sat Ardaric, king of the Gepid[ae],Valamir, king of the Ostrogoths, Onegisus, Ellac, Edicon, Maximin,Priscus, Theodore; and at tables farther off were placed Constantius,the Latin secretary of Attila, and Vigilius, the interpreter ofMaximin's embassy. Many another king and many another chief was there;and nearly five hundred guests, almost all leaders of differentnations, showed, by their different features and their differentgarbs, the extent of Attila's dominion. In the same hall, also, werecollected the ambassadors from several distant countries; and thereappeared humble envoys from Valentinian, emperor of the West, as wellas Maximin, whose coming from the Eastern empire we have alreadynoticed.Viands in profusion were placed upon the table, and delicacies ofevery kind gratified the palate of the most luxurious: rich wines, ofmany a varied sort, circled in abundance; and barbaric music, wild,but not inharmonious, floated through the hall, mingling with, but notinterrupting, the conversation of the guests. A multitude of slavesserved the banquet with rapidity and care; and no one had cause to saythat, in the hospitality of Attila, he had been at all neglected.At length, an elevated seat was placed in the midst of the hall; andan old but venerable man, with long white hair and snowy beard, slowlyascended and took his place thereon, while an attendant handed him upa small rude harp. In a moment, all the Huns were silent, while, withcareful hand and bent down ear, he put some of the strings of hisinstrument into better tune. The next moment, he looked up for asingle instant, with the natural glance towards the sky which almostevery one uses when seeking for elevated words and thoughts; and then,running his hand over the strings, he produced a wild and somewhatmonotonous sound, to which he joined a rich, deep voice, a littletouched, perhaps, but scarcely impaired by age. It was more a chantthan a song; but every now and then the plain recitation ceased, andhe burst forth into a strain of sweet, of solemn, or of majesticmelody, as the subject of which he sung required.The matter of his song was war and glorious deeds; and though the talereferred to former times and other countries, when Ruga first led theconquering Huns to triumph over all other nations of the earth, yetever and anon, with dexterous skill, he alluded to some late exploitin which the warriors around him had had a share. The noble, recklessdaring of Ardaric, the keen, sagacious wisdom of Valamir, werementioned with loud applause; and many another had his share of fame;but still, when wonderful policy, or heroic courage, or warrior skill,required some more striking and extraordinary comparison, the deeds ofAttila still rose to the poet's tongue, and a new inspiration seemedto seize him when he borrowed his illustrations from the life of themighty man before whom he sat.While gazing upon him, as he struck the harp, with his white beardmingling with the strings, Theodore could have fancied that he beheldthe great master of the epic, singing, amid the isles of Greece, themarvellous deeds of her primeval warriors; and for the first time hecould guess what had been the enthusiasm, what the inspiring interest,with which the voice of Homer had been heard, and which, graving eachword deep on memory, had served to transmit the great first model ofthe poet's art to after ages from his own rude and early day.Breathless silence hung listening to the song, except when, on somemore powerful appeal to the passions of his hearers, a loud andapproving shout of gratulation burst upon the poet's ear. Even theslaves paused in their office; and, when the song was over--after onemoment during which not a voice was heard--some lip broke the charmedquiet with a word of applause, and one universal cry of admirationcompleted the triumph of the verse.A slave filled hastily the wine-cup for Attila, and, as the monarchrose from his seat, gave another to the bard."Father of song," said the king, "I drink unto thee--may thy handnever lose its strength, nor thy voice its sweetness, nor the footstepof time wear the memory of mighty deeds from the tablet of thy brain!"The cup was filled again, and to each of his most famous warriors,calling upon them by name, Attila drained the cup with some words ofthanks and praise. To Maximin and Priscus also he drank, and then withready celerity the slaves cleared the dishes from the table, andanother service as splendid as the first supplied its place.At every course Attila thus drank to his guests, and song and musicwent on, but not with the effect that they produced at first. Themerriment grew higher and more loud; and Attila at length despatched aslave across the hall to bid Vigilius, the interpreter of the Easternembassy, to advance and speak with him.With a bending head and air of profound reverence, the cunningByzantine approached the king. The monarch motioned him to comenearer, and then addressed him in a low tone, laying at the same timeone finger of his sinewy hand upon the blade of the naked sword thatlay beside him. What he said no one heard; but the effect upon thecountenance of Vigilius was strange and fearful. The rose at no timeflourished very luxuriantly upon his cheek, but now that cheek turnedpale as death. A green and ashy hue, something even beyond the tint ofdeath itself, spread over all his face. His eyes opened wide, his jawdropped; and both Maximin and Theodore, whose looks were fixed uponhim, thought that he must have fallen to the ground. Attila, however,bowed his head, as a signal that the interpreter might retire; andthen perceiving that he could scarcely walk, the king beckoned to anattendant, saying coldly, "Lead him back to the table, or from thehall, if he prefer it."But Vigilius returned to the table, and drank cup after cup of wine.Attila looked round to Ardaric with a meaning glance, and then he badeone of the slaves send in the jesters. A moment after, two of thosemiserable beings entered the hall, and one of those scenes of rude anddissolute merriment ensued which makes the heart ache for humannature. Laughter rang from every part of the hall; but the face ofAttila was unmoved even by a smile. He sat and heard with calm andthoughtful gravity; and though he looked round from time to time, andnoticed with careful consideration his various guests, yet it isprobable his mind was far away, occupied with more importantinterests.At length, gliding in among the slaves, who, with their busy services,occupied the greater part of the space which the tables left unfilledin the centre of the hall, appeared the boy Ernac, and took his waytowards the table at which his father sat. The first smile thatcrossed Attila's lip beamed on it as the boy appeared; and greetinghim with many a fond caress as he hung at his knee, he spoke with himfor a few moments in a low tone, with an expression which showed howthat stern heart was melted at the sight of tender youth. After awhile, lifting his eyes, he looked towards the part of the hall atwhich Theodore was seated, and at the same time spoke a few words tohis son. The boy's eyes instantly followed those of his father; andbounding away as soon as they lighted upon Theodore, he was at theyouth's side in a moment, and greeting him, with eyes radiant frompleasure, upturned towards his face, while his lips poured forth wordsof gratitude and gladness."I thought thou hadst gone away, and left us for ever," he said,"though my father said that thou wouldst return. Yet I remember, whenI lost a young wolf that I had tamed, they all told me it wouldreturn, but it never came again. It was too wise," he added, laughing,but with a gleam of intelligent light beaming from his eyes--"it wastoo wise, when it had got back to its woods and to its own way oflife, to come back to captivity and strange customs."Ardaric, who sat near, laughed at the boy's simile; and Theodore,smiling also, answered, "And so I suppose, Ernac, because we Romanssay the great founder of our city was nourished by a wolf, you thoughtI must needs follow the example of your wolf's whelp. But did itpromise you it would return before it went.""No!" answered the boy, laughing; "and you did promise my father tocome back: I know that is what you mean; and I did not intend to saythat you were wrong to keep your word. If my wolf had returned, Ishould have loved it better, even though it made no promise, becausethat would have showed it loved me.""And do you love every one who loves you, Ernac?" demanded Theodore:"if so, love me, for I love you.""And so I do, noble Theodore," answered the boy: "ungrateful shouldI be if I did not love you. I always love those who are brave andgenerous, and I shall ever love you, because you saved my life, andrisked your own to save it. So I will try in return to love you betterthan myself, and I will ask my father to make you a king insteadof me.""But would you not wish to be a king, Ernac?" demanded Ardaric. "Poweris a great thing, boy! Power and command, to a brave and wise man, arenot to be despised. Would you not wish to be a king?""Not I!" answered the boy: "I will be a chief under my father or mybrother, and lead men to battle; but I never saw that kings werehappier than other men. I would rather have some one to tell me whatto do, and to make sure that I did not do wrong, than have no one toguide me, and be obliged to blame myself every day. Even you, nobleArdaric, you are a king, and yet you come to fight under my father'sstandard, and are willing to do what he commands."A slight flush came over Ardaric's cheek; but he replied, withoutanger, "True, Ernac; but we have not every day an Attila. The wisest,and the noblest, and the bravest may be proud to obey him; but aweaker king might find a foe in Ardaric where Attila finds a friend.With pleasure we obey those that we respect, but we spurn from usthose that we despise.""That is what I mean," said Ernac: "I would sooner obey some one whomI could love and reverence, than take all the trouble of making othersrespect and yield to me. No, I would rather not be a king; but I wouldfain see Theodore a king, and striking down enemies beneath his arm ashe struck down the wild urus."Both Ardaric and Theodore smiled, perhaps to think how readily thatunambitious spirit might learn in after years the lesson of aspiring;but if they thought so they were wrong; for such as it then showeditself was the natural moderation of the young chiefs spirit; and itnever became contaminated, even in mingling in scenes of strife andcontention, where every one strove for dominion except himself.They looked up, however, at the same moment; and both remarked, astheir glances accidentally wandered over the opposite table, that theeyes of Ellac, the eldest son of Attila, were fixed upon them andErnac with a look of jealous malignity, as the boy stood by them andprattled of all his fancies.Ardaric turned to Theodore, saying, in a low tone, "Were all asmoderate as this fair boy, a bitter strife might be averted from thefuture."But as Theodore was about to answer, Maximin and the rest of theRomans rose to withdraw; and knowing to what a pitch of excess therevels of the Huns were often carried, the son of Paulinus followedhis countrymen from the hall.Late and long the intoxicating juice flowed in the banquet-chamber ofAttila; but early on the following morning Maximin was admitted to thepresence of the king, and a long audience terminated as favourably asthe Roman ambassador could wish. Even Vigilius seemed to forget thefear that some casual words of Attila had called forth; and, at theend of a few days, the envoy and his train took their departure fromthe Hunnish village, bearing with them rich presents. Several Romancaptives also had been liberated at their request; but, alas! thoughMaximin tried eagerly to persuade Attila to free Theodore from thepromise he had made to remain among the Huns, the monarch was, on thatpoint, inexorable.Some months passed by in the sports and occupations of winter, andTheodore became more and more accustomed to the manners of thebarbarous nations among which he lived. The favour of Attila towardshim was unbounded; and the commanding mind of that great conqueror wasnot without its effect upon the heart of Theodore. He became fond ofthe proximity and conversation of the Hunnish king, and felt a sort ofstrange and exciting pleasure in the vague sensation of awe with whichAttila inspired all those who approached his presence. The monarch'skindness attached him, and his greater qualities gained the youngRoman's reverence, even while the strange excess of his worse passionsmingled a degree of regret in the sensations which he felt towardshim.At the same time, the favour in which Theodore stood with Attila,though it caused him some enemies, gained him many friends andcourtiers; and kind-hearted, liberal, bold, skilful, and active,possessing all those qualities, in short, which barbarous nations mostadmire, united to the graces and accomplishments of civilized life,Theodore won the love of many for his own sake; so that the halls ofhis dwelling were far more frequently filled with the noblest andgreatest of Attila's chiefs than those of Ellac, the monarch's eldestson.At length, as spring began again to blossom over the earth, theinterpreter Vigilius once more appeared at the court of Attila,accompanied by his son. But then came forth the secret of his formerjourney, and of the words that Attila had spoken. The base intriguerwas instantly seized and brought before the king, on whose right handstood Edicon as his accuser. Around were placed the chieftains of theHunnish nation, and, in their presence, Edicon charged the interpreterVigilius with having endeavoured to seduce him, during his embassy tothe court of Constantinople, to take the life of Attila on his return.Seemingly yielding to the entreaties of Vigilius and Chrysapheus, hehad feigned, he said, to enter into all their plans; but immediatelyon reaching his native land he had revealed the whole to Attila, who,with noble magnanimity, had suffered the suborner of his subjects tocome and go unarmed under shelter of the character of Maximin theambassador, who had been kept in ignorance of the base designs ofthose who sent him. But when, after having been warned that histreachery was discovered, the interpreter dared again to show his facein the country of the Huns, bearing bribes to the officers of theking, vengeance might well be demanded, and Attila determined that theaccusation should be publicly made, and the crime fully punished.Vigilius, of course, denied his crime; but when the very purse whichcontained the bribe he brought to Edicon was laid before him, anddeath--bitter death--was awarded by the assembled chieftains, both tohimself and to the son who was the companion of his journey and thesharer of his guilt, his courage failed; and, confessing his crime,but laying the burden thereof upon the eunuch Chrysapheus, hepetitioned for life and pardon with all the eloquence of terror.Attila gazed upon him as he would upon a writhing worm in his path;and, scorning to tread on so pitiful a thing, he sent his ambassadorsto demand of Theodosius the head of the chief instigator of thetreason meditated against him. Theodosius bought the pardon of hisminions with gold wrung from his people; and Attila continued to treatwith the monarch of the Eastern empire, while he prepared to turn hisarms against the West.These things, however, have been related on an eloquent, though notimpartial page; and to that I must refer those who would go deeperinto the history of the time. This is but a story of a narrowersphere.CHAPTER V.THE LETTERS.He stood alone at the door of his dwelling, gazing forth upon thesummer sunset, as--reflected in rays of gold and rose colour from thesummits of the mountains where the snow still lingered--it spread infloods of brightness over the western sky. During the day there hadbeen in the royal village of the Huns a certain degree of silentactivity, the coming and going of messengers here and there, thefrequent gathering together in small groups, the examination of horsesand arms, and the arrival of strangers from distant lands, whichbetoken, in general, some approaching expedition. As Theodore stoodand gazed out on the splendours of the dying day, he thought that erenow, on such an evening as that, he had drank draughts of deepenjoyment from that well of sweet sensations, unpolluted nature; butyet, before the sun had risen again, the bright hopes to which thatexciting draught gave rise had been trampled, like flowers before awar-horse, beneath the feet of fate. Perhaps it was that theindications of some near-coming change, which he had beheld during theday, had occasioned such feelings, and called up such memories; but,as he stood and gazed, a slave from the dwelling of Attila approachedwith rapid steps, and put into his hand some small leaves of vellum,rolled carefully up, and tied with waxed threads."From the land of the Alani," was all that the slave said, as hedelivered them, and then departed without waiting for any questions.With a beating heart Theodore opened the packet, and, sitting down ona seat before his door, he read as long as the light of the decliningday would permit, and then entering his dwelling, concluded his taskby the lamp.THE LETTER."You have not come, oh Theodore! You have not written. And yet to comewas impossible, neither could any messenger bear me a letter hither,for the snow has lain upon the mountains deeper and more terrible thanever I thought to behold. Why, then, should I think of things thatwere impossible for you to do? It was because I longed for that whichwas impossible; it was because love would not be persuaded ofdifficulties in the way of gratification."Oh how weary have been the hours, how dull, how tedious, since youleft us to return to your barbarian home! Each moment has seemed tolinger on the way, longer and more tardily than the rest; and thewintry year, as it went along, seemed to creep with the laggard stepsof age, slowly and more slowly, as every new hour was added to theburden that it bore. Neither have the objects around me been such asto give my mind any means of withdrawing itself from that on which itdwells. The white robe of winter has covered all; clouds have hungupon the sky, and obscured the sun; the forests have disappearedbeneath mountains of snow; and the grand features of the Alpsthemselves, softened and rounded by the same monotonous covering, havelost those fine and striking forms which we looked upon and admiredtogether when you were here."During the summer, I found a thousand objects to take--no, not totake my thoughts from you, but by recalling sweet moments andbeautiful scenes which we had enjoyed together, to create a brightillusion for my heart, and make me think the past not soirretrievable, the present less painful, the future more full ofhopes. Then I could gaze over the lake, and mark the sinuosities ofthe shore, till I could have fancied myself at Salona, and mistakenthat small water, with its tiny waves, for the grander and moresplendid Adriatic. I could sit upon the little grassy promontorybeneath the clump of pines, and think of the mound of cypresses by thebanks of the Hyader; I could gaze upon the mountains, and rememberblue hills that rose between us and Sirmium; and with all, and each,and everything, one beloved idea would mingle like sunshine, givinglight and beauty to the whole, one dear form would wander by my sidethrough the world of imagination, rendering all harmonious by themusic of his voice."During the summer, I could gaze upon the flowers, I could listen tothe birds, I could taste the fresh breezy air of morning, and think ofyou. Nothing that was sweet to mine eye, nothing that was dear to myheart, nothing that was melodious to mine ear, could I see, or know,or hear without remembering you. But, since then, the whole haschanged: ere you had been gone ten days, the snow came down, coveringthe whole country round, even to our very door. The flowers are gone;the air of summer breathes no more; the birds are mute; no objectsthat we have seen together strike mine eye; no sounds that we haveloved to listen to salute mine ear; and yet, day and night I think ofyou; but not with bright hopes or roused-up memories: rather with asad and longing regret that you are not with me, to cheer the darkenedprospect, and be the sunshine of my wintry life."Oh, if it be possible, come to us soon, my Theodore; come and soothus by your presence, and direct us by your advice. There are rumoursabroad among the nation with which we dwell, which add difficulty anduncertainty to the heaviness of exile and the pain of being separatedfrom you. They say that the king of this land has offended Attila, andthat the implacable monarch threatens vengeance. All hear the tidingswith fear and horror; for his wrath is as unsparing as the breath ofthe tempest, which with one blast overthrows the weak and the strongtogether. Messengers are now sent to propitiate him, and they bearthis letter; but Heaven knows, and Heaven only, whether any excusewill be received, any atonement permitted."Come to us then, my Theodore, if you can; and if you cannot come,find means to write to us speedily; inform us what we are to expect;tell us what we ought to do, for terrible, indeed, would be oursituation, in the midst of a strange land, and of a people who, thoughkind, are but the friends of yesterday, if war were to be added to allthat is already painful in our situation."My mother says that you will warn us of any danger, and inform uswhat is the best course for us to pursue. She declares that she hasthe most perfect confidence in you, and that at the court of Attilayou will soon learn, and be able to warn us of the result. But still Iperceive that she is anxious; still I see that she sits alone, andthinks with care over the future; still I mark that she listenseagerly to every tale and rumour concerning the approaching events."Ammian is as thoughtless as ever, thinking justly and wisely when hedoes think, but seldom giving himself the trouble to reflect at all;and yet, Theodore, it is time that he should think, for every day thechange that is working itself in his form strikes me more and more;and though but a few months have passed since you saw him, I think youwould say, could you behold him now, that he has made no smallprogress towards manhood. Nevertheless, his pleasures are still aswild, as roving, as uncertain as ever; he seems to find delight onlyin perils and dangers; in the rough exercise of the mountain chase, inspringing from rock to rock, where even the mountain hunters tell himto beware, or in traversing the turbulent streams, bridged by the ice,when the footing is scarcely solid enough to bear him as he passes.Then, again, when he has roamed far and wide for many a day, he seemswearied with one kind of sport, and sits down to weave wreaths ofevergreen for Eudochia's hair, or to sing us the songs that hecomposes in his wanderings, to the tunes that he catches up from thepipe of the mountaineers, as they sit watching their flocks in somesunny spot upon the hill-side."Often, too, Theodore, when I see him and Eudochia sitting togetherwith all that fond affection which they have shown towards each otherfrom infancy, I think how strange, and yet how happy it would be, ifthe same feelings, which have sprung up in your heart and mine fromthe same childish regard, should with them also arise to bind them forever to each other. He loves her, certainly, even now, as much as heloves anything, and he has, too, the power of loving deeply,notwithstanding all his wildness."How he loved your father, Theodore! how deeply! how lastingly! Evennow, seldom a day passes but he thinks or speaks of Paulinus; andmaking his javelin quiver in his hand, longs to plunge it in thebreast of Chrysapheus."Such feelings are strange, and I know not whence they arise; yet,when I think of them, I feel as if I too could experience them withthe same intensity. If I picture to myself any one injuring you, ohTheodore! I fancy that I too could hold the dagger or cast the spear.Think you not that we ought all to have been born in the old times ofRome, when men sacrificed everything for their country, and even womenshared in the same patriotic devotion. Always, Theodore, when my mindrests upon you, I imagine you overthrowing tyrants, hurling down theTarquin, driving Appius from his polluted seat, or leading armies forthe defence of Rome; and I believe that I could have stood by yourside, have shared your dangers, consoled your cares, enjoyed yourtriumphs, or died in your defence."But whither am I wandering? Far from the present scene and presentdangers, into the wide land of imagination, to encounter the chimerasof my own brain. Dangers enough and perils now surround us, without mydreaming of others; and your Ildica will show, beloved, that she canbear with firmness, if not act with energy, in difficulties, perhaps,as great as those which her fancy paints."I will not say, Come to us, my Theodore! for that may be impossiblefor you to do; I will not say, Write! for that may be equally so; butcome if you can, write if you are able. Tell us how we ought to act,and we will do it. Show us if there be really the danger which rumourteaches us to apprehend, and say what you think the best way ofavoiding it!"My mother will not write herself, but she bids me ask, had we notbetter now accept the invitation of Valentinian, and retire to Rome?We have gold enough remaining for a long time to come, and in theWestern empire we have powerful friends--but then we are farther fromyou, beloved. Nevertheless, what you advise, that we will do."Already, one of those weary seven years of your captivity has passedaway; but oh! if I look back to the time when we parted after theterrible days we spent by the Danube, the space between seemsinterminable. Many and many a year appears crowded into that one; andyet it is vacant, filled with nothing but the tedious passing of emptyhours, absent from him I love. It is like looking over the sands ofthe desert, one long, unvaried, interminable waste, with but onebright spot of verdure in the midst of the desolation, the few shorthours that you passed with us during the autumn. Blessed and happy,indeed, are those hours, ever embalmed in memory. They were in theirpassing a dream of delight, and now, even in recollection, they serveas an antidote to all the cares and sorrows of the present!"Yet those seven years will reach their end: and I shall see youagain, and once more lean my head upon your bosom, and hear yourvoice, and tell you all my thoughts. Let them fly, let them flyquickly, though they may be taken from the brightest season of ourlife; yet if the spring be without sunshine, well may we long for thesummer. Farewell!"Theodore pressed the letter to his lips, to his heart. Her hand hadtouched it, her spirit had dictated it: and the very sight of thosebeloved characters was balm to his bosom. The news she told, however,was painful; the danger that she apprehended great, if the rumours onwhich her fears were raised had themselves any foundation in truth.Without hesitation, Theodore took his way at once to the dwelling ofAttila, and was admitted to the presence of the king.The monarch's brow was gloomy, but he received the Roman youth withtenderness. "What wouldst thou, my son?" he said. "Thou hast hadletters, I find, from the land of the Alani. Do they bear thee goodtidings? Thy face is sad.""They say that the chiefs of the Alani fear the wrath of Attila,"replied Theodore, boldly."They have cause!" answered the monarch, sternly--"they have cause!but, if thou wouldst send any letters back, prepare them quickly, forby to-morrow's noon the messengers return, and some of mine ownaccompany them.""I would fain ask a boon," replied Theodore, anxiously. "In the landof the Alani, as thou well knowest, oh mighty monarch, I have thosewhom I love better than life itself. If thine arms, victorious as theyever have been, are now destined to be turned against the Alani, Iwould fain visit those dear friends, and provide for their safety.They are but women and children, and cannot protect themselves.""Thou canst not go, my son," replied Attila. "Thou goest with mewherever my steps are directed. Thus have I resolved for thy sake, aswell as for mine own. When last thou wert absent, dangers, andwellnigh death, befell thee! The same may occur again. Bleda is dead;but even for thy sake Attila could not slay a son. Thou understandestwell that which I mean. While thou art with me, thou art safe; butamong distant tribes, such is not the case. There, thy death might beaccomplished without leaving a trace to tell me how. I know not yetwhether the Alani are to be crushed as a swarm of wasps, or hived asbees. It depends upon themselves. Let them obey Attila, and they aresafe; but, at all events, I go towards the western seas; and thoughItaly will not be visited, some of my hosts may sweep the mountains asthey advance. It were better that they were not encountered bywomen--women such as these, who, I have heard from those who went withthee thither, are exceeding beautiful. Bid them remove to some otherland. They dare not, I think you tell me, return to Illyria on accountof the base, weak Theodosius; but, if thou wilt, I will issue mycommands to that throned slave to receive them with friendship andfavour. He dare not disobey!""Thanks, oh great king!" replied Theodore; "but willingly we will nottread that land again so long as he is emperor. Valentinian, however,in the West, offers them peace and protection. Thither will I sendthem, if, indeed, I may not see them ere they go. I fear not anydanger to myself.""It must not be," said Attila, in a tone that left no reply. "Thoumust go with me; but I promise thee that, this expedition over, thoushalt have permission to visit them in that great pile of stones whichyou Romans call the capital of the world, and shall abide with themlonger than thou didst before. In Rome thou wilt be safe; but I couldnot trust thy life in barren mountains and passes which would defy oursearch. The word of Attila is given: thou shalt visit them in Rome!and my promise, like thine, my son, can never be violated.""I thank thee, oh Attila," replied Theodore--"I thank thee, and feelthat thou art generous. So they be safe and free from harm, I amcontent to abide with thee.""They shall be safe," replied Attila; "for my messengers toValentinian shall command him to respect them as the children of hismaster; and the Alani shall have orders to guard them on their journeyinto the Roman state. Now hie thee hence and write thy letter--a wearytask, I should think it! What need have men with letters? Was notspeech enough? But they must still add to what the gods give them; andall their additions do but spoil Heaven's gifts."Theodore took his leave and withdrew; and going back to his dwelling,he called one of his attendants, saying, "Haste thee to Constantius,the Roman secretary of the king; ask him to send me parchment, andreeds, and ink, or, if he have no vellum, let him send papyrus."The materials for writing were soon brought to him; and sitting downby the fresh-trimmed lamp, Theodore spent the next four hours of thenight in pouring forth to Ildica all the feelings of his heart.THE REPLY."I have not come, oh dearest, and most beautiful, I have not sent,because to do either was impossible; and even now, my prayer has beenrefused, when I petitioned Attila to let me go, in order to guard theefrom difficulty and danger. He gives me the means, however, of sendingthee this letter; and although it will soon cause the distance betweenus to be increased, yet gladly and eagerly do I seize the opportunityof bidding thee fly from the land of the Alani ere it become dangerousfor thee to tarry. Fly, my Ildica; bid our mother fly as speedily asmay be; for although the anger of Attila towards the nation with whomthou dwellest may be appeased, yet the myriads of the Huns are armingfor some distant expedition, and he himself has said that a part ofthe host take their way by the Norican Alps. On their course is dangerand destruction; and even where they come as friends, perils notsmall, to all whom they approach, precede and accompany their march."Oh that I could be with thee, to guide and guard thy footsteps! Ohthat I could be with thee, to shelter thee in my arms from everydanger and from every injury! But it must not be: and I must bid theego farther from me, leave the calm retreat where, even in exile, wehave known together some of our brightest hours of uninterrupted joy,and plunge into the crowd of a wide, vicious, luxurious city, wherethousands will strive to efface the memory of the absent from thyheart; where thousands will strive to win the hand that has beenpromised unto me; where thousands will deem thy beauty and thy loveprizes to be won by any means, conquests to be made by any falsehood."Yes, my Ildica, thou must fly to Rome; and yet I bid thee do sowithout one fear that any thought or any feeling of her I love will beestranged from me by absence, that her affection will be diminished byany art of others to win it for themselves, or that her heart will notbe as wholly mine when next we meet as when last we parted. If I knowmy Ildica aright, and judge not Rome too harshly, the capital of theempire will be but a wide desert to her, who has no feelings in commonwith its degenerate and voluptuous inhabitants. Ravenna itself wouldbe worse; and I grieve that it is so, for my Ildica's sake, knowingwell that, even were the best and the brightest of other daysassembled round her, they could not steal one feeling of her heartfrom the first grateful object of her young but steadfast love."Go, then, to Rome, my Ildica! and, amid the best of those who stillremain, thou mayst, perhaps, find some who will cheer thine hoursduring our separation, some whose example and advice may be necessaryand salutary, both to Eudochia and to Ammian. Long, I fear, alas! toolong, will be that separation; for although Attila has fixed a time atwhich I may once more fly to see thee, yet that time is named as theend of the expedition on which he is now about to set out; and it isonly in the knowledge of one all-seeing Being how long that expeditionmay continue, or whither it may lead."Still, however, it is a bright hope, a hope that will cheer me andconsole me, though it may make the day seem long and the hours flyheavily, till they dwindle down to the moment of my glad departure. Ofwhat may intervene, I will think the best: dangers may happen, sorrowsmay befall; but I will not anticipate either the one or the other, andwill only think that every hour which passes only serves to bringnearer the time of our reunion."What I most fear is, that the arms of Attila are about to be turnedagainst some part of our native land; for where, indeed, could he leadhis hosts, without meeting some portion of the Roman empire? Hedemands, too, that I should accompany him; but be assured, sweetestIldica, that the hand of Theodore will never be armed against the landof his fathers; and though, as a Roman, I feel that I should bejustified in striking to the earth the head of a tyrant, or of atyrant's favourite, by whom my father was unjustly doomed to die,there is a difference between the country and its oppressor. I mightbe a Brutus, but I would never be a Coriolanus. If I go with Attila,and if his arms are turned against the empire, I may go as a spectatorto the war; but let it be remembered--and oh, Ildica, make it known,wherever a Roman ear will listen--that I go against my will, and as acaptive; that I leave my sword behind me in these wars; that my shieldis hung up by the hearth I leave in this barbarian land; and that, ifI fall amid the events which may now ensue, I fall without dishonor."Let me turn, now, to sweeter thoughts; let me think of some dearertheme. I have dreamed, I have fancied, that after this expedition isover, perchance Attila may abridge the period of my captivity, andpermit me to return, and at the altar of our God claim my Ildica as myown for ever. Oh, beloved! how my heart beats even when I think ofthat hour, when I think of the moment that shall make thee mine--minebeyond the power of fate itself--mine through life and througheternity--united unto me by bonds that nothing can sever--wife of mybosom--mother of my children--one, one with me in every thought, inevery feeling--in hopes, in fears, in joys and sorrows, one! Oh,Ildica! what were heaven itself, could we but think that dear bond,that tie which binds the soul itself, could be burst even by the handof death. Oh, no! I will not believe it, that even in another life Ishall not know, and see, and love thee still; that purified, perhaps,and elevated, calmed down and tranquillized from the agitating firethat thrills through every vein when I but think of thee, the sameintense affection which I now feel shall not survive the tomb, andbecome one of the brightest parts of a brighter state of being. Yes,Ildica, yes, it shall be so! Those who doubt it know not what love is;for oh, surely, if there be feelings in this life at all that deserveto be immortal, it is those which would make us sacrifice life itself,and all that life can give, for another."Thou thinkest of me, Ildica; yes, I know thou thinkest of me. Myheart is a witness for thine, that not an hour of the dull day passeswithout some thought of those we love; and it is strange, oh, howstrange! that out of objects which have no apparent connexion withsuch images, the idea of her I love is brought before my mind, and myheart, like the bee, draws the honey of those sweet associations fromeverything it finds. If, when hunting in the neighbouring woods, thesweet breath of the wild cherry blossom is wafted past me by the wind,the image of Ildica, I know not why, rises up instantly before myimagination; and every sweet perfume of the odorous flowers seems togain an additional fragrance from the associations that they call up.If the singing of the spring birds strike mine ear, do not the tonesof that dear voice come back upon memory, and thrill through my inmostheart? Everything is lost in thee; nothing that I admired, or loved,or delighted in before, seems now to have any separate existence in myeyes, but is all beheld with some reference to her I love."Oh, Ildica! do we not love each other better for all the anxietiesand cares which have surrounded the first days of our affection? Ifso, let us not regret them, for they have been stern but kind-heartedfriends, who may have chastised our youth, but have left us aninestimable treasure ere they departed: yes, inestimable, indeed, forthere are gems to adorn existence as well as to ornament the body; andthe brightest of all the diamonds of the heart's treasury is love suchas I feel for thee."Tell Flavia that I love her as her son; and tell her all I feel forthee. It will be more pleasant unto her ear than aught I could sayunto herself. Bid her not mourn more than needs must be to return toRome--the city which she knew in days of happiness--now that so muchof that happiness has passed away. Bid her cheer herself with hope,for the clouds are beginning to break away; and the sun may soon shineonce more, if not for her as bright as ever, yet with a tranquilsplendour that will refresh her heart."Cast thine arms round Eudochia, and kiss her with love for herbrother's sake, telling her how deeply and bitterly he regrets that heis not permitted to guard her youth, and foster her beauty and hervirtues, till a husband's hand took from his own the task. GreetAmmian, too, with love, telling him that he must curb his wild spirit,and keep all his courage and all his energies to protect those whomGod has placed under his charge, and left without other safeguard."One word more, my beloved, to end this long epistle. Doubt not thatat Rome you will find protection; for you have it from one whom youhave seen, but hardly know--from one so mighty, however, that, alas!experience shows, even Rome herself must tremble at his frown. Attilaprotects you; and unto Valentinian he has sent a message to respectyou and yours as if you were his children. The weak and corruptmonarch that Rome must obey dare as soon neglect this warning as fallupon his sword. The Alani, too, have orders to conduct you safely tothe Roman territory. Oh that every step should thus bear you fartherfrom me!"As I cannot see thee, as I cannot embrace thee, I would willinglywrite to thee for ever. But it must come to an end. Farewell, sweetIldica! farewell, my beloved! Remember me still, as heretofore! Loveme ever! Love me as well as I love thee! I ask--I can have--no betterlove. Farewell, again and again farewell!"CHAPTER VI.THE BATTLE.We must pass over the events of some months, and change the scene tothe heart of France.In the vast plains between the Seine and the Marne, where the eye canroam unobstructed over many a mile of open country, runs a brook ofthe clearest water, which, wandering on through vineyard andcornfield, joins the latter river not far from Soulanges.At the time I speak of, however, no corn spread over that wide plain,no vines obstructed the progress of the eye, and nothing but thin lowgrass, which had sprung up where wheat and oats had been cut down orburnt, covered the brown surface of the earth with a robe of autumnalgreen. A wanderer, who stooped down to bathe his weary brow in thatrivulet, had gazed, before he bent his head, upon the wide scenebefore his eyes, and over the whole plain not a living creature wasseen to move. A raven winged its slow flight across the sky, but thatwas the only sign of life which the keenest eye could discover. Whenthe wayfarer raised his head, however, and gazed again, a brown shadowseemed to lie upon the land near the horizon, and, mounting upon thebase of a ruined landmark, he saw that dull shade creeping onwardtowards him. He looked up to the sky to see if it were a cloud, which,borne by the wind, might interrupt the light of the sun; but over thewhole heaven was spread a thin, filmy vapour, which intercepted allthe stronger rays.He gazed again, and the shadow seemed to assume the form of a widerange of heathy bushes blown about by the air. Still the cloudadvanced, and gradually spreading, like a high wave, seen rushing in along bending line over the shore, it came forward across the plains,stretching out as far as the eye could reach. Distinct and moredistinct at length the brown masses raised themselves above the earth,and in the end innumerable horsemen might be seen advancing with aslow pace from the westward. A cry of terror burst from the wearywanderer, and he fled as fast as his limbs would bear him. Ere half anhour had passed, the war-horse of Attila pawed the ground beside thefallen landmark, and the myriads of the Huns spread out over all theplain."Let the ground before me be cleared," cried the king; and then,poising his javelin above his head, he cast it forward with prodigiousforce. A hundred cubits farther than any other arm could throw, itstill sang on through the air, then touched the earth, and quivered inthe ploughed-up ground."There pitch my tent," continued Attila; "there fix our camp. Turn allfaces back towards the west, for Attila has retreated far enough, andhere we have space to wheel our horses on the foe. Oh Theodoric!Theodoric! thou hast deceived and betrayed thy friend. I offered tomake thee a king indeed, instead of a puppet in the hands of Rome; but[AE]tius with his loud promises, and Avitus with his fair flattery,have seduced thee to the side of Attila's enemies, and, ere two daysare over, either he or thou must die. Had it not been for thee and thyGoths, the Romans of Gaul, like the Romans of the East, had been nowcrouching in trembling terror at the feet of Attila. But they shallstill tremble! Shall it not be so, oh Valamir? Will not thy subjectsdie their hands in the blood of their degenerate kinsmen? Shall it notbe so, Ardaric? Will not thy Gepid[ae] smite the heads of the vainloquacious Franks? Attila will beard the Roman, and even here shall bethe spot. Make the camp strong, and let no one sit apart from therest. Let the wagons be placed around, and the spaces beneath themfilled up, and leave no entrance but one; for if we destroy not thisRoman army in the field, we will wait it in our camp, and by the headof my father I will not leave the land till it is dispersed. Bid thewise men and the diviners sacrifice, and consult the bones of theslain, that I may know what will be the event of to-morrow. Tell themthat we fight, even if we die. Let them speak the truth, therefore,boldly. Ha! Theodore, my son, ride hither with me."The young Roman spurred on his horse at the monarch's command, androde on beside him while he surveyed the field. Theodore, however, wasnot armed, and he only feared that Attila might be about to ask himsome question in regard either to the Roman discipline or thearrangements of his own troops for battle, to answer which he mightfeel incompatible with his duty to his country. But Attila, as heproceeded, gave directions to the various leaders who followed him,interrupting, from time to time, for that purpose, his conversationwith the young Roman, which turned to a very different theme."Those diviners," he said, "I have no trust in them. Would that we hadhere that holy man from the mountains beyond the Tessa! Then shouldwe have some certainty in regard to the result of to-morrow's battle.Dost thou know, my son, what are the means which the Christian augursuse to learn the future as they do? Valamir, my friend," he continued,turning to the King of the Ostrogoths, "seest thou yon mound, the onlyone which interrupts the eye as it wanders towards the east. Thoughthat mound be scarcely bigger than a great ant-hill, much may dependupon it--even the fate of the battle," he added, in a low voice. "Wewill range our host along this brook, at the distance of two hundredcubits; the hill will be before us, but let it be seized ere thestrife commences. Say, Theodore, knowest thou how the Christian augursare accustomed to divine?""The Christians have no augurs, oh Attila!" replied Theodore. "Therehave been, and there are, prophets among them to whom is revealed byGod himself some of the events that are to come.""That is but a pretence," answered Attila. "We judge by the bones ofthe victims, other nations by their entrails. Some divine by the sand,some by the lightning, some by the flight of birds; but all who haveany knowledge of the future gain it from some manifest sign. So mustit be with the Christian augurs; but they conceal their knowledge,lest others should learn it and be as wise as they are. Ardaric, myfriend and wise counsellor, place thyself early upon the right. Thouwilt never fly nor bend, I know, but let us all be calm in the hour ofbattle. Let not rage and rashness make us forget that victories are asoften won by calm and temperate skill as by impetuous daring. Lo!yonder come the Romans! I would fain that they should not live anothernight on the same earth with Attila; but it is too late to destroythem to-day. I will not look upon them, lest I be tempted overmuch.What say the diviners?" he continued, turning to an attendant who camerunning up from a spot where a large fire had been hastily lighted."I know not, mighty king!" replied the slave; "but the sacrifice isover, and they come to seek thee."Attila paused, and waited, while a crowd of Huns and slaves, all eagerto hear the announcement, came forward, accompanying the diviners.They, unlike the Roman augurs of a former time, were dressed in nograceful robes; but, covered simply with the rude garments of theScythians, they were only distinguished from the rest of the Huns by awilder and fiercer appearance. As they came near, however, Attiladismounted from his horse; and the diviners approaching with lessreverence than the rest of his people displayed towards him, the elderof the party addressed him boldly."Hear, oh Attila!" he said--"hear what the gods pronounce by the bonesof the victims! Of the result of the battle we know nothing, andtherefore we cannot promise you the victory; but we know that theleader of your enemies shall die in the strife. To-morrow's sun shallrise upon him living, and set upon him dead. We have spoken what weknow.""[AE]tius shall die, then!" said Attila. "So let it be! But canye say nothing farther! Can ye not tell which will be successful into-morrow's strife!""We had no answer," replied the diviner, with a gloomy look; "the godsleft it doubtful.""They left it to our own valour, then!" cried Attila, in a voice oftriumphant confidence. "Our hearts and our arms shall make it nolonger doubtful. Lo! yon Romans still advance over the plain. Theymust not come too near us. Ardaric, let thy Gepid[ae] recross thestream, and ensure that the enemy do not approach within a hundredbowshots. Theodore, wouldst thou leave me, my son?" he added, seeingthe young Roman's eyes turned with a look of natural interest upon theadvancing legions of [AE]tius--"wouldst thou leave me, my son? If so,Attila gives thee leave to go. I fear not that there should be onebrave man added to yon mighty host of cowards. I have saved thy life,I have loved thee well, I have treated thee as my child; but if thouwouldst leave Attila at such a moment as this, thou shalt go inpeace."Theodore sprang to the ground and kissed the hand of the monarch. "Iwill not leave thee, oh Attila!" he said--"I seek not to leave thee,and of all times I would not leave thee now. Fight against my nativeland I cannot; but through to-morrow's field I will ride unarmed bythe side of Attila, and defend him, as far as may be, from everydanger in the strife. I am grateful, oh mighty king! for all yourfavours: I love you for all your kindness and all your noblequalities; and doubt me not, I beseech you, for though I fight not onyour part, none will be more faithful to you than I will. Oh, doubt menot!""I do not doubt you," answered Attila; "but let us to our camp."Difficult were it to describe, impossible to convey any adequate ideaof the scene of tumult, din, and confusion which the camp of the Hunspresented during that night. The circle of wagons placed in a doublerow, and forming in reality a strong fortification, was nearlycompleted, when Attila led the way thither, and turned his stepstowards his own tent. Fastened to strong stakes driven into the groundbetween the inner wheels, the wagons were immoveable from without, buteasily turned or withdrawn from within; and embracing an immenseextent of ground, they afforded space for the mighty host which Attilahad led into the plains of Gaul.During that night, and comprised in a space of a few miles, more thana million of human beings, either in the Hunnish or the Roman army,prepared for battle and panted for carnage. No still quiet followed inthe train of night: the blows of the hammer and the mallet, theringing of armour, the voices of guards and commanders, the tramp ofthousands passing to and fro, the murmur of innumerable voices, theloud and ringing laugh, the war-song shouted high and strong, thesounding of trumpets and of wild martial music, the neighing ofseveral millions of horses,[1] raised a roar through the whole air, inthe midst of which the sounds of an accidental conflict that tookplace between the troops of Ardaric and those of Theodoric, the Gothically of [AE]tius were scarcely heard; though so fierce was thestruggle for the bank of the rivulet, that fifteen thousand men wereleft dead within a stone's throw of the Hunnish camp.---------------[Footnote 1: The armies of Attila were always followed, we are told,by an immense number of spare horses, besides those which bore hiswarriors and those which were attached to the wagons.]---------------Thus passed the night; and early on the following morning Attilaappeared at the door of his tent, and was soon surrounded by thedifferent leaders of the nations under his command. His countenancewas serene and bright; and the attendants who had passed the night inhis tent declared that he had slept as calmly as an infant, from themoment that he lay down his head to rest to the moment that he woke tobattle. Calmly and tranquilly he asked the tidings of the night; and,in a brief conversation with the leaders, assigned to every one hisproper post, and pointed out the great objects to be striven for inthe coming conflict. Towards the third hour after daybreak, one of thewatchers before the camp of the Huns announced that they saw movementsin the Roman camp; and Attila, instantly springing on his horse, ledforth his troops himself through the single aperture which had beenleft for that purpose. Two hours more elapsed ere the whole of thatmighty host were in array; but then to any eye looking along over thewide plain, strange and fearful must have been the sight, yet grandand magnificent.On one side of that little brook, running pure and clear between thosehostile armies--like the bright stream of divine love, pouring on itsrefreshing waters of peace amid the strife and turbulence of humanpassions--stretched forth the host of Attila, nearly seven hundredthousand horsemen from every land and every nation of the North.There, in the centre, under his own immediate command, appeared thedark line of dusky Huns, little embarrassed with defensive armour, butbearing the strong and pliant bow upon their shoulders, and at theirside the quiver, loaded with unerring arrows; the large heavy sword,too, was in the hand of each, and at many a stirrup of the wildertribes hung, as an ornament, a gory human head. Far on the rightappeared the Gepid[ae], fairer in complexion, more bulky in limb, andmore splendid in arms and apparel, but generally reputed less active,less fierce, and less persevering than the Huns. On the left, again,were seen the Ostrogoths, tall, fair, and powerful; and theintervening spaces were filled up with a thousand barbaroustribes--the Rugi, the Geloni, the Heruli, the Scyrri, Burgundians,Turingians, and those called the Bellonoti. A thousand tongues werespoken in that host, a thousand varieties of face and garb were seen,but all were actuated by the same feelings--hatred to the Romans, andreverence for the mighty Hun.On the other side of the brook, again, appeared, not less in number,and not less various in appearance, the vast army which [AE]tius hadcollected from the different nations that inhabited Gaul; thelong-haired Frank, the blue-eyed Goth, the sturdy Armorican, thepowerful but doubtful Alan; and there, upon his right, appearedTheodoric, the wise and valiant monarch of the Visigoths, with hiswhite hair, speaking the passing of many a careful year, and his threegallant sons, ready to obey, with the activity of youth, thosedirections which the wisdom of his age might dictate. In the centrewere placed all the more doubtful allies of the Roman empire, mingledwith such as might act as a check upon their wavering faith. On theleft of the line appeared the Roman eagles, under the command of[AE]tius in person. There, too, might he be seen, in the eyes of thewhole army, riding from rank to rank, and with bold and cheerful wordsencouraging his soldiers, and exciting them to great exertion. Smallin person, but graceful, well proportioned, and active, with the lionheart of the hero and the eagle glance of the great general, the wholeaspect of [AE]tius breathed courage and inspired energy. Wherever herode, wherever he appeared, a cheerful murmur greeted him; and when atlength he galloped his splendid battle-horse along the line, and,riding up to Theodoric, embraced the old chieftain without dismountingfrom his charger, a loud and universal shout burst from the army, andseemed to the ears of the Romans a presage of victory.Calm, grave, and immoveable sat Attila upon his black charger, astone's throw before the line of the Huns. On him every eye in his ownhost was turned; and in that moment of awful suspense which precedesthe closing of two mighty powers in the first shock of battle, thebarbarian myriads seemed to forget the presence of their Romanadversaries in the intense interest with which they regarded theirterrible leader. Armed, like themselves, with a bow upon his shoulderand a sword in his hand, Attila sat and gazed upon his forces, turningfrom time to time a casual glance upon the Romans, and then lookingback along the far extending line of Huns, while a scarcelyperceptible smile of triumphant anticipation hung upon his lip.He sat almost alone, for his nearest followers and most faithfulfriends remained a few paces behind; while, with that stern, proudglance, he ran over his often victorious bands, and seemed waitingwith tranquil confidence for the approaching strife. At length, allseemed prepared on every side, and the stillness of expectation fellupon the field. It continued till it seemed as if all were afraid tobreak it, so deep, so profound grew that boding silence.Slowly turning his horse, Attila rode back towards the centre of theHunnish cavalry, and then, with a voice so clear, so distinct, sopowerful, that its deep rolling tones are said to have reached eventhe Roman lines, he exclaimed, "Unconquerable race, behold yourenemies! I strive not to give you confidence in me or in yourselves.Here is no new leader, no inexperienced army. Well do you know howlight and empty are the arms of the Romans. They fly not with thefirst wound, but with the first dust of the battle! Fearing to meetyou unsupported, and remembering that where Romans have encounteredHuns the Romans have fallen like corn before the reaper, they havecalled to their aid degenerate tribes, who have taken shelter in thevicious provinces of Rome, after having been expelled from among thenative Goths, from the Gepid[ae], the Heruli, the Alani. These, whomwe have driven from among us--these, weak, corrupted, degraded as theyare--form the bulk, supply the strength, afford the courage of thearmy before you. Behold them as they stand! are they not as one oftheir own fields of corn, which we have a thousand times trodden downbeneath our horses' feet? We are no weak husbandmen, that we shouldfail to reap such a harvest as that. On, warriors, on! Pour on uponthe Alani! Break through the degenerate Goths! At the sound of ourhorses' feet, the Roman eagles, as is their custom, will take wing andfly; and yon dark multitude shall disappear like the mist of themorning! Why should fortune have given unto the Huns innumerablevictories, if not to crown them all with this successful day? On,warriors, on! Drink the blood of your enemies! Let the wounded, indying, strike his javelin through his foe, and no one dare to die erehe have brought a Roman head to the ground. I tread before you the wayto victory; and if any one follow not Attila, he is already dead!"A loud acclamation burst from the nearer ranks, and ran along all theline of the Huns, while even those who had not heard poured forththeir own clamorous applause of the words which they fancied had beenspoken; and the clang of arms dashed violently together, mingled withthe deafening shout that rose up from the barbarian host."Seize on yon hill, Valamir!" cried Attila, while the roar continued:"it should have been done before."The monarch of the Ostrogoths hastened to obey; but scarcely had histroops been put in motion, when a corresponding movement was seen uponthe part of the Romans; and the terrible strife of that day--the mostfierce, the most sanguinary that Europe ever has seen--was commencedby the struggle for that low hill, between the two rival tribes ofGoths.For a time the rest of both armies remained unmoved, as if spectatorsof the combat; but rage and emulation increased in their bosoms everymoment as they gazed, and at length it became impossible for theleaders on either part to restrain in their troops the burning thirstfor battle. On poured the Huns upon the Romans: on rushed the Romanson the Huns. The whirling masses of the Scythian horsemen, envelopedin a cloud of dust, from which shot forth a hail of arrows, passedthrough and through the ranks of the enemy, casting themselves in vainupon the firm legions of [AE]tius, scattering the Franks and theSicambres, sweeping down whole ranks of the Alani and the Goths. On,in heavy line, with their long spears lowered, poured the multitude ofthe Gepid[ae], bearing slaughter and confusion wherever they came.But still Theodoric and his Goths maintained the hill; still [AE]tiusand his legions fought unconquered on the plain; still the Franks andthe Alani, knowing that valour could alone save them, continued thecombat against the Huns. Hour after hour passed by; rank after rankwas mowed down; the rivulet, late so pure and clear, flowed onward oneunmingled stream of blood; and the feet of the Hunnish horses, as theycharged again and again the confused but unsubdued masses of theRomans, splashed up a gory dew from the pools that lay unabsorbed uponthe loamy soil. So great, so terrible was the slaughter, that thehorses could scarcely keep their feet among the bodies of the dead anddying. Each waving sword dismissed some erring spirit to its lastaccount; each footfall trampled on the writhing limbs of some mangledfellow-creature.In the foremost ranks of battle, wherever danger was pre-eminent,wherever the foes remained unbroken, wherever the carnage was mostintense, there was seen Attila; and wherever he appeared, there forthe time was victory obtained. Through the whole of that day, too,Theodore was by his side; and for the second time he saw upon him whathis followers not unaptly called "the spirit of the battle." Thoughprompt and clear in every command, keen and ready to seize everyadvantage, the calm and moderate sternness of his demeanour was gone;and, fierce as the lion of the wilderness, rapid as the leven bolt ofheaven, remorseless and unsparing as the hurricane, he swept on. Noone stood before him for an instant; no one was struck a second time;but, wherever an adversary crossed his path, there was left, at asingle blow, a disfigured corpse upon the ground, or else his horse'sfeet trampled out the faint sparks that his sword had left.Death seemed to march before him against his enemies, nor ever turnedto approach himself; and only twice, when surrounded almost on everyside by the foe, could Theodore interpose to parry with an irontruncheon, which was the only weapon that he bore throughout the day,the blows of a spear and a javelin, which were aimed at the monarch'sthroat. The young Roman knew not that he had seen the servicerendered; but at length, when the day was far spent, Ellac, his eldestson, crossed the path of the monarch, saying, "Ride not in the battlewith the Roman, oh my father! He is of the country of our enemies, andmay kill thee when thy back is turned. Let me slay him even now, lestthe traitor destroy thee!""He has saved my life twice this day!" cried Attila, urging forwardhis horse. "Out of my way!" he continued, seeing that his son stillstood before him. "Out of my way! or, by the god of battles, I willsend thee to the land of spirits! Out of my way!" and he raised hissword over his son's head as if about to cleave him to the jaws.Ellac saw that the moment was not his; and, reining back his horse, hesought another part of the field, while Attila pursued his career, andstrove, but strove long in vain, to obtain possession of the hill. Atlength, as the closing day waxed faint and dim, and the gray shade ofevening falling over the whole bloody scene, announced that the battlemust soon close or be prolonged into the night, Attila for a momentgained the summit of that long-contested eminence, and slew with hisown hand the last of the Gothic warriors, whose especial charge hadbeen to defend that post. Up to that instant he had rushed on like adevouring flame, leaving nothing but ashes behind him; but there hesuddenly paused, gazed forth upon the confused and mingled masses ofthe Huns and Romans, that, with equal success, and very nearly equalnumbers, were seen spread over the plain for many miles around. Hethen lifted his eyes towards the sky, marked the dim gray that mingledwith the blue, and the bright star of evening betokening that thebrighter sun was gone; and with a sudden calmness said, in a low,tranquil voice, "It is too late for victory to-night! It is too late!Let the trumpets be sounded!" he continued, to some of those whofollowed--"let the trumpets be sounded, to recall all men to the camp!Gather together the ten nearest squadrons upon this slope! The Romans,I think, have had enough of strife to-day, and will not seek itfurther; but they have fought well for once, and Attila must defendhis own, while they seek a place of repose for the night."He added some further orders; and in a few minutes was heard, from theHunnish camp, the sound of trumpets, giving forth the peculiar notesof recall with which the Huns and other barbarous nations wereacquainted; and, separating themselves gradually but securely from themasses of the Romans, the various tribes which had followed Attila tothat bloody battle were seen moving, in firm and regular order,towards their camp.What would have been the result of this movement under othercircumstances, it is difficult to say, had the eye of [AE]tius markedthe proceedings of the Huns, or the mind of Theodoric directed themovements of the enemy; but trampled under the horses' feet, not farfrom the spot where Attila then sat, lay the disfigured body of theGothic king, and the Roman general was far away, embarrassed with aparty of the Gepid[ae], by whom he had nearly been taken.The inferior commanders of the Roman host gladly perceived that abattle, of which they were beginning to despair, was not entirelylost; and seeing the dark cloud of Huns, with which Attila on the hillcovered the man[oe]uvres of his troops, they dared not act any veryvigorous part, with thinned and exhausted troops, against so bold andwell-prepared an enemy. The trumpets of Attila continued to sound fortwo hours after nightfall: his forces entered the camp unmolested, andthe last of the host who left the battle-plain was the monarch of theHuns himself.[2]---------------[Footnote 2: Such I believe to be the real history of this famouscontest. We derive all our knowledge of the particulars from the Gothsand Romans, as the Huns were not historians, or, at least, did notwrite their own version of the events in which they were engaged. Evenin the present age, when both parties do not scruple to render theirpretensions to success on such occasions permanent, how often do wesee a battle lost claimed by the loser as a battle won! and, ofcourse, it is more likely to have been so when there was no checkfound in a counter statement. The historians, however, suffer one ortwo important facts to appear, which prevent us from believing that[AE]tius and Theodoric obtained a victory over Attila on the presentoccasion. In the first place, it is clear that the immense Roman andGothic army dispersed itself immediately after the battle in whichTheodoric was killed. Reasons have been assigned for this proceeding,which are in themselves improbable and unsatisfactory; but which, whencoupled with the fact that Attila afterward sacked Langres andBesanon, and with the strong reasons which exist for believing that[AE]tius himself retreated at once into the Lyonnaise, render thevictory of the Romans somewhat more than doubtful. It seems to me veryclear that the battle may have had an indecisive termination, but that[AE]tius, finding that the Goths and Franks could not be induced totry the fortunes of another day against Attila, retreated himself inhaste towards Italy; while Attila, whose loss had been very great,proceeded by a new road towards his own land, ravaging the country,and taking several very important towns in his way. The very words ofJornandes admit that Attila was but little depressed by the event ofthe battle, and imply that his after-march was still as in a career ofvictory. Nor is there the slightest proof, that I have been able todiscover, that [AE]tius, as some have declared, followed the monarchof the Huns even at a distance.If such were the way that the Romans and Goths employed a victory,they must have been moderate and generous indeed; and, under suchcircumstances, it might be doubtful whether they did not treat theirenemies more mildly than their friends. The character of [AE]tius isrepresented by his panegyrists on the present occasion (probably toscreen him from the disgrace of defeat) in a very singular and notcreditable point of view. He cheated both the Goths and Franks, we aretold, in order to get rid of them; and then, when left alone withAttila, escorted his great enemy quietly out of Gaul, sufferi2796ng him tosack and destroy what cities he pleased as he went. Is thisreasonable? Is this probable?]---------------CHAPTER VII.THE RETREAT."Let the dead be numbered!" said Attila, as he entered his tent--"letthe dead be numbered! I have lost many of my children! Let everychieftain of every tribe count up their numbers, and tell me how manyare wanting. We are brave men, and can look our loss in the face.Theodore, my son, I thank thee; and I give thee leave, as a Roman, torejoice that, for the first time, Attila has fought without winning avictory."Thus saying, he passed on, and Theodore turned to where his own tentswere placed. It had been a day of terrible excitement; and no man,probably, in either army, had felt such strange and contendingemotions as the young Roman, who, riding by the side of Attila throughthat terrible conflict, exerted every energy to defend the monarch'slife, and yet from his heart wished success unto his enemies. Thoughevery moment his own person had been in danger--the more, perhaps,because he sought to take the life of none himself--yet, during theday, he had not felt even that slight exciting shade of apprehensionwhich is rather pleasing than otherwise. His whole thoughts had beendivided between Attila and the Romans. He had sought most eagerly, andhe had found completely, an opportunity of proving his gratitude tothe monarch of the Huns for all the great and singular favour which hehad displayed towards him.That gratitude had indeed been great. It is true, he had discoveredthat Attila had a personal object in the first signs of forbearancewhich he had shown towards him; but Theodore was not one to scannarrowly the causes of gratitude, or to weigh it out in very fine andaccurate scales; and yet, though he would willingly have given hislife to save that of the mighty king who had protected and befriendedhim, he could not find in his heart to wish his fellow-countrymendefeated. Thus he had watched the wavering progress of the fight withan anxious and a beating heart, longing every moment to spring forwardand rally the legions when he saw them shaken, or to form again thecohorts broken by the Hunnish cavalry.The same feelings continued, and agitated him still after he hadre-entered the camp. Throughout the night a low and moaning murmurwent up from the plain between the two armies; and when Theodore,raised upon one of the wagons, gazed over that bloody field, as it layin the tranquil moonlight, he could see among the piles of dead, whichnow broke the flat line of the land, a number of objects movingslowly, and darkening, here and there, those spots where the beams ofthe calm, bright planet were reflected from heaps of corslets andshining arms. The whole camp around him, except a few solitarywarriors keeping guard, seemed now to have fallen sound asleep,wearied out with exertion, and none of the noises of the precedingnight broke the stillness of the air. Horses and men, equally tired,uttered no sound; and that low moan, not unlike the sighing of amelancholy wind, was all that interrupted the silence. As Theodoregazed, a step near him made him turn; and the next moment, mountingupon the same part of the rampart on which he had raised himself,Ardaric stood by his side, and gazed out in the same direction forsome time without speaking."What can that faint moan proceed from?" said Theodore, at length."You hear it, do you not, noble Ardaric? The stream is too small to beheard here!""I hear it well," answered Ardaric. "It is the groaning of the manywounded, I suppose, though I never listened to such a sound before.""Nor ever, probably," said Theodore, "saw such a field?""The world never has seen such till this day!" replied the King of theGepid[ae]. "The number of the dead is fearful. I alone have lostseventy thousand men: so say the leaders of the tribes. Did you notthink the enemy seemed to have suffered as much as we had at the closeof the day?""Fully!" answered Theodore. "But is it possible that the sound we hearcan proceed from the wounded and dying? It is horrible to think upon!""It may be the spirits of the unburied dead mourning over their fate,"replied Ardaric. "But what are yon moving objects? They must be eitherthe Romans come to seek for their friends, or the wounded crawlingabout among the slain. Hark, that cawing! and see, they fly up for amoment into the air! It is the ravens already at their repast. Thecarrion-eaters in all lands, the vulture, the worm, and the crow, havecause to be grateful to Attila. On yonder field, I should guess, mustlie, either dead or wounded, some half million of men. What a banquet!See, they settle again! and now some wise crow, perched upon a Romancorslet, shall peck, unreproved, the throat of one of those who usedto call themselves the masters of the world.""Cannot we go forth and aid the wounded?" demanded Theodore. "It isdreadful to think of leaving them to die.""Why so?" demanded Ardaric. "They will be at rest all the sooner.Those who had any strength left have crept into the camp long ago;those who had none are as well where they are, for neither can theyserve us nor we them. It is only a pity that those ravens are notvultures, such as we have in the East: they speedily make the dead anddying, one. But, doubtless, there are wolves here too, out of thegreat forest behind us. They will soon clear away the carrion. Ishould not wonder if that moaning, which I took for the groans of thewounded, were the well-pleased murmur of the wolves over theirunexpected feast.""Nevertheless," said Theodore, "I should much like to take a smallbody of men with me, and pick out those we can aid among the wounded.""What! and have the Romans or the Visigoths upon you, declaring thatyou were pillaging the dead!" replied Ardaric; "and then I should beobliged to go out to defend you. More Goths, more Huns would come up,and a night-battle would finish what a day-battle has so well begun.No, no, my young friend; by my counsel and good-will, not a man shallstir forth from this camp either to-night, or to-morrow, or the dayafter, so long as yon army lies before us. Our loss is nearly equalnow. We are in an enemy's country, where we cannot hope to increaseour numbers by a man: they are at home, and probably, ere to-morrow,may receive re-enforcements. Could we have crushed them in the battleof yesterday, the whole country would have been ours at once; but, aswe failed to do that, we must no longer leave them the advantages theypossess. Here, in our camp, we must await them, where our defences areas much as half a million more warriors. They cannot starve us, for wehave food enough for months, what with our horses and our cattle; andif they attack us boldly, they must be utterly defeated. No, no,Theodore, my friend, no one must leave the camp. Attila, I know, willseek to go forth and destroy them in the open plain; but all voiceswill be with me if he asks counsel of any one; and, having asked it,he will take it if we all agree. Now let us to our tents, my friend.After all, these tents are convenient things, though when we firstentered the Roman territory as enemies we had none, and despised themas idle luxuries, unworthy of a warrior. Now, not a leader among usbut has many.""So would it be, Ardaric, with every other Roman luxury," repliedTheodore. "What you contemn now, you will learn to tolerate, and atlength to like.""The gods forbid!" answered Ardaric. "Then will we cut our beards, andcall ourselves women.""The Romans have not fought like women this day, my friend," repliedTheodore."True! true!" replied the other. "A fair reproof, Theodore! They havefought well, and I did them injustice. Now, good-night, and sleep youwell. I was heated, and, to say the truth, somewhat anxious; and Icame forth for the cool air, and for something else to think of thanto-morrow. I have found both, and have also made up my mind, evenwhile gazing upon that plain. Sleep you well!"Sleep, however, was not known to the eyes of Theodore during thatnight. He was not yet sufficiently habituated to the mighty trade ofwar to see thousands perish, and know that thousands more were lyingaround in agony, with a calm and unconcerned bosom. He lay down torest his limbs, but sleep visited not his eyelids. Shortly after dawn,he rose and went out before his tent; but the host of the Huns wasalready up and stirring, and multitudes covered the tops of all thewagons, gazing out over the plain and towards the Roman encampment.Attila was still within his tent, though his battle-horse stoodcaparisoned by the side of the standard which was planted at theentrance. But Theodore was told that six or seven of the chief leaderswere in council within the tent; and, joining himself to a party ofHunnish chiefs who stood in the open space hard by, he remainedwaiting, with no slight anxiety, the result of the conference.At length the curtain of the tent was raised, and Attila, followed byhis chief leaders, came forth. But little alteration was visible inhis countenance, and yet that alteration had rendered the expressionmore harsh and severe. He was speaking when he came out, and the deeptones of his powerful voice reached to where Theodore stood."If it must be so," he said, "why, let it be so. Nor do I say thatyour counsel is not wise and prudent, though I feel within me thepower to crush yon swarm of insects as I would emmets beneath my feet.Still I would spare the people, if it may be so. But let it beremembered that Attila must never be defeated! It is sufficient not tohave been victorious; we must die here or conquer! Let my Huns, withtheir unerring bows, mount upon the ramparts of the camp. Let theother nations, my friends and allies, stand by to support them; thenraise me up a funeral pile before the entrance of this tent. Thereshall be the bed of Attila, if fortune and the god of battle shoulddesert him! To the ramparts, my friends, to the ramparts! Let no mansay that Attila does not yield to wise counsels, even when they areopposed to the most burning desire of his heart."With extraordinary celerity and perfect order, the Huns immediatelyspread themselves over the long line of chariots which formed therampart of their camp; and, intermingled with the Gepid[ae], and withthe spearmen of Valamir, stood prepared, with their bows in theirhands, and the arrow resting on the string, to send the winged deathamong the Roman legions as soon as they should advance to the attack.Several times during the course of the day bodies of the Roman andGothic troops were seen whirling about over the plain, and twice alarge division advanced very near the Hunnish camp, as if to feeltheir way towards a general attack. But a hail of arrows, darkeningthe sky, and carrying death and confusion into their ranks, causedthem to retreat even faster than they came; and day closed without theexpected attack.Early the next morning a rumour became prevalent in the Hunnish campthat the army was dispersing; and, on examining more accurately, itwas found that an immense body of Goths, and another of Franks, hadleft the camp of [AE]tius before daylight that very morning. Infinitewere now the conjectures throughout the barbarian host as to whatwould be the conduct of Attila under the present circumstances. It wasnot soon decided, however. Scouts returning to the camp after havingbeen sent forth to ascertain the movements of the enemy, and reportingthat the Goths and the Franks had halted at the distance of a fewleagues after leaving the Roman army, the ramparts of the Hunsremained guarded during the whole of that day; and no one was sufferedto leave the camp, except some small parties sent forth toreconnoitre.Attila only once left his tent during the whole day, when theunexpected appearance of a large body of cavalry, supposed to beGoths, on the eastern side of the plain, led to the belief that ageneral attack was about to take place upon the camp of the Huns. Theypassed away, however, without approaching; and Attila, returning tohis tent, remained in solitude during the rest of the day.By dawn of the next morning the Romans themselves removed to a greaterdistance, and towards noon an order was given for the Hunnish army toprepare to march. None knew the direction that they were about totake, none knew what purpose was in the bosom of the king; and when hehimself rode forth among the troops, not even Ardaric, his mostfamiliar friend, was aware of the course they were about to pursue.A few words announced the intentions of the monarch. "To the south,"he said; "I will not be further bearded by these Romans, though theybe leagued with all the runaways from the hardy North. On to thesouth, I say! Let them attack me, if they dare!"The tone in which he spoke was such as showed no inclination toreceive counsel or follow advice, and his orders were instantlyobeyed. No obstruction was offered to his march: the Roman army, as awhole, had disappeared; and though from time to time a few smallbodies of cavalry was seen upon the right of the Huns, showing that[AE]tius either followed or accompanied the march of the invaders, yetno attempt was made to bring on a general battle; and when, at the endof a four days' march, the Roman cohorts approached somewhat too near,they were speedily driven back by the Hunnish cavalry.On the fifth day, towards noon, the towers of a large and importantcity appeared, crowning the summit of some high hills, round the basisof which the barbarian army had been winding since the morning. Massywalls, close and elevated flanking towers, built from the bowels ofthe rock on which they stood, announced a well defended fortress,which, in the time of Rome's greatest glory, might well have beenlooked upon as impregnable. Nevertheless, no sooner did the eyes ofAttila rest upon it, after gazing over the country round, as if toascertain its capabilities for military man[oe]uvres, than, stretchingforth his hand towards Langres, he exclaimed, "It must fall! Valamir,my friend, lead the troops to the attack. I, with one fourth part ofthe army, wait upon this gentle slope for the coming of the Roman, ifhe dare to show himself. Let not the sun set, and see this city in thehands of the enemy."Langres fell, and [AE]tius struck no stroke to relieve it. Some of itsinhabitants found means to escape into the recesses of the mountains,and some even hid themselves in various parts of the town, where theywere not discovered, but all the rest perished by the sword; and thestreets of Langres flowed with human blood. As was very customary withthe Huns, it was fired in several places ere they left it as nightfell; but the solidity of the buildings, and the incombustible natureof the materials, saved it from anything but partial destruction, andAttila passed on without waiting to see that it was utterly consumed.Besanon shared the same fate as Langres; and on the morning after itsdestruction, Attila gazed from the heights in the neighbourhood, andexclaimed with a glance of triumph, as he beheld no force on any sideeither to watch his progress or oppose his will, "We are not defeated!Let them write it in their histories, that after a pitched battle, inwhich five hundred thousand men were slain, Attila rode unrestrainedthrough Gaul, and sacked two of her finest cities before the eyes of[AE]tius. But they will not write the truth--they will not, they darenot, lest in after ages every boy should spit at their memory. Now wemay safely turn our steps towards our native land, lest the winteragain set in, as it did when we were coming hither, and bind us withicy chains amid the fastnesses of the mountains."The direction taken by the army was now towards the east; and leavingGaul, Attila plunged into the passes of the Jura, pausing from time totime amid the sweet Helvetian valleys, as if he even hoped that theRomans might follow him thither, and once more try the fortune ofbattle. He who through his life had gone from victory to victory,whose steps had been upon the necks of conquered nations, and whosedaily food had been success, had met with a check, had encountereddisappointment, had been unsuccessful, if not defeated; and he seemedto thirst for an opportunity of wiping away the only stain, slight asit was, which a thousand battles had left upon his sword. None of hisconfidence had abandoned him; his reliance on his own mighty geniusand daring courage was unshaken; but yet the check received in thatundecided battle had wrought a change in Attila, and that changeunfavourable. Ever stern and unyielding, he had now become fierce andirascible; nor was that all: many of the vices of the barbariancharacter, which had been kept down, and, as it were, overawed in hisnature by the greater and more splendid qualities, so long as successhad attended him, now seemed, like slaves on the first reverse oftheir master, to rise up turbulently in his bosom, and threaten tousurp the supreme control.It was remarked, also, that Attila--fearing, perhaps, that his firstwant of success might have deprived him of some portion of his vastinfluence over the minds and hearts of his followers--had becomesuspicious, wily, exacting in regard to outward reverence,occasionally violent, and often intemperate. He assumed, too, agreater degree of pomp and external magnificence; as if the simplesplendour of his powerful mind was sufficiently tarnished by the oneslight reverse he had met with, to require the substitution of ameaner sort of majesty, to dazzle the eyes where the heart wasunsatisfied.The change, indeed, was not very great in any one particular, butstill enough so in each to attract the attention of a person whoremarked so closely as Theodore, and, in the aggregate, sufficient tostrike the eyes of others. This mood, too, increased in him daily;and, as he marched onward, it drew the attention of Ardaric himself.Through those wide beautiful valleys, clad in the everlasting greenwith which a temperate climate and a happy soil has robed them, theHunnish cavalry wound on, feeding their horses by the banks of thestreams and lakes, which, scattered in bright confusion throughout thefree Helvetian land, have rendered it, in all ages, a country ofenchanted sights. Through those deep passes, too, clad with the firand pine, whose evergreen garmenture bore no token of the approachingautumn, the long and dusky troops of barbarian horsemen poured on,lifting, with wild enthusiastic delight, to the mountain, the rock,the rugged precipice, the variegated foliage, and all the beauties ofuncultivated nature, those eyes which looked with scorn or abhorrenceupon all the productions of civilized art, and on the mighty masterworks of the human mind.Every now and then, however, where the beech, or the ash, or the elm,or the oak was mingled with the unchanging trees of the mountain, thesear aspect of the withering leaves, the tints of yellow and of brown,told Theodore but too surely that the autumn was far advanced. Theexpedition of Attila had now lasted a year and nearly nine months. Itwas more than that since he had heard the slightest news of Ildica. Itwas two years since he had seen her he loved: but time could donothing to diminish feelings such as his; and the longing once more toclasp her to his heart grew daily stronger and stronger instead ofdecreasing. He thought the rapid marches of the army slow andtedious--the way seemed long and interminable.At length began to appear the wide plains, the dark woods, the broadrivers, which announced once more their approach to the land of theHuns. Their last three days' march, however, was through fallen andfalling snow: but Theodore was not to be disheartened; and on the veryday that followed their arrival on the banks of the Tibiscus, heclaimed audience of Attila, and, reminding him of his promise,demanded permission to set out on his visit to Italy.The answer was stern and decisive. "It is impossible!"The monarch said no more, and Theodore, grieved and disappointed,waited on through a long, dark, tedious winter. With the firstblossoms of the spring, however, as the young Roman sat within hisdwelling, leaning his head upon his hand, and thinking of the past,the boy Ernac, now growing up in splendid beauty, ran gladly in,exclaiming, "My father calls for you! Come, Theodore, come! Attilademands your presence; and he is in a milder mood than he has beensince his return from Gaul."A glad hope passed through the bosom of Theodore, and, rising from hisseat, he followed to the presence of the king.CHAPTER VIII.THE REUNION.Rome, immortal Rome! the capital of the greatest and most despotic ofgovernments, whether democratic, imperial, or clerical, that ever thisworld has known; the fountain-head of the mightiest and most pervadingpower that ever has been exercised on earth! Rome, immortal Rome! theheart of the whole world during centuries of glory, from which issuedforth, poured through a thousand veins and arteries, the impulses ofcivilization to the remotest points of her mighty limbs! Rome,immortal Rome! wonderful in her rise, her duration, and her fall!Wonderful in her splendour, wonderful in her decay! Even when the timeshall come that men pass the ploughshare over her walls, or that thebeasts of the field find grass in her desolate dwelling-places, stillshall she remain immortal in history and tradition; still shall shewalk the earth among the spirits of the past, exercising over thedestinies of unnumbered ages an unseen influence through the record ofher marvellous deeds! Rome, gigantic spectre, still haunting the ruinsof the greatest empire that the world has ever seen! Rome, from whicharts, and knowledge, and power, and religion have flowed to distantages as from a source; but which--oh, strange to say!--has everpresented in herself the spectacle of anarchy, vice, and irreligion;and which stood forth from the whole world as the darkest and mostpolluted spot through many centuries and for many crimes. Rome,immortal Rome! We must now bend our steps through Rome.It was on a spring holyday, in one of the brightest months of theyear, ere summer had brought her burning heat, and after winter hadlost his chilling frown. The vegetable world was all in flower, andnature, like an April bride, was crowned with garlands. The sky wasall in smiles; the air was all balm; and the whole of a soft andpleasure-seeking population was pouring forth into the streets, orthronging the public places of the city, which had once been, indeed,the queen of empires, and was still majestic, though her reign wasover.Some show or some amusement, some procession or some festival, calledthe gay multitude forth towards the forum; and oh, how merrily, asthey went along, did the laugh ring up into the sky--did the gay songor the loud jest echo through the streets.Among the number who took their way onward through one of the longnarrow streets, were two girls carrying a basket of flowers betweenthem, and thus singing as they went of the sweet burden they bore.FLOWER GIRLS' SONG.Oh, the flowers of spring! the sweet-smelling flowers,Gay-robed companions of life's happy hours:They have come again to visit us here;They have come hand in hand with the young bright year.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,In garlands we twined them in infancy's hours;And every blossom we strung on the wreathWas like the sweet moments that flew beneath.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,They have wreathed the door-posts of love's own bowers;They have given their breath to the lover's sigh,And their hues to the loved one's cheek and eye.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,Fed with May sunshine and bathed with spring showers;When you have babes, as soon you may,Let them sport with flowers through their young bright day.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,When manhood puts forth his mightiest powers;Each noble thing does its wreath require,The warrior's sword and the poet's lyre.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,They are dear to us still when old age lours;We gaze on the blossoms that spring at our feet,And the perfume of mem'ry rises sweet.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,They have still their charm for all life's hours;And when at length in the tomb we are laid,Let our last bed of flowers be made.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!Oh, the flowers of spring! the beautiful flowers,Where saw you flowers so fair as ours?They are sweet to the scent, and bright to the eye,Oh, take them before they fade or die.Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers![3]---------------[Footnote 3: After writing the above song, a friend suggested to methat it bore a resemblance to some other verses of which we could bothrecall a part, but not the whole. We could neither remember theauthor's name, nor where they were printed; but I have since foundthat the poem alluded to is by Mrs. Hemans; and the author of Conti, awork full of interest, enthusiasm, and high feeling, lately pointedout to me that the stanzas are printed among the minor poems following"The forest Sanctuary." They commence, "Bring flowers!" and in two orthree of the stanzas there is much similarity with the above.]---------------So sung the flower-girls, as, carrying between them their basket,heavy with the rifled treasures of the spring, they walked on amongthe crowd, selling from time to time a wreath or a nosegay. Thepassers-by, however, unembarrassed with any burden, were more rapid intheir movements. The crowd became thinner and thinner as the moreearly hurried on. Scattered groups succeeded, hastening forward withan accelerated pace, lest they should be too late, or gain but badplaces at the show; and at length the numbers were so diminished as toleave the street nearly vacant; while the girls themselves, findingthat they had been outstripped by their customers, hurried their paceas fast as they could, in order to find a new market, where themultitudes were assembled.At the time when the street was the thinnest of people, however, thetrampling of horses, coming at a quick pace, was heard, and both thegirls turned round to look, the one exclaiming, "It is the bishop, Iam sure," and the other replying, "No, it is the qu[ae]stor by thenumber of horses: the bishop always goes in his chariot, foolishgirl.""Wrong, both of us," rejoined the first; "it is but a large troop ofbarbarians.""Oh, they will buy our flowers, then," cried the other. "I dare saythey are from [AE]tius's army; and the barbarians always spend theirmoney as fast as they get it."As they thus spoke, the troop which called forth these observationsapproached; and the two girls--one of them was remarkably pretty, andthe other thought herself so--turned their faces, with an air ofmodesty which it is possible they did not really possess, towards thepoint straight before them, and taking up again the burden of theirsong, "Oh, flowers! Buy my flowers!" they went on carolling gayly asthe strangers came near.He who rode at their head was a young man of about two-and-twenty,dressed in the Roman costume; but those who followed were clothed,though with some appearance of splendour, in the wilder garb of theHuns. Riding up, the young stranger stopped his horse by the side ofthe first flower girl, who instantly held up a bunch of very beautifulblossoms, singing on, with an air of sportive coquetry, "Oh, flowers!Buy my flowers." Theodore, for he it was, took the flowers, and gaveher a piece of money, saying, at the same time, "Canst thou tell me,pretty lass, where dwells Julius Lentulus. His house used to be here,methinks; but it is long since I saw it, and where I thought it stoodappears nothing but a high wall.""True, beautiful youth," replied the girl--"true, his house stoodthere: but Valentinian wanted the land to make a fishpond of; so hepulled down the house, and Julius Lentulus was obliged to remove; andnow dwells farther up, at the side of the Aventine. The emperor,however, betook himself to Ravenna; the fishpond was never made, andthe edile had the ground walled up; for he dare not give it back toJulius Lentulus for fear of the emperor.""Canst thou not direct me more exactly," demanded Theodore; "for Iwish to find the house instantly.""Ay! now I warrant thee," answered the girl, "thou art seeking thepretty Eudochia: often does she buy flowers of me when I go by theAventine. Ay! I warrant thee, some old lover of hers; for I remember,when she came back from exile in the barbarian land herself, some twoor three years ago. But alas! fair youth, thou hast a rival--nay, notone for that matter, but a hundred, though only one that isdangerous.""Pray who is that?" replied Theodore, with a smile, which encouragedthe girl to run on."As fair a youth as any in the imperial city," answered the girl: "shecalls him her brother Ammian; but once, as I rested in the gardens oftheir villa without the walls, I saw their lips meet as brothers andsisters rarely do meet; and I found afterward that there was no suchnear blood between them."Theodore's cheek reddened from feelings that would be difficult,and are unnecessary to define. "Alas, poor youth!" continued thegirl--"alas, poor youth, I am sorry for thee! but these things must beborne, sweet heart, and thou wilt soon find thee another bride.""Thou art mistaken, pretty lass," replied Theodore: "Eudochia is mysister, and Ammian I love as a brother; but have you no news of theLady Flavia and--""Ha, ha, I have thee now!" cried the girl; "thou wouldst ask after thefair Ildica. Thou art safe, then, stranger, thou art safe. She livesas a nun, and keeps her maiden beauties from the searching eyes ofadmiration. Seldom have I even seen her, but she is very beautiful.Thou wilt find her, too, by the Aventine; and if thou wouldst knowwhere Ammian is, I could tell thee too."The girl assumed an air of mystery as she spoke, which excitedTheodore's curiosity; and, without appearing to be anxious on thesubject, he merely asked, "And where, pray, is that?""I do not know whether I will tell or not," answered the girl; "itmight cost the pretty boy his life; but thou wilt not repeat it, andmay keep him from such follies hereafter. He has gone out," she added,approaching closer to Theodore's horse, and speaking in a lowertone--"he has gone out to see secretly a great sacrifice which is tobe offered to Jupiter by the people who dwell at the foot ofPincianus: I saw him going thither as I came along; for I heard thatthe good old pagans--as we Christians call them--were about to risktheir throats for the sake of offering a sacrifice to a god in whomthey do not half believe, and I went thither to sell my garlands. Aswe came back, we saw the young wanderer going thither for sport, andwe decked him and his horse out with flowers, as if he were verily tobe the sacrifice himself.""God grant that it may not be so," thought Theodore; but he merelyasked, "Are not the laws against these sacrifices very severe here inthe West? They are so in the Eastern empire at least.""Death to every one who beholds them," replied the girl; "but sincethe emperor has dwelt at Ravenna, people have not been so strict, andone may swear by Jupiter, or even by Venus, without danger. What itwill be, now that Valentinian has returned, I cannot tell; but I muston to the palace to sell him flowers, for he will soon be going tojoin the procession, and the pr[ae]positus always buys flowers of meand Claudia for the emperor's own use, he tells us."Thus saying, she tripped on; while Theodore turned his horse's headtowards the Aventine Mount: and, on inquiring for the house of JuliusLentulus, he was directed to a stately but somewhat gloomy edifice,enclosed within its own walls and gardens, and bearing an air ofmajestic decay, which harmonized but too well with the state of thecity and the country. On reaching the gates he asked at once forFlavia; but the old janitor considered him attentively for somemoments ere he gave him admission, for the person he inquired forreceived but few visiters."What is your name?" he asked--"what is your name, young lord! I amnot going to admit you and all these barbarians to the Lady Flavia,who rarely sees any one. Then that wild youth Ammian has gone forth,and there is no one but the lady and her daughter within."Beyond the great gates stood the house, with its long colonnade; butplanted in the space between were some bushes and low apple-trees,which prevented Theodore from seeing anything but the two steps whichraised the portico from the ground, and the lower part of the pillarswhich composed it. As he looked on, however, he saw a female figurepass along the colonnade; and, though he could not see the face, yetthe sight of the small graceful foot that moved the full and floatingrobe was enough to make his heart beat high."I am Theodore, Ancinus," he said. "Let me pass, my good friend. Thesestrangers can wait for me without. I am Theodore, son of Paulinus; Isay let me pass."There was a cry of joy from within; for the tones of that voice hadcaught the ear of Ildica, and she had paused to listen--there was acry of joy, a few steps, quick as those of the fawn bounding after itsmother over the morning dew, and Ildica was in her lover's arms."At length! at length!" she exclaimed, as, twined in his arms andpressed to his heart, she raised those large dark lustrous eyes to hisface, swimming with tears sweeter than the happiest smile that evershone upon the human countenance. "At length, at length, my Theodore,thou art come! Come after two long years and a half. Oh how weary hasfelt my heart under the passing of that tedious time; and how busy hasfancy been with all the dangers and with all the horrors in thestorehouses, the wide, dark storehouses of possibility! How I havetortured myself to think why my Theodore did not write; but thou artcome, and the clouds are all dispelled.""Beloved, I did write," replied Theodore. "Twice have I written; butit was under such circumstances that I could hardly hope thou wouldstever see the characters my hand had traced. Nor have I heard fromthee, my Ildica; but I fancied no neglect, no forgetfulness, no changeof affection.""I too wrote, beloved," she answered; "but I wrote only once, becauseno other occasion presented itself of sending letters to the countryof the Huns. Forgetfulness! neglect! change of affection! Oh,Theodore! could anything in life change that which I feel sure deathitself can never alter? What have I thought of but thee since last wemet? But let us to my mother; let her share our joy.""That joy will be greater, my beloved, when you hear all," replied theyouth; and, still circling her fair form with his arm, while her handremained clasped in his, he accompanied her back into the house whereFlavia sat, unknowing his arrival."Joy, dearest mother, joy!" cried Ildica: "here is our Theodorereturned.""Ay, and returned," added Theodore, "never to quit you again!Attila--though I saw that it gave him no slight pain--has freed mefrom the rest of the term which I had bound myself by promise toremain with him. He has but exacted that I shall never bear armsagainst his people, nor provoke them to strife with me; for he has asuperstition that the first injury inflicted by any of them upon mewill be followed by his ruin or his death.""Happy superstition!" cried Flavia, embracing him: "and so I trust ourlong sorrows are over, my dear son. We have needed thee much; but nowthat thou wilt not leave us more, my cares are at an end: and when Ihave seen thee and my Ildica united for ever, I willingly quit a worldof which I have long been weary.""Quit us not, my mother!" replied Theodore, "quit us not! but remainwith us, to behold our happiness and to share it! But oh, let thathappiness be made complete as soon as may be. Let no time elapse ereIldica becomes my own. Till I hold her to my heart, my own dear wife,I shall fear lest every hour that flies may bring some new misfortuneto separate us again. Say, Ildica, say, when will you be mine?"The blood rose in the beautiful girl's cheek, and neck, and brow,spreading through that pure and ivory skin like the blush of dawn uponthe snowy heads of the mountains; and feeling how the crimson wasmounting in her face, she hid it upon her lover's breast, replying,"When my mother thinks fit.""To-morrow! oh, to-morrow, dear mother!" cried Theodore."Nay, nay," said Flavia, with a smile, "not quite so soon as that! Letit be the following day. What say you, Ildica? Is that too soon?""Speak, beloved! speak!" cried Theodore; but she still hid her eyesupon his breast, and yet the soft clasping of her hand upon his toldhim that she gave no unwilling consent. Feeling that she was muchagitated, he sought some other theme to release her mind from itshappy burden, till custom should render it lighter to bear."She consents, my mother!" he said, "she consents! but where isEudochia? She must come and share our joy. I wonder she has not yetheard of her brother's return.""She has gone to the capitol," replied Ildica, raising her head:"there is a splendid sight there to-day; and Ammian sent a messengerto say he had found a place for her where she could see it all.""Ammian!" exclaimed Theodore: "I heard, as I came along, that he hadgone out of the city towards Pincianus.""Oh no," replied Flavia: "he went to the capitol, and sent both amessenger and a litter for Eudochia, saying that he had found a placefor her at the house of Julius Sabinus, otherwise she should not havegone."But Theodore was not satisfied. Though the words of the flower-girlmight be idle words, yet they remained upon memory, and a cloud cameover him as of new sorrows approaching. At that moment they heardvoices at the door, and one of them speaking with the tones of a womanin loud entreaty. Theodore listened: "I must see him, I must speakwith him," cried the voice: "it is not to sell my flowers: it is onbusiness of importance to him himself that I seek to see him. Onlytell him I am here, and see whether he will not let me speak withhim.""That is the voice of the flower-girl," cried Theodore, "who told methat Ammian had gone out to Pincianus. Some evil has happened, Ifear!""Again!" cried Ildica, "again!" and she cast down her dark eyestowards the ground with an expression of deep despondency, as if sheasked of the dust from which we rise and to which we fall--"What isthis inscrutable fate, that dogs us through existence, never sufferingus to know a moment's happiness, without pouring into the cup thebitter drop that turns it all to gall?"Theodore had in the meantime advanced towards the gate, and was metmidway by the flower-girl, with whom he had spoken, and who had nowpassed the gatekeeper and was hurrying in."You told me you were her brother!" she cried, as she met him--"youtold me you were her brother! If so, and if you would save her fromValentinian, fly to the palace, quick! They have borne her thither. Isaw her carried to the inner court in a litter, and heard her criesand entreaties when she discovered where they were taking her to. Ifyou are her brother, hasten thither quickly with your Huns! You maysave her yet; for almost all--guards, attendants, officers--have goneto the show. You may save her yet, perchance--or at least avenge her!"CHAPTER IX.THE TYRANT.In a room in the imperial palace, lighted from above, and far removedfrom any of the chambers usually inhabited by the emperors, upon aluxurious couch of down, covered with crimson, and strewed with theflowers of the hyacinth, whose sweet perfume mingled with that of athousand other flowers, gave the whole chamber an atmosphere ofdelicious but overpowering perfume, lay Valentinian, the weak,luxurious, vicious monarch of the West, clothed in a light andfloating robe of silk, and with his odour-dropping hair boundeffeminate with a fillet twined with flowers.He seemed to listen eagerly for some sounds; and in a moment or twothe trampling of feet, some sobbing cries, and a voice in the tone ofexpostulation, were heard. The next instant the door of the room--forit was one closed by a door furnished with locks and bolts--was thrownopen, and a litter was borne in and set down in the midst of thechamber.The slaves of Valentinian, for--though not habited in the usual garbof the imperial household--they were but the ministers of hispleasure, instantly withdrew, and, starting from the litter, a lovelygirl, terror in her aspect, and her eyes dewed with tears, stoodgazing wildly round the room, as if seeking some means of escape. Shewas yet in her early youth, and modesty and innocence were written inevery line of her fair countenance. But neither modesty, norinnocence, nor youth had any effect upon the corrupt and selfish manbefore her, who, as soon as the slaves were gone, advanced, and takingher hand, endeavoured to sooth her, pouring into her ear all the vilebut honeyed words of a consummate corrupter.Snatching her hand from his, and shrinking back from him into onecorner of the room, Eudochia gazed upon him in silent terror, as shewould have gazed upon some poisonous serpent suddenly crossing herpath. But Valentinian still pursued, exclaiming, "But listen to me,fair Eudochia. It is the emperor seeks your love. It is Valentinianwho commands your obedience. The wealth and splendour of a world shallbe poured out at your feet, the love of your sovereign shall encircleyou with all earth's choicest gifts;" and he went on with words onwhich we will not dwell to wrong her innocent ear with evilpersuasions.For a time Eudochia gazed in silence, as if terror and horror haddeprived her of the use of her intellect; but as Valentinianconcluded, and was again approaching her, she suddenly seemed torecollect herself, and, with a quick start forward, cast herself athis feet."Hear me, oh emperor!" she cried, "hear me, if there be one spark ofnoble feeling left in your bosom. If you be a monarch, if you be anemperor, if you be a man, hear me, and set me free! I cannot love you,I ought not to love you, but as a subject loves an emperor. You arealready wedded; my heart is already given to another! Wrong not yourempress, wrong not me, by seeking love that never can be yours. Let mego! oh, let me go! and show yourself really worthy of your highstation. You cannot--surely you will not be the first to violate thelaws which you are bound to maintain. How would you punish anotherwere he to treat me even as your slaves have done? Oh let me beseech,let me entreat, let me adjure you, by all you hold sacred, to set mefree! Hear me, hear me! Oh, monarch, hear me!"And with uplifted hands and streaming eyes she went on, urging him tojustice and compassion; but even her terror and distress had charmsfor the base tyrant. He attempted to throw his arms around her; hekissed her fair brow as she kneeled imploring at his feet. But at thatact Eudochia felt all the spirit of her race rise up within her, asshe saw her prayers unheeded and her appeals to justice only provokingdeeper insult. She sprang upon her feet, she freed herself from hisarms, she snatched from his girdle, even in the struggle to cast himoff, a small Eastern dagger which the weak tyrant wore. "Stand back!"she cried--"stand back! or, by the memory of my father, who died tosave his country, I will drive this blade into thy heart, thouTarquin!""Girl, you dare not!" cried Valentinian, drawing back; "you dare notraise your hand against your emperor!""All girl as I am, I dare raise my hand against any tyrant on theearth," replied Eudochia, "let him clothe himself with whatsoever namehe will. Come not near me, or you die! Tyrant, I am resolved! Myhonour is as dear to me as life to you! Let me go free, or Valentinianshall this day cease to live and reign!""Well, well! thou shalt go!" said the emperor, in a softened tone;"but I must call the slaves, to make them open the door from without.Promise me that thou wilt not strike me as I approach the door.""I will not," replied Eudochia, "so as you set me free.""You shall be free," answered Valentinian, moving towards thedoor--"you shall be free."But when between Eudochia and the entrance of the room, within asingle step of either, he suddenly turned, sprang upon her, wrenchedthe dagger from her grasp, and casting it on the other side of thecouch, exclaimed, "Now, girl! now! what punishment shalt thou undergofor daring to hold a dagger to the breast of thine emperor?"Eudochia gazed round in hopeless despair. But then came a sound ofhasty steps and angry voices; and, with sudden hope rushing throughher bosom, she uttered scream after scream, to attract the notice ofany one who might be passing near. Valentinian seemed not to haveheard or not to heed the sounds, for he pursued his evil course; butwhile he endeavoured to silence the unhappy object of his passions,the door of the chamber was shaken violently.The bolts and locks resisted; but another and another blow camecrashing upon the woodwork. Valentinian, with a cheek as pale asdeath, retreated towards the couch, and sought for the dagger, whichwas the only weapon he had worn. The next moment the door gave way,and the brother of Eudochia, followed by twenty or thirty of the armedHuns, rushed into the chamber. His sword was drawn and bloody in hishand; and stretched across the long passage might be seen the corpseof one of the base instruments of the tyrant's vices, who had dared toresist the passage of the Roman, hastening to the deliverance of hissister.Theodore caught her in his arms, and Eudochia wept upon his bosom. Butsuch thoughts as had inspired the bosoms of his ancestors were in hisheart at that moment, and he gave her little time to weep."Are you safe, my sister?" he cried, with his eyes still glaring onValentinian. "Are you pure! By the memory of our father, I adjure you!are you unpolluted?""I am, Theodore! I am!" she answered: "thanks to God and to you, Iam!""Vile slave!" cried Valentinian, attempting to assume the air ofempire; "who are you? How dare you--"But Theodore cut him short. "Base, effeminate, soulless tyrant!" heanswered, "well may you thank God that I arrived in time to save youfrom the crime you sought to commit! Well may you thank God! for yourcowardly and pitiful life had surely been ended here had you succeededin injuring her; and your soul had been sent to hell burdened with thesin it had just perpetrated."Valentinian trembled and turned pale, the coward blood forsaking hisheated cheek at the stern aspect of the young Roman. He attempted,however, though in a weak and faltering voice, to call for his guardsand his officers; but Theodore replied, with a look of witheringscorn, "You call in vain, tyrannical disgrace of Rome--you call invain. The means that you have taken to ensure that your crime shouldbe effected in silence and secrecy, have left you as powerless as thelowest slave in your dominions. All the better and the purer part ofyour court, sent forth to take part in the procession, have left youalone in this wing of the palace, with none but the slavish ministersof your pleasures near thee. They are in the hands of my followers,except yon rash fool, lying there in his blood who attempted to stop abrother flying to his sister's rescue. Thou art in my power," headded, "to take or leave thy pitiful life as I will; and couldst thoubut see how contemptible a thing thou hast made thyself, as thoustandest there, quivering with fear and guilt before thine injuredsubject, shame would surely supply the place of virtue, and thouwouldst blush for the crimes that have degraded thee so low.""Traitor!" exclaimed Valentinian, with the blood rushing up into hisface--"traitor, thou shalt rue this day!""Monarch, I shall not," replied Theodore, "were even your power asextended as it is weak and circumscribed; were the Romans found baseenough to suffer a tyrant to oppress a citizen for defending ahelpless girl, and that girl his sister, you dare not, no, you darenot openly raise a hand against my life. Know that in me you see onewhom Attila, at whose very name you tremble, looks upon as his son.Letters are already in thy court announcing my coming, and biddingthee do me justice in all things; and thou darest as soon raise thyhand against me as thou darest offer thy neck to the axe.""So," cried the base monarch, glad, like all weak minds convicted ofcrime, to seek revenge in scorn, where they have no refuge in justice,and no power of retaliation--"so thou art one of those degenerateRomans who fight against their country in the ranks of thebarbarians!""Monarch, thou liest," answered Theodore, boldly. "I have never foughtagainst my country. My sword has never been drawn, my spear has neverbeen pointed against a Roman breast. I have saved the life of Attila;I have saved the life of his son; but I have taken no part in hiswars, and defy thee to show that I have ever been guilty of one actagainst my country. Little, too, would it become thee, oh emperor, toreproach any one for betraying his native land. Hast thou not giventribute to the barbarian? hast thou never sacrificed the innocent tothe fury of the Huns? hast thou never encouraged the hordes of Scythiato invade the Roman territories. But I leave thee, oh monarch. Mysister is safe. Thy crimes are averted; and, as if clad in a panoplyof iron, my innocence defies thy power and scorns thy menaces. Come,Eudochia, come. The litter and the slaves which brought thee hither asthe object of a base monarch's passion shall carry thee back as pureas when thou camest."Throwing his arm round her, but without sheathing the sword he carriedin his right hand, lest any opposition should be made to his retreat,Theodore placed her in the litter; and, at a word to some of hisfollowers, the slaves of Valentinian who had borne her thither werebrought in, raised their fair burden from the ground, and obeyed atonce the young Roman in bearing her away homeward. The dark Huns whohad accompanied him surrounded them on every side; and Theodorehimself, after casting one more look of mingled scorn and indignationupon the tyrant from whom he had just snatched his prey, followed hissister from the palace without obstruction, and almost without notice,so carefully had Valentinian removed from the precincts of thoseapartments every one who might behold, or report, or interrupt thecommission of the crime he had meditated.While his own slaves had been compelled to bear Eudochia away, theweak monarch of the West had remained, with impotent fury burning inhis bosom, and eyes glaring angrily upon that which he could notprevent. His features had worked, his hands had wrung each other, hiscolour had varied under the influence of passion like the complexionof a timid girl. He had more than once sought for the hilt of thedagger, too, as if he would fain have struck it into the heart of thebold youth who taunted him so scornfully. But fear had restrained hisviolence; and, when Eudochia was gone, he remained for several minutesmotionless as a statue, gazing down upon the floor, without anyperceptible movement except a slight pressure of his hands together,and the sterner knitting of his angry brow.What were all the dark and the painful thoughts, the burning bittershame, the lowered but still fierce and venomous pride, that now ragedwithin, it matters not to inquire; suffice it, that so intense andpotent were they, that they seemed to absorb his whole soul and mind;and there he remained, as we have said, for many minutes, withoutspeech or movement. At length, however, the imprisoned tempest burstforth, and stamping violently upon the ground, he poured forth atorrent of curses and imprecations upon himself, upon Theodore, uponEudochia, upon the whole world; and then, casting himself down uponthat flower-strewed couch, he raved and gnashed his teeth, in theagony of anger, degradation, and disappointment. After a time,starting up again, he leaned his brow for a moment or two upon hishand, as if in thought, and then called loudly for his attendants."Ho, without there!" he exclaimed; "is nobody near? Is everybody fled?Are ye all fools, or cowards, or traitors? Does nobody answer to thevoice of the emperor?"As his voice ran along the passages of the building, with slow andfearful steps a single eunuch crept out from some corner, in which hehad concealed himself; and stepping with evident terror over the bodyof the fallen slave, who had been slain in attempting to prevent theentrance of Theodore, he approached the door at which the monarchstood, and cast himself at his feet."Pitiful, cowardly wretch!" exclaimed Valentinian, "why didst thouabandon thy lord, to be insulted by that frantic boy; or, if thouhadst not power to resist him and his barbarians, why didst thou notfly, by the opposite passage, to the chief apartments, and call up thechamberlain and his guards?""I had but time to hide myself in the bath, from which there is nooutlet," replied the eunuch. "My comrade was smitten to the ground ina moment; and I should have shared the same fate, without servingthee, oh great monarch! if I had not darted away where first I couldfind refuge.""Well, get thee gone quick," replied the emperor. "Call up hither,instantly, the prefect of the palace, and also the chamberlain. Losenot a moment."The eunuch hastened to obey; and after having been absent some time,which Valentinian passed sitting on the edge of the couch in deep andangry thought, he returned with several inferior domestics, butneither of the two high officers he had been sent to seek."Where is the prefect, where the chamberlain?" exclaimed Valentinian,with his eyes flashing and his brows knit into a more bitter frownthan ever. "Do all my servants neglect and abandon me?""Both the prefect and the guardian of the secret chamber," replied theslave, "as well as the count of the domestics, and all the other highofficers of the palace, are gone, by your own imperial order, to gracethe procession around the capitol."Valentinian again stamped with rage; but, after a few moments'consideration, he sent away the greater part of the attendants, andcalling to him one in whom he seemed to have more confidence than therest, he demanded, "Dost thou remember, Elius, whither we were toldthat wild youth, Ammian Flavius, had gone this morning?""I know well, oh emperor," replied the domestic--"I know well; for themen who lured him thither were sent by myself to get him out of theway. The inhabitants of two of the villages at the foot of Pincianushold to-day, we hear, a secret sacrifice to Jupiter; and this wildyouth, whom anything that is strange or extravagant will mislead, waseasily induced to go out to behold it, notwithstanding the penaltiesof death pronounced against all present.""Hark!" said Valentinian; "as soon as the procession is over, send outto Pincianus men enough to drown all these incorrigible pagans intheir own blood. Let them slay all they find. Jupiter shall havevictims enough; but on no account let them touch this Ammian. Takeespecial care to save him. Let him be brought into the city guarded.He shall be empaled alive! We will put down these sacrifices--but harkthee again, there is more to be done! Get thee gone, eunuch. Thou arta coward, and not fit to listen to the deeds of brave men. Elius, ayouth has been here and snatched the girl from my hands--her brother,it would seem--that Theodore whom we have heard of. He has borne herback to the Aventine. He has insulted me, the emperor. He has slainone of the slaves, and he must die, Elius. But on account of thisAttila, it must be no public act. He must die, Elius! but it must beby some chance accident, or in some casual strife. He must die, Elius,he must die! Let not the sun rise upon him again: I leave it to thee,my faithful servant--I leave it to thee to do justice upon thetraitor. There is a fair estate not far from Aricia. Thou knowest itwell--rich in wine, in oil, and corn--it is thine if this Theodore bedead ere to-morrow morning. See to it!""I will find means," replied Elius, calmly.Valentinian gazed in his face; and finding there a look of assurancewhich had never failed him, he felt as satisfied as if the deed weredone, and with a slow step he sought the other part of the palace.CHAPTER X.THE PAGAN SACRIFICE.There is even now--when the sweeping hand of ages has levelled withthe earth so many of the things which in the times we speak of were intheir splendour--there is even now at the foot of Pincianus a deep,shady grove of tall trees, amid the stems of which the treacheroussunshine of the Roman spring pours its mellow light with a peculiarcharm. This, however, is but a small vestige of the magnificent woodthat at one period covered the side of the hill, and swept over theundulating country at its base, a wood consisting solely of highupright trees, springing from a green and luxuriant turf, which theirown shadow kept cool and verdant. A bright stream, long since lickedup by the burning sun, then meandered round the foot of the hill fullof delicious water, brawling sportively with the stones which formedits bed; and by the side thereof, every here and there an open spaceappeared, as if left by the taste of some skilful planter, either forwanderers through that enchanted scene to pause upon and gaze on thecool wave, or for the gay and happy to meet in and prolong the hourswith feast and revelry.At either end of the wood, nearly a mile apart from each other, theone being situated half way up the slope, the other at its base, weretwo villages, which, though not remote from Rome, had, from variousaccidental circumstances, maintained in all ages much lesscommunication than might have been expected with the great city, andwhich preserved with peculiar tenacity those old manners and customswhich the secluded and the rustic adhere to with such fond affection.In vain had the customs of the city changed--the villagers ofPincianus changed not with Rome. In vain had empire succeededrepublic, and effeminacy and luxury flowed in with demoralizingpower--the villagers retained their old simplicity, and, when theycarried their produce to the town, but shrugged their shoulders at thestrange and women-like men that they beheld. In vain even had theemperors put down by severe laws the poetical religion of theirforefathers, and established a purer faith in its place--the villagersstill loved their old deities and served their old gods. Even more,they resisted the words of truth when the ministers of truth visitedthem in person; and driving forth from among them the preachers of theGospel, they returned to their old rites with persevering zeal.Severe and more severe measures had been employed to put downpaganism. Temples had been changed into churches; altars had beenoverthrown; the blood of the priest had been mingled with the blood ofthe victim, and the lives of the worshippers had been taken in thevery act of sacrifice: but still the villagers adhered to their oldfaith, and through nearly a hundred years of persecution and sufferinghad retained, either openly or secretly, their reverence for thethings their fathers had revered before them.A season of comparative tranquillity had succeeded; and though thepersecution of the idolaters had been cruel and virulent during thefirst years of the reigns of Theodosius and Valentinian, yet for thelast lustre this rigour had been relaxed; and though still obliged toconceal, as far as possible, the rites and ceremonies which theypractised, those who persevered in heathenism had suffered no verysevere inflictions.It was in one of those open spots, by the side of the stream which wehave already described, that on a bright May day were assembled amultitude of people, clothed in white garments, and met together,apparently, for the purpose of offering sacrifice. The turf, out ofwhich no tree grew, covered a space of nearly a hundred yards indiameter; but over a great part thereof hung the wide-spreadingbranches of the large oaks around, giving shade to the sylvanamphitheatre thus formed on the banks of the little river. The watersflowed on clear and sparkling; the murmurs of a distant fall filledthe air with music; bright sunshine was pouring over all the scene anddancing through the leaves upon the turf below; flowers crowned theheads of all the assembly, and gemmed the verdant carpet on which theytrod. Everything was smiling and beautiful; and, if the mind could bedivested of the remembrance of the dark and sinful object for whichthe idolaters met, the whole scene had in it something so graceful, sopoetical, so exciting, that one might well gaze with raisedenthusiasm, even if one took no part in the rite which was about to beperformed.With such feelings stood Ammian Flavius, a little apart from the rest,leaning against one of the trees, at a little distance from which twoservants held his horse. Four years had now passed since the periodwhich the reader first beheld him; and while Theodore had expandedinto a handsome and powerful man, Ammian, from the wild and beautifulboy which we at first portrayed, had grown up into a tall, graceful,manly youth. His fine features, his noble air, and his symmetricalform, might well attract attention; and many were the eyes that turnedupon him among those who met to offer on that day a sacrifice to theirfalse deity. They gazed, however, without any mingling ofapprehension; for it was not uncommon for some of the wild youths ofthe great city to steal out in secret to behold those rites to whichtheir concealment gave an additional charm.The day had waned considerably, and the sun was approaching the west.The flamen of Jupiter, as he called himself, though the office hadbeen long abolished, stood in his purple robe beside a small altarraised in the midst, and strewed with flowers, and a number of gaylaughing boys led along, with sportive glee, a milk-white bull, itsneck wreathed with garlands, and its broad brow crowned with flowers.Long nurtured for the purpose of the sacrifice, and rendered familiarwith the hands of men, which had never yet been raised against it withviolence, the noble beast, unconscious of its coming fate, walkedcalmly in the midst, suffering itself to be led up to the altar withan untightened rope. Beside the priest stood the cultrarius, leaningon his axe, and all pressed near to behold the ceremony of immolation.The invocation and the prayer had been pronounced; and the cultrarius,turning to the priest, demanded in the accustomed form, "Shall I doit?""Do it!" replied the priest, and swinging the axe above his head, thestout peasant who performed that office laid the monarch of the herd,at a single blow, dead at the foot of the altar. The priest washastening to apply the knife, when Ammian, hurrying forward,exclaimed, "I hear coming horses, my friends, be upon your guard."All looked up and listened, and some thought that they also heard thesounds; but if it was so, those sounds ceased almost instantly, andthe ceremony proceeded, while Ammian, with his colour slightly raisedat the mistake he appeared to have made, retired again to the tree bywhich he had formerly stood, and continued to gaze upon theproceedings of the rest.Before many minutes were over, however, a troop of Roman horsemenappeared on the other side of the stream; dashed through its shallowwaters; and with their spears and swords carried slaughter andconfusion among the heathen worshippers. The priest was at once struckdown; but the cultrarius defended himself with his axe for some time,and was at length slain by a javelin thrown from some distance.Resistance was also made by several others, who had arms concealedupon their persons; and if the whole body had taken the sameprecaution, they might in all probability have resisted successfullythe force sent against them, which did not consist of more than fiftyor sixty men.In the midst of the strife, five of the soldiers, leaving the othersto pursue their attack upon the heathen, cut straight across andsurrounded Ammian; who, seeing that no words were spoken, but deathinflicted indiscriminately upon every one, drew his sword, anddetermined to sell his life dearly. He was overpowered, however,before he could offer any effectual resistance, by one of the Romansspringing from behind the tree and clinging to his right arm. Inanother moment he found himself tied with cords, and dragged away intothe midst of the confusion, where the soldiers were still, withmerciless activity, slaughtering the unhappy wretches whom they haddetected in celebrating the forbidden rites.Without preserving any order themselves, the troopers pursued whereverthey saw a victim to strike; and the villagers, taking advantage ofthe trees, in many instances kept their cruel persecutors at bay forsome time; while the shifting of the horses here and there; therushing of the crowd of victims, now driven into a body together, nowscattering wide to avoid their pursuers; the efforts of resistance;the gestures of supplication; the shrieks of the women and children;the groans of the dying, formed altogether a scene of agony and horrorsuch as the eyes of Ammian had never before beheld.In the midst of it all, however, he suddenly perceived a horsemanclothed in the wild arms of the barbarians mingling with the Romansoldiers. Another and another appeared as if by magic, urging theirswift horses through the trees on all sides. The Romans, accustomedto see the barbarians in the emperor's service, seemed to lookupon all, except the villagers, as their friends, and took nonotice of those who appeared among them, till the number becameformidable--equalled--surpassed their own; and then he who appeared tobe the commander of the imperial troop suddenly drew up his horse andgazed upon the strangers."The barbarian is striking a Roman," he exclaimed. "What is themeaning of this? Fellow, art thou mad?"The only answer which he received from the man to whom he shoutedforth those hurried questions was a javelin cast by an unerring hand,which smote him between the eyes, and cast him lifeless beneath thehorse's feet.All was now confusion tenfold confused. The well-armed barbarians,hand to hand and man to man, drove back the Roman soldiers. Thevillagers, mad with rage against their oppressors, and inspired withhope by the unexpected aid they had received, became in turn theassailants, and following the Huns among their retreating adversaries,armed with the knives which they bore upon their own persons, or theswords which they caught up from the dead or dying, cut the sinews ofthe Roman horses, or gave the stroke of death to any one who fellwounded from his charger.For a short time the imperial troops resisted; but they were soondriven across the stream into the open country. Ammian, whom they hadplaced on his horse, was led along with them, his arms tied as theywere behind him, and unable to resist. But at length the rout of theRomans became complete, and they fled precipitately towards the city;while a small body of the Huns, urging their horses into double speed,dashed with a furious charge into the midst of the fugitives; reachedthe point where Ammian was borne along, slew the man who led hishorse, and, seizing his bridle-rein, hurried him away in the oppositedirection, leaving the Romans to pursue their flight without furtherinterruption.So rapidly did the barbarians urge their horses on, that Ammian hadneither time nor breath to ask any questions. Only once they paused,as, pursuing their course at full speed, they took their way towardsthe ancient Umbria; and that was when they perceived that the adverseforce, recovered from its terror, had detached a small body to watchtheir motions. Then, wheeling so suddenly upon it that retreat wasimpossible, they left not one of its number to bear back the tidingswhich it had been sent to obtain. Soon after, the sun set, and with ashort twilight night came on. The star of evening, however, shone fairover the whole world, and light sufficient lingered in the skies toshow a small lake spreading out across their path. At the spot wherethe road, taking a direction on either side of the lake, divided intotwo, stood a barbarian dressed and armed like the rest, and apparentlywaiting for them. A few eager and quick words were spoken in a tonguewhich Ammian did not understand; but he guessed, by seeing the manpoint down to one side of the lake with his spear, and by variousother gesticulations used on both sides, that he was directing theHuns to some body of their comrades; and he ventured to ask whitherthey were about to carry him."Fear not," answered the man who led his horse, in very good Latin,while another took advantage of the pause to cut the cords that boundhis hands--"fear not, you are with friends, and you are saved fromdeath: we bear you to a place of safety, where you will hear more."Thus saying, he took the road to which the other man had pointed, andgalloped on at the same quick pace as before. The moon was now risingover the neighbouring hills; and at the distance of about a mile theycame to a number of tents, pitched in a meadow by the bank of thelake. Several large flat boats were gathered together along the shore,and eight or nine armed men were watching on the verge of the lake;while round two or three fires, lighted at a short distance from thetents, were seen a multitude of barbarians revelling as usual overtheir evening meal.The sound of the coming horses had no effect upon the Huns; but seemedto call the attention of the persons, whosoever they were, within thetents; for the hangings of two of them were pushed back as Ammian andhis conductors approached, and several people in the garb of Romanscame forth. By the moonlight the youth could not distinguish theirfeatures, but there was more than one woman of the party; and as hesprang from his horse with feelings of joy mingled with doubt, he wasclasped to the bosom of his mother, Flavia, and then pressed in thearms of Theodore. Eudochia, Ildica, too, were there; and in a fewbrief words he related to them all that had happened to him. Atlength, shading his eyes from the light, he was led into the tent, andfound the whole of Flavia's household assembled as it had leftDalmatia, with the exception of those whom the stern monarch of thegrave had taken as his allotted tribute during four years ofwandering."What is all this? how is all this?" exclaimed the youth, gazinground: "are we about once more to try our fortunes on the wide world?""Even so, Ammian," answered Theodore: "circumstances compel us to it,even when we fancied we were united once more, to dwell in peacetogether for the rest of our days.""Well, I care not," cried Ammian: "one land is the same to me asanother; and wherever liberty is, we may find or found a Rome forourselves. But hearken, Theodore! Listen to me, my dear brother! Inall our past wanderings some one of us has been separated from thosewho were as dear to his heart as a part of itself. There wants somemagic link between us to bind us all together; so that, wherever wego, we may, as slaves to our affections, be chained inseparably to oneanother. I have a bond to propose, Theodore, which, though it beformed of flowers, will yet prove as strong as adamant. You are to beunited to my sister by the dearest ties; why should I not be united toyours by the same. Thus shall we become all, indeed, one family. Whatsay you, my beloved Eudochia? But you have said already, dear one," headded, casting his arms round her, "and it is needless to ask you.Theodore, Eudochia is mine--my promised bride! What say you, mybrother?""Nothing in opposition, Ammian," answered Theodore, with a smile;"nothing, but that you are very young, and somewhat wild, my brother!""Out upon such buts!" cried Ammian, laughing. "I am young; but peoplewould laugh at me more if I married when I was old. Youth is the timeof love, and Cupid should surely be the only god that leads us to hisbrother. As to my wildness, I own it has been so; but it is past.To-day, for the first time, I felt it, and regretted it, andwhatsoever I regret the possession of, I cast away, from that minute.When the imperial soldiers burst upon my poor friends with their whitebull, and seized upon me myself, slaying all around me, I thought ofEudochia, Theodore; I felt I had done wrong; I regretted my wildthoughtlessness; and resolved, if Heaven spared me, never more so tooffend again. I thought of Eudochia, Theodore; that thought cured meof my wildness, and will be my safeguard against the same diseaseagain.""Well may it be so, my son," replied Flavia; "and when you know allthat has befallen to this dear girl since you left us this morning,you will still more deeply feel the evil of such heedlessness; youwill guard your bosom still more strongly against its recurrence.""What has happened?" cried Ammian, his lustrous eyes flashing witheagerness--"what has happened?--Valentinian? Ah, I know it all! I sawhim gaze, and sigh, and pass us ten times on the course the other day.What has happened, my mother? Tell me! tell me!""I will," answered Flavia; but Eudochia clung to her, exclaiming, "Notnow! not now, my mother! Oh, not now! Oh, then I will go away!" andhiding her blushing face upon Ildica's bosom, she hurried away withher into another tent.All was then told to Ammian of Eudochia's danger and her rescue, anddeep and sad seemed to grow his feelings as he listened. "Fool that Iwas to leave her! Fool that I was to suffer myself to be seduced tobehold that idiot sacrifice! for seduced thereunto I was, doubtless,by the agents of that imperial villain. Why did you not slay him,Theodore? I would have slain him where he stood.""And so would I," replied Theodore, "if he had committed the crime heintended. He should have died that moment had my own death followedthe next; but Eudochia was saved; and I had still hopes of being ableto remain in Rome. When I returned to the Aventine, however, I heardenough to make me resolve on flying. I found, too, that the Huns whohad accompanied me from Dacia bore the commands of Attila to all theirfellow-countrymen in the service of Valentinian to return instantly totheir native land. I had nearly a hundred with me, several thousandsmore are at Rome and Ravenna; and I found that I could retreat fromthe wrath of the tyrant without his power being sufficient to preventme. As we came hither, we saw a small body of horse go out from thegates towards Pincianus, where we had heard you were; and, fearingsome danger, instead of merely sending a messenger to bid you join us,I sent a sufficient body of my followers to defend you in case ofneed. Their leader, who has been faithful to me for four long years,pledged his own life to bring you to me in safety; and here at lengthyou are, though I hear with pain that Roman blood has been shed.Doubtless we shall be pursued; but every hour fresh parties of theHuns are coming hither to accompany us, and ere to-morrow morning weshall be too strong for Valentinian to effect aught against us.However, Heaven forbid that the time should come when I may have todraw the sword against my fellow-countrymen even in my own defence;and to avoid it, we will cross the lake an hour before daylightto-morrow morning, then on through the mountains to rejoin Attila, whohas ever befriended me, and will, I doubt not, befriend me still."CHAPTER XI.THE UNEXPECTED MEETING.In a mountain pass a little to the westward of the spot where nowstands the small town of Bassano, among the first shoots of theRh[ae]tian Alps, travelled onward the family of wanderers, whosevarious course we have traced from the beginning of this tale, as,compelled by circumstances, and dogged by misfortune, they were drivenfrom land to land.They were no longer, however, alone and undefended amid all the strifeand danger of those perilous times: for the small body of Huns whichhad guarded Theodore in his journey to the imperial city had formed anucleus, round which the Hunnish auxiliaries in the neighbourhood ofRome had gathered, as he retrod his steps towards Pannonia; and alittle army of barbarians now accompanied him on the way. Those whohad been attached to him from his first arrival in the Hunnishterritory had not failed to magnify his deeds and reputation to everydetached troop who joined them. The favour in which he stood withAttila was told and commented on; and his power and influence, as wellas his courage, skill, and conduct, were so highly represented, thateach party tacitly submitted to his authority; and in all greatthings, such as the direction and general regulation of their march,suffered the young Roman to retain the command of the whole force, aswell as of his own particular followers.He was thus enabled to save the country through which he passed frompillage; and though two or three times reports reached him of bodiesof the imperial troops following his path, and even rumours of[AE]tius having returned, and being on his march across the fertileplains of Lombardy with a powerful army met his ear, he was happilyenabled to reach the foot of the Alps without having recourse to oneact of violence against any Roman citizen whatsoever.The spot where they now halted for the day was by the banks of one ofthose small lakes, whereof so many fertilize and beautify the lowerpasses of the Alps. On every side around rose up the mighty mountains;and over their wooded sides the clear masses of light and shade flewswift as the soft large clouds were borne by the quick wind throughthe lustrous summer's sky. It was evening time; and in all thethickets round about the nightingales--sweet untaught choristers, inwhose tuneful art no time nor cultivation can improve a tone orsweeten a single note--were chanting their thrilling anthem to the Godof nature. In the clear mirror of the lake, deep down appeared theinverted mountains, with the softened sky beyond, and every quickchange of light and shade.It was a lovely scene; and though the hearts of Theodore and Ildicahad now become sadly learned in the lessons of frequentdisappointment, yet that spot recalled their sweet refuge on the otherside of those dark Alps, where, amid the friendly Alans, they hadenjoyed some brief, but never to be forgotten, hours of unalloyeddelight. It recalled that place of refuge, and the hopes which theythere had felt; and though those hopes had again been disappointed,they blossomed anew, different, yet the same; changed a little in formand arrangement, but not less beautiful, not less sweet--flowers ofanother spring, but of the same kind, from the same stem, from thesame earth.They had pitched their tents in a situation which recalled theirformer resting-place the more strongly, as it was upon a projectingpoint a short way up the hill. Below them lay the encampment of theirHunnish followers, and around them the domestic servants of theirhouse; and as they sat there, and wisely encouraged once more thehappy feelings that were willing to return, Theodore urged that, asthey were now once more in safety, Ildica might give him her hand,whenever they could meet with a minister of religion to sanctify theirunion. Ildica said not one word against it; and as, with a slightblush and downcast eye she gave no unwilling consent, Theodore thoughther far more lovely than ever, although a shade of melancholy,gathered from frequent disappointment, anxiety, and grief, hung overher as if it had been a veil, seldom, if ever, raised entirely, evenin her happiest moments. That shade of melancholy also was somewhatdarker now, inasmuch as her fair and beloved mother had shown signs offailing strength under the long and weary journey which they had justbeen compelled to take. Theodore hoped that the day's repose whichthey were now enjoying in that calm scene might sufficiently restoreFlavia to proceed with comfort; but Ildica clearly saw that her mothercould bear no great fatigue; and from some casual words which hadfallen from her parent's lips, she had gathered that it was herintention, as soon as the double union of her children with those ofPaulinus had taken place, to retire for ever from the busy world, andpass her remaining days in one of those places of seclusion which wereat that time to be found in almost every part of the world. Ildicacould not contemplate such a separation without pain; and though sheshrunk not from her union with one whom she loved so deeply andintensely, yet she feared the parting with her mother, whom she hadloved so long, and who loved her so tenderly.Upon the brow of the promontory, Theodore and Ildica sat and gazed,and thought over the future, with sweet hopes and dark apprehensionscrossing the expanse of thought, like the sunshine and the shade thatflitted across the mountains before their eyes; and ever and anon theyspoke over many things, with that unreserved confidence which is oneof the sweetest drops in the ambrosial cup of love. Since they hadlast met, the tone of Ildica's mind had undergone some alteration. Ithad become deeper, more intense, more enthusiastic. In everything thatengaged her--though there might be fewer things that did so--she tooka profounder interest; and, whether it was her love for Theodore, herdevotion to the bright faith in which she had been reared, her lovefor her mother, or any other thing in which her heart was concerned,there was a depth, a strength, an energetic eagerness in her wholefeelings which raised and ennobled her still more than ever in theeyes of her lover.They sat and gazed. Wide spread over the valley below, and up thesides of the hill, even higher than themselves, might be seen variousparties of the Huns, seeking forage for their horses, or food forthemselves; and as the eye of Theodore was turned towards the entranceof the valley, where mountain falling over mountain seemed to close upthe pass, he thought he saw a considerable degree of bustle andmovement in a body of about thirty or forty of the barbarians, whom hehad marked winding down in that direction by the banks of a smallstream that entered the lake hard by. It subsided in a few minutes,however, and he took no further notice, pursuing his conversation withIldica, and looking on well pleased, while the Huns, in a spot void ofother inhabitants, engaged themselves in a thousand peacefuloccupations, as if they never sought for strife or dipped their handsin blood.Half an hour more had elapsed, or perhaps scarcely so much, andTheodore and Ildica were deep in the business of their own hearts,when suddenly a step sounded among the tents behind them,which--wherefore he knew not--made Theodore start and turn round.What was his astonishment when, not a spear's length from him, hebeheld Attila himself,[4] who, advancing with a slow step, lookedupon the young Roman with a smile as distinct as ever crossedhis stern, fixed countenance. The next moment, however, theglance of the barbarian monarch turned upon Ildica; and the light ofsuddenly-excited admiration shone forth from his eyes. It was butmomentary, however, and, addressing himself kindly to Theodore, hesaid, "So, my son, thou hast left the bright court of Valentinian tocome back to the barbarian. Thou art welcome; for I may chance to havemuch need of thee; and thou shalt find, as thou hast found, higherhonours and a kinder monarch in the land of the stranger than in thineown."---------------[Footnote 4: The march of the armies of Attila in all his expeditionsis very doubtfully displayed by ancient historians; but that in hisadvance into Italy he took and sacked the city of AugustaVindelicorum, or Augsburg, is clear, previous to the capture ofAquileia, and therefore that he must have traversed some part of theJulian or Rh[ae]tian Alps is equally certain. Any one who casts hiseye upon the map will see that his direct way into Italy, fromVindelicia, was by the passes of the Tyrol; and any one who isacquainted with the nature of the country will, if he take intoconsideration that the army of Attila consisted entirely of cavalry,conclude that the Brenner was the pass by which he conducted hismyriads towards the plains of Lombardy.]---------------Thus saying, he sat himself familiarly down upon the bank betweenTheodore and Ildica. She, however, rose, and was about to retire intothe tent; but he stopped her, gently saying, "Do not depart! Fear menot, fair one; I will not injure thee. Who is this, my son?" hecontinued, addressing Theodore--"is this thy sister?""Not so, oh king!" answered Theodore, who had always found it best tospeak to Attila the straightforward truth, without the slightestdisguise or concealment. "Not so: she is my promised bride, and in afew days will be my wife.""'Tis well!" said Attila; "'tis well! She is beautiful, and doubtlessgood. I will witness thy nuptials, and give thee the bridal present;for I hear, from those whom I met but now at the end of the valley,that thou needest a protector, and one shalt thou find in Attila."Ildica still stood lingering, as if anxious to retire; and the monarchof the Huns perceiving her embarrassment, added suddenly, "Well, hiethee in, then, fair one; thou fearest the barbarian king; but Attilacan be gentle to those he loves. I will pass this day with thee, myson; and this timid girl shall see that he whom she has been taught tolook upon as a cruel tyrant, can sit him down as peacefully to a calmand humble board as the most polished and effeminate Roman of them allcan cast himself on his couch to gorge upon a thousand dishes. Hiethee in, fair one; I will speak with thy lover alone."Ildica obeyed; and after she was gone Attila remained for severalmoments in a deep fit of thought. Then, raising his head, he turned tosome of his attendants who stood near, saying, "Get ye gone, and bringup hither the roe deer that the men took in the forest as we camealong, with what fish ye can find in the stream. Here will I take myevening meal. Get ye gone, all of you."The attendants departed as they were bid; and Attila again fell into adeep fit of thought, after which he turned to Theodore, and said,abruptly, "I am glad thou hast come back. This Valentinian, thiswoman-emperor, is insolent, and must be punished; and I am wellpleased that thou dwellest not among those who will soon feel thesword of Attila. Knowest thou what has happened in the East?""I heard as I went to Rome," said Theodore, "that the base murderer ofmy father, Theodosius, is no more; but I have heard no furthertidings, and only guess that the empire has fallen to his sister,Pulcheria.""And that Pulcheria has taken unto herself a husband," added Attila,"on whom she has conferred the rule of the land. We hear that he is abrave man and a wise man. If he be wise he will pay our tribute, or hewill have to do with a braver than himself.""Doubtless he will pay it," replied Theodore, with a sigh. "Hast thousent to demand it, oh mighty king?""I have," answered Attila. "For if it be not paid after conqueringRome, I march to Constantinople. But doubtless he will pay it.""Is this new monarch's name known?" demanded Theodore: "I know most ofthose who were in favour at the court of the East; but I know none onwhom Pulcheria was likely to shower such gifts.""His rise has been sudden," answered Attila. "He had gained somerenown as a soldier, and was a military tribune; but enjoyed no greatfavour with the empty Theodosius: his name is Marcian.""Marcian!" exclaimed Theodore, with joy sparkling from his eyes: "hewas the dearest friend of my dead father, and since my father's deathhas been equally the dear and considerate friend of his friend'schildren. He is, indeed, great as a warrior--noble and wise as a man."Attila's brow grew dark, as if he loved not to hear such praises ofthe Eastern emperor."Think you," he demanded, harshly, "that he will pay the tribute?Think you that he will yield obedience to our commands?""I think," replied Theodore, firmly, "that he will yield to no demandurged in a haughty tone. Were the greatest monarch on all the earth, Iwould rather have Marcian for my friend than for my enemy.""Ha!" cried Attila: "he had better set his naked foot upon an asp thancross my path of victory. Ha! what sayest thou? will he dare to raisehimself up against Attila?""Perchance not, oh great king," replied Theodore, "perchance not; butit will depend upon Attila's demeanour towards him. Marcian is noTheodosius. Bred in arms from his youth upward, his birthplace was thebattle-field; the camp his cradle; war and strife the sport of hisyouth; command the employment of his manhood. He is no silken reposeron soft couches, but a hardy soldier, for whom the palace willscarcely afford a pillow hard enough to prop his head. If Attilaentreat him fairly, Marcian is one to reverence and to love the highqualities of that mighty monarch, and to grant him the friendship thatone great man is fond to feel towards another; but if Attila declareshimself the enemy, and seeks to become the master of the emperor,Marcian will draw the sword, and it will never be sheathed till one orthe other lie in the cold grave. Oh Attila, you have never yet metwith Marcian. Better, oh king, better far to have him for your friendthan for your enemy!"Attila rolled his dark eyes fiercely as Theodore spoke; but for someminutes he answered not, and then, gradually resuming his sterncalmness, he said, "We shall see! We shall see! I seek not to wronghim--but we shall see! So this Macian was your father's friend; andyou know and love him yourself?""I do, oh Attila!" answered Theodore, "and I have cause. After myfather's death, Marcian sought out, protected, befriended me; enabledme and mine to pursue our flight in safety, and risked even theemperor's wrath in order to favour our escape. I love him dearly, andhe, for my father's sake, loves me. He is one of those men who, likethyself, oh king, are hard and firm as some fine gem, which nothingbut a gem will cut; but upon which, the lines once engraved no powerwill afterward remove; and there they last, as clear and definiteunder the wearing power of time as if nothing but a soft stream passedover them. My father's love will never be forgot.""The tribune might remember," said Attila, "what the emperor mayforget.""Not so, oh king!" answered Theodore: "Marcian changes not. The samewas he as a common soldier in the Roman ranks, as when a tribune,possessed of vast power. When in the lowest military station in thestate, his conduct, his manners, his mind, showed him worthy of thehighest; and when midway to power and dignity, unlike the changefulherd of ordinary men, authority sat as lightly on him as obedience.What he was as a soldier he was as a tribune, and will be as anemperor. Though not born in that high station, he was born for it; andnot only his virtues and his talents, but many another more marvellousindication showed that one day God would place in his hand thedestinies of the Roman people.""Indeed!" cried Attila, fixing his eye upon the young Roman with agreater expression of surprise than he ever manifested on any ordinaryoccasion. "Indeed! What were these portents?""They have been many, as I have heard," replied Theodore. "Escapesfrom danger almost miraculous; and twice, when sleeping in the openfield, an eagle has been seen to hover over his head, and shade himfrom the scorching sun. These I report but on hearsay. Once, however,I can speak myself to an event of the same kind. After a greatearthquake, some four years ago, he was coming from Salona toAspalathos, and was met by us upon the road. He pitched his tentwhere we encountered him; and while we were still with him, an eagle,which had followed his troop all day, came down and rested on thetent-pole."Attila started up and seemed troubled. "This is very strange," hesaid: "you were present yourself?""I was," answered Theodore. "There is no more doubt of it than that Istand here.""An eagle!" exclaimed the monarch: "so wild and fierce a bird toalight and rest amid a troop of men!""It is strange, indeed, oh king!" said Theodore, "most strange, but noless true; and its very strangeness made all men but himself believethat it was an indication of some future greatness."Attila replied not, but remained several minutes with his eyes bentupon the ground; and then, starting somewhat abruptly, he exclaimed,"Let us into thy tents, my son; I will eat with thee and drink withthee this night; and then leave thee till to-morrow, when thou shaltgo back with me to Tridentum. There my own ambassadors and those ofMarcian come to seek me; and as I will not ask thee to bear armsagainst thy country, instead of taking thee with me to sweep awayValentinian and tread upon Rome, I will send thee to this noblemonarch of the East. Thou mayst do more with him, perchance, than amere stranger."The heart of Theodore beat high, for he saw before him a prospect ofbetter things and happier days. The hope of a journey toConstantinople, where he might place Ildica, and all who were dear tohim, under the generous protection of Marcian, was in no slight degreejoyful, and he at length beheld, or imagined that he beheld, a certainand permanent refuge for the future, and a happy termination to allhis wanderings. Gladly, then, did he express his willingness to acceptthe office which Attila proposed to confer upon him; and though therewas something dark, and even gloomy, in the countenance of the king ashe followed the young Roman into his tent, yet the eyes of Theodorewere lighted up with joy and satisfaction, which spread itself to allaround.He found no opportunity of relating what had happened, or ofexplaining the hopes and prospects which had cheered his breast, yetIldica saw sufficient in the glad smile of Theodore's lip to feel surethat some new source of joy had been opened out for them all. Atheart, indeed, she was anxious for her mother, who, ill at ease, andreposing in another tent, entered not that in which the king partookof the evening meal with her children; but still the demeanour of themonarch himself, and the satisfaction which he saw upon thecountenance of Theodore, banished the darker apprehensions which hadmingled with her former hopes.The dark monarch of the Huns, retaining all his simple habits,drinking from the cup of horn, and served on no richer materials thanwood, unbent in the tent of the young Roman, as far as his own sternnature would suffer him to do, from the rigid gravity of his usualdemeanour. He spoke kindly and gently to Theodore and the rest, whomhe made sit around him, and from time to time his lip almost relaxedinto a smile at the wild, light spirit of Ammian, which would haveway, notwithstanding the overawing presence of that mighty andterrible man. On Eudochia he gazed as on a beautiful child; and thoughhe but seldom turned his eyes towards Ildica, yet when he did so therewas in them an expression which showed that her exquisite beauty,however graceful and refined, was appreciated by the barbarian monarchas much as it could have been by the most delicate sculptor of ancientGreece. Theodore, however, felt no alarm; and as soon as Attila hadmounted his horse and departed for his own camp, which was at thedistance of but a few miles, the young Roman hastened to communicateto Ildica and her mother his hopes and wishes. He told them theprospect of his being sent on a mission to Marcian; and he besoughther he loved to give him her hand, and to go with him as his bride tothe city of Constantine. Flavia's countenance lighted up with joy atthe thought, and Ildica said not nay. Again the time of their unionwas named, with but an intervening day, and Theodore lay down to restwith as much happiness as hope can pour into the human breast.CHAPTER XII.THE PURPOSE OF INJUSTICE.It was in a vast hall in the ancient city of Tridentum, hanging overthe Adige, where, rushing through the mighty rocks of the Rh[ae]tianAlps, that river pours on to fertilize the plains of Lombardy, thatAttila stood alone, on the evening of the day following his meetingwith Theodore. He had sent on messengers to demand the peacefulsurrender of the city; and he had promised, in simple but directterms, that if no resistance were shown, no violence should beoffered. The citizens, without any means of defence, gladly embracedthe chance of safety; and Attila, entering with a few thousand men,occupied the public places and buildings; while the innumerable armythat followed him lay encamped upon the mighty hills that sweep upround about the town, and the trembling inhabitants, shut up in theirhouses, waited in terrified expectation, hoping that the monarch'spromise might be kept, but fearing lest it should be broken.Attila stood alone; and little could he have brooked that any eyeshould behold the unwonted emotions that then shook his firm unbendingnature. To all his host it had become evident, indeed, that since hisencounter with [AE]tius a great change had come upon him; that hismind had lost a portion of its mighty calmness; that his strongpassions had been gradually triumphing over the powerful intellectwhich had alone sufficed to rule them. But none had ever beheld himmoved as he now was moved; and Attila himself, finding that he wasshaken by the tempest within his breast as he had never beforesuffered himself to be, grew fierce at his own weakness, and added tohis own emotions, by his very anger at not being able to suppressthem; and yet those emotions were not displayed like the passions ofordinary men.He stood in that hall alone, and remained for many minutes with hiseyes bent sternly on the ground, while over his harsh features passeda thousand shades of varying expression. But his form at first seemedcalm; and the only movement perceptible through his whole frame wasthe clasping and the unclasping of his left hand upon the hilt of hismassy sword. At length, however, he broke from that quiescentattitude, and strode quickly up and down the hall, then paused again,and once more gazed upon the marble pavement, enriched by thebeautiful art of ancient Rome with a thousand flowers and fruitssmiling up out of the cold stone.But the eye of Attila saw not the rich mosaic over which it wandered;and, after another deep, long pause, he exclaimed, "Why should I not?Is he not my slave, my prisoner? Is not his life and all he has mineown? That which I left to him upon sufferance, can I not resume when Iwill? By all the gods I will do it! He has had favours enough at myhands already. He may well sacrifice something to gratify Attila!" Andagain he fell into a fit of musing, which was at length broken by thedoor of the hall being slowly opened, and Onegisus, one of his mostattached chieftains, entering with a cautious and apprehensive step."So," said Attila, speaking to himself--"so--so I will do it. I wouldnot see his grief, nor hear his complaints--Ha! Onegisus! What seekestthou?""Pardon me, mighty king!" replied the chieftain; "I come from thy sonEllac. He finds not food enough for his troops upon the mountain, andhe would fain force these dronish citizens to give up the stores theyhave concealed from us in their houses.""Thou meanest he would fain plunder the city," replied Attila,sternly. "But it must not be: Attila has pledged his word. Tell him toseek for food in the valleys, or, if his troops be women, who cannotbear an evening's hunger, let him lead them down into the plainsbeyond. There shall he find food enough! Yet stay, Onegisus, I wouldspeak with thee on another matter. Ellac was busy at mine ear to-daywith the beauty of this maiden, this Roman girl, who, some people say,is to be the bride of Theodore. Thinkest thou," he continued, puttingon a tone of indifference--"thinkest thou that Ellac covets her forhimself? That cannot be, you know, unless she herself be willing; forI have promised protection both to him and her.""Not so, oh mighty king!" replied Onegisus, casting down his eyes,and, to speak but truth, appearing pained and embarrassed--"not so:Ellac has but lately taken unto himself a bride, as thou well knowest,and he seeks no other. He did but think that this maiden was toobeautiful to be cast away upon a stranger. Perhaps he fancied that shewere fair enough even to attract the love of such a king as Attilahimself.""Vain talk!" cried Attila, sharply. "She is very beautiful, it istrue--as fair, perhaps, as the eye of man has ever seen--but Attilahas other thoughts before him. Conquest! Victory! Onegisus, they shallbe the brides of Attila. Bear Ellac my message, and tell Ardaric Iwould take counsel with him."Onegisus retired without reply, and Attila remained waiting the comingof Ardaric; but the monarch had, with the words he had spoken, resumedhis habitual self-command: the sound of his own voice had recalled himto himself; and no trace of the varying passions which had latelyagitated him could now be seen upon his countenance.But, alas! Attila was not what Attila had been. The firm immoveablenature which he now assumed had then been really his own. He hadformerly been what he now appeared. A change, a sad change had comeover him since he had fought without conquering. He felt fallen fromthat height of irresistible power which he had once possessed: he feltirritated at its loss; angry with himself for the very irritation thathe felt; and obliged to have recourse to duplicity to conceal thechange from himself and others. For that duplicity again he contemnedhimself, and gave way to many a wilder passion, which had formerlybeen controlled, in order to relieve his thoughts from irksomecontemplation. He conquered almost all external appearances, however;the victory of his internal enemy was within. With him it was like asudden strife in a banquet hall, where contention raged fiercely inscenes that had once been calm, and where few signs betrayed to thosewithout that fury and wrath struggled within those halls, from thewindows of which the lights beamed calmly, except when a passingshadow, flitting rapidly across, told of some violent movement, thenature of which could hardly be divined.Thus seating himself in an ivory chair that stood at the farther sideof the hall, he waited for his friend and counsellor with a calmcountenance, playing with the hilt of his sword, and apparentlylistening to the murmurs of the river as it flowed by the building,and gazing upon the changeful light and shade as it danced upon theblue masses of the opposite mountains.Ardaric, however, was not long ere he appeared; but it was evidentthat there was some degree of embarrassment upon his countenance."Hast thou seen this new ambassador, my friend?" demanded Attila assoon as he approached. "Hast thou seen this Apollonius?""I have, oh king!" replied Ardaric; but there he paused, and spoke nofurther."What said he then?" exclaimed the monarch of the Huns, impatiently."Why art thou such a niggard of thy words, my friend? What answergives the puppet on the Eastern throne unto our just demand? What sayshe to our contract with Theodosius? Has he sent the tribute thereinpromised?""No tribute has he sent, oh Attila!" replied the King of theGepid[ae], looking suddenly up, as if forced at length to tellunpleasant tidings, and resolved to tell them plainly. "No tribute hashe sent, oh Attila! and touching the contract he replies, that it wasonly between Attila and a monarch that is dead; and that Marcian isnot Theodosius. Further, he declares that he will have no talk oftribute; and he bids your own ambassador say, that Marcian has goldfor his friends, but steel for his enemies."Attila had remained with his left hand resting on his sword; but as heheard the bold reply of Marcian to his demands upon the Easternempire, the long sinewy fingers clasped upon the hilt; and though heuttered not a word, he drew the blade half out of its sheath in theagony of suppressed rage, while his white teeth might be seen shutclose together, as if to imprison in his own breast the angry thoughtsthat struggled vehemently to burst forth. In the meanwhile Ardaric,who had now told the worst, and whose purpose was to sooth rather thanto irritate the Hunnish sovereign, hastened to add what he thoughtmight, in some degree, mitigate his wrath. "Nevertheless so, Attila,"he said, "though this man's words and actions are bold indeed, yet heis not without that reverence for the fame and might of Attila whichall inferior kings must feel; and this ambassador, this Apollonius, isloaded with presents far more costly and splendid than ever were wrungfrom the weakness of Theodosius."Attila sprang up from his seat, and grasping firmly the arm ofArdaric, he gazed sternly in his face, exclaiming, "Seek not to soothme, Ardaric, seek not to restrain my wrath! It is vain! It isunnecessary! The conduct of Attila shall not be governed by rage!Indignation shall have no share therein! Policy shall rule all: myconduct is determined; has been long determined, Ardaric; and thoushalt see that, provoked even to the utmost, Attila can play the lambtill the time be come for him to play the lion! Slaves, ho!" hecontinued, raising his voice; and instantly a number of attendantsrushed into the room, among the first of whom was Zercon, the blackjester of his dead brother Bleda.There was something in the sight that seemed to irritate the king,and, fixing his flashing eyes upon the hump-backed Moor, he cried,"Who bid thee hither? What dost thou, listening to the king's privatecounsel? Take him away; take the foul, impotent lump away, and strikethe eavesdropping ears from off his head! Away with him! Answer not,but let it be done! Thou!" he continued, to one of the attendants whohad followed--"thou! Get thee to this ambassador from the East. Tellhim that Attila has not time to give attention to such trifling thingsas the tribute due from Marcian; but, that as soon as he has a momentfor lighter affairs and things of no importance, he will see him. Inthe meantime, let him deliver the presents that he bears unto myofficers. Hence! Do my bidding quickly!"The attendants withdrew without a second warning; and Attila resumedhis conversation with Ardaric, who felt not a little relieved to findthat the mighty king to whom he had attached himself could still sofar govern his rage as to consult the dictates of good policy ratherthan those impulses of passion to which he had but too frequentlygiven way since his encounter with [AE]tius."I have thought over all this, my friend," said Attila, calmly, "sincea conversation which I held yesterday with the young Roman, Theodore."Ardaric marvelled somewhat at the cold epithet which Attila bestowedupon Theodore, whom, during the two or three last years, he had beenaccustomed to call, not the young Roman, but "my son," or "my adoptedson." Nevertheless he was well pleased that the conversation ofTheodore had produced such an effect, and he replied, "Thy conduct, ohAttila! shows that you have considered well, and, as ever, havedetermined wisely.""I think I have, my friend," replied Attila; "for if I had not,indignation would have trampled upon reason, and I should have beentempted to abandon that in which I am engaged, to tread upon the neckof the dog that thus snarls at my heels. But, as I have told thee,ever since that conversation I have thought over this. The youth, itseems, has known this Marcian for many a year, and tells me that heis, as he shows himself, bold, cautious, and vigilant. Now, thoughValentinian and Marcian separately are but as scorpions, on whichAttila would set his sandal's sole without a fear, yet the bite of thetwo might be dangerous, or at least painful. As it is, [AE]tius,possessed of Gaul, and planning to raise himself up there a separatekingdom, looks on not unwillingly while I crush the petty sovereignwhom he has long despised and ruled. But if Marcian, joined toValentinian, were to give the Western emperor a chance of resistingAttila with success, [AE]tius would be obliged to unite his forces totheirs, lest, at an after period, they should march together to punishthe rebellious or negligent subject, who left them to struggleunassisted against the mighty power of the Huns.""Wisely and well hast thou considered all things, oh Attila! I, lesspolitic, had only thought of the union of Marcian with Valentinian asdangerous to us. But if the power of the East and the West wereswelled by all the forces of Gaul, armies might be collected which,perchance, we should find to be overwhelming. How, then, oh Attila, doyou purpose to deal with Marcian.""As a skilful fowler, Ardaric, when he approaches his half-sleepinggame, coming nearer and nearer while he pretends to be looking andgoing another way. We will treat his ambassador as if angry, but notenraged past all endurance. We will send him back with messagesregarding the tribute, which will seem as if we were more covetous ofgold than of honour, and would, perhaps, take a part, if we could notobtain the whole. Thus shall he lull himself with embassies; while we,marching on, sweep Valentinian from the earth, lay Rome in ashes, andscatter the dusty fragments of her once mighty power unto all thequarters of the earth over which her empire in other days extended.Still, as we advance and conquer, as if wholly absorbed in the greatundertaking before us, we will make greater and greater concessions tothis Marcian, and he, if he be a true Roman, will exact more and more,till at length, with justice on our side and conquest on our sword,our strength united and increased, and our troops fresh from victory,we will pour into the fertile plains of Greece, and, with our free andmartial tribes, leave not a trace of any former yoke throughout theland. If my foot shall ever again tread the plains of Thrace, neveragain, so guard me all the gods who have made me what I am, will I goback one single step so long as one stone of all Byzantium remainsupon another!"He was still going on, when a door at the farther end of the hallopened, and the attendant whom he had sent to the ambassador presentedhimself. The man paused for a moment, with a pale countenance, as ifuncertain whether to advance or not. He was evidently under theinfluence of terror; but Attila's irritation had subsided whilepouring forth his plans into the ear of Ardaric, and he made theattendant a sign to advance, with an expression of countenance whichpartly reassured him. Hurrying forward, then, he cast himselfprostrate at the feet of the king, exclaiming, "How shall I dare, ohmighty Attila, to relate the bold words of the most insolent Romanthat ever approached thy presence?""Speak, speak!" said Attila: "thou art pardoned, if any pardon beneedful, for repeating what it imports the king to hear. Speak! whatsaid the ambassador?""His reply, oh king," answered the attendant, looking up, and halfdoubting the assurances of pardon that he heard--"his reply was, 'TellAttila the king, that though the time of the servant of Marcian is ofless value than the time of the monarch of the Huns, yet the dignityof the emperor must not be trifled with, and his ambassador is not oneto sacrifice it. If Attila be willing to see me, let him fix the timeand keep it. Hither have I followed him to Tridentum, from the wildsof Upper Dacia, and I will follow no farther, to be a spectacle to hisnation or to others. As to the presents, they are of little import;some thirty vases of solid gold, and some caskets of jewels; but, ifAttila would have them, he must receive them with his own hands. Tohim were they sent, and to none other will I deliver them.' Such werehis words, oh mighty king," continued the attendant--"I have repeatedthem truly, and if I have offended, let me die!"To the surprise of the attendant, and even of Ardaric, something likea grim smile passed over the harsh features of the Hunnish king. "Heis a bold knave, this ambassador," he said; "he is a bold knave, andwell chosen to do a dangerous embassy! Tell him to get him hence, andtake his presents with him! Say also that Attila, though he lovescourage, will not bear insolence, and therefore it is he will not seethis man. However, he is not willing to lose the friendship ofMarcian, who promises to fill the royal seat of the old C[ae]sars morenobly than late monarchs have done, and therefore Attila will sendback unto him Theodore, the son of his friend Paulinus, with power totreat of things that concern the friendship of the two nations. Heshall accompany the ambassador on his way. Go! tell him the words ofthe king."Ardaric, at the mention of the mission of Theodore, suddenly cast downhis eyes and bit his lip; and as soon as the attendant had risen fromAttila's feet and departed, he exclaimed, "Hear me, oh Attila, andtake thought before you determine upon sending this young Roman onsuch a task to the new emperor. Theodore is bold and faithful, I knowit well, and love him truly. But he is one of those who will think hisduty to his country superior to aught else on earth. He will reveal toMarcian all your plans and purposes, tell all the secrets of yourcourt, and of the past as far as may affect the future, and think it aduty to caution Marcian against trusting to the semblance ofmoderation you put on.""Wouldst thou do so, Ardaric, if thou wert a Roman?" asked Attila,with a smile; and then, before his friend could answer, he added,"Perhaps thou wouldst. In truth, I believe so. But I am preparedagainst that also, Ardaric. This Theodore has now with him abeautiful--a most lovely girl--his promised bride; and even to-morrowmorning he fondly thinks she shall be his. He is mistaken, Ardaric;for I will keep her and her mother here, as sureties for his doing mybidding to the letter--as hostages for his speedy return. Howeverstrong may be his wishes to serve his country, be you sure that natureand passion will have its way. What is it that passion will not do? Towhat will it not blind our eyes? What will it not make us see inthings the most different? With this Theodore, it will act to give thefairest colouring to everything that may keep Marcian at peace withAttila, and give him the opportunity of returning speedily to claimhis beautiful Dalmatian bride. He will tell no tales, Ardaric! He willgive no advice! He will speak no warnings that may raise up an eternalbarrier between him and that most lovely woman! He will think he doeshis duty to his country, and will do it, as far as nature will lethim; but passion will still have a voice in the council of his bosom,and make him do his duty unto me!"Ardaric made no reply, but looked gravely down upon the ground, andAttila fixed his eyes upon him for several moments, as if in surpriseat his silence. But there was something in the breast of Attila, aconsciousness, a sense of duplicity even towards Ardaric, which madehim forbear to question his friend. Attila was afraid to ask whyArdaric replied not! Attila, the mighty, the unconquered, theunconquerable Attila, was cowed by his own heart! Yes, Attila wasafraid!CHAPTER XIII.THE BITTER DISAPPOINTMENT.It was the same hall, but the things within it were changed. It blazedwith lights; it was crowded with people; and the leaders of theHunnish host stood round Attila the King, while in the clear deeptones of command he gave directions for their march on the followingday. On his left hand, at some distance from the chair in which hesat, appeared a group in the Roman dress, consisting of Ildica,Ammian, Eudochia, and Theodore, with a number of the household slavesof Flavia, and the barbarian followers of the young Roman gatheredtogether behind them.Seated in the midst of her children was Flavia, the only person exceptthe monarch who did not stand; but there was the weariness of illnesson her face and in her attitude, and the chair she occupied had beenlooked upon by her and her family as a token of Attila's kindobservation.Suddenly the tones of Attila ceased as he gave his last commands tothe leaders round him, and then, after a pause, he exclaimed,"Theodore! Come hither, my son; the king has a duty to impose onthee!"Theodore gave a bright glance to Ildica, and advanced till he stoodbefore the monarch, his countenance beaming with happy anticipations,and his heart beating high with the glad hope of soon bearing hissweet bride back to their own dear land. But the countenance of Attilawas stern and grave; and Ardaric, who stood on his right hand, castdown his eyes as Theodore approached."My son," said Attila, "thou art very young, and yet unto thee am Iabout to intrust a mission on which may depend the lives of millions,the fate of empires, and the destiny of the whole world. The monarchof the East has sent unto me hither a bold and insolent ambassador;and were I to read the feelings of Marcian in the conduct of hismessenger, I should instantly employ those arms which carried deathand victory to the shores of the [AE]gean Sea not many years ago, tohumble the pride and punish the faithlessness of this new emperor. ButI have heard what thou canst tell of him--thou who hast known him fromthy childhood; and Attila is inclined to respect and love Marcian.Attila may be his friend, if Marcian will; for while he treads uponthe worm and struggles with the tiger, he admires the lion and theeagle--kings in their kind like himself. Go, then, to this thy friend:return to him with the ambassador he has sent hither, and tell him thewords of Attila. Say, if thou wilt, that on thy report of his greatnobleness, Attila desires rather to be at peace than at war withMarcian; and ask what he will do to gain our friendship. It is not thepitiful thought of a few ounces more or less of yellow earth thatmoves Attila; and if Marcian be poor, let him say so; but justiceAttila will have in all things, and his honour and dignity will hedefend so long as he has life. Go, then, to Marcian; tell him thesethings. Tell him what Attila is, and bring us speedily thine answer.If thou usest diligence, thou wilt find us between this and Rome. Seekthe envoy from the East, and depart with him. Thou shalt have thetrain of a prince to honour Attila's mission, and gold to pay thyjourney through a sordid land and among a grasping people.""Willingly, oh Attila!" replied Theodore, "do I accept the charge; andhonouring thee, as I do from the depth of my heart, for all the nobledeeds that I have seen, and loving thee for all the kind ones thouhast done to me and mine, I will labour with the zeal of trueaffection to do thy bidding well."As he spoke, a red flush came over Attila's forehead; and a large veinthat wandered through the broad skin of his uncovered temples swelledand wreathed like a snake caught under the fork of a husbandman.Theodore, however, marked not the unwonted emotion, and went on. "Nordo I doubt," he said, "success in my undertaking; for, in the samemanner, do I love and honour Marcian for the same noble deeds and thesame kindness unto me and mine. I hope, I trust, I think that he lovesme too, and therefore do I judge that I, perchance--however young andinexperienced I may be--that I may succeed better than one older and astranger. Give me but to-morrow for repose, and on the following day Iam ready to set out.""Thanks for thy willingness, my son," replied Attila, "and thanks alsofor thy love; but thy young limbs scarcely do need repose, and thetime thou seekest cannot be afforded thee. By the first ray of lighttomorrow morning this insolent ambassador must leave the camp, andthou must go with him on the way."Theodore's countenance fell. "Alas!" he said, "I have told thee, ohking! that after many a painful year of absence I have found andbrought with me my promised bride, one to whom my heart is tied bybonds of old affection, with whom my childish hours were spent, towhom the thoughts of youth have all been given--"Attila made animpatient gesture with his hand. "Thou hast thyself promised, ohking," added Theodore, quickly, "to witness and confirm our union.""And so I will," answered Attila, sharply, "when thou returnest fromthe mission on which I send thee.""Oh, let it be before," exclaimed Theodore, eagerly--"oh, let it bebefore. I ask but a day, a single day, and then all can go with me toour native land, my bride, my mother, my sister, and her promisedhusband, Ammian. Once more re-established in peace, in the brightcountry of our birth, all my hopes will be fulfilled, and--""And thou wilt never return to Attila," said the deep voice of theking."On my life, on my soul, on my hopes of happiness in this life andhereafter," exclaimed Theodore, vehemently, "I will return if I be inlife, ere two months be over, and bring thee an account of my missionand its success.""It cannot be," said Attila, sternly--"it must not, and it cannot be.Youth, I will not tempt thee by granting thy request. We are allsubject to be led astray. Nature is strong within us, is stronger farthan all good resolutions; and with thy bride, thy mother, and thyfamily beneath the shield of Marcian, in thy native land, thou wouldsthave strong temptation to remain, and bitter agony of heart to leavethem all and come back hither. I say not that the frail thread whichbound thee to return would even then be broken; but I say that Attilawill never willingly stretch it more than it is formed to bear. Thymother and thy bride shall stay with me; not as a pledge for thy goodfaith, for even wert thou to prove faithless, Attila would neverinjure those beneath his protection; but as inducements to make thyreturn speedy and joyful. Thy bridal must not be till thou hast seenMarcian and return to me. Attila has said it, and his words are notrevoked."The angry blood rushed up into Theodore's cheek, and his eyes sparkledas few were accustomed to flash in the presence of that mighty andterrible monarch. "Then, oh king," he exclaimed, in a sharp voice,"then, oh king--"But at that moment a hand was laid upon his arm, and Flavia,anticipating the refusal that was about to burst from his lips, stoodby his side, saying, in a low voice, "Go, my son, go! obey the will ofthe king!" but her interposition seemed to come too late, for the darkthunder cloud of wrath had gathered heavy on the brow of Attila; andwhile the chieftains near gazed with painful apprehension on theunwonted signs of emotion which he had suffered to appear, hedemanded, in a voice that rolled like distant thunder round the hall,"Darest thou dispute the commands of Attila?"Theodore's eye quailed not, however, under that fierce glance; and,with his spirit all in arms, as it was at that moment, he might havereplied with words that would have sealed his fate for ever: butwithout waiting to hear him speak, Ildica, trembling with apprehensionfor him she loved, but filled with energetic resolution by that verylove itself, glided past him, and kneeling at the feet of Attila,raised her hands towards him in earnest supplication."Forgive him, oh mighty king!" she cried, "forgive him! He will gowillingly; he will go, and do thy bidding truly and faithfully. I, Iwill be the hostage for his faith and his obedience. Forgive him, ohforgive him! and let not your great soul be moved by the momentaryrashness of one who loves thee well, and will serve thee, as he hasserved, honestly, truly, bravely, zealously."The cloud cleared away from the brow of Attila as he gazed upon thatbeautiful creature kneeling at his feet, and he replied at once, "Heis forgiven; let him do our bidding, and return. We will protect theeand thy mother till he comes again, and none shall harm thee. Thou artrash, oh Theodore, and hasty in thy youth; but Attila is great enoughto be able to forgive: and, to show thee that thou art quite forgiven,we will grant thee one favour. But yesterday we were told that yonyouth, Ammian thou callest him, and the maiden, thy sister, wereplighted to each other, and that for his and her sake it was that thoufleddest from Valentinian. Thou thyself must return to seek thy brideand her mother; but, if thou wilt, thy sister, ere the earth be threedays older, shall give her hand to him, and follow thee with ourpresents to the court of Marcian."Theodore turned with a melancholy smile to Ammian and Eudochia, who,in the anxiety of the moment, had advanced to his side. He sawhappiness in the bright eyes of the one and in the blushing, downcastface of the other; and then, looking again towards Attila, he replied,"My bitter disappointment, oh king! shall neither make me selfish norungrateful. I receive your offer as a favour, and am thankful for itas such. Let their union take place, oh king, as speedily as may be,and let them join me in Thrace. It will take, at least, from my mindpart of the load which bears it down, to see them in peace andsecurity.""Be it so, then," replied Attila--"be it so. They shall follow theequickly. Thou knowest thy mission; thou knowest my will. Earlyto-morrow morning, with thine own attendants and those that I shallsend unto thee, thou settest out for Constantinople. So fare thee wellupon thy journey! All now may go--Attila seeks rest."With a sad but calm brow Theodore led Ildica and Flavia from the greathall of the palace of Tridentum to a distant part of the samebuilding, in which a lodging had been assigned to them. Eudochia andAmmian followed; but no one spoke for some time, till at length, whenthey re-entered the chamber from which they had been summoned to thepresence of Attila, Ildica raised her eyes, and gazed sorrowfully inthe face of her lover. Flavia, too, paused and looked upon them for amoment with a sad and heavy heart; and then, beckoning to Ammian andEudochia, she departed, and left the two alone.Ildica cast herself upon the bosom of Theodore, and they both weptbitterly. "Oh, my Theodore! oh, my beloved!" cried Ildica, as soon astears would let her.He pressed her to his heart in silence; but, ere he could find wordsto reply, the door of the chamber was thrown open by one of thehousehold slaves of Flavia, crying, "One of the barbarian kings, nobleTheodore, would speak with you instantly;" and, almost as he spoke,Ardaric entered the chamber. The King of the Gepid[ae] pointed to thedoor, and the slave, who gazed upon him with some wonder, instantlyclosed it and retired. Then advancing to Theodore, Ardaric took him inhis powerful arms, and pressed him frankly to his bosom."Theodore, my brother," he said, speaking the language of the Huns,which Ildica did not understand--"Theodore, I love you well, andgrieve for you. We have fought together, and been enemies; we haveeaten bread together, and been friends. Our enmity has been wiped out,our friendship never can; and I think that Attila deals hardly withthee. But look to thy fair bride," he continued; "she looks pale andfaint: let her go from us; I will not keep thee long; but yet I wouldfain speak with thee ere thou departest.""Ildica, my beloved," said Theodore, in the Latin tongue, but speakingslowly, so that Ardaric might hear and comprehend what he said, "thisis one of my best and noblest friends. While I am absent, thou maysttrust safely in him. He has something of importance to tell me, and Iwill seek thee again instantly!"Ildica made no reply, but retired into the inner chamber to hermother."Thou hast spoken truly, my friend," continued Ardaric: "she may trustin me when you are gone! and she may have cause to trust. Attila hasdealt hardly with thee, I know not why. I love not to inquire. Let menot wrong him by suspicions; but ever since that fatal battle in Gaulhe has been an altered man. Had he been always thus, he would neverhave reached the height of power he has attained. He has grown morelike his brother Bleda, jealous, hasty, intemperate--ay, and deceitfultoo. He may hide his future purposes from mine eyes, perchance; butArdaric knows that he is changed, and is upon his guard.""I see it too," cried Theodore--"I see it too; but even if this changebodes ill to me, what can I do to guard myself against it? What evil,think you, he meditates against me?""Nay, I cannot tell," said Ardaric: "I know not, nor will pretendto guess; and as to guarding against it, I can give but oneadvice--return as speedily as may be. Lose no time; fear not to killyour horses; and as you named two months to Attila himself, be not asingle hour beyond that time, as you value happiness and peace.""But why," exclaimed Theodore, "why think you that his wrath pointsmore particularly to me?""I know not well how to answer," replied Ardaric. "When we see a dullgray vapour gathering over the western sky, we say there will be atempest soon. When we see the light clouds making the mottled heavenlook like a dappled steed, we augur it will rain. Light signs forbodeheavy storms; and when I see many a changeful variation in the mood ofa man once so firm and steadfast, I am apt to augur evil, and to guesswhere it may fall. Towards you, to whom he was once kind as the springrain, Attila is now harsh and fierce, and I argue thence that, forsome cause, you have lost that favour which shielded you hitherto. Butthere is another reason why I bid you be upon your guard. You oncetarried long, I have heard, in the house of Bleda, the brother of theking, and must have often seen his daughter Neva.""Often, very often," answered Theodore: "a sweet, devoted, beautifulgirl, whose whole happiness seemed to rest in doing good to others.But I injured her not!""Thy fate seems of deep interest to her," replied Ardaric, with apassing smile, "for she sought me out this evening as we wereencamping on the hills--""Is she here, then?" cried Theodore, in surprise."Yes, and thousands of others," answered Ardaric: "the camp is full ofwomen. One would guess we were going to people some uncultivated land,for we bear almost all our women and children with us. But Neva ishere; for, alas, poor girl, her home is now desolate. Her mother diedsome few weeks ago. But, as I have said, not only the men of the land,but the women of the land also, have come forth to war.""Then I shall leave my Ildica," said Theodore, "with a lighter heart.Where there are women, she will find some to pity and console her.""Many, I trust," answered Ardaric; "but let me tell you, for the timewears, that this fair girl, Bleda's daughter, for whose orphan statemy heart has often ached, sought me out this evening, and, calling you'her brother Theodore,' besought me to aid and to support you againstyour enemies. Her words were somewhat wild and rambling; but it wasevident she had reasons to fear that evil threatened you.""Upon the journey?" demanded Theodore."No, no!" rejoined Ardaric. "I cannot tell you my own suspicions: Imust not repeat the words she spoke. We may be both mistaken; and,even were we right, our warning could be of no avail if you neglect tofollow the advice I have given. Hasten to Marcian; lose not an hourupon the road; fulfil your mission quickly, and bring back a reply, orgood or bad, without delay. Suffer yourself not to be entangled by anyone in long discussions; but simply tell your message, receive youranswer, and return within the space that you yourself have mentioned.In your absence I will protect, as far as may be, the precious pledgesthat you leave behind; my wife is in the camp; and though she speaksnot their tongue, our hearts, oh Theodore! shall speak for us. Ardarichas some power, and it shall be used for your service. Now fare youwell, for I must leave you;" and pressing Theodore once more in hisarms, he turned and left the apartment.The young Roman paused for a moment in deep thought; and then, with aheavy heart, sought those from whom he was to part so soon.CHAPTER XIV.THE MARRIAGE AND THE DEATH.Trent was still in the possession of the Huns--though the main body oftheir innumerable host had passed on--when, on the third day after thedeparture of Theodore, two young and beautiful beings stood before thealtar of the high church of that venerable city, in youth's brightestday to pass youth's brightest hour. There is certainly, in thatpeculiar moment of happiness in which the young heart of woman plightsits full faith to the man she loves, a beautifying influence, whichgives to features not otherwise remarkable a loveliness of expressionthat they possess not at other times. It is the beaming forth of thesweet chastened joy of fulfilled hope and gratified love: it is thepicture presented by the speaking face of many of those beautifulfeelings whereof external loveliness is but the type and symbol. Joy,timid modesty, pure affection, bright hope, unshaken faith, thefruition of long-nourished wishes, the fulfilment of the brightestexpectation of a woman's heart--all, all are there when she kneelsbefore the altar with the man she loves, to bind that solemn tie whichnothing but the grave should break.There knelt Eudochia by the side of Ammian; and though a slight shadeof sympathizing melancholy stole across the sunshine of her face whenshe turned her eyes on Ildica, yet her look was as bright as hope andhappiness could make it, and in the serious but still enthusiasticcountenance of her young lover might be read, in its very gravity, adeeper happiness than ever his lighter smiles betrayed.Ildica, poor Ildica, had twined the flowers in the fair bride's hair;and though a tear had fallen upon them, spangling their sweet leaveslike a drop of morning dew, yet she had struggled hard to banish everyselfish regret, and share to the full in the joy of those dear beingswhose union, and, as she trusted, whose happiness that day was tosecure.Beside Ildica stood her mother; but oh! what a sad change had thepassing of less than five years wrought in the fair form of Flavia,since first we saw her on the bright shores of the Adriatic. She hadknown grief, deep grief before that period; she had tasteddisappointment, and undergone misfortune of many kinds: but there is atime of life when the springs of health and sources of enjoyment flowup so full and bounteously, that the most scorching heat cannot drythem up; when the earthquake itself cannot overwhelm them; when stillthey flow on, under the fiercest sun of summer, and are but choked upin one place to burst forth and sparkle in another. But there comes anafter period, when, choked up and nearly obliterated by the sands oftime, the fire of lesser misfortunes will exhaust them quite, andleave the empty fountain, the dried-up spring, without a drop of waterto moisten the lip of hope. So had it been with Flavia: themisfortunes of her early years, the loss of her loved husband, thetyranny of a capricious and greedy monarch, an anxious widowhood,watching over her orphan children, had rendered the stream of lifecalm and dull, but had not diminished its waters nor seemed likely toshorten its course. But when a later epoch of existence had come on,and fresh sorrows, labours, anxieties, and cares had fallen fast abouther, the very hopes she had nourished, and the placid joys which hadrendered life verdant, faded by the wintry blast of latedisappointment, like the withered leaves of winter trees above afountain, had dropped fast and thick, and filled up the very well oflife itself. Her step was feeble; her once bright eye was dim; andthough the graceful line of that fair form remained, though the blackhair was little more silvery than before, and the white teeth had lostnone of their ivory purity, yet the pallour of her countenance, thebloodless lip, the languid, drooping eyelid, and the quick, difficultrespiration, all spoke that "the body was broken by its cares andlabours," and the spirit, weary of its ruined tenement, was hesitatingwhether it should not fly for repose.She gazed, however, with a bright and cheering smile upon Ammian andEudochia, as they knelt to pledge that sacred vow which she, too,hoped and believed would secure for them as much happiness as thisworld could bestow. She herself felt within her bosom rise up at thesight the memory of bright hopes and aspirations passed away, and thespring of life for the moment flowed more freely. They, as they lookedupon her, saw a happy change, and gladdened their own hearts by thethought that her health was better, and looked forward to the futurewith hopes for her as well as for themselves.Others, however, were present in the church; and Attila himself, witharms folded on his bosom, stood not inattentive to the words which aChristian priest addressed to the fair young beings met together thereto be parted no more. That priest was a venerable and a fearless man;and after his blessing had been spoken, and the indissoluble contractsealed, he poured forth an exhortation to maintain and hold fast thepurer faith in which they had been educated, touching boldly on thedoctrines of his holy religion as conrasted with the pagansuperstition of many who heard him, and appealing to the consciencesof all men to decide whether sublime purity of soul and body were notthe doctrines which God might teach and men revere.Attila listened in silence, though many of the barbarian chieftainsaround frowned angrily to hear their ancient faith assailed from thelips of one of a people whom they looked upon as conquered and troddenupon under foot. Attila, however, listened, as we have said, insilence; and only twice during all that ceremony did he take his eyesfrom the priest, to turn them for a moment upon the lovely countenanceof Ildica, and glance over that unrivalled form which might well havemade the sculptor blush at his imperfect works. They were withdrawn asquickly as turned thither, and he fixed them on the priest again, andlistened to his glowing eloquence as one who could admire, thoughunconvinced.The ceremony was over, the prayer prayed, the exhortation made. Thefeet of Ammian's horse was heard without pawing impatiently theground; the litter which was to bear Eudochia into Thrace wasprepared; the slaves who were to accompany her, and the guards whichAttila had directed to conduct them in safety to the frontiers of theEastern empire, stood ready before the gate. But when the bridegroomand the bride rose up from the altar, without turning to bid theirmother farewell, they advanced hand in hand to Attila, and knelttogether at his feet."Oh, great king!" said Ammian, "thou hast made us happy, and we haveto beseech thee to add yet one favour more. To return unto our nativeland is joy, for we love no land like that; but if our mother returnnot with us, the joy withers, and, like a flower in the night, it maybe beautiful, but we cannot see it for want of the sunshine to make itexpand. Let us beseech thee, then, oh king! crown thy great goodnessunto us, and either let our mother and our sister bear us company onthe way, or let us remain here till they may go there too."Attila listened with the same calm, steadfast look which in formerdays used never to be absent from his countenance; and no features ofhis face could have betrayed the slightest emotion produced by thewords of Ammian. When the youth had done, he replied, "Thy mother andthy sister must not depart; and I have promised the son of Paulinusthat thou shouldst join him with his sister in Thrace."He paused for a moment, and thought deeply, turned his eyes to Ildicaand Flavia, and then added, "Nevertheless, ye shall stay or go, asyour mother wills. If ye go not, the breach of the promise be uponyou. Attila has prepared to fulfil it; but he will not, he cannotdrive a son from a mother, and that mother ill as she is."Ammian and Eudochia rose and clung to Flavia, each exclaiming, "Oh letus stay, my mother! let us stay till Theodore returns!"Flavia pressed them to her heart, and kissed the fair brow of thatsweet girl; but she did not reply for some moments; while Eudochia,linking her hand in that of Ildica, exclaimed, "Plead for us, dearIldica! Plead for us, my sister!" and Ildica turned her lustrous eyesupon her mother, as if doubting and inquiring what she should do.To Flavia it was a moment of the most intense pain, to which the heartof any mortal being can be subject--it was the struggle of dutyagainst the tenderest, the noblest of human affections. It was a dyingmother placing one of her children in safety, with the certainty ofnever beholding him again, even while obliged to leave another in themidst of perils without any support. It was a moment of most intense,intolerable pain; and yet she conquered it."Eudochia," she said, calmly, "it must not be, my beloved child!Ammian, do not agitate and distress me! Theodore might wait for you.Your staying might delay his return. At all events, it is but for ashort time that we are parted," and she raised her eyes to heaven,while her lips still moved, but in silence. "Go, my children, go," shesaid: "hasten Theodore's return; bear him my blessing.""Must it be, my mother?" cried Ammian."It must, beloved!" answered Flavia, kissing him. "Take her, oh takeher from me," she added, unclasping the arms of Eudochia, who clunground her knees weeping. "Dear, affectionate girl, farewell! Take her,Ammian, take her! God's blessing and her mother's be upon you, mysweet children!" Ammian raised Eudochia, and half bore, half led herfrom the church.The eyes of Attila remained fixed upon the countenance of Flavia witha deep, earnest, contemplative gaze, which might have been painful toher had not other feelings absorbed every thought; and when, as Ammianand Eudochia disappeared through the portal, Flavia raised her robe toher eyes, and for the first time wept, Attila, the stern, dark Attilahimself was moved, and pressing his sinewy hand upon his brow, heexclaimed aloud, "Noble, noble woman!" Then turned, and, as if stungby some sudden pang, strode hastily out of the church.There came a sound of rude music from without, and of young voicessinging, as a troop of boys and girls, gathered together for themarriage, accompanied Eudochia and Ammian on their way to the gate ofthe city. But oh, how strange and harsh sounded that bridal song uponthe ears of the sad few who remained within the church! Flavia stoodand wept; and the large drops rolled slowly over the fair cheek ofIldica. But at length Ardaric, who had not followed Attila when hedeparted, advanced, and in a kindly tone which spoke to their hearts,notwithstanding his small knowledge of their language, bade them takecomfort."Let us leave this place," he said at length. "You have need, lady, ofrepose: to-morrow night the last of our forces leave Tridentum. Itwere needful for thee to pass all the intervening time in repose: andif thou wouldst take some simples, such as our people know well how toprepare, it might give thee strength for the journey. But let us leavethis place--the sight of it only makes thee grieve.""Let those sounds cease without, and then I will go," replied Flavia;and as soon as all was quiet in the street, the mother and thedaughter, left alone in the midst of a strange and barbarous host,took their sad way back towards the dwelling which they had inhabitedsince their arrival in the city of Trent. There Ardaric left them;and, entering into their own apartments, Flavia sent away all theslaves.As soon as she was alone with her daughter, to the surprise and griefof Ildica, the lady sunk upon her knees at her own child's feet."Pardon me, Ildica, pardon your mother," she said--"pardon yourmother, if, in the agony of this day, and in the anxiety to securesafety and happiness for one child, I have failed to purchase, even athis risk, support and protection for another."Ildica cast her arms around her, and striving hard to smile, she said,"Alas, alas! dear mother, why should you ask pardon of me? Know younot that your Ildica would gladly, willingly sacrifice everything butvirtue, and honour, and the love of those who love her, to secure thehappiness of her dear brother and the sweet sister of her infancy. Ohno, think not that I regret even for a moment that you have sent themfrom us, if by their presence they could not have comforted andsupported you. Ildica has a resolute heart, my mother, and can bear,with strong determination, whatever fate her God may send her. Withher own hand she can protect her honour, if need should be; and shefears nothing else; for death is little terrible to her, and that isthe worst that can befall.""But, alas! you know not all, my child," answered Flavia, sinking intothe seat to which her daughter led her, but still holding Ildica'shand, and gazing in her face. "Dear, beloved girl. I am dying!""Speak not such cruel words, dear mother," replied Ildica, not knowinghow terribly the ravager had proceeded in the frame of the loved beingwho was now her only support. "I see, indeed," she added, "that youare far from well; but I trust that fatigue and anxiety is the chiefcause, and that now you have seen so happy an event as the marriage ofour dear Ammian with Eudochia; now that you know them to be in safety;now that the speedy prospect of returning to our own land is openbefore us; now that nothing is wanting to our future peace andhappiness but Theodore's return--I trust, I hope, I am sure, dearmother, that joy will prove a good physician, and restore you quite.""Ildica," answered Flavia, "let us not deceive ourselves, my child. Ishall never see the Dalmatian shores again. How long this shatteredprison may keep the struggling spirit in its ruined walls, I know not;but in my bosom there is kept a fatal calendar, whereon is marked howmuch each day takes from the small remaining store of life, and I feelthat that store is nearly gone. Like a spendthrift with his treasure,Ildica, I would now fain hoard the little that remains, but know nothow, and fear that it will fail me soon. When, five days ago, wehalted by the little lake in those grand mountains, I felt that deathwas coming, but still thought that repose might keep him yet at bay,and give me time to reach some surer resting-place. But in that day'srepose, the active enemy still strode on his way; the next day'sjourney brought him nearer still; and the sad scene of your dearTheodore's parting led him onward almost to the door. I have shut myear while he knocked, listening to Hope while Ammian's bridal has goneforward; but I felt that Death went with me into that church, and hascome hither to sit beside me till I follow him to a brighter land,where the dark herald leaves us for ever at the gate."Ildica wept bitterly; and her mother, after pausing for severalminutes, proceeded:--"Must I tell thee not to weep, my child? Nay, Iwill not do thee so much wrong! Yes, weep, my Ildica! weep as I wouldweep for thee; but listen to me. I have said that I felt myself dyingwhen in yon church I sent from us Ammian and Eudochia. I sent themfrom us, knowing that I might soon have to leave thee here alone, inthe midst of a barbarous people, till thy Theodore, thy husband, shallreturn--alone, with no one to protect thee but domestic slaves, who,though faithful and attached, are still but slaves. Was not thiscruel, Ildica? Wilt thou forgive me?""Forgive you, dear mother!" cried Ildica, looking up reproachfully atthe very thought of forgiveness being necessary; "think you that formy selfish sorrows I would have had Ammian and Eudochia stay in scenesof danger, when peace, and joy, and safety were before them? If perilawaits me, Ammian could not, with his single hand, have averted it. Ifdeath be following me, too, in any shape, he could not have shieldedme from the lifted dart; and--for the sake of a few kind words andtender consolations, the balm of sympathy, and the fine elixir of kindfamiliar looks to sooth and cure a wounded heart--think you, dearmother, that I would have perilled his young happiness, and perhapscast the cloud of misfortune over his whole life? No; let me meet thecoming ills alone. There are many with whom I would gladly share thecup of joy, but none whom I would force to drink a part of thebitterer draught which I am bound to quaff. Forgive you, dear mother!oh, there is nothing to forgive!""Dear Ildica," cried Flavia, pressing her to her bosom, "noble,beloved girl! Sure, sure I am that, through whatever scenes the willof Heaven may lead you, you will bear up nobly still, and never, neverforget that you are the daughter of a Roman. Remember, Ildica--oh,ever remember--the land and race from which you spring. Think of theirgreat deeds and steadfast courage. Remember that, among the best andgreatest of our ancient names, your father might have boldly,confidently written down his own; and, whenever difficulty or perilfalls upon you, think how a Roman of old days would then have acted,and so act!""I will, my mother," cried Ildica, sinking on her knees beside Flavia;"I promise you, by all which is most sacred, that I will! Nothingshall ever make me forget that I am a patrician's child, bound by mynobility of blood to noble conduct. And should the time ever come thatI must be tried, the names of my ancestors shall not be blotted outfrom the roll of fame by any weakness of mine. I promise it! I vowit!" and, with high resolution beaming in her beautiful eyes, sherose, and stood in the majesty of loveliness by her dying mother'sside."May God bless you, and give you strength in all things, my truechild!" Flavia answered; "and yet, Ildica avoid all such trials; turnfrom all such dangers when you may. Seek not for dangers, but actboldly in them. And now, my child, one more direction, and I leave youto the keeping of your own heart and God's directing Spirit. If Ishould not live, which is, indeed, beyond all likelihood, to witnessTheodore's return, let no vain sorrow for the dead restrain you fromgiving him your hand at once. If but a single day have passed sincethe grave has closed over me, meet at the altar with the tear ofmemory dimming the eye of hope; but delay not your union by a singlehour. Wed him, my Ildica! wed your beloved without a hesitation; andfly with him, as speedily as may be, to our dear, beautiful land,where peace and safety shall attend you. To him, Ildica, to him onlyof all the world could I give you without a fear, without a sigh--tohim, noble, just, wise, brave, firm yet tender, generous yet prudent,ardent yet temperate. Oh, Ildica! oh that I could see that day! mylast, brightest hope, my fondest wish, my only remaining aspiration onthis side of the grave would then be fulfilled; and, as calmly as fora happy sleep, I could lay down my head in the tomb and say, 'Come,quiet Death! life has all finished well!'"The tears streamed anew down the cheeks of Ildica; and her mother,after a short pause, drew her gently to her, kissed her pure brow, andadded, "Now leave me, my sweet child, for one half hour. We shall bothbe the better of a brief solitude."Ildica withdrew without reply; for she sought not to add to hermother's emotions by emotions of her own. In her own chamber sheturned the hourglass, neither to fall short of nor to exceed the spaceof time that Flavia had appointed; and she would fain have bent herthoughts to contemplate all the frowning features of her present fate,and the still darker countenance of the future. She felt, however,that to do so would unfit her mind for the task of soothing andconsoling the last days of her mother; she felt that she might beshaken and overwhelmed by the burdens which she was destined atdifferent times to bear, if she suffered imagination to attempt toraise them all up at once, in order to feel and try their weight. Sheresolved, then, that she would not contemplate them until they cameupon her one by one; and, murmuring the holy maxim of Him who alonecould teach us the wisdom from on high, "Sufficient for the day be theevil thereof," she sank upon her knees and passed the half hour inprayer. When she rose she was calm and prepared, feeling that, thoughphilosophy may teach us to resist firmly the evils of life, it is onlyreligion that can teach us to bear them meekly.Her mother received her with a smile; and she, too, was calmer--forthe fatal truth had been spoken between them, the dark secret had beentold; and Flavia herself, prepared to die, was glad to have preparedIldica for her death. The rest of the day passed over tranquilly; andFlavia seemed relieved, and even better. There was a slight flush uponher cheek, which, though it was not exactly the rosy hue of health,gave a false appearance of returning powers. Her eye, too, was bright,and she breathed, or fancied that she breathed, with less difficulty.She cherished no hope, however; and Ildica was not deceived into thebelief that her mother could recover. Her disposition had once beenfull of hope; but the spring had lain so long under a heavy weightthat it had lost its elasticity; and the evening passed calmly, butnot cheerfully.At length, towards her usual hour of retiring to rest, Flavia took outof a casket a golden bracelet of an antique form, and, laying it onher knee, gazed upon it thoughtfully. It had been the first presentthat she had received from her dead husband, and in all herwanderings, under every blast of adversity, that bracelet still hadremained with her. She had worn it on the shores of Dalmatia; it hadbeen carried forth amid the rocking of the earthquake; it had beenrestored, with other property, at the command of Attila, after havingbeen taken by the Huns; she had possessed it among the Alani; she hadcarried it with her to Rome; she had brought it thence to where shesat even then. Every night, through a long life, she had gazed uponthat token of early affection; and now, with her thoughts turning toher husband, she looked upon it again, thinking, "I go to join him,where we shall never be separated more!"As she thus thought, she tried to clasp it on her arm: but suddenly itslipped from her fingers, rolled from her knee, and dropped upon theground. With a quick motion, she stooped forward to catch it ere itfell or pick it up; then suddenly pressed her hand upon her breast,and sunk back upon the cushions that supported her, exclaiming, "Mychild! my Ildica!"Ildica darted forward, and caught the hands that her mother nowextended towards her. The lips of Flavia still moved, but no soundfollowed; she fixed her eyes with a look of deep love upon her child;the brightness of being was still there; the flame of life's lampshone in them still brightly; but, in a moment after, it waxed dim andfaint: light and life, lustre and meaning, passed away; the jaw fell;the features became rigid; and the gray hue of vacant death spreadover the soulless countenance. A loud long shriek rang through thoseapartments; and when the slaves rushed in, they found their mistressdead, where she sat, and her daughter lying senseless at her feet.CHAPTER XV.THE ANTICIPATIONS OF EVIL.Long and dark was the sleep that fell upon Ildica: the overwroughtmind, the overexcited feelings, the heart and brain, stretched beyondtheir bearing to support each other, had worked in the mortal framethat complete overthrow of the equipoise which such a state almostinvariably will produce. The sleep of Ildica's mind--for the reasoningsoul remained asleep long after the eyes had opened again to the lightof day after her mother's death--was not the sleep which bringsrepose; and when at length she really woke, and gazed about her withfull returning consciousness, she found an unknown scene around her.She was stretched upon a rich couch, round which fell the hangings ofa tent; and though two of her own female attendants sat at the fartherside, there was watching over her a face as beautiful as she had everbeheld, but which was altogether strange to her eye. It was beautiful,as I have said, most beautiful; and though the hair was dressed in thebarbarian mode, and the garments were not such as the Romans wore, yetthe pure and snowy skin showed tints very different from the dingycomplexion of the Huns; and, though Ildica knew not the face, yetthere was something in it--something in the exquisite loveliness ofthose devoted deep blue eyes--that was not unfamiliar to herimagination. It was as if somebody, in former times, had sung, ortold, or written to her about eyes like those. Her mind, however,wandered still; and she could not recall where or how such animpression had been made upon her. But she saw, as she moved, thoseeyes bent upon her with a look of tender pity; and laying her handupon that which rested on the couch beside her, she would have spoken,but her voice was so weak that she herself started at its alteredsound."You are better," said Neva, for she it was who sat beside her--"youare better; I see you are better." And though the tongue in which shespoke was but a mixture of Latin with her barbarian dialect, yet herlooks spoke eloquently, and Ildica began to remember, or rather toguess, who she was.Neva watched her gently and assiduously; and Ildica recovered healthand strength; and grateful and tender did she feel towards that faircompanion, who wound herself day by day so closely round her heart,that she only wondered that Theodore could have continued to loveIldica when he had unknowingly won the heart of Neva. But thoughIldica recovered rapidly, that illness had wrought a change. Sheremained long in deep silent fits of thought. Sometimes, when she wasspoken to, her mind, intensely occupied with the dark past or the dimfuture, seemed to deaden her ear, and she made no reply. But, what wasstill more strange, she spoke of her mother, she talked of her death,she inquired of her burial, without a tear moistening her eyelids. Shewould fain have wept; she longed to do so; but no drops, no kindrelieving drops came from the dried-up well to give her ease. Hermother and Theodore were the two great themes of her thoughts; and ofher lover's coming back she talked with joy and smiles to her ownattendants; but, with kindly care, which showed how thoughtful she wasfor others, she avoided, as far as possible, the mention of his nameto Neva.Bleda's daughter, indeed, was now her chief companion; shared the sametent, and spent whole hours with her on each succeeding day. On Ildicashe seemed to look as on a superior being; and seated at her feet,with her arm resting on the fair Dalmatian's knee, she would gaze upinto her face, trace all those beautiful lines, and mark the fulllustrous eye, the swelling lip, and clear and rounded nostril, pureand defined, but soft and graceful as if chiselled from the Parianmarble. Thus she would gaze, and think in her own mind, that it was nowonder such a face and form as that, with such a spirit as shonethrough all that beauty, had lighted and kept alive, as pure andunextinguished as the fire of Vesta, the flames of love within theheart of one worthy of her--within a heart incapable of forgetfulnessor falsehood.Twice only did it happen that Ildica, who, however sadly her own heartmight be wrung, forgot not easily the feelings of another, mentionedeven the name of Theodore in the hearing of Neva. The first time thefair girl coloured and looked down; but the second she was sitting, aswe have said, at Ildica's feet; and though her countenance glowed, shegazed up and asked, "When you saw him, did he never mention Neva'sname?"Ildica bent down her head, and kissed the fair girl's brow, saying,"Yes, dear Neva, he did mention you.""And what did he say?" demanded Neva, burying her face in Ildica'srobe--"what did he say?""He told me," answered Ildica, pressing her hand gently, "he told mehow kind and good you had been to him; how you attended him insickness, saved him by your care from death, and rescued him in hismoment of utmost danger from the hands of those who would have slainhim. He told me all, dear Neva, he told me all."Neva cast herself upon Ildica's bosom and wept. "Then he told you,"she murmured, through her tears, "how I loved him, and how kindly andgently he soothed the feelings he could not return; how nobly andhonestly he told me that he loved another, whom he must ever love."Ildica pressed her in her arms; and, raising her eyes towards heaven,she said, in a low voice, "Oh God! why should I hope to be happy whenthis sweet being is wretched?""Nay, nay, Ildica," cried Neva, starting back as her ear caught thosewords, "I am not wretched; I am as happy as my state will admit; I amhappy in possessing the next best blessing to the great one of hislove. I have his friendship, his gratitude! I am happy in havingserved him; I am happy in having seen the being that he loves, and inloving her myself," and she pressed a fond kiss on Ildica's glowingcheek. "Now, Ildica," she continued, "now you know how I feel. I haveseen you; I know you; I am sure you are worthy of him; and so help meall the gods, if it were in my power this moment to take him from youand bind him to myself, I would rather die than do it! Speak to meabout him when you will, you will inflict no pain upon my heart. He isyour own, your beloved, your rightful husband. Neva is contented withher lot."Ildica smiled sadly. "Oh Neva," she answered, "it is hard to begenerous in love! There is no one thing on earth I know of that Iwould not give to make you happy, except the affection of Theodore.""And now I would not have it, could it be given," Neva replied; "buthe will soon be back again, dear Ildica. More than three weeks out ofthe two months allotted for his absence have already passed, and hewill soon be here: Ildica will then be his bride, and Neva will weavethe bridal flowers for her hair. Only remain within your tent, Ildica,as long as you can; and when the army marches on again, be carried inyour litter without speaking, so that Attila may think you are stillill."Ildica started, and gazed on Neva with surprise. "Why should I try todeceive Attila?" she demanded: "I have long wondered why you shouldoppose my going forth to breathe the free outward air when I am ill nolonger. Tell me, dear Neva, tell me what I have done to offendAttila?""You have done nothing to offend him," answered Neva: "oh no; it isnot his wrath that we fear! It is, that the sight of your beauty mightinflame his love. Therefore was it that Ardaric, who loves yourTheodore, so strongly counselled that you should hold the semblance ofsickness as long as may be."Ildica sank back upon the cushions that supported her, and hid herpale face in her hands, as if the doom of death had been pronounced inher ear. Terror overcame every reasoning power for some moments, andit seemed as if the fate which had been spoken of as merely possible,was certain and inevitable; and with her hands covering her face andher bosom heaving with convulsive sobs, she sat for several moments insilence; while Neva, alarmed by the state into which her words casther, tried, by every kindly effort, to sooth and reassure her.At length the fair Roman suddenly removed her hands, exclaiming, "Ihad forgot myself, Neva! and had given way to terror, a feeling thatshould have no empire in my bosom. I do not, I will not fear this man,terrible as he is. I will hide myself from his eyes most willingly.Till Theodore comes back, I will never leave my tent: but if my evilfate should draw his looks upon me; if what you fear on my accountshould occur, he shall find that the daughter of a Roman can act aRoman's part. No, I will not leave this tent till Theodore returns.""Alas! dearest Ildica," replied Neva, "ere two days be over you willbe forced to leave it. Attila has ravaged all this part of thecountry: these plains, so fertile and so populous not a fortnightsince, when we first issued forth from the mountains and encamped atwo days' journey from Tridentum, are now as bare as the summit of theAlps, and not a human being save the followers of the mighty king canbe seen for miles around. The white bones of the Romans who have beenslain, indeed, whiten the ground; and troops of wolves have followedus from the mountains, as if they had been called by the voice ofAttila himself to the feast he fails not to prepare for them; butnothing living and breathing is to be seen but ourselves and thosefierce beasts; and the day after to-morrow we are appointed to marchon and carry the same bloody scourge, the same fiery sword, fartherinto the empire."Ildica looked up towards the sky. "Oh God!" she murmured, "must suchthings be? Hast thou no chosen instrument, as in the days of old, tocheck the ravager in his course, to smite the mighty murderer ofnations?" and, clasping her hands together, she fixed her eyes uponthe ground, falling into a long, intense fit of gloomy meditation."It is strange," she continued, when, rousing herself at length fromher revery, she found Neva still sitting beside her in silence, andgazing anxiously upon her--"it is very strange! But who can tell thepurpose of the Almighty? who can see into the wise counsels of theOmniscient? who can tell at what trifling stumbling block this greatconqueror may fall down, or what small and insignificant means may, inthe hand of God, bring all his sanguinary expeditions to an end?""I do believe," said Neva, "that when he killed my father, Bleda, Ishould have slain him myself if I had ever been within arm's length ofhim, and alone. But he is much loved by his own people, and they keepa watch for him; and now he has been kind to me, and wiped out thememory of my father's death by tenderness and affection both to mymother and myself.""No personal revenge," said Ildica, thoughtfully, "can ever justify usin shedding a human being's blood--at least I think so, Neva; but inour own defence, or in the defence of those we love, or of ourcountry, or our faith, surely, surely God, the God of Hosts, willhallow and sanctify the deed. I think so, Neva, I believe so, but Iwill meditate upon it: I will inquire from the only source where wecan find sure guidance.""Where is that?" demanded Neva."In the word of God," answered Ildica, abstractedly, and again shefell into a fit of meditation, from which her fair companion did notchoose to rouse her. At length Ildica woke up of herself, and the sortof shadowy gloom which had hung upon her seemed in a degree banishedby reflection; for when she looked up, a smile, faint and chastenedindeed, but still most beautiful, played upon her lip for a moment."I cannot but think, dear Neva," she said, "I cannot but hope, that wehave been combating imaginary adversaries. Why should Attila think ofme? why should any idle beauty that you talk of make him persecute onewho never injured him, or wrong a man who, like Theodore, has servedhim well, and whom he himself professes to love.""You know him not, Ildica, you know him not," replied Neva; "hispassions are fierce, and devouring as the flame; and we poor women,but the slaves of his pleasures, are no more in his eyes thanmerchandise, things to be used while they please, and to be cast awaywhen the gloss of novelty is gone. Besides, those passions, thoughthey once had a check, have now none. He is changed, Ildica, he ischanged! Within the last two years a change has come over him whichrenders him no longer the same man. In former days you might rely uponhis justice, if not upon his humanity; you might trust in hisfriendship as much as you were compelled to fear his enmity. He wassincere, though never frank; and those who knew Attila well couldcalculate his rising up, and his going down, and his course throughoutthe day, as surely as they could calculate the rising and setting ofthe sun himself. But he is changed, Ildica, he is changed! He hasgrown suspicious of his dearest friends, deceitful towards those wholove him best, intemperate in all things; and while by day he revelsin blood, at night he revels in wine, till drunkenness closes the daywhich was begun with slaughter. The only thing that ever withholds himfrom gratifying his desires is shame; and if we can but keep thee fromhis thoughts till thy lover returns, the fear of sinking lower in theesteem of his chieftains will keep him from doing thee a wrong, fromviolating his word.""But why should I fear," said Ildica, "more than all the many womenwho, I learn, are in the camp.""Because thou art more beautiful than them all," answered Neva,looking up in her face with a smile."Yes, but he let Eudochia go," replied Ildica; "he suffered her todepart without one apparent wish to stay her; and she was much morebeautiful than I am--younger, lovelier in every way.""Oh no," cried Neva, "not half so lovely! But, besides, if I must tellthee all, I heard my cousin Ellac, the great king's son, contrivingwith Onegisus to inflame Attila's love for thee. He has hated Theodoreever since he set foot among our tribes, and he knew that he couldtake no more terrible revenge upon him, that he could bring down nomore certain destruction upon his head, than by raising up against himAttila as a rival in his love. I heard them lay their plot, and I knowthat they executed it in part. For that purpose was Theodore sentforth; for that purpose wert thou kept here; and had it not been forthy illness and for Ardaric's protection, who loves thy promisedhusband, thou hadst received, ere this time, terrible proofs that ourfears for thee are anything but vain.""I do remember," answered Ildica, "that on that sad night beforeTheodore's departure, one of the barbarian leaders, a noble-lookingman, whom he called Ardaric, and in whom he afterward bade me trustimplicitly, came to us, and warned him of some approaching danger--""It was I who warned Ardaric," interrupted Neva, "because I knew thathe was sincere and true, and loved thy Theodore well. All that he knewhe heard from me, or from that unhappy Moor, that deformed andmutilated negro, whom thou hast seen twice follow me into thy tent. Healso watched and saw much; and, with a shrewdness all his own,perceived that Attila was not unwilling to follow where his baser sonwould lead him."Ildica clasped her hands and gazed down upon the ground. "Oh, Neva!"she said at length, "you must aid and protect me; for--though I know,and feel sure, that if the hour of difficulty were to come I shouldfind courage, on the instant, to behave as befits my race andnation--though I feel sure and confident that there is no act which Ishould fear to do, that justice and my honour required of me--yet,Neva, yet I would fain shrink from the trial. In the contemplation ofit I am but a woman; and my very soul sinks, faint and dispirited, atthe very thought of what I may be called upon to suffer and to do.""I will aid you, I will assist you, dear Ildica," replied Bleda'sdaughter; "and there are many more in the camp who can assist youbetter, and who are willing to do so too; but I hear some one in theouter tent. It is the voice of Zercon, I think, speaking with yourslaves In him, too, you may trust; for he is one who will be faithfulunto death. He has known me from a child, and loves me well; and,since my father's death, there is scarce a bitter cruelty in all thelong dark catalogue of inflictions which man's savage, demon-likeheart has invented, that Attila has not practised upon him. He hatesAttila, therefore, and he loves all who are persecuted by hispersecutor.""I have heard Theodore mention him," replied Ildica. "Did he not aidin his escape? I would fain see him again, and speak with him. All whomay assist or aid me are valuable to me, dear Neva."Neva advanced, and drew back the curtains of the inner tent for amoment, saying, "Dost thou seek me, Zercon? What wouldst thou with me?Come hither, and speak with me," she added, ere the man could reply.Returning to the side of Ildica, she seated herself near her on thecushions; while the negro, Zercon, came forward, and drew the curtainsof the tent behind him."I came to warn you," he said, "that there are orders gone forth forthe whole host to move forward by dawn of day to-morrow, upon Veronaitself. Be wary, be cautious, lady," he added, fixing his eyes uponIldica; "all has gone well as yet; but the malice of enemies has but alight slumber.""My friend," said Ildica, in a calm but sad tone, "I have to thankthee both for thine interest in myself and for the services thou hastrendered to one dearer to me than myself. This sweet lady near me, thydead master's child, tells me that thou wilt befriend me, and will befaithful unto me even unto death.""That were saying little, lady," replied the negro. "Death, to me, isnot a thing to be feared. I will serve thee, if I can, through severertrials than that; though I think that all the skill of Attila himselfwill hardly discover a new torture or indignity which the body of mancan suffer--without being separated from the spirit--that he has notalready practised upon this wretched frame.""I am sorry for thee, my friend, I am sorry for thee," replied Ildica."Thy sufferings should teach us to bear our lesser evils with morepatience and fortitude.""Lady," said Zercon, "the difference between thy state and minerenders the computation of evils in our several cases very differentalso. Those evils, which to you are of the greatest magnitude, to meare less than the sting of a piping gnat; and it is not that we bearthem differently, but that our states from infancy to this hour haverendered them really different. You have been nurtured in ease, inpeace, and happiness. God made you beautiful as the day, and pouredthrough your young veins a stream of lordly blood, drawn from a sourceof mighty conquerors. Philosophers and schoolmen taught you how toenjoy; and wise and good relations showed you, from your youth up, thepath of virtue, and bade you prize honour as much, or more than life.Your heart and feelings, your mind and soul, even like your tenderbody itself, are subject to a thousand pangs, acute and dreadful, towhich mine are all insensible. I, born on an arid soil, sprung from adespised race, gifted with deformity, nurtured in hardship, companionfrom my infancy with famine, thirst, disease, and pain, tutored but tobear, and bred up in the bitterest school of suffering--I look uponevils which to other men are great, as enjoyment--actual happiness! Imay have heard the voice of philosophy, too; I may have listened towise and learned men; but the only doctrine which has been preached tome is to suffer all things--the only lesson that I have learnedthrough life has been endurance. The couch that feels hard to othermen as a flinty rock, is a bed of down to me. Contumely and disgracehave lost their sting: my body is insensible to blows, and my heart toindignity. If I lie down to rest without the mutilating knife oftyranny lopping away my limbs, I mark the day with a white stone, andcry! 'Oh happy chance!' And though I have been too well tutored inbearing the worst ever to take refuge at the altar of death, wheretyrants dare not follow, till fate shall lead me thither, yet, whenthe hour comes that opens that sanctuary to me, how glad will be itsshelter, how heavenly its repose. Lady! oh, beautiful lady! if you cangive me any service which can merit death, I will bless you as for aninestimable boon.""Alas! my friend, I know not what may come," answered Ildica, withtears standing in her eyes. "The time may not be far distant when I,too, shall look to death as the only relief.""I understand you, lady," answered Zercon, "and I know your danger;but it is one from which your own hand can righteously deliver you ifever it becomes imminent. Zercon--the poor, the despised Zercon--cangive you a gift worth more than a talent of gold in the hour of peril.Look here!" and, approaching closer to Ildica, he drew from his bosoma small dagger, the blade of which might be somewhat more than a spanin length. The haft was small, and formed of ivory; and the blade,when he took it from the sheath, though dull in colour and in polish,was evidently as sharp as a knife both at the point and edge."This steel," continued Zercon, "hard as a diamond and sharp as agraver's tool, would, if struck with a firm hand, pierce the strongestcorslet that ever came from the armorer's anvil. In the hand of aninfant, it would slay a giant; and I give it unto you, lady, againstthe hour when terror shall give place to resolution, and horror shallconquer fear."He spoke like a prophet; and Ildica took the dagger, and gazed uponits blade. "Do you mean," she asked, after a long pause, "that Ishould use this thing against my own life?""No," answered Zercon, eagerly; "no! I have never used it againstmine; but I have felt that there was a point at which endurance wasbound to stop; and that, if the time should come when opportunityfavoured the blow, I was called upon by the immutable command ofnature to strike in my own defence. That opportunity has never come;for it would but little serve me, when a tyrant ordered his slaves tocut away my ears or my thumbs, to take the life of one or two of hisinstruments. Had he been within arm's length himself, he had died assurely as I lived."Ildica mused with a melancholy look, still holding the dagger on herknee, while Neva, with the negro slave, gazed up in her face. The Moorseemed to read her thoughts. "Lady," he said, "I hold the same faithas you do. I have held it from my youth; but I am justified. Read inthat book, if thou canst read; not in the latter part alone, but inthe former also; and thou shalt find that our country's defence or ourown has been held just and righteous cause for slaying the oppressor.Lady, I say no more. Conceal the weapon in your robe; and should youever have cause to use it, let it be no hasty, ill-considered blow,aimed in the terror of the moment, but with calm deliberation, in achosen time, with the strength of virtue and of justice, and thefirmness of conscious right. I have given you what, if wisely used, isbetter than a jewel; but I will serve you with my heart's dearestblood to avoid the necessity of ever using it; and now farewell."He retired as he spoke; and Ildica, taking up the dagger, held it fora moment firmly in her hand, and then placed it in her bosom. Nevagazed upon her as she did so with a look of deep emotion; and then,sinking on her knees beside the fair Roman, threw her arms around her,and hid her face upon her lap, murmuring, "Oh, may you never have touse it!"CHAPTER XVI.THE POWER OF RESOLUTION.Scarcely was Zercon gone when the hangings of the tent which he hadlet fall behind him were again pushed aside, and an old woman, of somebarbarian tribe, frightful in features, and fantastically dressed,entered and stood before Ildica. Neva started up; and when she beheldthis personage she turned very pale."What wouldst thou?" demanded Ildica, in her own language; but thewoman did not seem to understand her, and continued to gaze upon herfrom head to foot."What wouldst thou?" repeated Neva, in the Hunnish tongue; in reply towhich the old crone burst into a loud and scornful laugh, adding, "Icame to see what I have seen!" and, turning as she spoke, she left thetent without waiting for further inquiries."Who is that, dear Neva?" demanded Ildica. "She is rude and strange inher demeanour.""Alas! alas!" replied Neva; "I fear her coming bodes no good. She isskilled in healing, and dwells among the wives of Attila; and I doubtnot that she has been sent to see if thou art still as ill as we havereported."At these words Ildica herself turned pale, and gazed anxiously uponthe countenance of Neva. She had no time, however, to inquire further;for scarcely had the woman left the tent when there was a cry of"Attila! Attila! The king! the king!" and the domestic attendants, whohad followed the fair Roman girl and her mother through all theirfortunes, ran in with looks of apprehension from the outer tent, andsurrounded their beloved mistress.The moment after the cry of "Attila! Attila!" was repeated, thehangings were again drawn back, and the dark monarch of the Hunsadvanced at once into the tent. There was a mortal paleness uponIldica's countenance; but, from the moment that the cry of "Attila!Attila!" had sounded on her ear till the moment that he came into herpresence, the eyes of those who surrounded her saw an expression ofhigh and noble resolution gathering upon that fair, lofty forehead, asthe electric clouds upon a summer's day may be seen rolling round somemountain peak, till that which, in the morning light, was all clearand fair, becomes, ere noon, awful in the proud majesty of the comingstorm.All rose and retired a step as Attila entered, except Ildica; but she,with queenlike calmness, kept her place: and it was wonderful to alleyes to behold that sweet and gentle girl, full of tenderness and softaffections, changed in a moment, by the power of a great mind andmighty resolution, into a proud and lordly being, fit to cope with thegreat conqueror of one half of the earth. There she sat immoveable,gazing with the unquailing light of her lustrous eyes upon the darkmonarch as he advanced towards her; and even Attila himself--thoughthe cause was surprise and admiration only--paused for a singleinstant midway in his approach, and scarcely could believe his eyes,that this was the same creature whom he had last beheld dissolved intears beside her departing brother. Her beauty, however, was asradiant, though it shone through another air; and, again advancing, heseated himself beside her calmly on the cushions, saying, "They havedeceived me: they told me you were ill!""I have been ill, oh king!" replied Ildica, in a voice not a tone ofwhich faltered, even in the slightest degree, "I have been ill, verynearly unto death.""Illness seldom wears so lovely a form," replied Attila, in a softenedvoice. "Attila trusts that thou art better, fair maiden; else thybeauty belies thy state.""I am better, oh king," answered Ildica; "and I trust that a few daysmore of repose may restore me completely unto health.""Were it not better for thee," said Attila, "to seek the open air, anddraw in the pure breath of the summer day, than, sitting here in theclose atmosphere of a tent, to waste the hours of sunshine?""The covering of this tent, oh king," replied Ildica, boldly, "shutsout from me more things than the pure air; and if, in going forth. Ishould gain advantage from the sweet breath of heaven visiting mylips, the sights that I should behold would carry tenfold poison to myheart by the sure channel of the eye--at least, if all be true that Ihave heard.""What hast thou heard?" demanded Attila, quickly, rolling his eye overthose that surrounded them, "what hast thou heard, sweet Ildica?""I have heard," she replied, unwilling to call down the anger of thatterrible monarch upon any one else, however sure she might be ofencountering it ultimately herself--"I have heard but the usual taleof warfare: I have heard of populous cities taken and made desolate;of blood drowning out the fire on the dear domestic hearth: ofthousands and tens of thousands slaughtered, and their bodies lyingunburied in the fields, or nailed, if they resisted, to the trees oftheir own fruitful gardens. I have heard of the whole land swept ofits produce, its arts obliterated, its monuments destroyed, itshusbandmen slain, even its women and children put to the sword--andthat land my country!"She paused; but Attila made no reply, and sat listening asif he expected her to go on. "Pardon me, oh king," continuedIldica--"pardon me, if I am bold to say thus much; but as it was griefwhich brought me nearly unto death at first--deep, bitter grief!--I amtold that any grief whatsoever, added anew, may complete what theother left undone, and bring me at once unto the grave.""A mother's death," replied Attila, without any sign of anger at thebold and proud demeanour of the fair Roman girl--"a mother's death, sosudden and unexpected, might well shake the strength and fortitude ofa daughter; but, as to other things, I see not why she should let hermind rest upon them.""Let me not boast, oh king!" replied Ildica, resolved to leave no wordunspoken which might guard her against all she feared--"let me notboast, but yet I may say, my fortitude is never shaken. It was thebodily strength gave way, and not the resolution of the heart. Neitherwas it a mother's loss alone: that was the last of many sorrows.Before it went the parting with my brother and the sister of my heart;and before that again the still bitterer parting with my promisedhusband, with him I loved, and always have loved, better than anythingon earth."Attila's brow grew dark, and he fixed his eyes bitterly upon theground. Ildica marked the expression, however much he strove tocontrol it, but she proceeded all the more eagerly; and had he been atiger ready for the spring, still she would have gone on. "Yes, ohking! that, though the first, was the bitterest stroke of all--for whoshall tell how I love him, how deeply, how sincerely, how beyond allother things I love him. Without him, life to me is a dark blank; andwhen you forbade our union, and sent him from me to a distant land,you struck the blow that undermined my health; you filled high the cupthat my mother's death caused afterward to overflow."She paused again, and Attila looked up and replied, "Thy voice issweet and musical, lovely girl, but thy words are harsh and somewhatgrating to mine ear. Attila seeks not to make thee unhappy; but be notrash, and change the tenderness which he feels for thee and thine intoa less gentle temper. I would not force thee to behold sights whichmay be painful to a woman's eye; but to-morrow early, thou, as well asthe rest, must set out upon our onward march.""Must we then go on," said Ildica; "I had hoped, as thou hast encampedhere long, some cause might induce thee to turn thy fiery swordanother way, and not let the edge fall heavy upon Rome.""We must upon our march!" replied Attila, "we must upon our march! Thecountry around us is exhausted of its stores. We have dried up theland of its wine and oil, like the summer's sun shining on a scantybrook. All is consumed; and where the foot of Attila's horse has trodgrows no grass afterward. I paused here," he added, with a grim smile,"because my son sent me word that a pitiful city of the Venetianprovince resisted the army of Attila, one of those stony piles inwhich you Romans love to dwell, called Aquileia.""What? Aquileia, the beautiful, the proud," exclaimed Ildica, "theprovincial Rome?""The same," replied Attila, "It dared to shut its gates against thoseI sent to possess it; and when I reached them myself, I found that ithad made its resistance good. It was different from the usual Romantowns. There were more than women and boys within. The catapult andbalista had been plied in vain. The walls held out; and as I rodearound, the soldiers on the towers, in their fancied security,laughed loud, and mocked the arms of Attila. But there was a certainstork--wiser, by the gods' own teaching, than the fools within--whosaw the horse of Attila pause before the spot where she had built hernest upon the ramparts, and, auguring destruction to the towers onwhich he looked, she took her young ones on her back, and flew awayfor ever. Over the fragments of her nest, strewed upon the ruins ofthat wall, passed the horse of Attila ere nightfall; and now let afterages look for Aquileia, and find some scattered stones spread over adesolate plain. The brothers of those who defended it shall nevergather their bones into their family sepulchre; for the flames of thatcity have confounded all, and nothing but dust is left. Thus perishall who resist the will of Attila," he added, and fixed his eyes fullon Ildica."They did but die," replied the Roman girl, and she gave him back hisglance as proudly as it was sent. The light of irrepressibleadmiration rose in that mighty monarch's eyes, and for several minuteshe remained gazing upon her in silence; but there mingled with thatsteadfast look an expression which, in spite of every effort, calledthe quick and modest blood into the cheek of Ildica."Those whom Attila loves," said the king, "are as sure of benefits asthose who resist him of punishments; and surely the regard of one,before whom the proudest monarchs of the earth bow down their heads,is a prize worth having to those whose hearts are noble and theirspirit high. The great, the generous, and the lofty minded should everlove each other; and I say to thee, fair maiden, that thy noble andthy daring mind has this day commanded the esteem of Attila more fullythan even thy radiant, thine unequalled beauty has called forth theadmiration of his eyes.""Esteem, oh Attila!" replied Ildica, in a calm, solemn tone, "mustever create esteem; for it is founded on virtue, and ever springs fromit. Those we esteem we would never debase, and dare not injure; andIldica rests tranquilly upon the esteem of Attila for protectionagainst all men--even should it be against himself."Attila cast down his eyes, and for a few moments remained in thought;then turning to the attendants round, he said, in a tone that admittedno reply, "Leave us!"One by one, those who stood near left the tent, Neva following moreslowly and with downcast eyes. Ildica lifted her heart to heaven, andprayed internally for strength and wisdom, for she felt that the hourof trial might be coming near. The hangings of the tent fell; butscarcely had they fallen when there came sudden voices soundingeagerly without, and in a moment after Onegisus entered the presenceof Attila."Let me die if I have offended, oh mighty king!" he said, inbreathless haste; "but I have tidings that admit no delay.""Speak them!" said Attila."[AE]tius, oh king, has passed the mountains," replied the chief; "hebrings with him the legions of Gaul. Valentinian has left Ravenna, andgathers an army under the walls of Rome. The fleets of Marcian areupon the Adriatic."Attila listened without a change of countenance. "Thy news from theEast is false," he said: "Marcian stirs not. Valentinian is a fly in aspider's web. Is it sure that [AE]tius has passed the mountains?""The tribe of Ilgours, who were in the country of the Burgundians,"replied Onegisus, "followed his march, and have sent on messengers towarn the king.""Then it is true," said Attila, rising, "and we must scourge him backinto Gaul. Attila marches for Milan. I leave you, my friend, to treadupon Verona and Padua, and to sweep the plains behind me of alladversaries. Leave nothing dangerous behind, and follow with allspeed. Where are Ardaric and Valamir? They must accompany me thisnight!" and with a slow and deliberate step he left the tent, givingno sign of emotion of any kind, unless his leaving Ildica without aword, or even a look, might be construed into a proof of how much thetidings he had just heard affected him at heart.Ildica lifted her eyes to heaven, and clasped her hands, exclaiming,"Oh God, thou dost not desert me in my utmost need! On thee will Irely!" and, with a heart relieved, she burst into a long but happyflood of tears."To Milan!" she thought--"to Milan! That is far off. [AE]tius, too,is before him. Ere I shall see his face again, Theodore will havereturned, and I shall be delivered!" and again she wept. Herattendants flocked around her; and some seeing her state, withoutknowing why, mingled their tears with hers."Weep not, my friends," she said at length--"weep not! I weep for joy!Leave me alone for a while; and give me the ivory scrinium with thesilver clasps. There is a book therein I would fain read totranquillize my mind."The attendants obeyed; and bringing her the casket which she hadmentioned, set it down beside her and retired. Ildica opened thescrinium, and, from among a number of rolls of parchment and papyrus,selected a manuscript in vellum, gathered together into the form oftwo or three small volumes, and pored eagerly upon the pages, seemingto find there matter for deep meditation and solemn interest. Now, hereye ran rapidly over the lines, and her hand turned the pages withoutpause; and then again she would suddenly stop, and looking up, as iffor light and direction, would think for several minutes over what shehad just read, as if the sense were doubtful, or the precept difficultof application. But the book was one which, in every age since firstits words were traced upon that page of light, has caused, and wellmight cause, the mind of man to lose itself in lofty musings. It wasthe book which to the eye of the inspired patriarch of old was shown,in the vision of those heavenly steps by which the angels of God camedown to earth, and ascended back again on high. It was the book whichleads the soul, step by step, from the thoughts of earth, and thecommon and familiar things which the mind of man can grasp, up tothose wide and sublime regions where, standing at the footstool of theAlmighty throne, we still gaze up on high, and thought loses itself inthe boundless space of mercy, power, and wisdom. It was that book,down each gradation of which angels and prophets came to visit earth,and lead back into heaven the just, the humble, and the true.There, as she read, the eye might see the history of that sacred Beingduring his short stay on earth, whose life was mercy and purity; whosewords were wisdom and holiness; whose birth and whose death wereequally miraculous and beneficent, an example, a teacher, a guide, asacrifice, an atonement. There, too, as her eye ran back over the longrecord, which marks the preservation of the revealed knowledge of ourGod, holy, and true, and wise, throughout ages and among nations,corrupt, perverse, unfaithful, the eye might trace the simple,touching story of the early fathers of mankind, and see displayed inthe candid words of Divine truth their thoughts, their errors, andtheir virtues, without a shade of palliation or excuse. There layrevealed the mighty trial of Abraham's triumphant faith; there, thesweet history of Joseph and his little brother; there, the tale ofRuth, and of the widow and her son, and the mighty faults and virtuesof Israel's psalmist king; there, his son's instructive wisdom andmonitory fall; there, all those affecting scenes which, in their grandsimplicity, defy the brightest eloquence of every people and of everytime, to move the heart of man as they do.But it was not on such scenes that the eye of Ildica principallyrested. She sought for matters more assimilating with her fate andfortunes at the time. She read of the battles of the chosen people ofGod, their wars, their victories, their reverses. She paused, andthought upon the history of Sisera and Jael; but oh, how her heartthrilled when she read the tale of the tyrant warrior, from whom awoman's hand delivered the people of the Lord! She read! she trembled!she gasped for breath! She laid down the book and wept aloud!Oh let us leave the secret feelings of her heart to commune withthemselves undisclosed! for who can say what those feelings were, howdeep, how sad, how terrible? Who can tell them all perfectly, who candisplay the struggle, and the mingling, and the strife, wherein athousand opposing thoughts, and hopes, and fears, bright sympathies,noble aspirations, lofty purposes, and mighty inspirations, togetherwith woman's shrinking modesty, intense love, and tender nature,contended like hostile nations bent on mutual destruction within thenarrow battle-field of that fair, beautiful bosom? Who can tell themall? and, if not all, should we trifle with a part? Oh no, no! we havesaid enough!CHAPTER XVII.THE WEAK AGAINST THE STRONG.Through the most fertile plain that Europe can display, amid the oliveand the fig, the loaded vine and the ripening corn, with on one side avast and interminable view over lands laughing in the richest gifts ofnature, and on the other mounting up into the sky the giganticmountains which separate that bright land from all the rest of earth,passed on a multitude of those savage warriors, who were destined tochange the rich plains of Lombardy from the garden of the world to themost desolate spot of this quarter of the globe.But, alas! not alone did those fierce warriors take their way,unaccompanied by any of the children of the soil. On the contrary,closely following their march, appeared a body which contained withinitself sad samples of all the vice, the weakness, the baseness of theland. There was the skilful engineer, whose warlike but not perilousart provided the means of destruction for other men's hands to use;there was the theoretic strategist, whose pen prepared the plans ofbattles that he could not fight; there the sculptor and the limner,ready ever to transmit unto posterity the features of those whoseactions commanded admiration, though not applause; there the thousandfawning slaves, ready to forget all ties, so long as they could coverbaser bonds by the golden ties of interest. Besides all these were thecaptives, not chained, indeed, but dragged along by fetters aspowerful as rings of iron, selected and preserved from slaughteredmyriads for a fate worse than death itself, on account of thosequalities which adorn and beautify the blessed state of freedom.Beauty, skill, strength, and activity: these were the sad gifts thatpurchased slavery.In the midst of these--herself a captive, though surrounded by her ownslaves, now all in bondage to another--was borne along the fairDalmatian girl, whose fate has occupied so much of our attention. Herway was cleared by parties of the Huns appointed expressly for thatpurpose; and honours, too queenlike, awaited her wherever she paused.In many a place she found garlands strewed in her way, and tutoredrejoicings greeted her at every resting-place. But oh! the coldestsilence, the most icy indifference would have conveyed more warmth toher heart than those demonstrations of a distinction which she feared.Seldom, very seldom did she raise her eyes; but, poring earnestly on abook before her, seemed buried in contemplations from which noexternal objects could awaken her. Twice only during the second day'sjourney from Verona did she look up, and then her attention was calledforcibly towards too terrible a sight by the wild ejaculations of theattendants who surrounded her. On either side of the road appeared,when she did look up, a range of trees, which had been planted toafford a pleasant shelter to the weary wayfarer from the burning raysof the summer's sun. But now, fixed upon those trees, were immensecrosses of wood, on each of which, extended by nails in the hands andfeet, was seen the dead body of a human being, contorted with theagonies of a painful death. Nor had one nation alone nor one countryfurnished the victims for that awful sacrifice; for there were seenthe dark-visaged Hun, the fair-haired Frank, the large-limbed Goth,the strong-featured Roman--all, in short, against whom any charge ofdeceit or infidelity towards Attila and the Hunnish nation could bebrought, were arrayed in fearful assemblage to terrify the passer-by.Ildica gazed on them when her attention was forced towards them; andthen, clasping her hands, she looked up on high, while her lipsmurmured woman's prayer for patience under all the sad scenes whichshe was destined to act in and behold. Then again, casting down hereyes, she strove to avoid, as far as possible, such fearful sights,hoping that brighter days and more joyful objects might come, and blotthem out for ever from the tablets of memory, or soften the harshlines so that they should be no longer painful. But still, as theymarched onward, fresh scenes of desolation and horror were forced uponher sight, and, whether she would or not, the indignant heart swelledup, and a voice within her bosom exclaimed, "Oh for a warrior's souland a warrior's might! Oh for an ancient Roman's undaunted energy, tostem this dark and ruinous torrent in its course, to drive back thedestroyer of my native land, to snatch the bloody scourge out of thehand of fate, and hurl it for ever into the gulf of death!"At length a large and magnificent city appeared before her; and Ildicaprepared her eyes to behold the same utter destruction which she hadbeheld in every other town. Her astonishment was great, however, onentering Mediolanum,[5] to behold the inhabitants pursuing theirordinary occupations; the shops opened, and their wares exposed in thevery presence of those ruthless barbarians who had come to spoil anddesolate the land. It is true, the great body of Attila's army wasencamped without its walls, and that but a few thousand of the Hunswere permitted to enter the city; but still, with its gates in theirpossession, and its walls covered by their troops, Milan was at themercy of the Hunnish multitude, and nothing but the awful name ofAttila saved it from destruction.---------------[Footnote 5: Milan.]---------------The troops of Onegisus entered not the gates of the city; but thelitter of Ildica was borne forward through the principal streets, andat length stopped before a magnificent pile of building, which was, infact, the royal palace of Milan. Those who accompanied her waited fordirections from some one within; and, after a brief pause, the litterwas again carried on into the interior of the palace. At the foot ofthe great staircase it was set down, and Ildica with her attendantswas bade to follow on foot. From room to room, from hall to hall, fromgallery to gallery, she was led onward by several of the barbarianchiefs, beholding, as she advanced, with wonder, not unmixed withpleasure, that, amid all the splendour which that building displayed,amid all the monuments of art which it contained, no act of violencehad been perpetrated by the hand of the barbarians, but that thereevery object remained untouched, or at least uninjured. At one spot,indeed, she beheld a painter busily employed in labouring with thebrush upon the walls, but he was a Roman; and on looking nearer sheperceived that he was making a complete change in one of the pictures,which represented some barbarian kings kneeling at the feet of a Romanemperor."What doest thou, my friend?" she asked."I am working at the command of the mighty Attila," replied thepainter, "in order to change this picture so as to suit the changes ofthe time. When I have done, two Roman emperors will be seen kneelingat the feet of a Scythian king."Ildica walked on without reply, feeling bitterly in her heart thetruth of the sad lesson which Attila thus taught.At the farther extremity of the building she found the apartmentsassigned to her; and in a moment or two after she had entered them,and when the Huns who conducted her had withdrawn, Neva, whom she hadnot beheld for many days, approached, and took her fondly in her arms.The girl's countenance was sad, however, and while she gazed uponIldica the tears rose in her eyes."Shall I say welcome?" she asked--"shall I say welcome, when I fearthat much grief awaits you? shall I say welcome to a place where youmust hear many things that will grieve you!"At these words the dull, heavy weight fell again upon Ildica's heart,and the struggle recommenced, the painful struggle, of strong andhigh-minded resolution against woman's natural fears andapprehensions. "Speak," she replied, "speak, dear Neva. Tell me whatnew cause of sorrow and of terror has arisen. Tell me what step hasbeen taken in the warfare that fate seems resolved to wage against myhappiness on earth.""Alas!" replied Neva, "alas! that my lip should tell it; but it isonly right to warn thee of what you might hear too soon from otherlips, and might hear unprepared. Attila speaks of thee often: Attilaspeaks of thee with love: Attila speaks of thee as of one destined tobe his; and thou knowest, Ildica, that his will is like the will offate.""Not so, Neva; not so," replied Ildica. "There is a will above his!"But while she thus expressed her trust, the tears rolled from her eyesin despite of every effort, and she wept bitterly. "There is a willabove his," she said, "holier, more merciful, and mightier far! In itwill I trust, Neva, in it will I trust! But what do I do weeping?" sheadded--"what do I do weeping, when I have to think, to resolve, andact? what do I do weeping, when lo he comes, and I have need ofvigour, not of tears; of determination, not of terror? Hear you nothis step, hear you not his step? He is coming! he is coming! Hear younot his step?" and, as she spoke, she grasped the arm of the fair girltight in her hand, and gazed towards the door with a look of wild andpainful anticipation, which, had it not been too well justified by hercircumstances, might well have passed for the vivid but wanderingglance of insanity."It is not his foot you hear," replied Neva, fondly linking herself toIldica, and striving to assuage the fears which she had herselfoccasioned. "That is not his step--I know it well, Ildica! I haveknown it, and trembled at it from my infancy. As the beasts of thefield have an intimation of the earthquake, and fly trembling from thewalls over which the impending ruin is suspended--as the light summerinsect, to whom the falling drop of a spring shower is a deadly ocean,finds some warning to seek shelter beneath the foliage against thecoming destruction--as the birds cease their song, and the cattle seekthe fold before the approaching storm--so unto me has been given anaugury of danger and of terror, in the world-shaking step of thatawful king. I have heard it in the sunshine of summer, and thesunshine has been clouded: I have heard it in the dead of the night,and night has assumed the horror of the grave. But hark! Whoever it isthat speaks with the attendants without--that voice is not Attila's,nor was the step."As she spoke the curtain was withdrawn, and there appeared, not theform of the Scythian king, but that of Ardaric, chief of theGepid[ae]. His countenance, as we have already said, was naturallyfrank and open; and, unlike that of Attila, it displayed, as in ahighly polished mirror, every emotion of his heart, except when, bysome great effort, he drew an unwonted veil over the picture of histhoughts, which there found their ordinary expression. His face wasnow clouded; and advancing towards Neva, he spoke a few words to herin the Hunnish dialect; and then turning towards Ildica, addressedher, though with considerable difficulty, in the Latin tongue.Agitated, terrified, and confused, it was with difficulty Ildicagathered his meaning. She found, however, that what he said consistedof warnings of approaching danger, like those which Neva had alreadygiven, and of caution and advice as to how she should avoid ormitigate them. Though for the time Ildica's mind could scarcely graspthose counsels, yet they returned beneficially to her in the hour ofneed. She heard him tell her that delay to her was more valuable thanbeaten gold, and remind her that in her case any sort of duplicity wasjustifiable to foil a tyrant who knew no scruples, and joined deceitwith power. But all that Ildica could reply, under her overpoweringsense of the fearful struggle she saw approaching, was, "Can I notfly? Oh, can I not fly?""For fifty miles around on every side," replied Ardaric, "the troopsof the Huns are spread over the country; and for more than fifty milesbeyond those, scattered parties from a thousand different nations, butall attached to Attila by vows, by love, or by fear, roam through thecountry, and keep, as it were, an outer watch on his camp. The eaglemay escape from the net woven to catch a sparrow; the lion may rendinto a thousand pieces the toils which were set to catch the stag orthe elk; but thou canst no more escape from the midst of the host ofAttila than a small fly can disentangle itself from the meshes of thespider."Ildica wept bitterly, nor was it with the kind of tears which bringrelief. They were not tears for the past--the dark, irretrievablepast, for the beloved and the dead, for the hours wasted or thepleasures passed away--they were not tears, in short, for any of thosethings which may be mourned with mourning sweet and profitable--butthey were the deep, bitter, fruitless tears of apprehension, wrungforth by the agony of a fearful but unavoidable fate. She weptbitterly, she wept wildly; she noted not Ardaric, she heeded not thevoice of Neva. Hopes and consolations they offered her in vain. Adviceand direction seemed to fall unheeded on her ear: she appeared not tonotice their presence or be conscious of their sympathy. Indeed, sototally was she absorbed in the overpowering sorrows of her own heart,and the fearful contemplation of the destiny before her, that she knewnot when they left her, or awakened from the vision of her wo tillanother voice demanded, in a tone that made her start wildly from herseat, "Why weepest thou, maiden? why weepest thou so bitterly?" andAttila stood before her.She gazed upon him with a wandering and anxious look while one mightcount ten, but then the triumph of the powerful mind began again. Themoment of terror and apprehension was over--the moment of resolutionand of action was come. Womanly weakness had had its hour, and waspassed. The Roman heart was reawakened by the voice that called her tothe trial. The sight of Attila, like the fierce sun shining on thedewy grass after a storm, dried up the tears in her eyes; and afterthat brief pause she replied, "I weep, oh king! because as a woman Iam weak; because I am apprehensive of the future; because I amuncertain of the present; because I grieve for the past. Little causeis there to ask any one living why he weeps. Thou wouldst do morewisely wert thou to ask any one in this world why he smiles.""Maiden," replied Attila, "dost thou think that such vague words candeceive me? Thinkest thou that so thin a veil can hide the features ofthy mind? Thou weepest for thy lover! thou thinkest that he is eitherdead or faithless, because he has not come so soon as he promised!""Thou art mistaken, oh Attila!" replied Ildica; "I neither think himdead--for God protects the good, the virtuous, and the noble--nor do Ithink him faithless; for to judge so harshly of him would be to wrongthe God who formed his heart, and made it upright, true, and constant.I may have fears and apprehensions, but they are not of him or of histruth. What they are matters not to any one; for though I may becarried captive after a mighty conqueror's army, the freedom of mythoughts he cannot touch; and I am still at liberty in heart and soul,above his reach, and far beyond his power."Her words, however bold, seemed to give no offence to Attila; but, onthe contrary, as she spoke, a brighter and a warmer fire glowed up inhis countenance, and taking her unwilling but unresisting hand, he ledher back to the seat from which she had risen, saying, "Thou art boldas well as beautiful, and well fit to be the bride of some greatwarrior, whose soul is capable of prizing such as thine.""May such be my fate!" replied Ildica. "Theodore, to whom all mythoughts and feelings are given, is worthy of much more than this weakhand. Hast thou heard news of his return, oh king? and dost thou cometo make me happy with the tidings!"Attila's brow grew dark for a moment; but the angry cloud soon passedaway, and the light of other passions returned to his countenance."No, Ildica, no!" he said, "I come not to tell you of his return, forno news of his coming has yet reached the camp, though the time fixedby his own lips as the utmost period of his absence has wellnighexpired. No, Ildica, no! I come to tell thee of a brighter and aloftier fate which may be thine, if thy mind be capable, as I am sureit is, of higher aspirations and more noble hopes.""I seek no loftier fate, oh king!" cried Ildica, shrinking from hiseager gaze, and striving to delay the utterance of words by Attilawhich, with woman's keen insight into the heart of man, she knew wouldbind him to pursue his purpose by the bond of pride, stronger, farstronger than even passion itself--"I seek no loftier fate, Ientertain no higher aspirations! To be the wife of him whom my hearthas loved from infancy to womanhood--to wed him who has loved methrough every change of fate, through peril and danger, throughabsence and temptation--to wed him who has so loved me, and whom I solove, is to my mind the brightest fate, the loftiest destiny thatwoman could obtain.""But if he be dead?" said Attila, fixing his dark eyes full upon her."Then," replied Ildica, seeing the danger of the slightest hesitationin her answer to such a suggestion, "then will I either die also, or,vowing myself to silent prayer, leave for ever an idle and a sorrowfulworld, and hide myself with some of those lone sisterhoods who spendtheir days in solitude.""Not so," answered Attila, drawing closer to her: "thou shouldst havea better destiny; thou shouldst be the bride of Attila--his chosen,his best beloved bride; honoured and revered above all others; queenof his heart; mistress of his actions; sovereign of all the nationsthat bow to his command."Ildica sprang from his eager arm, and cast herself upon her kneesbefore him. The terrible words were spoken! There was no escape leftbut in determination strong as his own! She could no longer avoid thetheme most dreaded; and her task was to meet it boldly and at once!"Hear me, oh king!" she cried, earnestly--"hear me! I am small, andthou art great! Hear me, and save me even from thyself! I love anotherdeeply, devotedly, truly; but even were that other dead, I could neverlove thee as thou wouldst wish to be loved--nay, as thou deservest tobe loved. Mighty warrior! great and magnanimous king! unequalledconqueror! wilt thou debase thyself to contend with a woman? wilt thoudegrade thyself to violate the sanctity of thy word, to wrong theinnocent and the unoffending, to betray those who trusted thee, todestroy him who loved thee? Wilt thou risk being defeated by thestrong and resolute heart of a girl like me? Monarch! I am not in thypower, but in God's! To God I will appeal against thee; and soonerthan become thy bride, will give my spirit back to Him who lent it.Think not that thou canst frustrate my purpose, and debar me of mywill. A camp has always weapons whereby my own life can be reached; notent but has its cord; no banquet but has its knife. Not a tower ofthis city but affords me the means of defying the mighty power ofAttila; and the flinty bed beneath yon window would, to me, seem acouch of down compared with thy bridal bed, oh king! But thou wiltspare me! thou wilt spare me! I know thy better thoughts and noblernature. Thou dost but try me. Thou wilt still be just, and wise, andesteemed of all men! If Theodore be dead, tell me so; and I will vowmyself to God--I can bear such tidings with calm grief; but never,never can I love Attila as Attila should be loved! Oh, let mereverence and admire him still! Force me not to see in him the paganking--the destroyer of my country--the enemy of my faith--the slayerof my promised husband--the betrayer of his trust--the falsifier ofhis word--the tyrant of a woman whom he had vowed to protect!"So rapidly, so earnestly, so vehemently did she speak, and at the sametime so lovely did she look in the attitude of eager supplication,that Attila had neither time nor inclination to interrupt her; and,though admiration and tenderness were crossed by jealousy at the wordsof love which she bestowed on Theodore, and by anger at the daringterms she feared not to apply to himself, he remained silent for amoment after she had done, gazing on that splendid countenance andthat beautiful form, awakened, as both face and figure were, into athousand fresh graces by the imploring earnestness of her address."Take care," he exclaimed at length, "take care. Remember, love may beturned into hate; and the hate of Attila is a thing to be feared.""Not near so much by me as is his love," replied Ildica. "Oh king!thou canst but slay me, and I fear not death. No torture that thecruellest tyrant ever yet invented is equal to the torture of themind; and were I to wed Attila, could my mind ever be free fromagony?""Why? why?" demanded Attila, fiercely. "Is it that this form ishateful to thee? Is it that this hand, which a thousand conqueredkings have felt proud to kiss, is abhorrent in thine eyes?""No, no! oh no!" cried Ildica, taking the hand that he had partlyextended, and pressing her lips upon it--"no, mighty king, far fromit! It is that I love another with a love that death itself can neverchange. It is that our faith is different, all our thoughts unlike,that thou art the avowed enemy of my country. Yet all that werenothing compared with my love for another. Were he dead to-morrow,still would he live in my heart as vividly, as strongly as if I sawhim every day. This is no vain dream, no idle fancy! I have known itand proved it during long, long years of absence; and I should butgaze upon thee and think upon him--I should live in the past and hatethe present for his sake! Oh, mighty Attila! be generous, be noble!and command, by thine actions, the only kind of love that Ildica canyield thee. Heaven is my witness, that far from feeling towards theewith the cold abhorrence which thou seemest to think I experience--farfrom striving to hate thee even as the enemy of my country, and toregard thee with detestation, as many of my nation do--ever since thatday when first in the plains of Margus thou savedst the life of him Iloved, and didst free me and mine from terrible captivity, I have everloved thee with deep veneration. I have thought of thee as at oncemighty and generous, a conqueror, but a noble one, the enemy of mycountry indeed, but a great, a wonderful, a just, a lofty-minded man.Thus have I thought of thee, and thus has my beloved Theodore evertaught me to think, by word and by letter, by the tale of thy greatdeeds, and by his knowledge of thy noble nature."Attila was evidently moved; and, folding his arms upon his breast, heturned his eyes from Ildica as if from some impulse of shame, andfixed them on the ground. The fair girl, however, saw that she hadproduced some effect, and she proceeded eagerly in that strain whichhad been thus far successful."Think, oh Attila," she exclaimed, "think what has been the conducttowards thee of him whom I so dearly love. I know not half of what hehas done, for he boasts not of good actions; but sure I am that youhave ever found him faithful, zealous, and true; and thou canst inthine own mind trace, as in a picture, all that he has done for theeand thine. Have I not heard, here in the camp, that he saved the lifeof thy youngest child, the beautiful youth whom they call Ernac? HaveI not heard that in some battle in Gaul more than once he risked hislife to defend that of Attila? Has he ever failed thee in the hour ofneed? Has he ever spoken to thee or of thee one unjust word? Has heever betrayed thee in small things or in great? Has he ever beenuntrue to thee, oh king? And wouldst thou now betray him; wouldst thoumake his life miserable who always sought thy welfare? Wouldst thoutake that life which was risked to save thine own? Wouldst thou takehis bride, the chief object of his existence, from him who, from thejaws of destruction, rescued thy beloved child?""No, no, no!" cried Attila, taking both the hands that she held outtowards him in the act of adjuration--"no, no; I will not wrong him!Thou hast conquered! Whatever I may feel, however strong and burningbe the passion that thou hast kindled in my heart, I will not take hisbride from him who saved my son. Rise, maiden, rise! and set yourheart at rest! If the son of Paulinus return to claim thee for hisbride, his bride thou shalt be, and I will send ye together far fromme, that the memory of these feelings may never be reawakened by thesight of thy beauty. A week hence is the utmost term that he allowedhimself to return; I will add thereunto another week ere I see theeagain, that I may not increase the fire that burns even now within myheart. If he be not then returned, Attila will cause diligent searchand inquiry to be made, that his fate may be clearly ascertained.Attila will do justice to the son of Paulinus; but if he be dead, asin these times of trouble and of pestilence he well may be, Ildicawill do justice unto Attila."Her heart sunk at his last words; but she had gained so much alreadythat she dared not risk all again by reply. All she answered then was,"God defend us both!" and covering her fair face with her hands, shegave way to the many mingled emotions that struggled in herbreast--present relief--future apprehension--hope, never-dying,consoling hope--her dark, inseparable companion, fear--the agitationof a great struggle achieved; and the overpowering sense of successbeyond her anticipations--she could not restrain them all--she gaveway, and wept.Attila gazed upon her for several minutes in silence, and thenexclaimed, "Thou art too lovely! But be comforted," he added, "thoumayst be happy yet!"Thus saying, he turned, and left her to indulge her tears in peace.CHAPTER XVIII.THE POWER OF MIND."On to Rome! on to Rome! On to the eternal city! On to the ancientcapital of empires! On to the throne of mighty kings of old! Attilahas conquered [AE]tius! The two mighty men have met; and the weakerhas given way. Attila triumphs over [AE]tius! On to Rome! on to Rome!The world is open and prostrate before the sword of Attila. On toRome! on to Rome! On to spoil, and to victory, and to triumph!"Such were the cries that ran through the host of the Huns, as theymarched on from Milan towards the devoted city of the C[ae]sars, Andmighty and terrible indeed was that innumerable multitude, as,composed of a thousand nations, it flowed on like an overwhelmingdeluge upon its way. Those who stood and gazed upon its wide-extendedfront, as, rushing on irresistible, it swept the fair plains ofLombardy, might well want language and figures to express the awfuladvance of the barbarian world.The dark thunder-cloud, sweeping at once over the clear blue sky, andshutting out sunshine and daylight beneath its ominous veil, is tooslow in its course, too unsubstantial in its form, to afford an imageof that living inundation. The avalanche that sweeps down the side ofthe Alps, overwhelming flocks, and herds, and cities in its way, isbut petty when compared with the immense masses of that fierce andfurious multitude. The long wave of the agitated sea, when cast by thebreath of the tempest upon the echoing shore, would give but a faintidea of that rushing multitude of armed men.No! Neither bounded to a narrow space, nor gradually and slowlycarried forward, nor checked in its course and retiring to returnagain, did the multitudes of Attila advance. But, spread out from seato sea--rushing onward with the swiftness of the wind--irresistible,overpowering, vast, like the dark tide of lava when it rushes down thechannelled sides of Etna, came the barbarian myriads, findingbrightness and beauty before them, and leaving darkness and desolationbehind.Through every road, over every field, into every city, across everyriver, they passed. Like the sword of the destroying angel in thedwellings of the Egyptians, nothing seemed to stop them, nothing toimpede their progress, even for an hour. Terror and lamentation wentthrough all the land; and the voice of weeping was heard from thebanks of the Athesis to the Straits of Scylla; Ravenna, defensible asit was, was abandoned in a day; and Rome itself wailed in tremblingfor the approach of a new, a fiercer conqueror than Alaric.At length the tent of Attila was pitched by the side of a grand lake,where from its bosom flows the stream by whose banks the sweetest ofthe Roman poets sung. No longer simple, as when he first enteredGreece, appeared the camp of the barbarian king; no longer was seenthe ring of wagons only, and the multitude sleeping in the fresh airof night; but there, tents of every form and every hue diversified theplain which stretches along, from the base of the gigantic mountainsthat enclose the stormy waves of the Benacus, to the soft green fieldsof the fair Mantuan land, where the "silver-gray cattle" of whichVirgil sung still bathe in the placid waters of his native Mincius.Far and wide as the eye could see extended that vast encampment; andthe air, for many a mile, rang with the neighing of horses and theclang of arms. At the very junction of the lake and the river, on ahigh sloping ground, whence the eye of the monarch could behold boththe far plains covered by his innumerable host and the waters of thelake, with all its grand and beautiful shores, was pitched the tent ofAttila, together with those of the persons immediately attached to themonarch himself: and splendid was the sight, when, after a night ofrepose, the cloudless sun of Italy rose up and poured its flood ofsplendour over one of the loveliest scenes of earth, living andanimated with the figures of those wild but splendidly-attiredhorsemen.At the entrance of the tent, beside which his horse was held prepared,stood Attila, gazing over that thrilling sight; and, strange as it mayseem, there was something in the picturesque beauty of the scene, inthe poetical aspect of the whole, the mighty host, the mightymountains, the beaming sunrise, and the glowing lake, that found, evenwithin the breast of the fierce conqueror, a sympathizing appreciationof what is bright and beautiful in nature.He stood and gazed, and felt his soul calmed and soothed."We will stay here to-day," he said. "The land is rich and plentiful:the people will be happy in this place of oil and wine. We will stayhere to-day; and to-morrow, onward towards Rome! But what is that?" hecontinued, after gazing for some minutes longer. "What is that,winding slowly along in the distant country, following the road by theside of the river? It looks like a long train of horsemen approachingslowly, and it can hardly be any of our own tribes returning at thisearly hour. What can that be?"No eyes, however, but his own were keen enough to distinguish, in thefar distance, the object to which he pointed; and he added, "Let someone be sent forth to see, and let no man be injured who comes to us inthe garb of peace. This day there shall be no blood shed, unless ourenemies seek it themselves. Here we will taste repose andtranquillity."Several hours had elapsed; the myriads of the Huns were all awake andstirring; thousands of wild horsemen were galloping over the plain,exercising their horses, or practising with the javelin or the spear:and others on foot were moving about among the tents, in all thebustling activity of the morning's duties, when the train which Attilahad seen approaching through the distant country entered the Hunnishcamp, and were led forward towards the tent of the monarch. Some ofhis own messengers, who had gone out to meet the strangers, hurried onbefore to inform him that envoys from the Emperor Valentinian wereeven then coming near his presence. But the monarch, who still, thoughchanged in many things, retained in some degree his contempt for pompand show, merely ordered the hangings of his tent to be drawn up, and,seating himself in the entrance, awaited the arrival of the imperialambassadors.At their head appeared an old man, riding on a mule; and though theHuns gathered round in crowds to see an equipage to which they wereunaccustomed, yet there was something so venerable and commanding inthat old man's air, that even the rude barbarian soldiers forbore topress upon him, and merely gazed; while--with his look now raised toheaven, as if in momentary supplication, now cast down upon theground, as if in deep thought--he rode slowly on through the midst ofthat fierce and blood-accustomed host, as if fear and wonder wereutter strangers to his bosom.After him followed a number of other men, clothed with princelysplendour, and mounted on fiery chargers; but ever and anon their eyeswere cast around upon the sea of dark faces that surrounded them, andan expression, perhaps not of fear, but certainly of anxiety, might beseen upon their countenances. At first the Huns demanded amongthemselves why the old man upon the mule rode first before thewarriors; but when they compared his aspect with those who followed,they saw that he was in his proper place.Last came a number of domestic servants and attendants, followed byslaves beating on a long train of beasts of burden; and in the slavesmight be seen--as with hard hearts and unsparing hands they struckunmercifully the dumb suffering creatures but a grade belowthemselves--in them might be seen, though springing from a lowermotive, the same fearless indifference to the presence of the strangemultitude as he who led them displayed from a sense of faith and duty.At the foot of the little hill on which stood the tent of Attila themultitude of the Huns paused, and followed the strangers no longer;and there, too, the envoys of the emperor were directed to dismount.The command was instantly obeyed; and leaving the servants and thetrain of baggage in the hands of some of the officers of the camp, allthe rest began to ascend the hill towards the presence of the monarch,who, seated in the door of his tent, with but a few of his chiefleaders around him, waited above, examining the persons and the air ofeach of the strangers as he approached.With a slow step, dignified, calm, and collected, that old man who hadled the Romans climbed the hill, slightly bowed by age, but ratherstiffened than enfeebled. He was tall and largely proportioned; andhis snowy hair, which, like that of the barbarians, felt not thesteel, escaping from a cap of a peculiar form that he wore upon hishead, flowed down in wavy curls upon his shoulders. His eye, which hebut once raised towards the tent of Attila as he ascended, was calmand mild, but full of sleeping fire; and his step, though slow, wasplanted firmly upon the ground, giving to his whole demeanour an airof resolution and of power, which was not without its effect on thosewho watched his advance up the mountain.Attila himself, as he sat in the stern silence natural to him, andbeheld the calm and equable approach of the messenger of Valentiniantowards his presence, might wonder at that unshaken firmness which sofew displayed under similar circumstances. He moved not a muscle,however, but gazed sternly upon the envoy, till at length, whenwithin ten paces of his seat, the great Pontiff of Rome--for he itwas--paused in his advance, and said to those who followed, in a full,steady voice, "Let Avienus and Trigetius come with me! The rest waithere!" and then, proceeding on his way, he drew near to Attila."Who art thou?" demanded the barbarian king, in that full deep tonewhich was powerful and impressive, without being rude or abrupt. "Whoart thou that comest so boldly before Attila?""I am Leo, the servant of God!" replied the pope, bending his head ashe pronounced the almighty name."Of what God?" demanded Attila."There is but one God," replied Saint Leo; "there is but one God,holy, just, and true; Lord of lords, and King of kings! The lowest ofhis servants am I!""Thou meanest the God of the Christians?" said Attila.The pope bent his head in reply, and the monarch proceeded. "It iswell," he said, "it is well! Now tell me what thou wouldst have withAttila. Why comest thou to me hither, when, but a few short days, andI had come to thee?""It is to prevent thy coming that I seek thee," replied thebishop--"it is to prevent thy coming, and to stay the stream of bloodthat is poured out before thy steps. It is to stay from desolation thebeautiful land that thou treadest like a wine-presser beneath thyfeet, crushing all that is good and excellent, and leaving nothing butthe worthless refuse. It is to adjure thee, by the name of God MostHigh, to spare his servants, and to turn thee from a land which hisholy faith hath sanctified, and the blood of his saints made sacred. Ido adjure thee by his name to pause in the course which he hashitherto made victorious, lest he take thy strength from thee, anddestroy thee as thou hast destroyed others. Monarch!" he continued,seeing a cloud gathering on the brow of Attila--"monarch! I menacethee not with any human arm. None has ever been able to resist theesuccessfully; none has ever had power to oppose thee long: but know,oh king! that thou, like all others, art but an instrument in thehands of a mightier monarch. Thou art called the SCOURGE OF GOD, andverily he has used thee for the purposes of his vengeance. With theehath he wrought destruction, and inflicted punishment upon thefaithless and the unrighteous. In his hand thou hast been as thepestilence or the thunderbolt. Thou hast swept away nations. Thou hastsmitten down monarchs. Thou hast trodden the palace and the cottagealike, with the sword of the destroying angel in thy hand; but now, inthe name of the same God, who sent thee forth to conquer and to slay,I bid thee pause and turn back upon thy way, lest he take thy strengthfrom thee, and reduce thy glory into shame. Remember, oh king!remember that one who, like thee, was mighty; who, like thee, wasfierce; who, like thee, was unconquerable by man, trod these sameplains but a few brief years ago; and, as a vulture, swept the landwith the wing of desolation. Remember how Alaric, the mighty and thestrong, marched on at the head of his innumerable hosts, and, likethee, found none to stay him. Remember how he heard the warning topause, and turn back ere he set his foot within the eternal city.Remember how he neglected the warning; how he despised the words; howhe conquered Rome, and died. In all things but in this was he likeunto thee! But in this was he unlike, for I know--and feel--andsee--as if it were before me in a vision, that thou shalt listen tothe word of the servant of God, and sheath the sword, and turn backupon the way. Monarch! I tell thee, and my words shall prove true,that none henceforth for ever shall march against Rome, and placetheir camp round about it, and subdue it unto their hand, withoutmeeting some terrible reverse; without finding death, or downfall, ordishonour follow, as surely as night follows day. Some shall comeagainst it and take it, and die as soon as they leave it. Some shallassail it, and fall even in the hour of victory. Some shall subdue it,and,  after years of glory, shall see the brightness of their fametarnished with shame, defeat, and overthrow, with long and wearyinactivity, and lingering death. But thou shalt listen to the voice ofwarning; thou shalt fear the name of God, and the word of God'sservant, and shall turn thee back, and escape the peril ofdisobedience."Bold and striking as his words was the action which, accompanied them;dignified, nay, sublime, was the expression of his countenance. Thedark eye filled with the fire of genius, the fine features beamingwith the divine light of enthusiasm, the lips trembling with theeloquence of the heart, the arms outstretched in passionateexpostulation, the broad chest heaving under its flowing robes withthe energy of lofty thoughts, while the full, powerful, melodiousvoice, clear, rounded, unhesitating, poured forth the stream ofwords--all, all formed a splendid whole, such as none there presenthad ever seen before; and the barbarian monarch himself and his fiercechiefs gave ready way to the delusions of imagination, and believedthat they beheld an immediate messenger from heaven. Even when he haddone, and remained with his firm unquailing gaze fixed upon the faceof Attila, with eyes that sunk not to encounter the look at whichnations trembled, all those around, though the impression produced byhis oratory perhaps faded, still looked upon him as a superior being,still waited for the answer of their own monarch with anxiety, perhapswith apprehension.But Attila, though struck and admiring, forgot not himself inwonder--that passion of the weak. From the beginning to the end, whileSaint Leo spoke, the mighty monarch fixed upon his countenance thesame stern, immoveable gaze, under the influence of which everyinferior mind gave way, every ordinary heart lost courage. Twice hisswarthy brow slightly contracted as the prelate spoke those bold wordswhich Attila's ear was seldom wont to hear; but his face was moved inno other feature: and he made not an effort to stop the orator in thecourse of his eager and energetic speech. When he had concluded,Attila continued to gaze upon him thoughtfully and intently; but,apparently, neither scornfully nor displeased.At length he said, "Thou hast spoken like a god; but know that not thegods themselves shall turn back Attila from his course, unless he havethe justice he has demanded. Thou art reverenced, oh Leo! as one ofmighty powers--as one inspired, perhaps, by the God whom thou servest,with eloquence above that of mortals; and willingly will Attila hearthee discourse on the matters of thy high calling, as to whether therebe more gods than one; as to the nature of the soul of man; the powersthat govern him throughout life, and the fate that awaits him beyondthe grave. On such matters shalt thou be listened to willingly, nay,more, with reverent ears, as becomes those who hear the words of onetouched by the spirit of a god. We will attend to thine exhortationsin favour of Rome, to thy warnings in regard to those who conquer it,even to thy menaces against the life of Attila himself. But Attilaturns not aside for words! He whom the embattled line of enemiescannot impede is not to be overawed even by a holy man as thou art. Hefears not the sword; he avoids not the spear. The twanging of thebowstring makes not his eyelids fall; the shout of the enemy ispleasant on his ear. His battle-horse shall bear him onwardwhithersoever his fate directs; and if the destiny of Attila liewithin the gates of Rome, to Rome herself and to her capital willAttila go to seek it. Death comes but once, and chooses his own time.The sentence is written on high; and so help me Mars and my goodsword, as I would not reverse it, were it to be fulfilled to-morrow.My grave is already dug by the hand of destiny, wherever that grave isto be. And what matters it to Attila whether he lie beneath the grayolives of Italy, or the green birch-trees by the Danube?"He paused a moment, gazing thoughtfully upon the prelate; and a slightsmile might have been seen upon the lip of Ardaric, to hear his mightyleader adopting, as he went on in the career of victory, so much ofhis own doctrine of fatalism.In a moment Attila proceeded. "Thus much I have spoken," he said."Looking upon thee as a messenger from the gods, and filled with thespirit of the knowledge of the future, willingly on these points willI discourse with thee at large, seeing that in all the lands I havevisited I have never met any one like thee. But if thou comest as anenvoy from Valentinian--lord of these lands, but unto me a slave, onwhose neck I set my foot--thou must speak of other things if thouwouldst turn me from the path which lies before me. Thou must speak ofofferings to atone for the past; of tribute to show his subjection forthe future; of the complete satisfaction of all my just demands. Thoumust show Attila that the glory and honour of himself and of hispeople are to be maintained and increased by following the course thatthou wouldst have us pursue, ere thou canst hope to stay these myriadson their forward way, or turn the sword of Attila in anotherdirection. Do this. Leave my justice and my honour no plea againsthim, and I will raise up a wall between you and the desolation of mypresence. Your fields shall flourish in the sunshine. Your riversshall flow with the accustomed wine; the land teem with oil and bread;and ye shall rear your children up in peace, safe from the destroyingsword, till the name of Attila be no more than the whisper of the windthrough the gorges of some distant mountain." A bright and heavenlysmile beamed up over the noble features of Saint Leo, and he repliedat once, without pause or hesitation, "Monarch, I will turn theeback!"There was something so dignified, so majestic, so sublime in the air,the tone, and the manner with which the pontiff pronounced those fewwords, that Attila himself was visibly struck and surprised. "How so?"demanded he: "how so--how wilt thou turn me back? Wilt thou bring downfire from heaven?""I will do more!" replied Saint Leo--"I will give thee such justicethat even the heart of a conqueror can demand no more! Thou hast saidthat thou wilt turn back if I will satisfy thine honour and thyjustice. I have offers for thee, which, as a minister of God's word, Ideclare to be as full and complete satisfaction as ambition itselfcould demand. Wilt thou hear them now, oh king?""No," replied Attila, "I will not. Thou art weary with travel, andhast many years upon thy brow. Attila has kept thee too long alreadywithout offering thee bread and rest. This night shalt thou repose intranquillity and peace. The wine shall flow for thee, and the feastshall be prepared--"Saint Leo waved his hand, "Fasting and prayer," he cried, "fasting andprayer shall be my companions. Prostrate in the dust, lifting my heartunto the throne of God, humbly calling upon the name of my Saviour,beseeching the Spirit of truth to guide me aright! With fasting andwith prayer will I entreat the almighty Disposer of all hearts tosoften thine, and change its stern nature into mercy. Be it as thouhast said, oh king! I will seek repose. Those who came with me haveneed of it; and in the mean time my words have fallen upon an ear thatwill not lose them lightly. When may I hold further commune withthee?""Two hours ere noon to-morrow," replied Attila. "Till then, seekrefreshment and repose, and Attila will take counsel as to the verysmallest offering which he can receive as a propitiation to suspendhis sword. In the mean time, I give thee unto the care of these myofficers. Thou fearest not to rest within the camp of the Huns?""I am in the hand of God!" replied Saint Leo, throwing wide his armsand looking up to heaven--"I am in the hand of God! Why should Ifear?"CHAPTER XIX.THE VISION AND ITS INTERPRETATION.There were frequent messengers came and went to and from the tent ofAttila, and there was movement and agitation in the camp. Round themonarch sat his tributary kings; and various were the different shadesof expression which passed over the countenances of those fiercechiefs, as they listened to the words of their leader, and heard allthat had befallen since, on the preceding day, the great pontiff ofRome had appeared to stay them in their advance."It was but a vision of the night!" said Attila--"it was but some idledream, and yet it came before me full, tangible, complete. There wasno wandering of thought to other things, no confusion of fancies, nobreaking off and beginning again; but it was all clear and definite,accurate and minute; and yet it was but a vision, an idle dream, whichAttila will heed no more than he would a fanciful cloud wrought intostrange forms by the wind that bears it.""Heed no visions, oh Attila!" said Ardaric--"the only sure vision willbe the walls of Rome.""And yet, oh mighty king!" joined in Onegisus, "one at least herepresent would fain hear the substance of the dream that disturbed thyslumbers. It has been held by wise men and by priests long versed insacred things, that dreams come forth from the gods, and are one meansof making their will known to men. I at least would fain hear whatvision it was that broke the sleep of Attila.""And I also! and I! and I!" said many voices round as soon as thedemand was made; and leaning his broad brow upon his hand, with hiseyes fixed thoughtfully upon the table at which he sat, Attila notunwillingly proceeded to speak as they required."It seemed to me as if I had slept some hours," he said, "and that Iwas awakened by a noise, when, looking up, I saw all things around meas I had seen them when I closed mine eyes. There were the hangings ofthe tent, there the clothing I had put off to rest, there burnt thefeeble lamp, there lay the strong sword. Two javelins crossed hungupon my right, and a spear lay near me on the ground. I saw it all asdistinctly as ere I closed my eyes that night, when lo! the hangingsof the tent were moved, raised up; and, without sound or motion oftheir limbs, the figures of two men approached my couch. A cloud oflight environed them around, hiding in its blaze all things behind it.The lamp grew dim as if it had not been lighted, and in this cloud,borne on to where I lay, the strangers came, clothed in strange robes,simple and unadorned, with hair and beards of snowy whiteness, and themarks of extreme age upon the face of each. One, however, was olderthan the other, and of coarser features, though there was a fire andeagerness in his large eye which spoke a mighty and energetic spirit,prompt in its emotions and its acts. The younger seemed more calm andof a loftier aspect, and on his countenance were seen the traces ofhigh thoughts, perhaps, too, of some sufferings endured withfortitude, but felt with keen perception. A smile, bland andbeautiful, sat on his lips, and there was in his glance that quick yetthoughtful movement which I have seen in men, deep arguers on rightand wrong, subtle in their eloquence, and powerful to untie thetangled intricacy of questions remote and difficult. Around them inthat cloud of light there shone a greater light, as if it issued forthfrom them and from their garments; and though they seemed of flesh aswe are, yet there was a difference that scarcely can be told, butwhich rendered their bodies more glorious and pure to the eye thanours. I would fain have stretched out my hand to seize my sword, but Ilay as if chained down by adamantine bonds. I would fain have spoken,to demand who dared in such a sort to disturb the sleep of Attila, butmy tongue refused its office, and my lips moved without a sound.Approaching, as I have said, without any visible motion of theirlimbs, but borne forward by some unseen power, they came near, andstood by the side of my couch: there, gazing upon me for a moment,their eyes seemed filled with pity or with sorrow, and at length theyounger said, 'Attila! Attila! thou hast fought, and thou hastconquered, and unwittingly, but not unwillingly, thou hast done thewill of God! Now turn thee back upon thy way, for thou shalt smitethis land no more. Turn thee back upon thy way, and hesitate not, forwe are sent to bid thee sheath the sword, lest it fall upon thine ownhead. Turn thee back, turn thee back, and that speedily, as thouwouldst live and conquer still!' And with that the light grew faint,the figures seemed to dissolve, the cloud passed away; and I was lyingin my own tent, with the lamp burning feebly by my side. It was but avision, an idle dream, and it is passed! Attila heeds it not. It wasbut a vision, an unreal vision!""It was a strange one though, oh mighty king!" said Onegisus; "and Iwould fain ask yon holy man who came hither yesterday if he can givethe interpretation thereof, and tell who were these that appeared untothee.""First let those who slept in the outer tent," said Ardaric, "beclosely questioned if any one passed by them in the night.""I have questioned them already," said Attila--"I have done more: Irose instantly--for my limbs and my mind seemed freed as if from aheavy weight--and drawing back the curtains that divide the tent, Ifound that no one living could have entered without treading on thesleeping bodies of those of my warriors who lay without. It was but avision, an idle vision of the night!""I put no faith in visions," said Ardaric: "they never visit me. If Idream, 'tis of some empty thing, taking fanciful shapes withoutregularity or continuance, forgotten as soon as passed. I put no faithin visions."Attila's brow contracted slightly, but he made no reply; and Valamir,his Gothic tributary, who had hitherto remained thoughtful and silent,now raised his eyes. "Thy vision is a strange one, oh king," he said,"and worthy of some consideration. More, perhaps, than thou thyselfart willing to bestow upon it. Yet would I not ask the interpretationof this eloquent man, whose voice was heard so powerfully yesterday;for he of course will see therein a confirmation of his own warnings.There is another in the camp who may be better trusted. Dost thouremember, oh mighty Attila, a holy hermit, who dwelt in the mountainstwo or three days' journey from Margus, and who--""But he is dead," interrupted Attila; "he has been dead two years.""True," replied Valamir; "but near him there dwelt another hermit,less shrewd and wise, perhaps, but, even more than he was, touchedwith the fire of the gods. Wild, rash, and fearless, he speakswhatever the spirit prompts, and in such a man's interpretation onemay trust his confidence. Among the train who followed hither thishigh-priest of Rome was the very man, and well acquainted with themanners and the languages of us people of the North. He was wanderingyesterday evening through the camp; and I myself saw him preachingboldly strange doctrines of other gods to a large crowd of Huns andGepid[ae]. Let him be sent for, and to him let the vision be told. Onhis interpretation we can better rely."All voices applauded the proposal, and instantly was it executed.Messengers went forth to find the enthusiast Mizetus, and in a fewminutes he stood before Attila and his counsellors. He was silent asthe grave while the vision was being told to him; but then--stretchingforth his hands, and turning his eyes full upon the countenance ofAttila, though not with a fixed and steadfast gaze, but with a wildand rolling glance--he exclaimed, "Is it not simple as the light ofday? Is it not open as the summer's sky? Is it not clear as the watersfrom the rock? What need of interpretation? What need of any one toexplain? There is but one God, oh Attila! though thou and these, asslaves of Satan, worship stone, and wood, and iron. That God has beenmerciful to thee, oh king! and has sent unto thee the apostles of hisson, Peter the prince of the apostles, and Paul the chosen by thevoice of God! To thee, from another world, he has sent those, throughthe midst of thy sleeping guards, who, when they lived in this world,passed through the hands of jailers, cast from them the fetters ofiron, and walked free through the prison doors of the Roman governor.To thee has he sent them in mercy, to turn thee back from the way ofdestruction. Listen to their words, tread back thy steps, sheath thesword, open thy heart to the word of God, and thou shalt be safe. Ifthou doest not this, if thou goest on in rapine and injustice,shedding the blood of the faithful and smiting the people of Christ,lo! I tell thee, when thine errand is accomplished, and the judgmentsof God wrought out, thou shalt die by some despised death; thinearmies shall melt away like snow, the bodies of thy warriors slainshall rot under the summer's sky, and a pestilence shall go forth fromtheir bones to root out those whom the sword has spared. Wo unto you!wo unto your mighty men, for the sword of the Lord is out against you,and he shall scatter you to the uttermost parts of the earth, andshall grind your mouths in the dirt of the earth ye have trodden soproudly, and shall cast ye forth as dead dogs, to be an abomination tothe passer-by!"More than one sword leaped from its sheath at those bold words, butthe deep, thunder-like voice of Attila stayed them from smiting therash enthusiast. "Harm him not, harm him not!" cried the monarch. "Bythe soul of Attila, he dies who strikes him! Did we not bid him speak?Did we not call for his words? and shall we slay him because they aresuch as please us not? Stranger," he continued, "thou hast spokenrashly among rash men, nevertheless thou art safe, and mayst depart!"Mizetus turned to leave the tent; but, ere he went, he raised hishand, and said, in a solemn tone, "I grieve for thee, oh Attila! forthy fate is near!""Let it come!" replied Attila--and the enthusiast departed."We have spent too much time on this thing," continued the monarch,"let us now turn our thoughts to more substantial warnings. Ardaric,my friend, as thou hast said, this vision was indeed but an emptydream, and but matter for a moment's speculation; but I have tidingsfor thee which thou knowest not of, for thy Gepid[ae] lie high up uponthe hill. There are those here, however, who know that between sunsetlast night and sunrise this morning, the sword of the pestilence smoteamong the warriors who lie by the side of the river nearly tenthousand men!"Ardaric started up, and gazed fixedly on the countenance of Attila."Itis true!" said the monarch; "but this is not all, my friend. Afleet from Constantinople has wafted a new host to our noble enemy[AE]tius; nor is that all either," he added, raising his voice; "thearmies of Marcian have crossed the Danube, and cut to pieces three ofour tribes upon the Dacian frontier. Now, friends and counsellors, youknow the whole. Tell me what shall be the course of Attila. Shall I goon, and lay Rome in ashes? Shall I pause here, and accept the tributethis priest is prepared to offer? Willing am I to do the first,willing would I be to do it, were I as sure that death would followwithin a day as I am that there is a sun behind the clouds that nowstretch over the sky.""Hear what he has to offer, oh mighty king," said Ardaric; "then, ifit be enough to satisfy the honour of Attila and save the glory of hiswarriors, accept the conditions. Let us retire from this pestilentialland, and then--""What then?" demanded Attila, after waiting for a moment to let thechief conclude his sentence."Nay, I know not," replied Ardaric. "Then--let us do whatsoever Attilawill."A brief smile passed like lightning across the countenance of theking. "And then," he said, "and then--to Constantinople! and we shallsee who is to live or die; who is to be a monarch, who a slave! Thesword of a thousand battles against the broken spear of a weak Roman!Methinks the chances are unequal. Kings of great nations! Friends ofAttila! There is no need to ask what are the terms this Roman bishopbrings. They are known to me already--revealed to me in no vision,Ardaric, but told to my messenger at my demand. He offers a gift tentimes in value all that the East and West have ever given, an annualtribute double that which we received from Theodosius. A futurecompensation for the dowry of Honoria, and the restitution of allcaptives and fugitives from the Hunnish nation! Is this sufficient?""It is! it is!" replied the chiefs; and a messenger was instantlydespatched to summon Saint Leo to the tent of the barbarian monarch.With the same calm dignity as before, the prelate presented himselfbefore the council of Attila, and in his whole demeanour there wasthat grand, but simple and unassuming majesty, which commanded thereverence, the respect--almost the love--of men of a different nation,creed, language, manners, habits, thoughts. Attila himself rose at hisapproach, and, with an air not less in dignity, took him by the handand placed him by his side.The pontiff felt that he had touched the heart of the barbarian, andhe was more moved at having done so than had the utmost ire of thatmighty king--a king who feared no chastisement, acknowledged no lawsbut his own sense of right, bowed to no superior on earth or inheaven--than had his ire threatened the worst tortures that could beinflicted. Through the reverence with which he had inspired thebarbarian monarch he saw, as through a long avenue, a number ofsympathies, noble feelings, and generous sentiments, akin to thosewhich dwelt in his own heart; while hope stood half way between, andbeckoned to the kindred bands to unite for mighty purposes and grandendeavours. A moment's reflection, however, a moment's glance of themental eye over the sad but solemn and oracular book of experience,showed him the falsehood of the siren's tale, and made him grieve thatthe brightest feelings of the human heart, mutually perceived andunderstood, and which, could they meet and co-operate, would work outthe blessing and happiness of thousands, should ever thus be stoppedby obstacles insignificant, and totally unseen by those who attempt topass them, till all their efforts for unanimity and concord areoverthrown.Calmly and clearly, in answer to the questions of the king, herecapitulated the splendid, the degrading offers of Valentinian; andhe added, "This, oh king, am I commanded to propose: this am Iauthorized to promise. The gift is already in thy camp; the tributeshall soon follow; and--as a mediator between thee and them whosuffer, standing pure and impartial under the eye of God, who is of nonation and of no country, and respecteth no man for a name--I declarethat thou hast now offered unto thee more than thou canst claimaright; more than equity could pronounce against them; more thanjustice can award unto thy claim. But when unto all this is added thegreat triumph of clemency, the mighty privilege of showing mercy, thetriumphant glory of sparing those thou couldst destroy; so help meHeaven, as I do believe that there is offered unto thee more than eventhy conquering sword could win, more than thy highest ambition coulddesire, more than thy vastest efforts could attain! Is it moreglorious to slaughter than to save? Is it more mighty to destroy thanto spare? Is it a greater sign of power to cast down than to raise up?He that saves from the slayer is greater than the slayer; he thatshields from the destroyer is victorious over the destroyer; and hethat raises up does a deed which shall last long after he who castsdown is forgotten! Spare then, oh Attila, spare the nations! and if insparing them thou gainest a triumph over thyself, thou doest thatwhich the noblest of thine enemies has never been able to do, andraisest to thyself the crowning trophy of thy fame, under which shallbe written by the hand of history, 'None but Attila gained thevictory over Attila!'"Even had he not spoken, the terms he offered would have been accepted;but had they been less than they were, they would have been acceptedunder the influence of his voice. The gorgeous presents were broughtup and displayed before the tent of Attila. The gold and the silverwere poured out; the jewels and the cloth of gold were displayed tothe eyes of the admiring chiefs who crowded round. But Attila himselflooked not on them; his eyes were either thoughtfully lifted to thesky, in that direction wherein lay Rome, or else bent down in deepreflection upon the ground, while traces of emotion, slight indeed inthemselves, but still from their unusualness indicative of strongfeelings within, might be traced upon his countenance.When all the gifts were displayed, he turned abruptly to Saint Leo,saying, "Messenger of a mighty God, Attila turns upon his steps. Takewhat thou wilt of these baubles, either as an offering to thy Deity oras a gift unto thyself!""God forbid!" replied the pontiff: "the God I serve--the onlyGod!--dwells not in temples made with hands, and requires no offeringsfrom the sons of men but a pure and contrite spirit, a repentant andan humble heart. As for me, I take no part in the spoils of mybrethren, and I leave them to him to whom they were sent, and of whoseforbearance they are the price and recompense.""Thou art the first priest," cried Attila--"thou art the first priestof any god that ever yet I heard of who refused gold and jewels whenthey were offered to him freely.""Thou hast known but few Christian priests, my son," replied SaintLeo, mildly. "The priests thou hast known were the servants of thosewhom we call devils, Mammon; or Plutus, the demon of covetousness;Belial, Lucifer, or Apollo, the god of pride; Moloch or Mars, thedemon of bloodshed. The priests of all these and many others, fortheir several purposes, seek wealth and splendour; but the servants ofGod, the only true God, seek his glory, and know their ownunworthiness. Oh Attila, I leave thee! I came unto thee, knowing thatthou hadst a mighty name, and that none upon this earth had been foundto conquer thee; that kings, and princes, and warriors of great renownbowed down trembling before thee, and shrunk from the very glance ofthine eye; and yet I feared thee not. I go from thee now with myreverence not lessened, but with deep sorrow at my heart, to findnobler qualities in thy nature; qualities which, guiding and directingthe inferior ones of courage and military skill, have made thee whatthou art; and yet to see that those qualities, like diamonds in someundiscovered mine, lie wasting all their brightness, because they arenot known and estimated. The knowledge of one true God, the faith inone redeeming Saviour, are all that is wanting to raise Attila highabove living men! I leave those in thy camp who may show thee a lightthou hast never yet seen. Listen unto them, oh Attila! listen untothem and be saved! Yet! yet! I trust the mild spirit of the AlmightyGod will touch thy heart, and turn it into humility and righteousness.Then, mounting from the humbleness of faith, Attila will rise to apitch of glory no earthly arms can ever win, and stand upon a pointwhere mortal monarch never placed himself without the Spirit of theLord to raise him up on high.""Thou speakest words I do not comprehend," said Attila, turning away."God make them clear to thee in his own good time!" replied thebishop, and slowly descended the hill.CHAPTER XX.THE SOMETHING WORSE THAN DEATH.We must now turn again to Ildica! In agony of heart, she sat withinher tent with the spirit bowed down and nearly broken, and the bodilyframe bent and shaken under the load of grief. Before her stood themessenger of Attila, who bore her the sad tidings of the loss of himshe loved. Beside her stood the fair daughter of the dead king Bleda,and the wild enthusiast Mizetus.Tearless, all tearless was the bright eye of the Dalmatian girl,although through the clear white skin of the temples might be seen theblue veins swelling up like cords with the rushing up of the agonizedblood.The enthusiast kept silence, and gazed on her with a look of deepgrief; but from the dark blue eyes of Neva rolled profuse the largeheavy tears, and in the sorrow of her own heart she asked many aquestion of the messenger regarding all the particulars of the fate ofone still too dearly beloved."Art thou sure," she demanded, "that the winds and tempests did thework of death? Art thou sure that the commands of Attila, more cruel,more unsparing than the fierce elements, had not their share?""I know nothing," replied the messenger, "but that which I wascommanded to say. The ship perished, and almost all on board weredrowned.""Almost all!" cried Ildica, starting up, and gazing eagerly in theman's face--"almost all! Then there is yet hope!""Alas, no!" replied the messenger. "All who reached the land wereslain upon the shore by some wandering bands of warriors!""Even so! even so!" cried Ildica; "sent on purpose to destroy him athis landing! Oh, fatal beauty! Thou hast caused the death of him Iloved most on earth;" and she cast herself down upon the couch and hidher face in her robe; while from time to time a sharp shudder might beseen to pass over that fair form, as if the anguish of the spirit weredestroying its earthly tabernacle."Art thou sure that he was in the ship?" demanded Neva, still clingingto a hope."Quite sure!" replied the messenger; "presents from the EmperorMarcian--goods marked with the youth's name--his very clothing itself,have been brought into the presence of Attila.""Of his murderer!" said Neva; "of his murderer!'"The man, who was a Roman fugitive, made no reply; and, after a briefpause, withdrew from the tent."What means she, maiden?" demanded Mizetus, turning to Neva; "whatmeans she when she says that her beauty has caused the death of himshe loved?""Dost thou not comprehend?" cried the girl, gazing at him through hertears; "dost thou not know that Attila himself seeks her love? Canstthou not guess that he took the life of him who was his happierrival?""Is it even so?" cried Mizetus; "alas, unhappy maiden! for what artthou reserved?" and, after gazing at her for a moment or two inmelancholy thought, he left the tent, and turned his steps towards theroyal pavilion of Attila himself.Where was that pavilion now? No longer on the shores of the wildBenacus, no longer looking over the fertile plains of Italy, but onthe slope of the Carpathian mountains, amid the rude but magnificentscenery of the hill country. There were congregated the myriads of theNorth; there was pitched the camp of a thousand nations, coveringevery rise, and sweeping down into every valley. But as Mizetuswandered on among them, all were in movement; the Huns, and theGepid[ae], and the Goths, the Heruli and the Alani, were pouring forthslowly on foot, and mounting with a low rushing murmur towards thetent of Attila. As they went one spoke unto the other, and the voiceof complaint made itself heard."Why call for us now?" cried one."We might even now have been revelling in Rome!" said another."Has Attila lost his daring?" asked a third."Is he to be led by the smooth words of a graybeard in long robes?"demanded a fourth.And thus they went murmuring on, till, gathering together upon thehill-side, they covered a vast extent, above which again--with a spaceof many cubits between it and them, kept clear by the officers of theking--towered the pavilion of their mighty chief. During some time thenoise of coming feet was heard; but at length all the men of that vasthost seemed congregated there: the curtains of the tent were drawn,and Attila stood before them. He gave one slow glance around, and theloudest murmurer in the host cast down his eyes before that darkcountenance, as if he feared that the monarch might see the rebellionin his heart, and smite him on the spot. All was hushed as if indeath; and then the voice of Attila was heard, spreading round andround, till scarce a man in all that multitude could fail to catch hiswords."Ye have dared to murmur at the will of Attila!" he said "Ye havedared to think that ye knew better than he did! Ye have dared to callhis wisdom weakness, because he led you away from Rome, whosetreasures were exhausted to buy your absence; and while ye thuscomplained, ye knew not whither he was leading you! It is time that yeshould hear, in order that shame may glow like a burning spot uponyour brows. I lead ye to Constantinople, to the city of the C[ae]sars,to the plunder of the richest capital in the universe! I swear," hecontinued, drawing his sword, as if moved by some sudden impulse, andholding it up on high before his eyes as he addressed to it hisvow--"I swear that I will not leave one blade of grass in Thrace, norone city standing, nor the wall of one fortress not cast down, nor oneliving enemy to oppose my path! This sword will I not sheath till Isheath it in the capital of the East. The feet of my horse shall neverpause for more than one rising and setting of the sun, till I tightenthe bridle in his mouth on the shores of the Thracian Bosphorus. I goforth to smite and to destroy, and I will make the land like unto onewhich has never been inhabited. I will cast down everything in my way;and the vulture which follows me, to eat the dead bodies of mineenemies, shall not have to raise his wings when he snuffs theircarcasses from afar. Ye have heard the will of Attila! Get ye gone!Sharpen your arrows, but restrain your tongues!""Boaster," cried a shrill voice from the crowd, speaking in the Greektongue, "thou shalt die even in thy pride!" But the crowd had alreadybegun to move, and the noise of their innumerable feet drowned thesounds of that warning voice. The multitude separated slowly; Attilare-entered his tent; and Mizetus, with his hands clasped, and his eyesfull of wandering fire, bent down upon the ground, strayed away with aslow irregular pace along the course of a little rivulet that streameddown from the higher hills. He muttered to himself as he went, andlittle note did he take of the various groups of Huns that passed him."Is it not so?" he said, as he wandered on--"is it not clearly so? Isit not the will of Heaven, distinctly revealing unto me the way tosave the people of the Lord? Shall this pagan barbarian smite thefaithful and the just? Heaven forbid! God has provided a remedy. TheLord has found a means of deliverance! I will do his will! I will workunder the guidance of his spirit! I will not delay, no, not an hour,but I will gird up my loins and be doing!"Long he wandered on, and long he continued thus muttering to himself;but at length he stopped suddenly, and exclaiming, "God strengthenme!" he turned and took his way straight to the tent of Ildica. Herattendants in the outer apartment sought to prevent his entrance; buthe said, "I must see the Roman maiden; I come to bring herconsolation." And, after some delay and inquiry within, he wasadmitted. Neva was with her still, and the wife of Ardaric, with someother women of high station among the Huns, were also present,striving to give her consolation; but Ildica, with her eye alltearless and fixed upon the ground, sat in the midst, her handsclasped together, her lip silent, her features motionless, as if sheheard not one word of all that was addressed to her."Daughter," said Mizetus, in the pure harmonious tongue of her ownland--"daughter, listen to me!"There was something in the sweet tone of the melodious Greek--therewas something in it associated with home, and happiness, and earlyyears, and the bright images of joys for ever gone, that seemed tostartle her, and for a moment she looked up with a thoughtful gazeupon his countenance; but the next moment she dropped her eyes again,and remained as silent as before."Daughter, listen to me," continued the enthusiast, in that wild butelevated tone which will command attention if aught on earth canawaken it--"listen, for I bring thee consolation! I bring theeconsolation from on high! It is revealed unto me that thou artreserved for great things, and destined to work the deliverance ofpeople and of nations! It is revealed unto me that by thy hand shallthe faithful of the Lord be delivered, and that thou, in thy beautyand in thy wisdom, shall do more than the mighty and the great havebeen able to accomplish!"Still Ildica gave no sign of attention. Not a feature in her face wasmoved, and she remained gazing with the same fixed, meditative look onone spot of the ground, as if utterly absorbed in deep and unbrokenthought. The enthusiast paused to see whether she heard or not, andfor a moment all was silence. But the next instant, to the surprise ofall, the lips of the fair unhappy girl were seen to move; and, as ifthe Greek accent of Mizetus had touched the thrilling cord ofassociation between her present misery and the moment when misfortunesfirst began to fall upon her, recalling the dark and painful momentwhen she left Dalmatia, her voice was heard singing snatches of thesong that her mother's slaves had poured forth when they left behindthem Aspalathos for ever:--"We leave you behind us, sweet things of the earth;Our life is a race to the death from the birth;We pause not to gather the flowers as they grow,The goal is before us, and on we must go!"Fair scenes of our childhood! dear homes of our youthMemorials of innocence, virtue, and truth!The land of our birth, the dear mother that bore,We leave you behind us, we see you no more!"We leave you behind us, sweet things of the earthHopes, joys, and endearments, sport, pleasure, and mirth;Like a tempest-driven ship, sailing by some bright shore,Time hurries us onward, we see you no more!"And when she had done, she looked round her with a smile so terribleat such a moment, that every woman's eye there present, whether theyunderstood the words or not, overflowed with tears."Poor maiden!" cried Mizetus, "her heart is fearfully oppressed, herspirit sadly bowed down. Heavy has been the burden that the Lord hasgiven her to bear, but great is the glory he reserves for her. Neithershall the mind break, nor the spirit be crushed under its load; butwith time, and with care, and with consolation, this wandering moodshall pass away. Let us now, however, leave her, for the presence ofmany may irritate rather than sooth. Thou, maiden," he continued,turning to Neva, "thou that seemest to take a deeper interest than therest, abide with her, and watch over her tenderly. Watch over her!watch over her carefully! for she has yet her appointed task to do."Thus saying he left the tent, and the women followed, leaving Nevawith Ildica alone. The next morning early Mizetus took his way towardsthe tent of Ildica ere the army began its march; but, as he advanced,a spectacle arrested his progress for a moment, which the Hunsthemselves in passing gazed on fearfully, but paused not to examine.Down from the tent of Attila to the bank of the rivulet extended adouble row--an avenue, in short, of enormous crosses; and nailed uponthem, as had been the case in the neighbourhood of Verona, appearedthe corpses of at least a thousand of the monarch's own immediatesubjects.Among them were many of those chiefs and officers who had beenpreviously believed to stand high in favour; and, as the variousmasses of the Huns passed by those sad memorials, the chiefs who hadbeen among those to complain that he had not marched on Rome, and hadyet escaped the terrible execution of that night, trembled when theybeheld the ghastly spectacle, and thanked the gods that had preservedthem.Mizetus, on the contrary, gazed fearlessly on the proofs of Attila'sstern severity, scanned the agonized countenances of the dead, markedthe contorted limbs, and murmured as he passed, "More, more bloodpoured into the cup of vengeance! More to be accounted for! Nor is theday far distant!"As the enthusiast passed on, Ardaric rode by slowly towards the tentof Attila, gazing with a frowning brow, and a sad but indignant air,upon the bodies of the dead. With a sudden spring forward, Mizetuslaid his hand upon his bridle-rein; but Ardaric shook it from hisgrasp, exclaiming, "Why stoppest thou me in such a spot as this? Getthee hence, madman!""Not so mad as he who did this deed!" replied the enthusiast."Perhaps not," answered Ardaric; "but the deed is none of mine;" andraising his rein, he rode swiftly on. Mizetus proceeded on his way,and found her he sought sitting nearly as he had left her the daybefore. He found that she had undergone very little change. She tookher food, and suffered her garments to be changed mechanically; butshe spoke not, or very seldom, and then with wild and unconnectedwords, referring to things apparently remote. The enthusiast remainedwith her long, nor ceased, during all the time of his stay, to pourforth, in language wild but figurative, and with words ready andprompt, the same unconnected and mystical exhortations to which he hadgiven utterance the day before.He was interrupted by the marching of the army to another station inits advance upon Greece; but, ere he left the tent of Ildica, he saw,well pleased, that he had more than once gained her attention, thoughbut for a moment; and on the following day that attention was morefixedly obtained. The third day she listened to him, though sheanswered not; and the fourth day she wept for the first time.Thenceforward, though she spoke but seldom, and though, when she didspeak, there appeared in her words a difference from the ordinarytrain of thought, a slight deviation from that clear intellectual pathwhich her mind had ever followed, yet in some degree she resumed herordinary occupations, suffered herself to be moved on in her litter,calmly, if not cheerfully, and from time to time spoke a few words toNeva, with an effort to show her gratitude and regard.Thus passed the time till ten days after the sad news of Theodore'sdeath had reached her ear, when, as they marched along, and she lay inher open litter, carried in the rear of the army, suddenly Attilahimself appeared, and drew up his horse beside her. He gazed upon herwith an eye in which there shone some pity, and he asked, "How goes itwith thee, beautiful Ildica?""As well as may be, mighty monarch," she replied, looking firmly uponhim without a trace of fear."Thou art better than I expected," said Attila, apparently surprisedat her calmness."I am better than I had hoped or feared," she answered; "but hope andfear are over, oh monarch!""Not so," replied Attila; "there is still, I trust, much joy for theeon earth;" and, thus saying, he rode on.On the evening of that day, when the tents were pitched, Ildica, aspale as marble, was seated in her own; and leaning on the pillows ofthe couch, while Neva sat beside and held her hand, she listened tothe old man Mizetus, who, standing on the other side, read from anopen book, and commented as he went.At length he closed the pages, and, gazing full upon her, heexclaimed, "Such is thy lot! Such is the will of Heaven! Such is thydestiny! and great shall be thy reward! Though thou hast suffered, andstill shall suffer, till the work be accomplished, thy sufferingsshall be forgotten in the exceeding great joy of thy recompense! Such,such, I tell thee, is to be thy fate!""I am ready!" replied Ildica, solemnly--"I am prepared! Let it come!"Mizetus added a few words more; but, ere he could conclude thesentence, one of her attendants entered, and announced that amessenger from Attila awaited her without. Her cheek and lips turnedpaler still, but she answered calmly and at once, "Give himadmission!""Beautiful maiden," said the messenger, when he stood before her,"Attila greets thee well, and calls thee his beloved. He says thatgrief has had its due, and that joy must have its day; and he bids mypoor tongue announce to thee that Attila has chosen thee for theenvied station of his bride. To-morrow the army halts the whole day,and at the hour of sunset, ere Attila sits down with his warriors tothe banquet, his bridal shall be solemnized with thee by the priestsof his faith and of thine! What answer shall I bear the king?"Ildica heard him with apparent calmness; but Neva felt the fingers ofher beautiful hand clasp tight with agonized emotion on her own.The fair girl's lips moved, but no sound issued forth. Anotherstruggle, they moved again, and her voice was heard!"Who shall resist the will of the king?" she said, and bowing herhead, she suffered the messenger to depart. The curtain of the tentfell behind him; and starting up, she fell at the feet of Mizetus.Then clasping the old man's knees with her arms, she exclaimed, "Novow! No vow! I can take no vow! Save me from that!""Fear not," replied the hermit--"fear not, my daughter! Thou shalttake no vow. Be but a passive instrument in the hands of God!"CHAPTER XXI.THE BRIDAL OF ATTILA.On an eminence rising above the banks of the river, near which thevast army of the Huns pitched its camp on the ensuing night, was founda splendid pavilion, with workmen still labouring hard to complete it,when the vanguard of the army reached its ground. Ere Attila himselfarrived, the whole was finished; and a palace of richly-ornamentedwoodwork, mingled and decorated with hangings of crimson and gold,waited his approach.The mood of the monarch, however, was not placable; and the workmenwhom he had sent forward to prepare his abode received no token of histhanks or approbation, notwithstanding the skill and zeal which theyhad displayed. Those who had accompanied him on the way had found goodcause to mark his discontented humour; and Ardaric and Valamir, andeven Onegisus himself, had seized the first opportunity of withdrawingthemselves from the side of one who treated all with indignity, whichtheir free spirits could but ill bear. The cause of this harsh rumourmight be, it was whispered, that Ardaric had ventured remonstrances,and Valamir had seconded them, which were displeasing to the ear ofAttila; but never before, in his most passionate moods, had he givenway to such intemperance of language as he had that day displayedtowards two of his noblest and most disinterested supporters. An hourafter their arrival, however, they received a summons to attend thebridal and the banquet of the mighty king; and to the pavilion on thehill they took their way, clothed in the most splendid robes that thecamp could supply.In a vast hall, decorated by crimson hangings, which many a tributaryland had combined to furnish, stood Attila himself, already surroundedby a multitude of his officers and chiefs. To the astonishment ofevery one there present, however, the monarch of the Huns appeared notnow in the plain garment of his Scythian ancestors. For the first timein his life, gold, and jewels, and vestures of silk covered thepowerful limbs of the mighty conqueror. The heavy iron sword whichnever before had left his side was now no longer there. All the rudeweapons of war were carefully excluded from his dress; and jewels ofinestimable value bound his haughty brow.In the same hall, at the farther end, was raised a temporary altar,festooned with green leaves and the few autumnal flowers which thecountry round could supply. Elevated upon that altar was seen theponderous sword of the Scythian Mars, famous in the history ofAttila's reign, from the singular manner in which it had been found.Beside it stood a number of the Scythian priests; and the steps whichled to it were thickly strewed with leaves of the wild laurel and thehemlock.The countenance of Attila himself was now cleared of the clouds whichhad obscured it; but still, the joy with which it beamed as plainlytestified the change which his nature had lately undergone as thefrowns that had hung upon it before. In former days, the countenanceof Attila had been a stranger to both frowns and smiles. The sternpassions which moved him then had wrought and struggled within thesecret chambers of his breast alone, and no light emotions had seemedto affect his outward bearing. Now he was moved by many things; and,in spite of all his efforts to seem what he had been, the emotions ofhis heart thrilled through his bodily frame, and made themselves seenupon the surface."Where are the Christian priests?" demanded the voice of the monarch,as soon as he had spoken a few words to Valamir and Ardaric, in a toneevidently intended to soften the harsh impression produced by hisill-humour of the morning--"where are the Christian priests?""None have been found in the camp, oh mighty king," said Edicon,coming forward. "I have inquired in every quarter, and none have beenfound.""None!" exclaimed Attila; "none! Where is that rash priest Mizetus; hewho by a few empty words provoked the wrath of so many mighty chiefs.I have seen him since in the camp. I saw him no later than yesterday.Let him be sent for; and tell the bride that Attila waits her coming,as the spring-earth waits for the rising of the morning sun."The messengers departed; and then came a pause, dead and silent, andpainful to all but those common spirits who saw nothing in the scenethey were called to behold but the common festivity of a day. Ardaricand Valamir gazed upon each other, but they spoke not, till somecasual movement caused a murmur to run through the hall. Then, in alow voice, the latter asked the former, "What, think you, will be theresult?""I know not," answered Ardaric; "but, from what I hear, she is notunwilling. Yet, from some chance words dropped in my wife's presence,either her mind wanders as that of one deprived of reason, or elsedeeper thoughts than we know of are at work within her brain. But lo,they come!"As he spoke the door of the hall was thrown open, and a bevy of fairyoung girls, strewing the way with flowers, entered the hall, andwound round towards the altar. Following them, and leaning on the armof Neva, appeared the Dalmatian bride, clothed in robes of white.No fear, no agitation was in her step; but firmly and easily she movedalong the hall, beauty and grace shining like a glory from every limband every feature. Neva was far more moved than Ildica; but thecountenances of both were paler than the Parian stone; while fromthose fair, colourless faces beamed forth the beautiful eyes ofeach--the deep, devoted, dark-blue eyes of Neva, the large, lustrous,liquid eyes of Ildica, shining like brilliant lamps from out a marbletomb.They took but one gaze around the hall as they entered; but that gazehad a different effect upon each. With Neva it seemed to bewilder andconfound: she dropped her eyes again instantly, and advanced with awavering and uncertain step. The gaze of Ildica was firm and calm;though, as she beheld the scene of barbaric splendour that surroundedher, her brow slightly contracted; her eye flashed for an instant witha wilder, perhaps a brighter fire. Slowly she turned her gaze towardsthe altar; and, without noticing any one in the hall, approacheddeliberately the spot where the sacrifice of herself was to becompleted.A number of matrons followed; and behind them again came the hermitMizetus, clad in the same wild robes which he wore in the desert andon the mountain. Attila turned to approach the altar; but the hermitadvanced towards him, saying boldly, "Thou hast sent for me. I amhere. What wouldst thou with me!""I have sent for thee," replied Attila, "to perform between me andthat maiden the nuptial ceremonies, according to the customs of herpeople and the rites of her faith.""I am no priest, oh Attila!" answered the enthusiast. "I am onetouched by the finger of God, and set apart to speak terrible warningsand foretel great events. But I have neither power to loose nor tobind, to take up nor to cast down. No ceremonies can I perform; for Iam no priest according to any human law. But what needst thou think ofpriests or ceremonies?" he continued, seeing Attila stand thoughtfullybefore him. "Let the ceremony be performed according to thine ownwill. Is not the will of Attila superior to all law?""Thou sayest right," answered Attila, advancing to the altar. "It is!"And placing himself by the side of the altar opposite to Ildica, hesaid, "Let the rites proceed! Oh beautiful Ildica, are you willing?"Ildica raised her eyes, large, calm, liquid, shining as fountains ofliving light. She gazed on him for a moment, and then, "I adjure thee,oh Attila!" she cried, "to tell me truth! Is he dead?""He is!" replied Attila, emphatically."Art thou certain--quite certain?" demanded Ildica, still gazing inhis face."As certain as if my hand had slain him," replied Attila."Ha!" said Ildica. "Even so!""What sayest thou?" demanded Attila."That the will of the king is law." And she cast down her eyes to theground."Most beautiful and best beloved!" exclaimed Attila, taking her handwith a look of eager passion. "Let the rites proceed."They did proceed; and the strange and fanciful ceremonies of the pagannuptials were begun and ended between Attila and Ildica!Still, during the whole of that ceremony, the fair unhappy girluttered not one word; but, passive before the heathen altar, she stoodlike the victim so often brought there to be sacrificed. Her lipsmoved not; her voice was heard not; and, without either consent ordenial, she became the bride of that dark and mighty king.The priests ceased; the ceremony was over; and she still stood silentbefore the altar, with her hand lying in that of Attila. And those whostood by and saw, never forgot the sight of those small, white, taperfingers resting in that broad powerful hand. At length she lifted upher eyes, as if seeking for the heaven; and then her lips moved for amoment, as if in prayer.As was the custom, the women of the highest note there presentsurrounded her, and led her away to a banquet prepared for her alone.Ildica ate one cake of bread, and drank one cup of wine, and thensought the chamber reserved for her. They would have led her in, andstayed with her to adorn her; but she paused at the door, and badethem leave her. They hesitated, and urged the custom of the land. Butshe raised her head proudly, saying, "I am a Roman even here! But whatto you is more, I am the bride of Attila, and I command you, leave me!I must spend the intervening time in prayer," she added, in a mildertone; and, ceasing to urge her further, the women left her to her ownthoughts; and every one betook them to their homes again.In the mean while Attila lead his chiefs to the banquet; but, as theywent, Ardaric and Valamir walked side by side, and spoke together in alow tone over the scene just past."I comprehend it not," said Ardaric; "I understand it not. The memoryof old affection is clearly strong in her heart; neither do I thinkthat she forgets her country, nor believe that she is one to wedeither for fear or for ambition! If there should be some higherpurpose in her bosom, Valamir? If she should meditate some mightydeed?--a deed which, since Attila is no longer Attila, many a braveman in the camp has pondered on as the last hope of many here--a deedwhich, since safety has been banished from our tents, and the swordsof our friends have been drawn at midnight against ourselves, may evenhave crossed my mind and thine?""Hush!" said Valamir; "Onegisus watches us. Let us sit at separatetables; but humour him to the full; and, as he has now forgot hisancient temperance, let him drink deep. It matters not to us whetherdrunkenness disgrace him on this night of pageantry or not. Cross himnot, I beseech thee, Ardaric! Thou hast had warning enough this daythat Attila hears counsel no longer, even when given for theprotection of his own honour."Seated at the banquet, the same scenes, or very similar ones, tookplace, which we have dwelt upon before. The same, in all respects,except in the conduct of the chief actor therein. The rude poet sangthe glowing tale of mighty deeds and great warriors in the long-gonepast; the jester excited the roar of ribald laughter; the wine flowedplenteously; the chiefs drank deep; but Attila, no longer calm andgrave, followed each impulse of the moment--now gave way to some hastywrath, now joined in the peal of merriment; and still, in the deepwine-cup, provoked the emulation of his warriors.It was when the night waxed late, and the banquet was nearly over,that Zercon, the negro jester, who had already played his part in thehall for the amusement of the guests, entered again, bearing in hishands an enormous cup of gold, richly gemmed at the rim and on thehandles. The shape was beautiful; the workmanship splendid; the jewelsof inestimable value; and, as he approached the seat of Attila, theeyes of the monarch, already inflamed with wine, gazed on themagnificent vessel with eyes of wonder and admiration. Kneeling beforehim, Zercon placed the cup in his hand, saying, "Behold, oh mightyking, a present just arrived from a dear friend and well-wisher ofAttila. Thy messengers have just returned from the M[oe]sian frontier,and bear thee this jewelled cantharus from Eugenius, bishop of Margus.Happily has it come to grace thy bridal night."Attila took the cup, and gazed upon it, repeating thoughtfully, "FromEugenius, bishop of Margus!--the boy's uncle! I will use it some othernight.""Nay, oh mighty king!" said Zercon, "no night like this; for in it youmay pledge yourself to avenge the wrongs of him who sent it.""What wrongs?" cried Attila, turning upon him fiercely. "I know of nowrongs that he has suffered.""It comes," replied Zercon, in a deep tone, "from the dead to theliving! from the impotent to the mighty! Eugenius has been put todeath, by command of Marcian, for admitting the Huns to the Romanterritory; and thy messengers have but escaped with life and this cup,which he had just given them for thee, as a pledge of his friendship."Attila's countenance grew as dark as night. "Take the cup," he cried,to one of his officers; "take the cup and let it be purified withfire. Then bring it to me."The attendant took the cup, and held it over a lighted torch in themidst of the hall. Then, after passing it through water, he brought itto the monarch, who filled it to the brim: and, rising from his seat,exclaimed, "Pledge me, kings and mighty leaders! Pledge me, in ourlast cup this night, death to the slave Marcian, who has dared to slaythe friend of Attila!" and he drank off the wine at once.He had not spared the cup throughout the night; and now that deepdraught had a visible effect. He felt it himself; and, setting downthe cup, leaned his head upon his hand for a moment; then suddenlyrose, and, bending slightly to his guests, quitted the hall with anunsteady step. Several of his chief attendants followed, but theyreturned the moment after; and many of the leaders rose and left thehall, conversing in low voices on the varied events lately passed.Others remained, and protracted the debauch; but by the first hourafter midnight the pavilion of the king was void of its guests, andall had returned to silence.Among the first that left the hall were Ardaric and Valamir; and, asthey passed through the camp of the sleeping Huns, they paused for amoment beside one of the tents in which a light was burning, and fromwhich might be heard the voice of lamentation."Hark! Her slaves weeping over her unhappy fate!" said Ardaric."What! did she not take them with her?" demanded Valamir."Not one," replied Ardaric; "not one, I hear. Neva, dead Bleda'sdaughter, who dwells in our tents with my own children, reported thatshe went alone; and none has been with her so much as Neva! She wentalone, Valamir: she went alone to her abhorred task, whatever thattask may be! Let us early to-morrow to Attila, and let us go together.My heart is not at rest!"Within the tent by which they stood were, as Ardaric conjectured, theslaves and attendants of Ildica, weeping for their mistress, who hadgone forth alone, solitary, unaided, unbefriended, in that awful hourof trial; and had gone so by her own choice. Collected in the outerchamber of the tent she had occupied, they mourned as for her funeral;but in the inner chamber of that tent were others who mourned notless, but whose mourning was mingled with a strange agitation whichwas neither hope nor fear.By the light of a lamp, holding high a wooden cross, stood the hermitMizetus, and at his feet knelt the fair girl Neva, raising her eyes tothe symbol of a new faith which the enthusiast had lately planted inher heart. Dark and obscure as was his own knowledge of the truth,clouded by a bewildered brain and distorted by wild fancies, he hadstill been able to show her a glimmering of the light which wasafterward to shine upon her more fully. Both were pale and haggard,and moved by the anticipation of great and terrible events; and asthey passed there the long hours of that dreadful night, the young,fair, lovely maiden kneeling at the feet of that old ascetic, thetears poured down her cheeks in torrents; the sobs burst strugglingfrom her young kind bosom; and often the agony and apprehension of herheart convulsed her form as if in the grasp of death."Fear not, fear not, my daughter!" would the hermit exclaim. "Fear notfor her! fear not for us! There is a mightier power than any on theearth to shield us! There is a greater arm than ever drew mortal swordto defend us! Even were we in the gates of death itself, I would bidthee fear not; for God has broken the bonds of the grave asunder, andprovided a ransom to deliver us from hell itself!" Thus did he speakthrough the livelong night, and thus did he try to give herconsolation and support; still bidding her not to fear, till at lengthhe said, "Fear not, maiden! fear not! Lo, the night is past, and themorning is come; and after the darkness in which we walk upon thisearth shall come the light of a brighter day! Fear not! fear not! Isay unto you, fear not!"CHAPTER XXII.THE DEATH OF THE MIGHTY.All was quiet amid the splendour of the pavilion of Attila. Not asound was heard within its walls, though the light of day had made thelong morning shadows short, and the squadrons of Huns had for somehours been moving in the plains below. Ellac and his forces had goneforth with the dawn of day to occupy the new ground appointed for theevening halt: and two or three hundred thousand men had followed somehours after. The heavier cavalry of the Gepid[ae] and Ostrogoths hunglike dark clouds upon the sloping hills between which the riverwandered; but while the Huns themselves continued to march on undertheir several leaders, according to the commands they had receivedupon the preceding evening, the forces of the two great auxiliarynations remained stationary, waiting the orders of their severalkings.Ardaric and Valamir, followed by a large train of their chief nobles,had ridden at an early hour to the pavilion of their great leader tofelicitate Attila on his nuptials; and now they waited with Onegisusand Edicon, in an inner apartment of the pavilion, which served as anantechamber to that in which the mighty king reposed. They hadremained there several hours; and while Ardaric spoke in a louder tonewith Onegisus, Valamir conferred with Edicon apart. Doubt and anxiety,however, were now beginning to cloud the countenances of all; and someof the inferior attendants from time to time looked in, to see if thekings had yet been admitted to the presence of their chief."This is very strange!" said Ardaric, at length: "what may it mean?""It will soon be noon!" said Valamir; "and it is more than strangethat he who through life has risen daily with the morning light shouldshow himself thus tardy.""It were well to wake him," said Onegisus."Ay, if he may be wakened," muttered Ardaric, drawing back the curtainwhich hung over an ornamented door of woodwork. "But what is here?"Each started forward at his sudden exclamation, and beheld, wellingfrom underneath the door, like water from the shelf of a rock, anddabbling the rushes with which the floor was strewed, a stream of darkgore, which had been concealed by the curtain. They gazed upon it, andthen in one another's faces for a moment; and no one found a voicetill Onegisus, turning suddenly as if to leave the chamber, exclaimed,"I will call the attendants! We must force the door!""On your life, Onegisus!" cried Ardaric, seizing him in his powerfulgrasp, and drawing his sword--"you stir not hence! We must deal withthis deed alone. Valamir, you are with me. Edicon, I can trust in you;guard yonder doorway!""What would the noble Ardaric?" cried Onegisus: "why grasp you me sotight, oh king' I seek not to oppose your will; for if I judge by yondark blood aright, there is none in all this camp greater thanArdaric. What would the mighty king with his servant?""I would nothing that is wrong, Onegisus!" replied Ardaric, freeinghim from his grasp, as soon as he saw that Edicon had placed himselfbefore the door which led to the outer halls; "I seek nothing that iswrong! I covet not the greatness that thou talkest of! I demand nopre-eminence! Valamir, my friend, are we not equal in all things? or,if there be a difference, thou art superior to me in calm consideratewisdom, and no way inferior to me either in power or right. What Iseek, Onegisus, is this--only this! that we who are here present mayinvestigate this deed alone, and take counsel together upon whateverexigency we may find before us. Thou art a man of wisdom and ofcourage, and true ever to thy word. Swear to me that thou wilt bear apart in whatsoever we determine in regard to the deed that is past;that thou wilt join in whatever report we make regarding the darksecrets of yon silent chamber; or we must find means to silence thytongue, lest it sow dissension among the host, and give us over to thepower of the enemy!""Willingly will I swear what you require, oh noble Ardaric!" repliedOnegisus, "so far as regards the present deed; but if dissensionscome--and I see that thy fears and mine look the same way--I will notpledge myself to take any given part. I will act freely as my judgmentshall dictate when the time shall arrive. Rather than do otherwise, Iwould bid you plunge your swords into my bosom even now, and let medie before the doorway of my murdered master!""Onegisus," replied Ardaric, in a solemn and melancholy tone, "we knownot yet what has befallen, but the oath that thou hast pledged isenough. None loved Attila better than Ardaric while Attila remainedhimself; but we all feel that Attila has been unjust! Now let us seekadmittance here!" and he struck upon the door with his clinched hand,exclaiming, "Ho! does Attila sleep? What ho! within there! The sunstands high at noon!"There was no answer! All was as silent as the grave!There was an awful pause, while each looked anxiously in the face ofthe other. But then was heard a sound in the outer chambers, andvoices in high dispute; the tone of a stranger, though speaking theHunnish language well, demanding entrance; and the tongues of theattendants refusing him admittance. Then again were words spoken inthe well-known voice of Theodore, the son of Paulinus, "Out of my way!By the God of battles, I will cleave thee to the jaws! Out of my way,I say! Be it on thine own head, then, fool! Thou strivest with amadman! Down!"Then came a heavy fall."Give him admittance, give him admittance," cried Ardaric and Valamirin a breath: "oppose him not, Edicon! Poor youth, he will find himselfalready avenged;" but, as he spoke, the door burst open, and Theodore,with his naked sword all bloody in his hand, rushed in."Stand all without," cried Edicon, putting back those who werefollowing to seize him. "Leave us to deal with him. The king has notyet come forth!" and closing the door upon them, he drew across it themassive wooden bar that hung beside it."Oh Ardaric, Ardaric!" cried Theodore, "hast thou betrayed me too?""No, on my life, dear youth," cried the King of the Gepid[ae],catching him in his powerful arms--"we thought thee dead--thou earnestnot at the time!""How could I come?" cried Theodore--"waylaid on every shore, tossed bythe tempest, turned back, delayed--how could I come? But unhand me,Ardaric, I am mad with injury and revenge; and I will in to yonderfalse, faithless tyrant, and die for my revenge!""Theodore," said Ardaric, holding him still with his left hand, butpointing with the other to the stream of blood which flowed frombeneath the door of Attila's chamber, "either the hand of some god, orher own, has avenged thee and thy poor Ildica already!"Theodore gazed on it for a moment, and an awful glow of satisfactionrose in his countenance. Then darting forward from the grasp ofArdaric, he laid his hand upon the door and attempted to open it. Itresisted, and, setting his powerful shoulder against it, he shook itwith all his strength. Again he shook it to and fro! The fasteningswithin gave way, and it burst open with a loud and sudden crash.Theodore took a step forward, and then paused, while all the othersrushed in.The light streamed down from windows near the roof, and passingthrough the silken curtains, which both served for ornament and toexclude the air of night, poured softened into the chamber. It was anawful scene on which that calm, solemn light fell tranquilly.There, on the floor, scarcely two paces from the door, clothed in thesame splendid robes which for the first and last time in his life hehad worn; with the jewelled circle on his brow, the blazing diamondson his broad chest and in his sandals, lay the dark and fearfulmonarch of the Huns, the victor of a thousand fields, the mightyconqueror of unnumbered nations! Mighty no more! Awful still! butawful in death, and from a small spot on the silken vesture whichcovered that breast, wherein for so many years had lain the fate ofempires and the destiny of a world, proceeded the dark stream ofblood, thick and clotted, but not yet dried up, which had oncethrobbed in that lion heart, and now had left it cold and vacant. Theground around was flooded with the stream of gore; his vesture wassoaked and dabbled in it; but it was clear that he had fallen at once,without an effort or a struggle; for there he lay, as calm as if insleep, with even a smile of joyous triumph on his lip, as he hadentered that fatal bridal chamber, which was to be unto him the hallof death.It was an awful sight; but still more awful, still more terrible wasthe object on which the eye rested when it was raised from Attila. Afew cubits beyond him, in a seat wherein she had evidently waited hiscoming, sat Ildica, the beautiful Dalmatian bride. On a table besideher stood a lamp, just dying out; on her knee rested her right hand,with her fair delicate fingers clasped tight round the hilt of a smalldagger, from the point of which some drops of blood had fallen uponher snowy garments; her other hand grasped tight the arm of the chair.One of the shining tresses of her long dark hair had dropped from thepin that held it, and fallen upon her bosom; but in all else her dresswas as she had appeared at the altar. Her cheek, her brow, her neck,were clear and pale as alabaster. The only crimson left was in herlips.Some have written that she was weeping, but they lied! She wept not.Not a drop of moisture was in her eye, though its liquid light, pureand unquenched, beamed there as bright as ever. But those darklustrous eyes, as if the whole world had vanished from her thoughts,as if for her the whole universe, except one dark and fearful object,was annihilated, were fixed immoveable on the corpse of that mightyking, whom no warrior had been found to conquer, but who had fallen inthe hour of joy, intemperance, and in consummate injustice, by her ownweak, delicate hand.The blows of Ardaric upon the door, the sound of his voice, thecrashing of the shivered fastenings, the tread of many feet in thatawful chamber, had not roused her, even in the slightest degree, fromthat deep trance of overpowering thought. Her ear seemed deafened, hereye blind, her lips dumb, her whole form turned into stone, by thegorgon aspect of the just but terrible deed which her own hand andmighty resolution had achieved.Well might she so remain; for the stern and resolute men who now stoodbefore her, accustomed as they were to blood and slaughter in all thefiercest forms, prepared, too, as they were for the sight of death,were, nevertheless, overawed by that still, solemn, fearful scene, andstood for a space gazing silently, as if they, also, were petrifiedwith the objects they beheld.The first who raised his eyes from Attila was he to whom that dimchamber contained an object dearer far than any other thing on earth;and, gazing for a moment upon her, he exclaimed, "Oh, Ildica! ohbeloved! thou hast been true to me, indeed!"The counter-charm was spoken; the beloved tones were heard. Ildicaraised her eyes, started from her seat, gazed wildly upon him, and,with a loud, piercing shriek, fell senseless at his feet.Theodore threw his arm round her, caught her from the ground, andpressing her tight to his bosom, placed himself opposite to thechieftains who had entered with him. Then raising the drawn sword,which still remained in his hand, towards the sky, he exclaimed,"Almighty God, I thank thee even for this day! Ardaric, Valamir,Onegisus, Edicon, call in your warriors! call them in, and let themslay us together, for this deed which she has done, and in which Iglory! Had her hand not done it, mine should have striven to do it.Call them in, and let them mingle our blood together. Thrilled withthe same emotions through life, and faithful unto death, that bloodmay well flow forth at the same moment; and still will it keep apartfrom that of Attila! Call them in! call them in! or, if ye begenerous, plunge your own swords in our bosoms! Lo, here I drop myweapon, and offer you my throat!""Onegisus," said Ardaric, "Attila has died in doing an injustice. Whatsayest thou?"Onegisus paused, and looked down, while many emotions were evidentlycontending in his breast. At length he raised his eyes to Ardaric, andsaid, "It must not be known that Attila died by the hand of a woman?""Wisely bethought!" cried Ardaric. "The shame would travel through thewhole world! Let it be given forth that Attila has slain himself. See,she has dropped the dagger. Let it be laid beside him.""Not so," said Valamir; "that were a still greater shame! Let it besaid that he died from the bursting of his mighty heart after theintemperance of last night's revel: and that we found him suffocatedin his blood, and the bride--as all may see her carried forth--in adead swoon from terror.""But what shall be her fate'" demanded Onegisus; "what shall be herdoom hereafter?""Onegisus," replied Ardaric, solemnly, "thou hast a wife whom thoulovest! thou hast a daughter dear unto thine heart! Look upon yon fairgirl, and think she is thy child. Remember the terrible cause that shehas had; remember that her mind, as all of us have seen, has wanderedsince the tale of this youth's death; remember all that thou wouldstremember were she thy child, and then say what shall be her doom!"Onegisus turned away his head: and stretching forth his right hand,"Let her go free!" he said; "let her go free! But if it come toEllac's ears, fearful will be the consequences.""Fearful to those who fear him," replied Ardaric, his lip curling withscorn. "She shall go safe. Valamir, Edicon, what say ye?""Let her go safe," replied Edicon."She has done a great deed of sovereign justice," replied Valamir,more boldly. "Let him blame her who will. I give her mighty honour!Let her go safe!""All are agreed!" cried Ardaric. "Edicon, my friend, call up to theantechamber my train and that of Valamir, and let her be carriedinstantly hence; not to her own tent though, but to mine, under thecare of my wife. I can trust thee, Edicon, from what passed between usyesterday--I can trust thee. Take this ring! Bid my squadrons comedown hither with all speed!""And my brave Goths," added Valamir, "shall glide down and interposebetween us and the Huns. Theodore, stay thou with us. Valamir andArdaric pledge their hands to thee for thy safety and the safety ofthy bride."Theodore stood as one dumb; for life was a thing which had passed fromhis thoughts and his hopes, and he had only longed to die with her heloved Eagerly, however, did he grasp the hands of Ardaric and Valamir,and willingly did he intrust the fair inanimate form of that unhappybut heroic girl to the noble friends who had interposed to save themboth. Borne upon a couch from that fatal chamber, he beheld hercarried forth towards the tents of Ardaric; and in a few minutesafter, the faithfulness of Edicon to his trust was displayed by therapid movement of the Gepid[ae] down towards the pavilion. Dark andpowerful, the squadrons swept around, while the Goths of Valamirmarched on likewise, and cut off the spot where the corpse of themighty king reposed from the great body of the Hunnish cavalry. Norwas their appearance too soon; for all, by this time, within thepavilion and without, was a scene of clamour and confusion, whichmight well have ended in bloodshed had not the two monarchs possessedpower at hand to enforce obedience to their commands.The decease of Attila was already known, and consternation wasspreading among the ranks of the Huns. The report, too, was notwanting that he had met a violent death; but those only were admittedto view the body upon whom the chiefs who had first seen it coulddepend; and the word of Onegisus satisfied the great mass of thepeople. Messengers, however, were despatched to Ellac, and the otherchildren of the dead monarch, with all speed, by the chiefs of theHuns who had remained behind; but Ardaric and Valamir took everyprecaution in order to meet in arms, should it be needful, either thenatural thirst for vengeance of the young monarch, or the firstoutbursts of characteristic insolence which his newly-acquired powermight call forth.Instant preparations also were made for rendering back unto the bosomof the earth the clay of that mighty being who had so long proved itsscourge; and the commands of the two great chieftains enjoined thatall which barbarian splendour could effect should be done to givemagnificence to the interment of Attila.Ere nightfall the messengers reached the camp of Ellac; and, had theyfound him there, he might have returned in time to discover the mannerof his father's death; but Ellac had gone forth with a large train toenjoy one of the favourite sports of the Huns, a torchlight hunting inthe neighbouring forests; and he returned not to his tents till thedawn of the following day. Ere midday, however, he had reached thepavilion where all that remained of Attila reposed; but, by that time,the body was enclosed in a triple coffin, of iron, of silver, and ofgold; and if he then entertained a suspicion, which he probably did,the aspect of the united Gepid[ae] and Goths taught him to restrainany expression that might bring on the struggle which all men saw mustultimately come, before he had rendered himself certain of the supportof all the tribes of Huns, and prepared all the resources of hisnation.That support was doubtful; those resources were by him untried. Ellacstood beneath the crimson tent under which they had laid the body ofAttila, and gazed upon the golden coffin of his mighty father; but novoice hailed him successor to his power!CHAPTER XXIII.THE PARTING FOR EVER.A second, a third day had passed, and it was night; and, kneelinghumbly before a small black cross, with tears continually streamingfrom her eyes, was that fair girl whose unhappy fate had led her fromthe sweet tranquillity of the domestic home--the home which love, andfancy, and hope had taught her to prize as the brightest lot onearth--to scenes of strife, and turbulence, and toil, to caresunceasing, and to acts which, purchased by the agony of her own spiritand the blasting of her own hopes, had changed the fate and wroughtthe deliverance of a world.It was night; and she wept and prayed alone. An hour more, and she wasto be borne, guarded in safety by a strong band of warriors, from acamp where, with the light of the ensuing morning, a ceremony was tobe performed which might well end in general bloodshed: and she weptand prayed in silence; wept the blighting of her dearest wishes; wepther own fate and the fate of him she loved; prayed forgiveness for anact she had been taught to consider righteous, and holy, andsanctified, but for which her own heart smote her, even though by itshe had won her own deliverance. She prayed forgiveness for that act,heroic, mighty, beneficial as it was; and while the whole Christianworld raised up the thankful hands, and praised God for theirdeliverance, she besought his pardon for the deed that had achievedit.Solemn and sad was the scene presented by that tent, as there, stillexquisite in beauty, she knelt before the cross; and the solitarylamp, casting its full light upon her, showed those graceful lines andlovely features too truly expressive of utter despair. After a while,she strove to dry the fountain of her tears; those tears, bitter asthey were, had been a relief to her overloaded heart. She thought sheheard a sound, and rose from before the cross. It was but to be caughtin the arms of him she loved.He pressed her to his bosom; and for a moment she lay there, while joyecstatic--joy worth years of suffering--thrilled through her heart,and took away all power to speak, to think, or to resolve.The next instant, however, she started up, and struggled from hisarms, exclaiming wildly, "Touch me not! Touch me not! Oh, Theodore,touch me not! I am unworthy that thou shouldst touch me."Theodore paused and gazed upon her, and over his face their gatheredthe cloud of uncertainty and apprehension. A doubt, a suspicion,horrible, fiery, agonizing, maddening, rushed through his brain, andhe exclaimed, "Oh, God! is it possible? Have I then lost my Ildica--mypure, my holy, my beloved!"Written on his countenance, she saw the dreadful thought that crossedhis mind; she heard it in the deep despair that shook his voice. "No,no!" she cried, lifting her eyes towards the sky; "no, no! As there isa God in heaven--as there is redemption for all sins--I am thine,thine only, thine faithfully, thine in every thought, in heart, mind,body! thine alone!""Then come to my arms!" cried Theodore; "come to my arms, and be myown for ever, brightest, dearest, most beautiful, and most beloved!""Oh, no, no, Theodore!" she answered, sadly; "oh, no, no! never can Ibe thine except in spirit and in love. This hand has lain in the handof the barbarian. This hand has been died in the blood of his heart.This hand never, never can be given to thee in wedlock, pure, andnoble, and virtuous as thou art.""Nay, nay, Ildica," he said, twining his arms round her, and pressingher closer to his bosom--"nay nay; but hear me. Sit down here by yourown Theodore, your brother, your lover, your promised husband."She sobbed violently, and her tears deluged his bosom. "Listen to me,my Ildica," he continued, seating himself with her on the side of thecouch, and still pressing her to his heart. "Is my happiness nothingto Ildica, that now, when fate at length unites us, her hand shouldsever the dear bond for ever?" Her only answers were sobs. "Hear me,"he said--"hear me, Ildica. Thon hast done an act for which all nationsbless thee. Nor wert thou to blame for any part therein. Thou hadst noother way to save thyself from a fate far more terrible. Thouthoughtest that I was dead! Flight was impossible, resistance vain!""Listen to me, Theodore," she said, raising her head and looking onhis face more calmly, but still sadly and gloomily--"listen to me, andthou shalt see that I know, and have calculated, and pressed forth thehoney from each excuse, for the act that I have committed. I will tellthee all--I can tell thee all--for my reason and my memory are nowclear, and I can look back upon the past as upon a picture, wherein Ican see my own image acting a part involuntarily in mighty and awfuldeeds. Listen to me, then, beloved; and while I lie here and repose,for the last time in life, upon that dear resting-place whereon I hadhoped to cradle all my after years, I will tell thee all, all the darkthoughts and sad memories of the past. Thou hast heard how my motherdied, and how a violent and a raging sickness deprived me for long ofsense. Never after that, Theodore--never, after I awoke and foundmyself alone in all the world, thee absent, my mother gone, Ammian,Eudochia far away--Never do I think that my mind regained its tone. Itwas as a bow which the strong arm of misfortune had stretched too far;and though it sprang back in a degree, it never became straight andpowerful as before. Then came all the horrid visions of thebarbarian's love; but under all those trials I struggled, as myTheodore might have seen and approved. Amid them all there is not onememory that lies heavy at my heart. I bore up with fortitude: Iresisted with courage: I pleaded, as I fancied, with success. But thenat length, as hope, bright hope was rising up, and telling me that aweek, a day, an hour might bring thee to me, suddenly, and withoutpreparation, they told me that thou wert dead. They left me to believethat thou hadst been murdered by command of him who sought my love. OhGod! I can scarcely think of it even now," she continued, clasping herhand upon her forehead.But, after a moment, she went on, with a deep sigh--"Well, there fellupon me a cloud; I walked amid those around me as one walking in amist. I saw little, I knew little, of all that surrounded me. Briefsnatches of what was said I understood. People came and disappearedlike figures in a thick fog, and voices sounded in mine ear as ofdistant persons, that one sees not, heard talking in a dark night. Butamong those voices was one," and her voice rose, "which taught me alesson of high daring, which showed me holy authority for a deed ofblood, which called upon me night and day to deliver the earth fromher scourge, the nations from their destroyer, the people of God fromtheir oppressor and their enemy. Night and day that voice told me thatI was the appointed, the chosen of the Lord, to do his will upon hisadversary. It told me that for this I had been made hopeless andrendered desolate: for this I had been cast into the hands of thebarbarians: for this had the infidel king been made to cast the eyesof passion upon me. Oh Theodore! that voice but strengthened ideaswhich I had already conceived; it but nerved my heart to deeds that Ihad already contemplated. I had promised my mother that, in the timeof trial, I would act as one of my ancestors would have acted: I hadpromised my own heart that I would die sooner than suffer the love ofany but thyself. There was, as thou hast said, no escape; there was noresistance. I was called to the sacrifice of the bridal by a command,not an invitation; and I went in the strength of madness and despairto slay the slayer of my father, my husband, and my people; to cutshort deeds of blood by one as dark and terrible; and to prevent theaccomplishment of that fearful vow which he had made, to lay theEastern world in ashes, and to leave not a blade of grass or a livingsoul between the Danube and the Hellespont. Three fearful lots werelaid before me, to choose which I would. They were--to abhor myselffor ever as the slave of Attila's foul passions--to slay myself toescape him--or to slay him, and, though my certain death shouldfollow, thus free the Christian world, and deliver the nations fromthe sword of the destroyer. I chose, oh Theodore, the bolder and themightier deed: I chose that which I believed was justified inself-defence, which was beneficial to the human race, which I had beentold was pleasing unto God. I chose it with an unshrinking heart, akeen eye, and a steady hand. But remember, oh remember, that I vowedno vow; that I promised no promise unto him; that I stood passive,while they muttered, and they sacrificed, and never, never gave thehand he took. Remember, that at that very altar where he sealed hisown fate, when solemnly adjured to tell the truth, he swore to me thatthou wert dead, and lost to me for ever. I had no choice, I had nohope, I had no safety! But when he fell and lay before me, the darkblood spouting from his stricken side, and the quivering heel smitingthe ground in the agonies of death, the justification passed away; theterrible thing that I had done absorbed all thought, and feeling, andsensation. Then immediately you rushed in. No, it could not beimmediately, though it seemed so unto me; but what passed I know not,till your voice called me for a moment to recollection; and joy, andhorror, and despair cast me senseless again."Theodore pressed her tenderly to his bosom. "And does not this show,"he said--"does not all this show that thou shouldst be dearer thanever to my heart? Does not this show that thou, whose every feelingthrough life has been given to me, should, through my future days, bethe object of all my love, and care, and tenderness? Yes, yes, myIldica; my bosom shall be thy resting-place, my arms thy shield, myheart thy sanctuary, my ear the willing listener to every sorrow andto every care, my voice the soother of thy griefs, the consolation forall that is painful in memory. Theodore will devote his life untothee; his every thought, his every hope, his every wish--""Forbear, forbear, Theodore," she cried; "for Ildica's life must begiven up to God. From this day forth no hour shall fly--but those inwhich He sends his blessed sleep to allay the fiery memories of thepast--without some prayer for pardon, without some petition for lightin this world of darkness, without some act of penitence, ofadoration, of thanksgiving. What I have told thee, Theodore, shouldmake thee know that in this I can never change; that I have thoughtdeeply over all that is past; and with restored reason and a clearintellect, there is but one place for me on earth--the calm andtranquil cell in some solitary sisterhood, where I may devote, as faras love for thee will let me, all my thoughts to God. Oh, Theodore, becontented! In those thoughts thou wilt share enough. Thou, thou aloneart my object upon earth, round which still cling the garlands ofsweet flowers that fond hope and young affection twined in the daysgone by. Oh, Theodore! those flowers are all immortals: the dew ofmemory shall preserve them still, as bright as when first we wreathedthem in the golden past. Their sweet odour shall still endure toperfume the very latest hours of life; and let us hope--ay, let ushope, that, with a garland in our hand, a garland of those sameimmortal flowers of love, we may meet ere long in heaven! Oh,Theodore! that life may have been terrible, painful, disastrous, butnever can be useless, that makes us look forward with hope and joy toa better being and a nobler state." She gazed upward for a moment,then cast herself upon his bosom and wept.He held her to his heart in silence, for there was a sacredness in hersorrow, an elevation in her purpose, which he dared not combat at thatmoment, though the hope of changing it was not extinct. Gladly,however, did he hear her, after a long pause given to the burstingforth of that deep emotion--gladly did he hear her revert to a lesspainful, a less agitating theme. "Eudochia," she said--"Eudochia andAmmian; tell me, Theodore, are they well and happy?""I left them so, beloved," he replied, "and trust they are so still;but that is long ago, for I have been delayed by every disaster thatcan befall the traveller on his way. Tempest and shipwreck, storm andenemies, the darkness of sixteen days upon the wide sea, a host ofinsidious foes lining the shore, obstacles which the might of mancould not overcome, tortured, impeded, delayed me; and I am here withscarce ten of all my followers left alive, and with my own life amiracle even unto myself. When I left my sister and thy brother,however, they were well and happy; she full of smiles and hopes; andhe, though graver--calmer I should say, than he was, yet, lookingthoughtful happiness whenever he gazed on his own dear bride. They areboth happy--most happy; and we may be so too. Yes, yes, my Ildica,brighter thoughts will come: I will see thee this night depart towardsour own land with joy and thankfulness; and will follow thee with amore rapid pace ere two days be over. We have none but each otherleft, my Ildica, to cling to in the world; and our prayers, ourthanksgiving, our adoration, will rise as gratefully to the heavenlythrone, from two united hearts, thankful for mutual love and mutualhappiness, as from two separate beings, torn asunder when they lovedthe most, and ending in solitary misery a life that has already knownsome sorrows."She shook her head and murmured, "It cannot be!"But Theodore would not believe aught but the voice of hope; and hepressed her closer to his heart. "Hark!" he said, after a moment;"there is the litter and the train of horsemen that accompany thee!Ardaric has fully provided for our safety till we reach the borders ofour own land."There was the sound of a step in the outer tent, and the curtain whichdivided it was raised. So often had misfortune stricken her, socontinually had the wave of evil tidings been poured upon her ear,that, even at that slight sound, Ildica started, crept closer to thebreast of her lover, and gazed forward with a frightened glance uponthe moving curtain. The form that appeared, however, was not one toinspire fear; it was that of Neva, now pale as Ildica herself, butscarcely less lovely. She was covered with a mantle of furs, and ahood of fine sable was drawn partly over her head.On seeing Theodore with Ildica, she paused and hesitated; and eitherthe lamp, flickering with the wind of the moving curtain, cast for amoment a red light upon her countenance, or else the blood mounted upinto her cheek, and then, rushing back again, left it as pale asbefore."Ildica, dear Ildica," she said, again advancing, "all is ready!"Ildica's fortitude returned. It was only in anticipation she wastimid. "And must I part with thee, too, dear Neva?" she said; "withthee, to whom all my consolation during the last sad month is owing?Must I part with thee, too--and for ever?""No, Ildica, no," answered Neva. "I go with thee, wherever thou goest.Whatever be thy fate, dear sister of my heart, sister in misfortuneand disappointed hopes, with thee will I go, if it be to the uttermostparts of the earth. Thy lot I will share, thy sorrows I will sooth,till I see thee at length rewarded with happiness; and then, as adistant gazer upon a beautiful scene, I will look on from afar, andthank God for the brightness of the evening."Ildica cast her arms around her and melted into tears; and then,suddenly raising her head, she gazed upon the lovely countenance ofBleda's daughter, and turned, as if with the inspiration of suddenhope, towards Theodore. "Oh, Theodore, Theodore!" she exclaimed; "thoumayst be happy yet."He seemed to gather her meaning in a moment. "Hush!" he exclaimed, ina tone almost rendered stern by the very vehemence of his feelings."Hush, hush, Ildica--by the sacred purity of thine own heart--hush!"He cast his arms around her, and pressed her to his bosom; and then,knowing how valuable every moment of that night might be, he gentlydrew her onward towards the litter which stood without, surrounded bya large body of the barbarian horsemen. Ardaric was there, but hegazed on Theodore and Ildica in silence; and the young Roman, raisingher in his arms, placed her himself in the double litter. He assistedNeva to follow and seat herself by Ildica's side. "Farewell, Neva!" hesaid; "gentle, excellent girl, farewell!--Theodore will ever love youas a brother. Ildica, my bride, my promised, my beloved, farewell! Eretwo days be over, I will follow thee on thy way."She suffered him to embrace her again as she lay on the litter, andshe returned the embrace. But, as her cheek lay on his shoulders, shemurmured, "Farewell, beloved of my youth! beloved shalt thou still be,even unto death; but hope no vain hopes, Theodore; Ildica is vowedunto prayer and unto repentance. Farewell for ever!"The litter moved on; the dull sound of the horses' feet was heard uponthe grass; the last horsemen filed away over the hills; the sounds ofthe departing force grew fainter and more faint; the noises of theseveral camps around rose louder on the ear; and Ardaric laid his handupon Theodore's arm, saying, "They are gone! Let us to counsel, myfriend."CHAPTER XXIV.THE END OF A SAD HISTORY.It was a fair autumn day, and the mighty clouds which swept from timeto time over the deep blue sky served not to lessen, but rather toincrease the brightness of the face of nature. In the centre of theplain which lay between two wide sloping hills was erected a tent ofcrimson silk, the awnings of which, festooned on high, exposed toview, raised on a low platform, a coffin of burnished gold.[6]---------------[Footnote 6: Let it be understood that such particulars are notimaginary Attila was buried with the rites here described.]---------------The space around, for the distance of two bowshots on every side, waskept clear; but beyond the limits of that open ground, in onewide-spreading ring, extended the dusky line of barbarian warriors,whose hands had carried desolation into the heart of so many sunshinyand prosperous lands. Deep was the phalanx of those dark warriors, as,each mounted on his battle-steed, they sat in grim array around thebody of their king. The whole plain was occupied by their multitude;and while the soldiers and chiefs themselves thus formed in regularorder a living amphitheatre below, the women, the children, and theslaves swept up the hills around and gazed upon the awful spectacle.After the first confusion incident to giving form and array to such avast body of men had subsided, the sad and solemn occasion of theirmeeting, the important and terrible events that were likely to ensue,kept even the rude barbarians hushed around; and though the dullstamping of the horses, unconscious of the cause of halt, raised amurmuring sound, the human voice was not heard throughout that mightyhost, or, at most, a low whisper rustled through the ranks.At length two groups separated themselves from either side, and,advancing for a short space into the arena, dismounted from theirhorses, and approached the tent on foot. On the one side appearedEllac, the son of the dead king, and three of his brethren, of whomErnac, the youngest, was one; while Onegisus and Orestes, a favouriteofficer of Attila's, accompanied them towards the tent. On the otherhand appeared Ardaric and Valamir, Theodore and Edicon, with twoinferior chiefs of tributary nations.All were unarmed, as had been before agreed; and with branches of oakin their hands, they one by one entered the tent, and laid the leafyoffering on the bier of Attila. His children and the two Hunnishchieftains stood on the one side of the coffin, and the two kings withtheir companions on the other; and, after gazing for a time on thegold that covered the ashes of the mighty king, they raised their eyesto each other, and it was evident that but little love existed betweenthose who were there face to face.There came an uneasy pause; and then Ardaric, breaking silence, said,"Are we not here, oh Ellac! to celebrate the funeral of that mightyking who for so many years has led us on to battle and to victory? Ifso, let us plight our hands unto each other, that, for two days, allsubjects of debate which may arise, either between me and thee, orbetween the nation of the Huns and the confederate nations which forso long have borne them company in war, shall be laid aside, and thatwe shall live together for those two days as friends and brethrenunited in common love and reverence for the mighty dead."Ellac gazed at him with a fierceness that he could scarce subdue; and,after a violent struggle with himself, replied, "So shall it be, ohArdaric! when thou hast satisfied me of one thing. Ere I clasp thehand of any man in amity, even if that amity be to last but for twodays, I will know whether the hand offered to me be pure from myfather's blood. Of late thou hast been heard to murmur at the will ofthe king--to condemn his actions--to say that he was changed--todeclare the executions that his will ordained, unjust: ay, and,meddling even in his domestic life, to oppose, till his own wrath wasexcited, his taking to his bed a pitiful Dalmatian girl."Theodore's hand grasped for the hilt of his sword; but, fortunately,the weapon was away."On the day of my father's death," continued Ellac, "comes back yonderRoman, the affianced husband of this slight womanly toy, wherewithAttila chose to solace his hours of idleness. Thou and some few othersare together in the antechamber of the king when the viper he hasnourished in his bosom returns. The king is found drowned in hisblood. All this is strange, oh Ardaric!""Ellac," replied Ardaric, sternly and solemnly, "darest thou to accuseme of the murder of thy father, or of sharing in any way in his death?Ardaric was the friend of Attila, but the enemy of those faults which,alas! were growing but too thick upon him. But I tell thee, Ellac,that perchance the thought of slaying Attila might be more familiar tothe heart of his own son than to the breast of Ardaric! Silence! andhear me," he continued, in a voice of thunder, seeing that Ellac wasabout to interrupt him--"silence! and hear me to an end; then answer!I know thine inmost thoughts, oh Ellac! But here I swear," and he laidhis broad hand upon the coffin, "by the immortal gods, and by theblood of Attila! that neither I nor mine, nor one here present withme, is guilty of the death of the mighty king--contrived, or aided, orexecuted his murder. Now, oh Ellac, if thou art still unsatisfied, letthis triple coffin be opened, and thou and I will separately place ourhands upon the heart of Attila, calling on him to show who mostconspired, longed for, thought of, planned the death of that greatking. Then shall we see at whose touch his blood will soonest flow!"Ellac turned away his head--"It is enough," he said; "thine oath willsatisfy me!"A bitter and indignant smile curled the lip of Valamir at his reply."Since thou art satisfied, Ellac," he said, "pledge us thine hand thathere, meeting in peace, at the funeral of thy father, we his friends,the companions of his toils, the sharers in his successes, may inpeace also offer to his ashes the honours due to the mightiestmonarch, the greatest conqueror, the most heroic warrior that earthhas ever seen or shall see! Pledge us thy hand, that for this day andthe next, peace, and amity, and good faith shall reign between theHuns and the nations we command, and let every question which maycause dispute or division be postponed till those days have passed."Ellac hesitated: "Yonder is the grave," he said at length, pointing toa deep pit and a high mound of earth which had been cast up to formit. "Yonder is the grave. Thou knowest, Ardaric, that the blood ofslaves and captives must be shed, as a sacrifice, on the spot whererest the bones of Attila. Thou wouldst not send the spirit of themighty king upon its long journey through the realms of night with noattendant shades around it. I claim a sacrifice; and as the first whofollows the great monarch to the pastures of the dead, I claim thebride that he had wedded on his night of death; I claim her he hadmade his own in the sight of heaven and earth, to follow himwhithersoever the gods shall appoint him to go!""Out on thee, fiend!" cried Theodore; "out on thee, unjust andbarbarous man! Lover of blood, faithless, false, and insolent; nobride of Attila's was she; no sacrifice shall she be to the demon ofthy mighty father--to the manes of him who, had he been as pitiful andas contemptible as his son, would never--""Hush, hush!" cried Ardaric, laying his hand upon his arm--"hush,hush, Theodore! Provoke not quarrel now! Ellac, what thou demandest isimpossible. Were she even here in the camp, my honour, and theglorious name of Attila himself, would demand that she whose hand hadlain in his should be held sacred, so long as Ardaric had a sword towield in her defence. But she is far hence. Long, long miles separateus from her; and ere thou or thine could reach her, she would be safein her own land. If thou wilt swear peace, why well! but seek not todelay us longer with vain and idle pretexts!""Pretexts!" exclaimed Ellac, furiously; "proud leader, who art thou,to talk to me of pretexts? Who is king here on the Pannonian soil,that thou shouldst beard me thus?""Beard thee!" cried Ardaric, with a scornful laugh. "Who is king here!why, beardless boy, Ardaric is king as well as thou art! Thy father'sfriend, but not his servant; his ally, not his subject, serving himwell and truly from love and admiration; but owing him nothing, no,not an ounce of gold! Speakest thou to me as if thou wert Attila? Poorworm! know thyself better; and if thou wouldst know who is king, threedays hence I will give thee an answer--ay, such an answer as the worldshall never forget--written with steel, in characters of blood. Butlet us now have peace! If thou wilt now swear to deal faithfully withus, say so at once. If not, lo, we mount our horses, and we draw ourswords. But upon thee and thine be the shame and the disgrace ofdishonouring thy father's ashes. We offer thee peace to perform therites due to the ashes of the mighty king--take it or refuse it, now,and at a word."Onegisus caught the arm of Ellac as he was about to reply, andwhispered with him eagerly for several minutes. Ellac looked downsullenly on the ground for a moment, and then, raising his eyes,replied, "Peace! let it be peace for those two days! I swear to keepit inviolate by the ashes of my father, and by the eternal gods. Butafter that, oh Ardaric, will come the trial between thee and me. Thehosts that have conquered under Attila shall not be divided under hisson. Let our strength be tried, and if thou canst break the chain thatI will put about thy neck, thou shalt drag Ellac after thee. Threedays hence, at the third hour after sunrise, I will wait for thee inthe plains beside the river Netad, where late I pitched my tents onthe day of my father's death. There shalt thou find me, and if thoucomest not to me I will seek thee, and I will bow thy proud head tothe dust. As for yon paltry Roman, if he come with thee, he shall findthe fate that he deserves. Perhaps he may not die--his blood is toolike water to be worth the spilling. Shorn, mutilated, cropped, andhis flesh marked with the burning steel, he shall stand among theslaves of Ellac, and wash the vessels from his master's table.""Ellac," answered Theodore, calmly, "Ellac, I will come! and if thegod of battles abandon me not now, I will give unto thee a better fatethan that which thou wouldst grant to me. On the third day hence lookthou well unto the dawning sun, for if I live thou never shalt see itrise again. For these two days, however, let us all swear peace!""We swear! we swear!" they cried, and laid their hands upon the bierof Attila.*    *    *    *    *    *The dark squadrons began to move, a thousand horsemen at a time; andwith a slow and solemn pace they approached the tent where lay thebody of the mighty king, wheeling round it once, with still decreasingspeed, as if reluctant to pass for the last time before him who had sooften led them on to victory. Ever as they went, with downcast looks,they sung to a wild and melancholy air the song of the departed great.When each squadron had performed its round, it took its place oncemore in the vast circle, and another succeeded and performed the samesad rite, till at length, when the sun's course had waned to less thanan hour of light, the whole had completed the task. Then ten of thegreatest chieftains lifted the golden coffin, and, placing it on theircrossed spears, bore it towards the grave.As they advanced, the circle of the Huns, rendered skilful in such anevolution by their practice in hunting, grew smaller and smaller,pressing into a narrower ring; and forth from among them were driven acrowd of pale and ghastly wretches, who knew the fatal hour of theirimmolation nigh, and yet, with vain and fruitless hopes, looked roundfor impossible escape. That iron ring was at length narrowed to lessthan a bowshot in diameter; and some hundred or more of the chiefwarriors pushing their horses forward, drove the trembling slaves onto the brink of the pit.The golden coffin was slowly lowered down into the grave. Those whowere behind pressed onward to behold. The swords of the nearestwarriors leaped from their sheaths, waved above the heads of thevictims, and a loud and fearful shriek rang up to the offended sky.Jewels, and gold, and precious stones were showered in from all handsamong the blood and writhing bodies that half filled up that horribletomb. Then piled they in the cold gray soil, till it rose in a mounthigh above the rest of the land. They covered it with the turf theyhad removed. Night fell, and all was done.*    *    *    *    *    *An old man stood upon a hill and gazed, and though arrows fell at hisfeet, still he looked forth upon a widespread grassy plain, where twomighty hosts had been contending, from the third hour after the dawnof day till the fourth hour following noon. They had met, myriads uponmyriads; but now thin and scanty was the field, and few and weary werethe combatants; but still that old man gazed, and still his voicemurmured forth, "Lord God Almighty, thou dealest righteously! Theslayers of all men are slain by their own swords!"At length, where flowed a rivulet on to the neighbouring river, thosetwo dark armies seemed separated for a space, and rolled, like twothunder-clouds ready to meet, at a little distance from either bank:then, like lightning from those clouds, sprang forth two gallant men,borne on towards each other by their fiery chargers, as swiftly andunwearied as if throughout that day there had neither been fatigue norstrife. The one was habited as a Roman, and his steed, plunging in thestream, bore him to the other bank ere his adversary could reach it.They met; their swords waved in the air; the eyes of the beholderswere dazzled; but, in a moment after, the barbarian was seen bendingto his saddle-bow. A second deep stroke descended on his neck, and,falling headlong, he rolled, a corpse, upon the plain!The Gepid[ae] poured across the stream: the Huns fled in disarray;slaughter and destruction hung upon their rear, and the mighty fabricof Attila's empire was at an end for ever.*    *    *    *    *    *Nearly thirty years after, when the empire of the West was at an end,and the empire of the East revived for a time with a show of falseprosperity, a powerful man, clothed in the splendid arms of apretorian prefect, wandered up one of the low hills which border theIllyrian shore. He was led by a woman, on whose fair countenanceremained the traces of splendid beauty; and whose deep blue eyes stillretained an expression of deep, devoted tenderness, though thattenderness was now given to the highest object of human feelings. Shewas clothed in the habit of a recluse, such as was then common, andthe way they took was towards the cemetery of a solitary nunnery. Theguards of the prefect remained below, but he himself was admitted by aspecial favour; and, passing through the little wicket gate into thecalm and silent spot where reposed the ashes of the holy and the pure,they came, after a few steps, to a grave covered with fresh turf."She lies there!" said Neva--and Theodore cast himself down upon thegrave of Ildica, and wept!