The Project Gutenberg EBook of Henry of Guise; (Vol. I of 3), by G. P. R. (George Payne Rainsford) JamesThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: Henry of Guise; (Vol. I of 3)or, The States of BloisAuthor: G. P. R. (George Payne Rainsford) JamesRelease Date: April 9, 2012 [EBook #39411]Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HENRY OF GUISE; (VOL. I OF 3) ***Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by theWeb Archive (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign)Transcriber's Notes:1. Page scan source:http://archive.org/details/henryofguiseorst01jame(University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign)2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].HENRY OF GUISE;OR,THE STATES OF BLOIS.VOL. I.London:Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New-Street-SquareHENRY OF GUISEOR,THE STATES OF BLOIS.BYG. P. R. JAMES, ESQ.AUTHOR OF"THE ROBBER," "THE GENTLEMAN OF THE OLD SCHOOL,"ETC. ETC. ETC.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FORLONGMAN, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,PATERNOSTER-ROW.1839.DEDICATION.*   *   *   *   *TOTHE HONOURABLEFRANCIS SCOTTMy dear Scott,In dedicating to you the following work as the tribute of oldfriendship, and of sincere and well founded esteem, allow me to add afew words in explanation of the course I have pursued in thecomposition. I do this, it is true, more for the public than foryourself, as you were with me while it was in progress, and by yourgood judgment confirmed my opinion of the mode in which the subjectought to be treated.The character of every person who plays a prominent part on the greatstage of the world is of course lauded by friends and decried byadversaries at the time, and the mingled report comes down to afterages. But the mists of prejudice are wafted away by the breath ofyears. The character of the historian is considered in connexion withthose of the personages he has depicted; and allowances are made forerrors and wrong views on all sides: the greater facts remain, ingeneral, clear and distinct; and from these, together with those smalltraits which are rather let fall accidentally than recorded, bycontemporaries, the estimate of history is formed.There are some characters, however, which from various causes remainobscure and doubtful through all time; and many which have points inthem that are never satisfactorily explained, producing acts whichcannot be accounted for; like those waters which have never beenfathomed, though we know not whether it be some under current that wesee not, or the profound depth itself, which prevents the plumbed linefrom reaching the bottom. Amongst the many acts recorded in the annalsof the world, the motives for which have never been ascertained, oneof the most extraordinary is, that of Henry Duke of Guise, when, onthe 12th of May, 1588, the famous day of the barricades, he had thecrown of France within his grasp, and did not close his hand. Somehave called it weakness, some virtue, some moderation, someindecision; and in fact, whatever view we take of it, there are pointsin which it is opposed to the general character of the Duke.In the account of this transaction, which I have given in thefollowing pages, I have rather attempted to narrate how the event tookplace, than to put forth a theory regarding the motives. My ownopinion is, indeed, fixed, after diligent examination of everycontemporary account, that the motives were mixed. I do not believethat the Duke's moderation proceeded from indecision, for I imaginethat he had decided from the first not to dethrone the King; but I dobelieve that he might be, and was, much tempted to usurp the throne,as the events of the day proceeded. Opportunity could not be withoutits temptation to a bold and ambitious heart like his. Whether hewould have remained master of his own conduct, whether he would havebeen able to struggle against his own desires and the wishes of thepeople, whether he would have maintained his resolution to the end ofthat day, had the King not escaped from Paris, is another question.Suffice it that he resisted the temptation as long as the temptationexisted; and that he did so deliberately is proved, by his strictlyprohibiting the people from surrounding the royal residence, "lest itshould commit him too far." Upon this view of the case have I based mynarration.In regard to the death of the Duke of Guise, I had but littledifficulty; for the event is so amply and minutely detailed bycontemporaries, that no doubt can exist in regard to any of the facts.In the treatment of the story, however, I had to choose between twocourses. A French writer, or writer of the French school, in order toconcentrate the interest upon the Guise, would most likely havebrought into a prominent point of view his criminal passion for Madamede Noirmoutier, and would have wrought it up with sentiment till thefeelings of the reader were enlisted in favour of herself and theDuke.I did not do this for two reasons. In the first place, it would havebeen a violation of history to represent Madame de Noirmoutier as anything but a mere abandoned woman, as her amours with Henry IV. andothers clearly show. In the next place, I consider it an insult tovirtue to endeavour to excite interest for vice. It was necessary,indeed, to introduce Madame de Noirmoutier, on account of the famouswarning which she gave to Guise on the night before his death; but Ihave done so as briefly as possible for the reasons I have juststated.I have only farther to say, that I know there is a French work bearingthe same title, or very nearly the same title, as this. I have neverseen that work, nor read any review of it, nor heard any part of itscontents, and therefore have no idea whatsoever of how the story isthere conducted. Doubtless very differently, and, perhaps, much betterthan in the following pages; but, nevertheless, I trust that thepublic will extend to them the same indulgence which has been grantedto my other works, and for which I am most sincerely grateful.To you, my dear Scott, I am also very grateful, for many a happy hour,and many a pleasant day, and for many a trait which, in our mutualintercourse, has given me the best view of human nature, and added oneto the few whom in this life we find to love and to respect. Accept,then, this very slight testimony of such feelings, and believe meever,Yours faithfully,G. P. R. James.HENRY OF GUISE;OR,THE STATES OF BLOIS.CHAPTER I.It was as dark and sombre a morning, the sky was as gloomy, the earthas dry and parched, as earth, sky, and morning ever appear in the mostnorthern climates. A dull grey expanse of leaden cloud shut out theblue heaven, a hard black frost pinched up the ground, the blades ofgrass stood stiff and rugged on the frozen soil, and vague grey mistslay in all the hollows of the ground. The forests, the manifoldforests that then spread over the fair land of France, showed nothingbut bare branches, except where here and there the yoke-elm ortenacious beech retained in patches its red and withered leaves, whilebeneath the trees again, the ground was thickly carpeted with thefallen honours of the past summer, mingled with hoar frost and thinsnow. A chilliness more piercing than mere frost pervaded the air; andthe aspect of the whole scene was cheerless and melancholy.Such was the aspect of the day, though the scene was in the south ofFrance, at a spot which we shall leave for the present nameless, whenat about seven o'clock in the morning--an hour in which, at thatperiod of the year, the sun's rays are weak and powerless--a tall,strong, florid man of about four-and-thirty years of age was seen uponthe edge of a wide wood walking along cautiously step by step,carefully bending down his eyes upon the withered leaves that strewedhis path, as if he had dropped something of value which he sought tofind.The wood, as we have said, was extensive, covering several miles ofundulating ground, broken by rocks and dingles, and interspersed bymore than one piece of water. It contained various kinds of tree, aswell as various sorts of soil; but at the spot of which we now speakthe wood was low and thin, gradually increasing in volume as it rosealong the slope of the adjacent hill, till it grew into a tangledthicket, from which rose a number of tall trees, waving their greybranches sadly in the wintry air. On a distant eminence, rising farabove the wood itself, might be seen towers, and turrets, andpinnacles, the abode of some of the lords of the land; and at the endof a long glade, up which the man we have just mentioned wascautiously stealing, as we have described, appeared a little cottagewith one or two curious outbuildings, not usually found attached tothe abodes of the agricultural population.The features of this early wanderer in the woods were good, theexpression of his countenance frank; and though poring so intentlyupon the ground as he passed, there was nevertheless an air ofhabitual cheerfulness in his countenance, which broke out in thefrequent smile, either at something passing in his own thoughts, or atsomething he observed amongst the withered leaves. He was dressed in aplain suit of dark brownish grey, with a cap and feather on his head,a sword by his side, and an immense winding horn slung under his leftarm; and though at the present moment he was without either horses ordogs, his whole dress and appearance bespoke him one of the huntsmenof some neighbouring lord.After having walked on for about three or four hundred yards, hesuddenly stopped at some traces on the ground, turned into the wood,which in a particular line seemed disturbed and broken, and followingthe marks, which denoted that some large object of the chase hadpassed that way, he reached the thicker part of the wood, where, touse his own expression, he felt sure that the boar was lodged.It would be useless and tedious to accompany him in all theperquisitions that he made round the thicket, in order to ascertainthat the animal had not again issued forth from its woody covert. Hesatisfied himself, however, completely, that such was not the case,and then paused, musing for a moment or two, till he was roused fromhis reverie by the distant sounds of human voices and of horses' feet,coming from the side of the glade in which we have first displayed himto the reader's eyes. He now hurried back as rapidly as possible, andin a minute or two after stood uncovered in the midst of a gay andglittering party, on which we must pause for a few minutes, ere weproceed to describe the events of that morning.There were about twenty persons present, but the greater numberconsisted of various attendants attached to the household of allFrench noblemen of that period, under the names of grooms, piqueurs,valets de chiens, chefs de relais, &c. Three out of the group,however, are worthy of greater attention, not alone because they werehigher in rank, but because with them we shall have to deal throughoutthe course of this tale, while most of the others may well beforgotten. The eldest of the three, bore the robe of an ecclesiastic,though in his deportment, as he sat a spirited, and somewhat fretfulhorse, he seemed fully as well suited to play the part of a gaycavalier as that of a sober churchman.His features were fine, though not strongly marked; the nose straightand well cut; the chin rounded; the brow broad and high, and the mouthwell formed. But with all these traits of beauty, there were one ortwo drawbacks, both in feature and expression, which rendered hisaspect by no means so prepossessing as it otherwise might have been.The eyes, which were remarkably fine, large, dark, and powerful, weresunk deep under the sharp cut, overhanging brow, looking keenly outfrom below their long fringed lids, as if in ambush for each unguardedglance or gesture of those with whom he conversed. The lips, though,as we have said, well formed, closed tight over the teeth, which wereas white as snow, never suffering them to appear, except when actuallyspeaking. Even then those lips parted but little, and gave one theidea of their being, as it were, the gates of imprisoned thoughts,which opened no farther than was necessary to give egress to thosewhich they were forced to set at liberty. The nostril, though it wasfinely shaped, was even stiller and more motionless than the lips. Nomoment of eagerness, no excited passion of the bosom, made thatnostril expand, and if it ever moved at all, it was but when a slightirrepressible sneer upon the lip drew it up with a scornful elevation,not the less cutting because it was but slight.The age of this personage at the time we speak of might be aboutforty-five; and if one might judge by the clear paleness of hiscomplexion, a considerable portion of his life had been spent inintense study. The marks of his age were visible, too, in his beardand mustachios, which had once been of the deepest black, but were nowthickly grizzled with grey. No sign, however, of any loss of strengthor vigour was apparent; and though still and quiet in his demeanour,he seemed not at all disinclined to show, by an occasional exercise ofstrength or agility, that stillness and quietude were with him mattersof choice and not of necessity. He kept his horse a very small pacebehind those of his two younger companions; but he so contrived itthat this very act of deference should not have the slightestappearance of humility in it, but should rather seem an expression ofwhat he owed to his own age and character rather than to theirsuperior rank.The other two were both young men in the very early outset of life,and were so nearly of the same age, that it was difficult to say whichwas the elder. Both were extremely handsome, both were very powerfullyand gracefully formed; and the most extraordinary similarity offeatures and of frame existed between them, so that it would have beendifficult to distinguish the one from the other, had it not been thattheir complexions were entirely different. The one was dark, the otherfair: in one the hair curled over the brow in large masses, as glossyas the wing of the raven; in the other, the same profuse and shininghair existed, but of a nut brown, with every here and there a gleam asif the sun shone upon it. The eyes of the one were dark, but flashingand lustrous; the eyes of the other of a deep hazel, and in them theremingled, with the bright bold glances of fearless courage, anoccasional expression of depth and tenderness of feeling, whichrendered the character of his countenance as different from that ofhis brother as was his complexion.Notwithstanding the great similarity that existed between them, theywere not, as may have been supposed, twins, the fairer of the twobeing a year younger than his brother. They were both, indeed, as wehave said, in their early youth, but their youth was manly; and thoughneither had yet seen three-and-twenty years, the form of each waspowerful and fully developed, and the slight pointed beard andsweeping mustachio were as completely marked as the custom of the dayadmitted.On the characters of the two we shall not pause in this place, as theywill show themselves hereafter; and it is sufficient to say that therewas scarcely a little word, or action, or gesture, which did not moreor less display a strong and remarkable difference between the heartsand minds of the two. During their whole life, hitherto,notwithstanding this difference, they had lived in the utmostfriendship and regard, without even any of those occasional quarrelswhich too often disturb the harmony of families. Perhaps the secret ofthis might be that the elder brother had less opportunity ofdomineering over the younger than generally existed in the noblefamilies of France, for their mother had been an heiress of greatpossessions, and according to the tenour of her contract of marriagewith their father, her feofs and riches fell on her death to hersecond son, leaving him, if any thing, more powerful and wealthy thanhis elder brother.The fortune of neither, however, though each was large, was of suchgreat extent as to place them amongst the few high and powerfulfamilies who at that time struggled for domination in the land oftheir birth. The territory of each could bring two or three hundredsoldiers into the field in case of need: the wealth of each sufficedto place them in the next rank to the governor of the province whichthey inhabited; but still their names stood not on the same list withthose of Epernon, Joyeuse, Montmorency, Guise, or Nemours; and,contented hitherto with the station which they enjoyed, neither theythemselves, nor any of their ancestors, had striven to obtain fortheir house a distinction which, in those times, was, perhaps, moreperilous than either desirable or honourable. Neither of them, indeed,was without ambition, though that ambition was, of course, modified bytheir several characters; but it had been controlled hitherto,perhaps, less by the powers of their own reason than by the influenceof the personage who now accompanied them, and whom we have beforedescribed.Not distantly connected with them by the ties of blood, the Abb deBoisguerin had been called from Italy, where he had long resided, tosuperintend their education shortly after their mother's death. Hisown income, though not so small as that of many another scion of anoble house in France, had, nevertheless, proved insufficient throughlife to satisfy a man of expensive, though not very ostentatious,tastes and habits; and the large emoluments, offered to him, togetherwith the prospects of advancement which the station proposed held out,induced him without hesitation to quit his residence in Rome, andrevisit a country, the troublous state of which gave the prospect ofadvancement to every daring and unscrupulous spirit.It may seem strange to say, as we have said, that the influence of anambitious man had been directed to check their ambition: but he wasambitious only for the attainment of certain ends. He valued not powermerely as power, but for that which power might command. Personalgratification was his object, though the pursuit of thatgratification, as far as the objects of sense went, was alsorestrained, like his ambition, by other qualities and feelings. Thus,as an ambitious man, at the time we speak of, he was neither fiercenor grasping; as an epicurean, he was not coarse nor insatiable; andyet with all this apparent--nay, real, moderation--there lay withinhis breast, unexcited and undeveloped, passions as strong and fierce,desires as eager and as fiery, as ever burned within the heart of man.He controlled them by skill and habit, he covered them, as it were,with the dust and ashes of his profession, but it needed only anaccidental breath to blow them into a flame, which, in turn, wouldhave given fire to every other aspiration and effort of his mind.He had found it in no degree difficult to obtain a complete ascendencyover the minds of the two young men he was called upon to govern.Their father had plunged deeply, after his wife's death, into the warsand troubles of the times, and he left his two sons entirely to thecare and direction of the Abb de Boisguerin. Thus he had everyopportunity that he could desire; and he brought to the task mostextensive learning, which enabled him to direct in every thing theinferior teachers. His manners were graceful, polished, andcaptivating, his temper calm and unruffled: hiding his own thoughtsand feelings under an impenetrable veil, never alluding to his pastlife or his future purposes, he skilfully, nay, almost imperceptibly,made himself master of the confidence of others, and gained everytreasured secret of the hearts around him, without giving anything in exchange. His learning, his wisdom, his acuteness, hisimpenetrability, won respect and reverence, and almost awe, from thetwo youths yet in their boyhood: his courtesy, his kindness, hisconsideration for the errors and the desires of their youth, gainedgreatly upon their regard; and their admiration and love was increasedby some events which took place towards their seventeenth andsixteenth years.It happened that about that time their master of arms was teachingthem some of the exercises of the day in the tilt-yard of the castle;while their governor, with his arms folded on his breast, stoodlooking on. He usually, under such circumstances, refrained frommaking any observations; but, thrown for a moment off his guard on thepresent occasion, by what appeared to him an awkwardness on the partof the master in teaching some evolution, he said courteously enough,that he thought it might be executed better in another manner.Conceited and rash, the master of arms replied with a show ofcontempt. The Abb then persisted; and the other, with a sneer, beggedthat he might be experimentally shown the new method of the governor.The churchman smiled slightly, threw off his gown, mounted one of thehorses with calm and quiet grace, and with scarcely a change offeature, or any other appearance of unusual exertion, displayed hisown superiority in military exercises, and foiled the master of armswith his own weapons. Ever after that, from time to time, he mingledin the sports and pastimes of the young men, never losing sight of hisown dignity, but showing sufficient skill, address, and boldness tomake them look up to him in the new course to which their attentionwas now directed by the customs of the age.The Abb de Boisguerin, however, did not suffer their whole attentionto be occupied by those military exercises, which formed the chiefsubject of study with the young nobility of the day. He had causedthem at an earlier period to be instructed deeply in the more elegantand graceful studies: he had endeavoured to implant in their minds afondness for letters, for poetry, for music. Drawing, too, andpainting, then rising into splendour from the darkness which had longcovered it, were pointed out to their attention, as objects ofadmiration and interest for every fine and elevated mind; and while nomanly sport or science was omitted, the many moments of unfilled timethat then hung heavy on the hands of other youths in France were bythem filled up with occupations calculated to polish, to expand, andto dignify their minds.As far as this had gone, every thing that the Abb de Boisguerin haddone was calculated to raise him in the esteem of his pupils; andwhen, on the death of their father, they found that their preceptorhad been appointed to remain with them till the law placed theirconduct in their own hands, they both rejoiced equally and sincerely.It may be asked, however, whether, of the two brothers, the Abb hadhimself a favourite, and whether he was better beloved by the one thanby the other? Still wise and cautious in all his proceedings, hisdemeanour displayed no great predilection to either. No ordinary eyecould see: they themselves could not detect, by any outward sign, thatone possessed a particle more of his regard than the other, and bothwere towards him equally attentive, affectionate, and respectful. Butthere was one peculiarity in his method of dealing with them, and inthe effect that it produced upon either, which showed to himself, andunwittingly showed to one, which was the character best calculated toassimilate with his own.It more than once happened, nay, indeed, it often happened, that inorder to induce them to arrive at the same conclusion with himself, orto lead them to do that which their passions, prejudices, orweaknesses made them unwilling to do, he would address himself, notdirectly to their reason or to their heart, but to their vanity, theirpride, their prejudices: he would politically combat one error withanother: he would not exactly assail what he knew to be wrong, butwould undermine it; and when he had conquered, and they were satisfiedthat he was right in the result, he would then point, with a degree ofsmiling and good-humoured triumph, to the subtle means which he hademployed to lead them to his purpose.The elder brother would sometimes be angry at having been so led; butyet he took a certain pleasure in the skill with which it was done,and more than once endeavoured to give the Abb back art for art. Hestrove to lead his younger brother by the same means, and more thanonce succeeded. The younger, however, on his part, showed no anger athaving been led, if he were fully convinced that the object was right.He never attempted, however, to practise the same; and as he grew up,when any act of the kind was particularly remarkable in the Abb, orin his brother, it threw him into musings more serious than thosewhich he usually indulged in. If it diminished his regard for either,he did not suffer that result to appear; and when he reached theperiod at which his mother's estates were given into his own hands, heeagerly besought the preceptor to remain with them, and insured to himan income far beyond that which any thing but deep affection andregard required him to bestow.The interest of their father had before his death obtained for theAbb de Boisguerin the office of a bishopric; but the Abb haddeclined it--perhaps, as many another man has done, with more ambitionthan moderation in the refusal--and he had continued to remain withhis pupils, increasing and extending his influence over them, up tothe moment at which we have placed them before the reader. He hadcarefully withheld them, however; from mingling in that world of whichthey as yet knew little or nothing, and in which his influence waslikely to be lost, looking forward to that period at which thecircumstances of the times should--as he saw they were likely todo--render the support of the two young noblemen so indispensable tosome one of the great parties then struggling for supreme power, thatthey might command any thing which he chose to dictate as the price ofadhesion.Such was their state at the period which we have chosen for openingthis tale. But there was another point in their state which it may benecessary to mark. They were not themselves at all aware of theirown characters and dispositions; nor was any one else, except theclear-sighted and penetrating man who had dwelt so long with them; andhe could only guess, for all the world of passions within the bosomsof each had as yet slumbered in their youthful idleness, like Samsonin the lap of Delilah; but they were speedily to be roused.The dress of each requires but little comment, as it was the ordinaryhunting dress of the period, and was only remarkable for a good dealof ornament, denoting, perhaps, a little taste for finery, which mightbe passed over in youth. Of the two, perhaps the younger brotherdisplayed less gold and embroidery upon his green doublet and ridingcoat. His boots, too, made, as usual, of untanned leather, displayedno gold tassels at the sides; though his moderation in these respectsmight be in some degree atoned by the length of the tall singlefeather in his riding cap.Such were the principal persons of the group which rode into the greenalley or glade that we have described in the wood; and the rest,amounting to some twenty in number, comprised attendants of all sortsin the glittering and many-coloured apparel of that time.CHAP. II.Did all that are hunted in this world--whether the chase be carried onby care, or villany, or sorrow, by our own passions, or by themalevolence of our fellow-men--did all that are hunted in this worldobtain as loud and clear an intimation that the pursuit is up andstirring, as the wild boar which had been tracked to its covert thenhad, we might have a better chance than this world generally affordsus of making our escape in time, or, at least, of preparing fordefence.Much was the noise, great the gingling and the tramp, the whining ofimpatient dogs, the chiding of surly foresters, the loud laugh and gayjest of their masters, in the glen of the wood within three or fourhundred yards of the thicket in which the boar lay sleeping. He wokenot with the sounds, however, or, at all events, he noticed them not,while the preparations went on for putting his easy life in the brownforest to a close."Well, Gondrin," exclaimed the elder of the two brothers, Gaspar,Marquis of Montsoreau--"Well, Gondrin, have you made sure of ourbeast? is he lodged safely?""As safe as an ox in his stall," replied the huntsman, whom we haveseen tracking the steps of the wild boar over the crisp frost-coveredleaves of winter. "He has his lair in the thicket there, my Lord, and,as near as I can guess, he is but a hundred yards in. If you go roundby the back of the cottage, and station two relays, one on the hill ofDufay, and the other on the bank of the river by the bridge ofNeufbourg, you will have a glorious chase; for he can take no otherway but down the glen, and then crossing the high road by the river,must run all the way up the valley, and stand at bay amongst the rocksat the end.""Beautifully arranged, Gondrin, beautifully arranged," cried theyounger brother, Charles of Montsoreau, Count of Logres; but hiselder brother instantly interrupted him, exclaiming, "But have you notnetted the thicket, Gondrin?""No, my Lord," replied the huntsman; "Count Charles said the other dayhe loved to give the beasts a chance, and lodged as the boar is, youwould miss the run, for then he must turn at bay in the thicket and bekilled immediately.""It matters not, it matters not," replied Gaspar de Montsoreau. "IfCharles like it, so let it be; and yet I love to see the huge beastdarting from side to side, and floundering in the nets he did notthink of. There is a pleasure in so circumventing him.""It is not too late yet," said the fine rich musical voice of the Abbde Boisguerin. "The nets can be speedily brought, and the thicketenclosed.""Oh no," cried both brothers at once: "we have no such patience, youknow, good friend. Send down the relays, Gondrin, and let us begin thesport at once.""I will go round to the left of the thicket with my men," continuedthe younger brother, "and will keep the hill-side as well as if therewere all the nets in the world. You, Gaspar, keep this side and thelittle lane behind the cottage.""And what shall I do?" demanded the Abb with a smile. "I must notshow myself backward in your sports, Charles, so I will go withGondrin here, and some of the piqueurs, and force the grizzly monarchof the forest in his hold."The matter being thus determined, the relays were sent down, and theparties separated for their several stations, Gondrin saying to hisyounger lord as they went round, "If I sound one mot on my horn, sir,the boar is making his rush towards you; if I sound two, he is takingtowards the Marquis; but if I sound three, be sure that he is goingdown the valley, as I said, and must take to the rocks, for he has nochance any other way but by the ford, which he won't take, unless hardpressed.""I will go straight round by the ford and turn him," replied his younglord. "Then we make sure of him altogether, Gondrin."Thus saying, he rode quickly on and took his station on the hill,where an open space gave him room to plant his men around so as tomeet the boar at any point of the ascent, in case the beast turned inthat direction and endeavoured to plunge into the depths of theforest.Some time was allowed to elapse, in order to give the relays time toreach their stations, and then, from the western side of the thicket,were heard the cries and halloos of the huntsmen, as they themselvesplunged into the wood, and encouraged the dogs to attack the boar inhis lair. For a short space, the hounds themselves were mute; but, inabout five minutes, they seemed to have got upon the boar's scent, whohad moved onward, roused by the cries of the hunters, and a loud longopening burst announced that they had come upon his track, A minuteafterwards, a single note was heard from the horn of the huntsman, andthe grey form of the boar glanced for a moment past one of the gaps inthe wood where the younger of the brothers had stationed himself; butthe beast plunged in again immediately, and a piercing yell from oneof the dogs seemed to show that he had passed through the midst of thehounds, taking vengeance upon them as he went for disturbing hisquiet. Shortly after, the horn of Gondrin gave the signal that theboar was rushing down the valley. Charles of Montsoreau paused to bequite sure, but the three notes were sounded again after a moment'ssilence, and, setting spurs to his horse, he galloped on likelightning to interrupt the boar, and turn him at the ford. The loudcries of the dogs in full chase were sufficient to show him that hewas right in the direction he had taken till he issued forth from thewood, and after that he could see with his own eyes the whole scene ofthe boar's flight, and the pursuit through the open country into whichthe beast was now driven.Galloping on with all the eagerness and impetuosity of youth, he madeat once for the ford; now catching wide views of the landscape as hepassed over the side of some open hill, now losing the whole again ashe plunged amidst the leafless vineyards or woods. The country aroundwas thus hidden from his sight, and he could see nothing but the dulldry stems of the vines, in a low sloping hollow through which hepassed, or a few mottled patches of darker cloud upon the dull greysky overhead--when suddenly his ear caught the sound of distantfire-arms, and he drew up his horse in no small surprise.The situation of the country, indeed--the wars that were takingplace in almost every part of France--the general disorganisationof society, which throughout almost the whole land changed thepeasant into the soldier, either for the purposes of plunder orself-defence--might be supposed to have rendered such sounds not atall unfamiliar to his ear; and, in truth, two years before he wouldhave shown no sign of astonishment to have heard a whole park ofartillery roaring in the direction from which he now heard the soundof a few scattered shots. Since, then, however, the tide of warfarehad been turned in another direction. In the secluded spot in which hedwelt, few visits from occasional marauders were to be apprehended:the peasantry had returned to their labours, and no news of any kindfrom the distant provinces had given reason to suppose that thescourge of civil war was again likely to afflict that part of thecountry. Some precautions, indeed, had been necessary to keep downpetty feuds and plundering excursions amongst some of the inferiorgentry and partisans in the neighbourhood; and the two young noblemenhad been called upon to practise some of the most important duties oftheir station, in maintaining, as far as possible, peace andtranquillity around them.After pausing, then, for a moment, to listen, Charles of Montsoreau,judging that the sounds he heard proceeded from some new infraction ofthe law, rode on, determined, as soon as he had finished theall-important business of the chase, to investigate the matter morethoroughly, and to punish the aggressors. All these fine resolutions,however, were changed in a moment; for almost as soon as they wereformed he emerged from the vineyard through which he had been passing,entered upon the open side of the hill, and a scene was presented tohis eyes which excited other and somewhat more painful feelings in hisbosom.Although the point on which he stood was not particularly high, theview was extensive and uninterrupted by any very near object. Thevalley through which the stream wound was about a mile and a half inbreadth, and five or six miles in length; along the whole extent ofwhich the high road was visible, with the exception of a few hundredyards here and there, where a rock, or a peasant's house, or awater-mill by the side of the stream, interrupted the view. At thedistance of somewhat more than half a mile lay the bridge over thestream, and half way between it and the spot where the young gentlemanstood, appeared one of the large, heavy, wide-topped carriages of theday, drawn by six horses, and driving along at a furious rate, as ifin full flight. The driver was lashing his horses with furiouseagerness; but ever and anon he turned his head to look behind towardsthe bridge, where a scene appeared, which showed his anxiety toquicken his pace to be not at all unnatural.Half upon the bridge and half upon the road, on the nearer side of thestream, appeared a very small body of horsemen, apparently not morethan seven or eight in number, contending fiercely with a larger body,as if to give time for the persons in the carriage to escape; and fromthat spot, rolling up in white wreaths amongst the yellow banks andcold green wintry slopes of scanty herbage, curled the white smoke,occasioned by the discharge of fire-arms. At the distance of about amile and a half beyond, again, was seen coming up, with headlongspeed, a still larger body of cavalry; and it was evident, that at therate with which the latter were advancing, the carriage and itsdenizens, if such were the object of their pursuit, would not be verylong before they were overtaken.It is a pleasant weakness in young and generous minds to seek in allstrifes the defence of the weaker, even when we do not know whetherthe cause that we thus espouse be or be not the just one. Charles ofMontsoreau paused but for a moment, and then rode down towards thecarriage as fast as possible, followed by his attendants. The coachmanshowed great unwillingness to stop; but he had no power of resistingthe command which he received to do so, and accordingly, as soon as itwas repeated, obeyed. But, at the same moment, the head of an elderlylady, apparently of some rank, was thrust forth from between thecurtains of the vehicle, uttering various not very coherent sentences,and displaying in every line and feature indubitable marks of greatfear and trepidation.Brought up in the habit of chivalrous courtesy, the young noblemaninstantly raised his cap, and bowing low, asked if he could render herany service. His words were few and simple, but there was greatencouragement in his air; and the lady replied, "Oh! for Heaven'ssake, do not stop us, young gentleman. We have been basely betrayed byone of our servants into an ambush of the King of Navarre's reiters,who seek to make us prisoners, and Heaven only knows what may becomeof us if they succeed.""If the reiters be those that are following you," said the youngnobleman, "there is no earthly possibility of your escaping them,madam, except by taking refuge in the chteau of Montsoreau hard by. Iwill give your coachman directions, and then go down and help todisentangle your attendants, who seem to be contending gallantly withsuperior numbers on the bridge.""A thousand and a thousand thanks, young gentleman," replied the lady."But how," she added, with a look of uncertainty, "but how can we tellthat we shall be kindly received at Montsoreau, and shall not,perhaps, be treated as prisoners there also?""By my promise, madam," replied the young gentleman with a smile, "Iam Charles of Montsoreau, the Marquis's brother: will you trustyourself to my word?""Most willingly," she said; and turning to the coachman, the younggentleman added, "Drive on with all speed till the road divides, thentake the left-hand road up the hill and through the wood; demandadmittance, in my name, at the castle, if I should not have come up intime. But I shall have overtaken you before then. Now, speed on, andspare not your beasts, for the way is not long, if you be diligent."Thus saying, he again bowed low and rode on, and in a very few minuteshad reached the spot where the contention was taking place between theparty of light-armed servants attending upon the carriage and theheavy armed reiters.The young nobleman was not unwilling to signalise himself by any deedof arms that might fall in his way; but on the present occasion nogreat opportunity was afforded him, for the numbers he brought to theassistance of the servants appeared so formidable in the eyes of theother party who were already engaged in the fray, that they hastenedto draw back for the purpose of waiting in security the arrival oftheir comrades; and the only event which took place worth noting wasthe action of the commander of the reiters then present, who turneddeliberately as he retreated, and fired his pistol at the head of theyoung nobleman with so true an aim as to send the bullet through hishunting cap, within an inch of his head.Under any other circumstances, Charles of Montsoreau would not havefailed to repay this sort of courtesy with something of the same kind;but recollecting the situation of the persons in the carriage, heshowed more cool prudence than might have been expected from hisyears; and telling an elderly man, who seemed the principal attendantpresent, that the carriage was proceeding as fast as possible to theshelter of the chteau of Montsoreau, he bade him ride after it withall speed."You, Martin," he said, turning to one of his own followers, "gallopup to the ford, cross it, seek out the hunt, which I can see no longerin the field, and tell my brother what has happened, asking him tohasten back to the castle with all speed. I shall wait here for atime, to watch the movements of the reiters, and see that they do notpursue you--so lose no time, but spur on speedily."The man did as he was bid, and for about five minutes Charles ofMontsoreau kept his position upon the bridge, supported by nothing buthis own attendants. The servant whom he had despatched to his brotherreached the ford and crossed it, without any attempt on the part ofthe reiters to interrupt him. He then galloped on in the direction ofthe rocks, at full speed; and Charles of Montsoreau having seen him,as far as he could judge, in safety, turned his horse, and rode afterthe carriage and its followers.In the mean time, while these events were taking place, on one side ofthe valley the boar, following the plan that the huntsman Gondrin hadlaid out for him, pursued the course of the stream, and though chasedby the dogs in full cry, paused not, and turned not, till at thewater-mill a fierce watch-dog rushed out upon him, and received inreturn a wound from one of the beast's sharp tusks, which laid himdying upon the road. This little incident did not stop the fierceanimal for an instant; but it seemed to confuse him, and made him turnfrom the direct course he was pursuing sooner than he otherwise wouldhave done. He doubled once before the hounds almost like a hare, andthen darting up one of the narrow passes to the right, led hounds andhuntsmen a considerable distance from the spot where the chase firstcommenced, before he was finally driven into the valley of rocks, fromwhich there was no outlet, and where he was, consequently, obliged tostand at bay.The way that he took led the main body of the huntsmen, with the younglord of Montsoreau and the Abb of Boisguerin, into a track, fromwhich the other side of the valley was not visible; and their owneagerness, the cries of the numerous dogs, and the shouts and halloosof the huntsmen, prevented them from hearing those sounds which hadattracted the attention of Charles of Montsoreau. When the Abb andthe Marquis arrived, they found the noble boar already brought to bayby the dogs, and defending himself stoutly against his enemy. Two ofthe hounds were already sprawling in their blood beneath his feet, andthe Marquis sprang to the ground to put an end to the strife as soonas possible.Nothing extraordinary occurred to mark the event of the chase. Theboar, like one of those unfortunate men that we sometimes see in theworld, upon whom every sort of misfortune falls one after another,torn by the dogs, assailed by the huntsmen, confused by the clamour,was soon killed amongst them; and Gaspar, whose hand had performed theactual deed, executed all the usual offices of the hunter upon thatoccasion, and stepping out the boar's length, declared that it was oneof the finest brutes that he had ever slain."I wonder where Charles is," he exclaimed, as soon as the whole wascompleted. "He must have missed us at the turn by the water-mill."And thus saying, he gazed down the valley of rocks, through theopening of which might be seen a part of the other valley, with thewood from which the boar had been forced, and the grey towers of thechteau of Montsoreau rising upon the hill beyond. A single horsemanappeared coming up the valley, at the distance of about half a mile;but as the young marquis gazed in the direction of the castle, his eyewas suddenly attracted by a quick flash which seemed to dart from oneof the embrasures, and almost at the same instant a white cloud ofsmoke enveloped the top of the principal tower. After a shortinterval, the loud booming report of a cannon made itself heard, andanother, and another flash issued forth from the embrasures on theside which commanded the road, while the cloud of smoke around thecastle grew deeper and more extensive; and the repeated roar of thecannon gave notice to the country round that war had returned todisturb the peace which had reigned in those valleys for the last twoyears."What is the meaning of this?" exclaimed the Marquis, turning towardsthe Abb--"What can be the meaning of all this?""Why, simply," replied the Abb, "I suppose some unexpected attackupon the castle, and that your brother Charles has thrown himself intoit, and is firing upon the enemy. But, if I mistake not, this mancoming up at such speed is his piqueur Martin. He rides to us withnews, depend upon it."The man soon conveyed to them his own tale, and added the information,that, as far as he could judge from the backward looks that he hadcast as he rode along, the body of reiters who had followed in pursuitof the carriage amounted at least to the number of two hundred. Thesituation of the Marquis and his companions was now in some degreeembarrassing; for their party was far too small to afford a hope offorcing their way into the chteau at once, if opposed by the superiorforce which the man described. Measures were, therefore, immediatelytaken, for calling the peasantry around to arms; and such was themilitary and enterprising spirit of the day, that you would havethought from the alacrity with which the pike was grasped, and thesteel-cap put on, that some joyful occasion called the good countrymenforth from their homes, and not a matter of peril and strife.In the course of about two hours, more than forty men had collected inthe valley of rocks; and with this small force, Gaspar de Montsoreauprepared to force his way into the chteau, though the Abb deBoisguerin still remonstrated with him on the smallness of the number,and advised him to wait for further support. As they were discussingthe matter, however, the huntsman Gondrin stepped forward, and, with alow inclination of the head, addressed his lord."I think, sir," he said, "if you would let me guide you, I could bringyou through the wood to the postern under the rock, without theseGerman vagabonds catching the least sight of your march; and at thatpostern, you know, defended by the guns of the chteau, you could defythe whole world till the postern is opened.""How do you propose to do it, Gondrin?" demanded the Abb, scarcelygiving the young lord time to reply."Why, I mean," replied the man, "to go round under the hill to theroad between the deep banks, which would cover a whole troop of men atarms, much less a small body, such as we have here. That leads usstraight into the wood behind my house; and then there is the pathwhich I always follow myself in coming up to the chteau. It neverleaves the covert of the wood till it reaches the postern, or at leastthe little green that opens before it.""Oh, Gondrin is right, Gondrin is right," exclaimed the young marquis."He is always sure of his way. Lead on, Gondrin: keep about twentyyards in front, and we will follow as orderly as we can. But some onebring along the boar! we must not leave the boar behind!"The march was then commenced; and the only farther observation thatwas made upon the proposed course proceeded from the Abb deBoisguerin, who said in a low voice to the young nobleman, "My onlyreason for questioning Gondrin so closely was, that he has alwaysshown a much greater fondness for your brother than yourself, as youmust often have observed; and I thought he might lead us all intogreater peril than needful, in his zealous eagerness to succourCharles."The Marquis did not reply, but rode on thoughtfully; and yet, uponwords as light as those, have often been built up in this worldrancours and jealousies never afterwards extinguished. In the presentinstance, indeed, and at the present moment, the effect went nofurther than to make Gaspar of Montsoreau ask himself, "I wonder whyGondrin should love my brother better than myself? and yet I haveremarked he does so."As they marched on, the sound of the cannon was still heard from timeto time; but at length, as they entered the wood, it ceased, and washeard no more. After threading the narrow path by which Gondrin ledthem, they issued forth upon a green slope beneath an angle of therock on which the chteau stood. The chief road leading to the castlewas visible from that point; but no body of reiters was now to be seenthere; and the moment that they were perceived and recognised from thebattlements, glad shouts and gestures from the retainers on the wallsgave them to understand that the enemy had thought fit to abandontheir object, and retreat. Perhaps Gaspar of Montsoreau was not quitesatisfied that the defence should have been made and the enemyfrustrated by his younger brother; but his heart was stillsufficiently pure and upright to make him angry with himself ondetecting such sensations in his bosom.CHAP. III.Those who have never lived amongst strange and stirring events, thosewho have never been accustomed to hourly danger, and to continualchange, form no idea of the ease with which the human mind reconcilesitself to the various rapid alternations of our fate, and how soon thehabit of enterprise, excitement and hazard, produces an appetite forthe very things that would seem abhorrent to our nature.The incident of the appearance of the reiters in that part of thecountry, of their attack upon the chteau of Montsoreau, and of theabsence of its lord at the moment, might have ended by the capture andburning of the castle, and by the massacre of all within its walls.But the moment that it was over, the Marquis and his train rode in,and springing from his horse, he entered the hall, laughing gaily atthe perilous events just past. Finding no one there but some servants,he next proceeded to a part of the building which was called theLady's Bower, where he was informed his brother now was, with theguests who had so unexpectedly taken refuge in the chteau. He wasfollowed thither by the Abb de Boisguerin, and on entering they founda scene which--though of no very stirring character--we must attemptto paint for the reader's eye.The lady's bower was a large, lightsome chamber in one of those towersof the chteau which was least likely to be exposed to the fire ofartillery in case of attack--for we must remember that everynobleman's house in that day was built chiefly with a view to defence,and was in fact a regular fortress, as far as the science of the timecould render it so. The windows of the bower looked over the mostabrupt part of the hill on which the castle stood, and, beyond that,upon the wide woods, that, sweeping away down into the valley, coveredan extent of many miles of low and gently undulating ground, whichafforded no eminence whatsoever, within cannon shot, that was notcompletely commanded by the castle itself. The bower had also theadvantage of being on the sunny side of the building, turned away fromthe cold north, and from the east, and looking to the land of summer,and to the point where the splendid sun went down after his dailycourse. On the day that we have mentioned, indeed, the greatlight-giver vouchsafed but few of his beams to the world below; but inthe huge fire-place of the lady's bower, which was furnished with itscomfortable seats all round, blazed up a pile of logs, giving heatsufficient to the whole room, to compensate for the absence of thesun.At a little distance from the fire was collected a group of persons,of which the graceful and dignified form of Charles of Montsoreau wasthe first that caught the eye. He was standing with his hunting cap inhis hand--the long plume of which swept the floor--and was bending inan attitude of much grace to speak with a lady who was seated in alarge arm-chair, and who, looking up in his face, was listening withapparently great interest to all that he was saying. That lady,however, was not the one who had spoken to him from the carriage. She,indeed, sat near, while three or four female attendants, who had comewith her in the vehicle, stood behind. But the lady to whom Charles ofMontsoreau was speaking was altogether of a different age, and of adifferent appearance.She was apparently not above nineteen or twenty years of age, andcertainly very beautiful, although her beauty was not altogether ofthat sparkling and brilliant kind which attracts attention at once.The features, it is true, were all good; the skin fair, soft, anddelicate; the figure exquisitely formed, and full of grace; but therewere none of those brilliant contrasts of colouring that areremarkable even at a distance. There was no flashing black eye, fullof fire and light; the colour on the cheek, though that cheek was notpale, was pure and delicate; the hair was of a light glossy silkenbrown, and the soft liquid hazel eyes, screened by their long lashes,and fine cut eyelids, required to be seen near, and to be marked well,before all the beautiful depth and fervour of their expression couldbe fully perceived. There was one thing, however, which was seen atonce, which was the great loveliness of the mouth and lips, everyline of which spoke sweetness and gentleness, but not withoutfirmness--tenderness, in short, gaining rather than losing fromresolution. Those lips were altogether peculiar to the race and familyto which she was--not very remotely--related; and it was to theirpeculiar form and expression, that was owing that ineffable smilewhich is said to have borne no slight part in the charm that renderedher nearest male relative at that moment all-powerful over the heartsof men, made him, Henry of Guise, more a king in France than thesovereign of the land--at least as far as the affections of the peoplewent--and which had added the crowning grace to the beauty of theunfortunate Mary Stuart.The dress in which this fair girl was clothed was that in which shehad been travelling, and consequently there was but little ornament ofany kind about it; and yet the blood of the princely Guises spoke outin every movement and in every attitude, too plainly for any one tohave mistaken her for aught but what she was, had she been dressedeven in the garb of a peasant.The elder lady, clothed altogether in black, with her grey hair drawnback from the point of the black velvet curch with which her head wascovered, and an eager, somewhat restless, eye, presented no pointseither of great interest or attraction, and appeared what, in fact,she really was, a poor and distant relation of the young lady whom sheaccompanied, willing to derive competence, importance, and dignityfrom acting the part of companion to one above herself in worldlyadvantages.It frequently and naturally happens, that persons in such a situationlose all native dignity of character, and become at once subservientto those above them, and domineering to those below. This, indeed, isnot always the case; and when it is not, the great trial of the humanheart, which such circumstances inflict, but leaves the character ofthose who endure it well, more bright and noble than they otherwisewould have appeared. But in the present instance, the result was themore common one, and the old Marquise de Saulny, though possessingseveral good qualities, presented, in general, a character but littleestimable. Talkative till she was repressed; loving to rule and directthe household of the young lady to whom she was attached; excitable,and somewhat tyrannical by nature, but subservient by habit and bypolicy, she was often inclined to affect a degree of power andauthority over her fair companion, which the sweet girl herself butrarely thought it worth while to oppose, but which, as soon as she didoppose it, sunk into the most perfect submission and humility. Often,too, she would make an effort to engross the whole conversation, andin ordinary instances did so without any fear of rivalry from her lessloquacious companion; but whenever the young lady herself showed aninclination to speak, Madame de Saulny was silent, or only conversedwith the inferior persons round about her in a low tone.As we have said, it was by the side of the younger lady that Charlesof Montsoreau was now standing, giving her apparently an account ofthe events that had just passed, while she, with her soft eyes turnedeagerly towards his face, listened to every word he uttered with deepinterest, and asked him manifold questions as he went on.It would seem that Charles of Montsoreau had not been aware of thereturn of his brother, for he started slightly at his appearance, andthe young lady turned her eyes towards the door with an inquiringlook, as the Marquis and the Abb de Boisguerin entered."This is my brother, madam," said Charles of Montsoreau, taking a stepforward. "Gaspar, I have been acting as your lieutenant here duringyour absence. The man I sent to you doubtless told you what had thenoccurred; and although I knew not, when I offered these ladies in yourname the protection of your chteau, whom it was I had an opportunityof thus slightly serving, I was quite sure that I only did what youwould have done if you had been present.""Undoubtedly, my gallant brother," replied the Marquis--"you did allthat was right, and all that was chivalrous. For my own sake, I mustregret my absence at the moment when these events took place; but forthese ladies' sake I cannot regret it, for I know none who wouldwelcome them more warmly, or defend them more gallantly, than you,Charles.--And so you have stood a siege and won a battle during myabsence, while I have only had the luck to kill a huge boar.--I hope,"he added, advancing towards the younger lady, "I hope that you haveneither suffered great fear nor great inconvenience; and though it ispossible that these reiters will linger about in this neighbourhoodfor some time to come, being now upon our guard, we shall soon havemen enough under arms to protect you against any further violence."While he had been speaking the young lady had regarded himattentively, but with a very different glance from that which she hadbeen giving to his brother. It seemed as if the events which had takenplace had rendered her familiar with the one, even in the short spaceof time which their acquaintance had yet lasted, and she looked uponhim as a friend, while she gazed upon the other as a stranger. Shereplied courteously, however, thanking him for the hospitality whichhad been shown to them, and assuring him, that though she hadcertainly been very much frightened while they were flying from thepursuit of the reiters, yet she had lost all fear as soon as they werewithin the walls of Montsoreau."You have forgot one thing, Charles," said the Abb de Boisguerin,advancing, "which is to present your brother and myself formally tothese ladies; for we, who were unfortunate enough to be absent on aless pleasing occupation than that of giving them assistance, do notyet know to whom you have been fortunate enough to afford protection."Charles of Montsoreau coloured slightly, as he was reminded of hisomission, and then presented his brother and the Abb to the Marquisede Saulny and Mademoiselle de Clairvaut.At the name of the latter, the brow of the Abb de Boisguerin, whichhad been somewhat contracted, expanded in a moment, and his liplighted up with a bright smile."If I am not mistaken," he said, bowing low to the younger lady,"Mademoiselle de Clairvaut is niece of that most noble prince the Dukeof Guise.""My mother was his niece," replied the young lady; "but I may boastthat his affection is not less for me than if I were myself hisniece--I may say his daughter.""Well may any one be proud of his regard," replied the Abb, "andwell, I feel sure, may the Duke of Guise also feel deep regard forMademoiselle de Clairvaut. But I trust that this young gentleman hasalready taken care you should have some better entertainment than thereport of cannon. You have, I hope, had some refreshment.""No," replied the young lady, with a smile, as she saw the colouragain come up into the cheek of Charles of Montsoreau at the impliedreproach; "no, he has been sufficiently occupied, till within the lasthalf hour, in defending us from the enemy, who seemed at one time, Iunderstand, resolved to storm the chteau; and since then, I have kepthim giving me answers to many foolish questions; so that he has had notime to think of offering refreshment to any one--though I know, mygood Madame de Saulny, that fear always makes you hungry.""Not such fear as we have had to-day, dear Marie," replied Madame deSaulny. "It has been quite enough to-day to take away my appetitealtogether, till I heard that we were quite safe, and those hatefulreiters gone from before the gates. How I shall ever gain courage toset out again I do not know.""I only trust, dear madam," said Gaspar de Montsoreau, "I only trustthat your terror may last a long while, so that we may keep our twofair prisoners within our chteau till such time as all the roads arein perfect safety."The colour came a little more deeply into the cheek of Marie deClairvaut."I think, indeed," she said, "that we ought to set off again as soonas possible. We owe you many, many thanks, gentlemen, for theprotection you have already afforded, and the hospitality you arewilling to show. But as I am hastening by my uncle's direction to myestates near Dreux, where I expect to meet him, I fear I must notlinger by the way. Some of our poor attendants, I understand, arewounded; these we must leave to your kind care. But I hope it will befound possible for us to proceed on our way before nightfall.""You will pardon me, madam," said the Abb de Boisguerin, "and myyoung friends here will pardon me for taking the matter in some degreeout of their hands; but believe me, what you propose is perfectlyimpossible. It would be madness to attempt it. I should hold myself,as an ecclesiastic, deeply criminal, were I not at once to remonstrateagainst such a proceeding. The whole country, between this and Dreux,a space of more than two hundred miles, is filled with the bands ofthe King of Navarre, especially the Germans, and other heretics inhis service. I take it for granted, that you have got a passport andsafe-conduct from some of his chief officers; but the conduct of thereiters towards you this day must have shown you how little suchsafe-conducts are respected by those bands of ruffians.""Indeed," said Madame de Saulny, "you give us credit, sir, for moreprudence than we possess. We have neither passport nor safe-conductfrom any of the heretic leaders; for this young lady was so anxious toobey the directions of her uncle at once, that she would stay for noremonstrance.""Now that we have her here, however, she must submit to be morestrictly ruled," said Charles of Montsoreau with a smile."Ay, but we have your promise that we should come and go in safety,and without opposition," said Marie de Clairvaut in the same tone, andlikewise with a smile. "You surely will not shut the castle gatesagainst my departure.""No, we will not do that," said his brother; "but we will reverse theusual course, if you prove refractory, and turn you over from thesecular arm to the power of the church, fair lady. Our excellentfriend, the Abb here, shall decide upon your fate, and I feel surethat his decision will be ratified and confirmed by your princelyuncle.""My judgment is soon pronounced," said the Abb. "In the first place,before you can or ought to stir a step from beyond these walls, youmust absolutely procure a safe-conduct from Henry of Navarre, or someof his principal leaders. We will send off a messenger to obtain it;and in the mean while a courier shall be also sent to his Highness theDuke of Guise, to give him notice of where you are, and to have hisgood will and pleasure in regard to your farther proceedings."The young lady turned an inquiring glance upon her companion. It was alook of much doubt and hesitation; but whatever might be her ownwishes upon the occasion--whether inclination led her to stay, orfeelings of propriety prompted her to go--her appealing eyes werecertainly turned to a personage whose mind was already made up as towhat was expedient to be done. Madame de Saulny loved not reiters atall; the sound of their galloping hoofs in pursuit of the carriage,the report of fire arms upon the bridge, the roaring of the cannonfrom the castle, were all still ringing in her ears, and persuadingher, in a very loud and imperative voice, that on such a cold day, andin such perilous circumstances, a warm comfortable mansion, good food,good lodging, and good attendance, with the society of two handsomeyoung men, and an agreeable ecclesiastic, formed a whole infinitelypreferable to a dull high road in frosty weather, coarse lodging, badinns, dangerous driving, and fears at every turning."Now, my dear Mary," exclaimed Madame de Saulny, "you see that all myopinions are fully confirmed by authority, which I trust you will paya little more attention to. This excellent gentleman has only saidwhat I said before, and if you persist in going, the consequences beupon your head.""My only fear," replied the young lady, "is that the duke should notapprove of my staying. But when the opinion of every one is againstme, of course I must yield.""Do not be the least alarmed in regard to your uncle," replied theAbb; "he shall be fully informed that you were very desirous offalling into the hands of the reiters; but that we would not permityou to have your own way, and detained you here by force against yourown will.""Under those circumstances, of course, I have no choice," said theyoung lady, "but I will beg that no time may be lost in despatchingthe messengers, so that I may not have to reproach myself withunnecessary delay of any kind."The Abb and his two young friends assured her that no delay should beused; and it now being settled, according to the wishes of all partiesbut herself, that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut and her companions were toremain at the castle of Montsoreau for some days, her two young hosts,placed in a new but not unpleasant situation, busied themselveseagerly to provide for her comfort, and to make her hours fly ashappily as possible. The first thing to be done was to give her andher companions some refreshment. The best apartments of the castlewere allotted for her use; and although she could not help feelingthat her situation was somewhat strange; though it occasionally madeher heart beat with the apprehension of not doing what was right, andcaused the colour to come more deeply into her fair cheek when shethought of it; yet Marie de Clairvaut, somewhat like a bird escapedfrom a cage, felt, in the midst of timidity and apprehension, a joy inher little day of liberty, and prepared to make herself as happy asshe could.CHAP. IV.The prudent plans and purposes of the most prudent and politic peoplein this world are almost all contingent--contingent, in the firstplace, upon circumstances, the great rulers of all earthly things,and, in the second place, not less than the first, upon thecharacters, thoughts, and feelings of the very persons who frame them.Many a one may be tempted to tell us, that it must be a prudent man toform prudent resolutions, and that such a prudent man will keep them;but now the reverse of this common-place reasoning is directly thecase, and the most prudent determinations are but too often taken bythe most imprudent people, and violated without the slightest ceremonyor contrition. This is, indeed, almost universally the case; forreally prudent people have no need to make resolutions at all, andthose who make them have almost always some intimation in their ownmind that there is a likelihood of their being broken.The case of Marie de Clairvaut was not exactly that of a person eitherwanting in prudence or in firmness. She often considered thoughtfullyand long, regarding proprieties and improprieties before shedetermined on any course of action; and, in the present instance, asshe sat by her solitary toilet-table in her own chamber, she revolvedin her mind her situation--the guest of two young and wealthy nobles;and although she felt perfectly confident, both from their wholedemeanour and from the redoubted power and influence of her uncle,that she would be treated with the most perfect courtesy, hospitality,and kindness, she saw that she would have in some degree a difficulttask to perform, both in regard to them and to herself.Though younger than either of them, Marie de Clairvaut had seen agreat deal more of the world; and from her own circumstances, andthose of her family, she had been called upon to consider subjects andto deal with events, which rarely fall within the scope of a young, avery young woman's reflections. We have said in the end of the lastchapter, that Marie de Clairvaut prepared to make herself as happy asshe could; and it was the feeling that she had given way somewhatincautiously to such a design, during the first day that she had spentwithin the walls of the chteau of Montsoreau that made her--as shesat preparing to retire to rest--think seriously over her situation,and, as we have said, frame her resolutions according to the result ofher reflections.Some time was likely to elapse before she could hear from her uncle;and in the mean while two great perils menaced her in her presentsituation, as great and as probable, perhaps, as any that fancypainted in regard to her falling into the hands of the reiters, thoughcertainly of a very different character. The first of these perilswas, that either of her two gay and gallant hosts should fall in lovewith her. The days of chivalry were not then over--men didoccasionally fall in love with a lady and not with her wealth; andthere had been observable more than once, on the countenances of thetwo brothers, various looks and expressions so strongly indicative ofadmiration, that Marie, without any particular vanity, might wellsuppose that warmer feelings still, might spring up in the track ofthose which had risen already so rapidly.The next great danger was one of a still more terrible character--itwas, that she herself might fall in love with one or other of thebrothers. Now there were various things which rendered this probable,as well as various things which rendered it improbable. In the firstplace, though of a gentle and affectionate disposition, she had neveryet seen any one whom she could really love; and though she hadmingled with courts and moved in scenes where those startling changeswere constantly taking place which try and ultimately use and wearaway the finer feelings of the human heart, yet her bosom had beenoriginally richly stored by God with warm, and kind, and generoussensations; and all that she had seen of the world and its worldlinesshad but tended to make her not only hate and detest it, but cling toany thing that savoured of a fresher nature. She had lived enough incourts and crowds to make her abhor them, but not enough to forget herabhorrence; and she was now cast entirely into the society of twobeings as little like those courts and crowds as it was possible toconceive: she was dependent upon them for amusement, support,protection; and withal there was that touching knowledge that she wasadmired and liked; which, to a generous and a feeling mind, is fullyas powerful--though acting in a different way--as to a vain and aselfish one.Had there been, in the simplicity and the want of knowledge of theworld which characterised the two brothers, any thing in the leastdegree laughable or extravagant, there might have been no occasion forfear; but such was not the case: their manners and their tone were inthe highest degree courteous, nay, courtly. They felt withinthemselves the station in which they were born, the high educationwhich they had received, the superiority of their mental and corporealpowers over most of those with whom they had ever been brought incontact; and that feeling added a dignified and somewhat commandingease to the grace which nature had bestowed and education improved.Marie de Clairvaut then considered all these things calmly anddeliberately, wisely making use of her own dispassionate judgment, solong as she knew that judgment to be cool and unbiassed. The reader,skilful in the human heart, perhaps may be inclined to ask, whetherthere was or was not really some little indication, in her own heart,of a liking and admiration for one of the two brothers, which causedher to be thus circumspect and careful? All that we can answer is,that she herself did not think so; but merely feeling that, placed inan unusual situation, she was responsible to herself, and to them, andto her uncle, for her conduct, she took the very first opportunity ofcontemplating all the circumstances that surrounded her, in order toshape her conduct by the dictates of reason. She took a strongresolution, indeed, but that was the only indication of weakness thatshe discovered.In the first place, then, she resolved, on her own part, not to bebetrayed by any circumstances whatever into falling in love witheither the elder or the younger brother; and, in the next place, sheresolved to do all in her power, without acting insincerely in anydegree, or discourteously, to prevent either of them from falling inlove with her. Such a resolution implied that she was not to allowherself to be so happy as she had at first hoped and expected to be;but, nevertheless, she framed her purposes accordingly, and determinedthat only so much of her time should be given to the two brothers askindness and lady-like courtesy required. She would not attempt toassume a false character, for such a thing was quite contrary to thefrankness and sincerity of her nature. While she was with them shewould appear what she really was, but she would avoid, as far aspossible, all those occasions of intimacy and constant communication,which her residence in their mansion, during troublous times, mightnaturally produce.Now, all this was very wise and very prudent and we have endeavouredto show, that Marie de Clairvaut was not one of those people whoseprudent resolutions are taken from a consciousness, secret or avowed,that prudence itself is wanting. Nevertheless, Marie de Clairvaut wasa girl of less than nineteen years of age, and no more mistress,either of events, or of her own conduct and resolutions, underparticular circumstances, than if she had been fifty. She began herplan, indeed, on the following morning, by pleading occupations ofvarious kinds as an excuse for remaining the greater part of the dayin her own apartments. But, alas! there were two enemies in her owncamp.One was Madame de Saulny, who thought herself bound to remain with herfair cousin, and yet had a very strong inclination for the moreextended society which the chteau afforded. The other was a stillmore dangerous foe, namely, herself, who, to say sooth, found the timepass uncommonly heavily, having with her on her journey neither books,nor any other of those sources of occupation which might have helpedto while away the hours in the solitude of her own chamber. Having buta fretful companion in the good marquise, and none of any interestamongst her inferior followers, the first day wore away tediously,and, if we may say the truth, the hours that she gave up in solitudehad the evil effect of making those that she spent with threeintelligent and highminded men appear far more delightful than theymight otherwise have done.She found, also, that all three possessed accomplishments very rareamongst the high nobility of that day; that the whole world of art andnature, as far as it was then known, had been opened to theirinquiries: and not only did music, and song, and poetry, aid to makethe day pass pleasantly, but they also rendered the conversation thatoccupied another portion of the time refined, and bright, andcomprehensive. They were not driven to talk of nothing but horses, orarmour, or the battlefield, or the chase, though such matters were notaltogether excluded; but, as must ever be the case, every subjectspoken of received a peculiar colour, a tone, a shade from the mindand habitual feelings of the speaker. If Charles of Montsoreau spokeof a horse, it was not in the terms of a horse-dealer, but it waseither as the sculptor, the painter, the poet, or the soldier: hedwelt upon the beauty of its form, the docility of its nature, thefiery energies which render it the most poetical object in the wholeinferior creation. If he talked of the chase, it was not alone of theslaughter of stout boars, or the tearing down the antlered quarry; butit was of the eager excitement of the scene; the rapid motion throughfair woods and bright prospects; the music of echo and the hounds; theexpectation, the strife, the slight portion of danger; of all, inshort, which makes the real difference between the hunter and thebutcher.Marie de Clairvaut was not so much of a recluse the second day as thefirst; and with music, and song, and conversation, such as we havedescribed, it passed as pleasantly as might be; but there were severalother little incidents which from time to time took place to vary anymonotony that might have been felt. A report of reiters having beenseen at a small distance reached the castle in the morning, and somehorsemen were sent out to ascertain the fact. Preparations ofdifferent kinds were made for offering indomitable resistance in caseof any fresh attack by a larger force. The armoury was explored; andwhile every sort of weapon needful for arming the peasantry wasbrought forth, pikes, and arquebuses, and morions, Charles ofMontsoreau pointed out to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut many a curious oldrelic of other days, to each of which some legend was attached--thecasque and hauberk of the crusader, the arms of some noble ancestorslain on the bloody field of Poitiers, or still older and lesscertain, the gigantic gauntlets of a follower of Hugh Capet, and themighty sword and horn of one of the paladins of the Great Charles.Then came in the youthful peasantry to be enrolled--some called uponas of right by their young lords, but many flocking with voluntaryreadiness to the chteau at the first sound of war; then a tour of thebattlements was to be made, and Marie de Clairvaut, accompanied hertwo young hosts round the towers and the walls, gazing from breastworkand embrasure over as bright, but as curious, a scene, as it waspossible to conceive. The light mist which we have mentioned asoccupying the lower parts of the ground on the day before, had beendispelled during the night by the severity of the frost; but it hadsettled down upon all the branches and stems of the bare trees inglittering crystals of white, which now reflected with dazzlingbrilliancy the rays of the clear unclouded sun.Perched, as was usually the custom at that time, upon one of thehighest points of the country round, even the windows of the castlecommanded a very extensive view: but from the tops of the highertowers on which Marie de Clairvaut now stood, miles beyond miles wereextended beneath her eye on every side; and the whole shone bright andclear in the sun's light, displaying a varied landscape of forest andfield, and hill and plain, all covered with the same glisteningfrostwork, and only varied in hue by the deep shadows cast by the lowwinter sun, and by the blue tints of the far distance, where thedistinction between field and forest was lost, and some high hillsbounded the prospect.Though somewhat monotonous, there was much to admire; and Marie, andthose who accompanied her, stopped often to gaze and to comment on thescene. It must be acknowledged, that Charles of Montsoreau kept notfar from her side as she walked on, and that, though his brother wasnear her on the other hand, it was towards the younger that shegenerally turned, either to hear what he said, or to make someobservations on the objects beneath her eyes. Throughout the course ofthat day, indeed, she gave him much of her attention, perhaps agreater share than his brother thought quite equitable; and certainlyhad Marie been asked, when she retired to rest that night, which ofthe two brothers was the most graceful, which sang, or spoke, or actedmost pleasingly, she would undoubtedly have fixed upon Charles.Perhaps she might ask herself some questions on the subject; but herheart was sufficiently free and at ease, to make her believe thatthere could be no earthly harm in preferring the society of one in aslight degree to that of the other, and of rendering justice, as sheconsidered it, to both. If there was, indeed, in her own mind theslightest idea that any particular feeling of preference was growingup in her bosom for Charles of Montsoreau, the only effect that it hadwas, to make her think it was very natural such a thing should be thecase, as he had been the first to give her assistance and protection,and to peril his life in her behalf. Though the elder was verycourteous, she thought, and very kind, and graceful, and agreeable, itcould not be expected that she should like him as well as the personwho had been actively interested in her defence; and thus she slept atease, imagining that both brothers were but mere common acquaintances,who might never be thought of three times after she left them; though,in comparing the one with the other, she was inclined to like theyounger better than the elder brother.While the two young noblemen had been carried, by the most naturalfeelings in the world, to bestow the chief share of their attentionupon the beautiful and interesting girl who had so suddenly andstrangely become an inmate of their dwelling, the Abb de Boisguerinhad held more than one long and apparently interesting conversationwith the Marquise de Saulny. In those conversations--whether they tookplace in the halls, or the armoury, or on the battlements while theMarquise, with two of Marie's women, followed the young lady over thechteau--the Abb, as we have said, seemed to take considerableinterest: but still, from time to time, his eyes fixed upon thegraceful and beautiful form of Marie de Clairvaut, or gazed earnestlyupon the fair face as, beaming with the radiance of the heart, itturned from one brother to the other at every interesting point of theconversation. In the expression of his eyes, fine, intelligent, andspeaking as they were, there was something, perhaps, not altogetherpleasing--a look of admiration, indeed, but a look mingled with ortaking its meaning from, feelings, perhaps, not the most pure andholy. It was more like the gratified admiration of a critic, than theordinary impression produced by beauty upon a fine mind.However that might be, Madame de Saulny soon became aware, though shewas a woman and a French woman, that the Abb de Boisguerin, in theattentions which he paid her, was not actuated by any admiration ofher own personal charms; and as she was fond of such attentions, andnot very scrupulous as to any innocent means of attracting or holdingthem, she made Marie de Clairvaut, her personal beauty, and the highqualities of her mind and heart, one of the chief topics of herconversation with a person whom she saw was already, in a greatdegree, occupied with such subjects.It may be asked, what were the real feelings of the Abb de Boisguerinhimself? It will be fully time to dwell upon those feelings hereafter;for at the time we speak of, if there were any feelings in his bosomat all different from those which ordinarily occupied it, they wereyet but as seeds in which the first green bursting forth of the germwas scarcely apparent, even to the closest inspection. It is true thathe sat up for more than two hours after the young lady herself and hertwo noble hosts had all retired to rest. It is true that, with hisarms crossed upon his chest, he walked up and down the hall, in whichhe was now left solitary, musing beneath the light of the untrimmedlamps, and revolving many a strange fancy and shadowy imagination inhis own powerful mind. He felt that they were but fancies; but he toldhimself that it is often from the storehouses of imagination thatstrong minds draw the rich ore from which they manufacture splendidrealities. Ambition finds there her materials; love his gayest robes;passion gains thence many a device for his own ends; and even scienceand philosophy have often to thank imagination for many a granddiscovery, for many a bright thought and happy suggestion.As he paced up and down that hall in silence and solitude, communingwith his own heart and his own mind, the consciousness of vast powers,great courage, and mighty scope of intellect, became more distinct,and clear, and potent in his own bosom. He asked himself, what, withsuch a mind, he might not be, if, looking on the troublous times inwhich he lived as a mere scene for his ambition, he were to plunge atonce into the contentions of the day, and, with the sole object of hisown aggrandisement in view, employ upon all things round him themastery of superior intellect. He asked himself this; and with thatthought, there might come up before his mind the thought of lovelikewise, the thought of passions, which have so frequently gone handin hand with ambition, and of gratifications to be obtained by theobtainment of power.As he thought, he paused, casting down his eyes, and they accidentallyfell upon the sort of half clerical garments that he wore. He gazedfor a moment at his own dress, and then he murmured to himself, with ameaning smile, "Thank Heaven! I have taken no vows but such as can bethrown off as easily as this garment."CHAP. V.The luxury of the present age has perhaps made no greater progressthan in the cultivation of flowers, and in nothing, perhaps, has itproduced its usual effect, of depriving men of the sweet zest ofsimplicity, more than in our enjoyment of those sweetest of theearth's children. Heaven forbid that we should lose any of the manybright and beautiful blossoms which have been added so abundantly toour stock within the last few years: having possessed them, we cannotlose them without pain; and, perhaps, in the very variety we receive acompensation for the something that is lost. But yet there can be nodoubt that in the present day we do not feel the same keen pleasureand enjoyment in our gardens thronging with ten thousand flowers whichmen did in those old days, when few but the native plants of the soilhad yet received cultivation.At the time that we are now speaking of, the attention of men ingeneral was first strongly turned in France to the cultivation oftheir gardens; and Du Bellay, Bishop of Mans, was about that veryperiod importing from foreign countries multitudes of those plantswhich are in general supposed to be indigenous to the country. One ofthe first efforts in the art of gardening had been to multiply thoseshrubs, which, though not, as generally supposed, indeciduous, retaintheir leaves and their colouring through the colder parts of the year,and cover the frozen limbs of winter with the green garmenture of thespring. Amongst the next efforts that took place, were those directedto the production of flowers and fruits at seasons of the year whenthey are denied to us by the common course of nature; and any littlemiracles of this sort, which from day to day were achieved, gave agreater degree of pleasure than we can probably conceive at this time,when such things are of daily occurrence.In passing round the battlements of the castle, as we have describedin the last chapter, Marie de Clairvaut had remarked a considerablegarden within the walls of the chteau itself. She had seen the rowsof the neatly clipped yew, and the green holly, and she had thoughtthat she could discover here and there a flower, even in the midst ofthat ungenial season of the year. How it happened, or why, mattersnot, but upon the third morning of her stay, she woke at a far earlierhour than usual, and rising, after a vain effort to sleep again, shedressed herself without assistance; and believing that she should haveno other companion but the morning sun, she proceeded to seek her wayto the garden, with a feeling of pleasant expectation, which may seemstrange to us in the present day, but was then quite natural to one ofher disposition and habits. The garden was easily found, many of theservants of the chteau were up and about; and one of them with hasteand care proceeded to open the gates, and unlock the doors, for thefair lady, and usher her on her way.It were needless to enter into any description of the garden; for few,scanty, and poor were the flowers that it contained, even in itsbrightest moments, compared with those now produced in the garden of acottage in England. At that season, too, every thing was frozen up,and the more severe frost of the preceding nights had killed eventhose hardy blossoms that seemed to dare the touch of their greatenemy, the winter.It was enough, however, for Marie de Clairvaut, that the plentifulrows of evergreens refreshed her eye; and she walked along thestraight alleys with a feeling of joyous refreshment, while thehoar-frost upon the grass crackled under her feet, or, catching themorning light upon the yews and hollies, melted into golden drops inthe cheerful sunshine.She hoped for half an hour of that sort of solitude, when, thoughthere is no one near us, the heart is not solitary; when we holdcompanionship with nature, and in a humble, though rejoicing spirit,converse with God in his great works.At such moments, dear, indeed, must be the person, sweet to our heartmust be our ordinary commune with them, harmonious must be theirsensations with every feeling of our bosom, if we find not theircoming upon us an interruption; if we can turn from the bright face ofnature to the dear aspect of human love, and feel the scene, and thecompanionship, and ourselves, all attuned together.Such we cannot say was the case with Marie de Clairvaut, when, onhearing a step behind her, she turned and saw the young Marquis deMontsoreau. She felt disappointed of her solitude; but, nevertheless,she was far too courteous in her nature to suffer such sensations toappear for a moment, and she returned his greeting with a kindlysmile, and listened to his words with that degree of pleasure whichthe intention of being pleased is sure to carry with it. Gaspar deMontsoreau talked to her of many things, and spoke on every subject sogracefully, so clearly, and so pleasingly, that when memory broughtback the conversation which she was accustomed to hear in courts andcities, it seemed to her a sort of miracle, that wit and talent, suchas those two brothers possessed, should have grown up like a beautifulflower in a desert, so far removed from any ordinary means ofcultivation. She felt, too, that, on her return to Paris, a comparisonof the sort of communion which she now held in the country, with theonly kind of society which the capital could afford, would be very,very detrimental to the latter.The young marquis, after the first salutation of the morning,commented on her early rising, and told her that both he and hisbrother had been up even before sunrise."Some of our people roused us," he said, "with tidings of a large bodyof armed men having encamped on the preceding night at the distance ofabout seven leagues from Montsoreau." And he added, that his brotherhad found it necessary to go forth with a small party of horse toreconnoitre this force, and ascertain its purposes and destination. Hedid not say, however--which he might have said--that other tidings,regarding the movements of this body of men, had rendered it scarcelynecessary to pay any particular attention to them, and that it wasonly in consequence of his pressing request that Charles of Montsoreauhad set out upon a distant expedition, which must keep him absentduring the greater part of the day from the side of Marie deClairvaut.On their farther conversation we must not dwell, for we wish to hurryforward as rapidly as possible towards more stirring events. Sufficeit to say, that it passed pleasantly enough to the fair girl herself,and far more pleasantly, though also more dangerously, to Gaspar deMontsoreau. He sat by her side, too, during the morning meal, whilethe Abb de Boisguerin occupied the chair on the other side, betweenherself and Madame de Saulny. The Abb spoke little during breakfast,and left the conversation principally to the young marquis; but whenhe did speak there was a depth, and a power, and a profoundness in hiswords and thoughts, that struck Mademoiselle de Clairvaut much,commanded her attention, and excited some feelings of admiration. Butit often happens, and happened in this case, that admiration isexcited without much pleasure, and also without much respect.The mind of a pure and high-souled woman is the most terribletouchstone which the conversation of any man can meet with. If therebe baser matter in it, however strong and specious may be the gilding,that test is sure to discover it. We mistake greatly, I am sure, whenwe think that the simplicity of innocence deprives us of the power ofdetecting evil. We may know its existence, though we do not know itsparticular nature, and our own purity, like Ithuriel's spear, detectthe demon under whatever shape he lurks.Thus, while Marie de Clairvaut turned from time to time, struck andsurprised, towards the Abb de Boisguerin, when he broke forth for amoment with some sudden burst of eloquence, there came every now andthen upon her mind a doubt as to the sincerity of all he said--a doubtof its being wholly true. That the great part was as true as it wasbeautifully expressed, she did not doubt; but it seemed to her as ifthere was frequently some small portion of what was doubtful, if notof what was absolutely wrong, in what he said. She tried to detectwhere it was, but in vain. It became a phantom as soon as ever shestrove to grasp it; and though at times she seemed to shrink from himwith doubts of his character, which she could not define nor accountfor, at other times she reproached herself for such feelings; andthinking of the two noble and high-spirited young men, whose educationhe had conducted with so much skill, wisdom, and integrity, she feltit difficult to believe that his own nature was any thing but upright,noble, and just. She knew not, or recollected not, that the childrenof darkness are, in their generation, wiser than the children oflight, and saw not that it had been the policy and first interest ofthe Abb de Boisguerin to acquit himself of the task he had undertakenin the most careful and upright manner.The greater part of the day passed over much as the preceding one haddone, with merely this difference, that the Marquis, aided by theAbb, persuaded his fair guest to wander forth for a short time beyondthe immediate walls of the chteau; assuring her, that as his brotherwas out scouring the country, and the peasantry all round prepared tobring intelligence to the castle rapidly, no danger could approachwithout full time for escape and defence. The Marquis and the Abbaccompanied her on either side, and a considerable train of servantsfollowed, so that Marie de Clairvaut felt herself in perfect security.Nevertheless, the ramble did not seem so pleasing to her as it mighthave been. Neither, to say the truth, did it appear to afford theyoung nobleman himself the pleasure which he had anticipated. For thefirst time, perhaps, in his life, the society and the conversation ofthe Abb de Boisguerin irritated and made him impatient. He himselfbecame often silent and moody; and after a time the Abb seemed tonote his impatience, and divine the cause, for with one of his ownpeculiar slight smiles, he betook himself to the side of the Marquisede Saulny, and left Gaspar de Montsoreau to entertain his fair guestwithout listeners or interruption.The young lord's equanimity, however, had been overthrown; it was sometime ere he could regain it; and just as he was so doing, and theconversation was becoming both more animated and more pleasing betweenhim and Marie de Clairvaut, his brother Charles was seen comingrapidly over the hill, at the head of his gallant troop of horsemen,with grace, and ease, and power in every line of his figure, the lightof high spirit and of chivalry breathing from every feature of hisface, and every movement of his person.His keen eye instantly caught the party from the chteau, and turninghis horse that way, he sprang to the ground by Mademoiselle deClairvaut's side, and gave her the good morrow with frank and manlycourtesy. He said little of his expedition, except to laugh at theunnecessary trouble he had taken, the band of men whom he had gone outto reconnoitre proving to be a troop of Catholic soldiers, in theservice of the King of France. He showed no ill humour, however,towards his brother, for having pressed him to undertake a uselessenterprise, when, undoubtedly, he would have preferred being by theside of Marie de Clairvaut. But the smiles with which she received himproved a sufficient recompense; and he now applied himself to make upfor lost time, by enjoying her conversation as much as possible duringthe rest of the evening, without observing that his brother appearedto be out of humour, and not very well satisfied with the attentionsthat he paid her.The first thing that at all roused him from this sort ofunconsciousness, was a sudden exclamation of the Marquis towards theclose of the evening, when he was performing some little act ofceremonious courtesy towards their fair guest."Why, Charles," he exclaimed, "one would think that you were the Lordof Montsoreau, you do the honours of the place so habitually."Charles of Montsoreau had never heard such words from his brother'slips before. He started, turned pale, and gazed with a silent glanceof inquiry in his brother's face. But he made no reply, and fell intoa fit of deep thought, which lasted till the party separated, and theyretired to rest.Marie de Clairvaut had remarked those words also, and she felt painedand grieved. She was not a person to believe, on the slightestindication of her society being agreeable to any man she met with,that he must be necessarily in the high road to become her lover. Sheknew, she felt, that it was perfectly possible to be much pleasedwith, to be fond of, to seek companionship with, a person of the othersex, without one other feeling, without one other wish, than thosecomprised within the simple name of friendship. She, therefore, didnot know, and would not fancy, that there was anything like lovetowards herself springing up so soon in the bosom of Gaspar deMontsoreau. But she did see, and saw evidently, that he sought tomonopolise her conversation and her society, and was displeased whenany one shared them with him. It made her uneasy to see this, for, tosay the truth, the conversation, the manners, the countenance, of hisyounger brother, were all more pleasing to her--not that she felt theslightest inclination to fall in love with Charles of Montsoreau, orever dreamt of such a thing. But, as we have before said, if she had apreference, it was for him.Nor was that preference a little increased by the manner in which hebore his brother's conduct. He became more silent and thoughtful:there was an air of melancholy, if not of sadness, came upon him fromthe very moment Gaspar spoke those words, which struck Marie deClairvaut very much. He showed not, indeed, the slightest ill humour,the slightest change of affection towards his brother. He seemedmortified and grieved, but not in the least angry; and during theensuing days bore with a kindly dignity many a little mark ofirritation, on his brother's part, which evidently gave him pain."It is a sad thing to be a younger brother," thought Marie deClairvaut--"perhaps left entirely dependent upon the elder."But that very night it happened that Madame de Saulny informed herthat Charles of Montsoreau was, in his own right, Count of Logres,and considerably superior to his brother, both in power and wealth. Itneed hardly be said that her esteem for himself, and her admiration ofhis conduct, rose from a knowledge of the circumstances under which itwas displayed; and she could not help, by her manner and demeanourtowards him, marking how much she was pleased and interested. She gavehim no cause to believe, indeed, that the interest which she did feelwent beyond the point of simple friendship. But a very slight changein her demeanour was sufficient to mark her feelings distinctly; forher character and her habits of thought and feeling at that time werepeculiar, and affected, or we may say regulated, her whole behaviourin society.As yet, she knew not in the slightest degree what love is; and though,in her heart, there were all the materials for strong, deep,passionate attachment of the warmest and the most ardent kind, stillthose materials had never been touched by any fire, and they lay coldand inactive, so that she believed herself utterly incapable of soloving any being upon earth, as man must be loved for happiness. Froma very early age she had made up her mind, when permitted, to enter aconvent; and though neither of her uncles would consent to her sodoing, yet she adhered to her resolution, and only delayed itsexecution. She knew that at that time, and she believed it would everbe so, that all her hopes and affections were turned towards a higherBeing; and these feelings in some degree against her will, gave adegree of shrinking coldness to her demeanour when in the society ofmen, which made the slightest warmth of manner remarkable. Theexquisite lines of Andrew Marvell upon the drop of dew might well havebeen applied to her general demeanour in the world:--"See how the orient dew,Shed from the bosom of the mornInto the blowing roses,Yet careless of its mansion newFor the clear region where 'twas born,It in itself encloses,And in its little globe's extentFrames as it can its native element.How it the purple flower does slight!Scarce touching where it lies,But, gazing back upon the skies,Shines with a mournful light,Like their own tear,Because so long divided from the sphere.Restless it rolls and insecure,Trembling lest it grow impure,Till the warm sun pities its pain,And to the skies exhales it back again."Notwithstanding the words of his brother, and the impatience whichGaspar more than once displayed, Charles of Montsoreau changed hisconduct not in the slightest degree towards Marie de Clairvaut. He waskind, attentive, courteous, evidently fond of her conversation andsociety; and more than once, when he was seated at some distance,while she was talking with others, she accidentally caught his eyesfixed upon her with a calm, intense, and melancholy gaze, whichinterested and even confused her.The conduct of the elder brother, however, gave her some degree ofpain. He was always perfectly courteous and kind, indeed, but therewas a warmth and an eagerness in his manner which alarmed her. She wasafraid of fancying herself beloved when she was not; she was afraid ofhaving to reproach herself with vanity and idle conceit, and yet athousand times a day she wished she had not stayed at the chteau ofMontsoreau; for she saw evidently that she had been the cause of pain,and she feared that she might be the cause of more. In one thing,however, she could not well be mistaken, which was, that the Marquisfound frequent pretexts, and not the most ingenuous ones either, forinducing his brother to absent himself from the chteau. Charlesyielded readily; but Marie de Clairvaut saw that it was not willingly;and once, when he consented to go to a town at some distance, whichwas proposed to him with scarcely any reasonable cause, she saw aslight smile come upon his lips, but so sad, so melancholy, that itmade her heart ache.In the mean while the weather had turned finer; the frost haddisappeared; some of the bright days which occasionally cheer the endof February had come in; the country immediately around wasascertained to be in a state of perfect tranquillity; and Mariereadily consented to ride and walk daily through the environs, knowingthat on these excursions, accompanied by her woman and Madame deSaulny, she was thrown less into the society of Gaspar of Montsoreauthan while sitting alone at the chteau. On one occasion of this kind,when the morning was peculiarly bright, and the day happy and genial,it had been proposed to bring forth the falcons, who had not stirredtheir wings for many a day, as several herons had been heard of by theriver since the thaw had come on.An hour or two before the appointed time, however, intelligence wasbrought to the castle, which proved afterwards to be fabricated, thata neighbouring baron of small importance had gone over to the party ofthe King of Navarre.Gaspar of Montsoreau seized the pretext, and endeavoured to persuadehis brother to visit that part of the country, and ascertain thefacts. But, for once, Charles of Montsoreau positively refused, andhis air was so grave and stern, that his brother did not press itfarther.Gaspar was out of temper, however, and he showed it; and finding thatCharles kept close to the bridle rein of Marie de Clairvaut, heaffected to ride at a distance, with a discontented air, givingdirections to the falconers, and venting his impatience in harsh andangry words when any little accident or mistake took place. No heronwas found for nearly an hour; and he was in the act of declaring thatit was useless to try any farther, and they had better go back, when abird was started from the long reeds, and the jesses of the falconswere slipped.Marie de Clairvaut had been conversing throughout the morning withCharles of Montsoreau--conversing on subjects and in a manner whichdrew the ties of friendship and intimacy nearer round the heart--andit so happened that the moment before the heron rose, she remarked, ina low tone, "Your brother seems angry this morning; something seems tohave displeased him.""Oh, dear lady," replied the young nobleman, "I pray you do not judgeof Gaspar by what you have seen within these last few days. I fearthat he is either ill, or more deeply grieved about something than hesuffers me to know. He is of a kindly, affectionate, and gentledisposition, lady, and from childhood up to manhood, I can mostsolemnly assure you, I never yet saw his temper ruffled as it seemsnow."Marie de Clairvaut raised her eyes to his face with a look full ofsweet approbation; and she said, "I wish you would just ride up tohim, and try to calm him. Why should he not come near us, and behaveas usual?"Charles of Montsoreau turned instantly to obey, merely saying, "Keep atight rein on your horse, dear lady, till I come back, for he issomewhat fiery."He had just reached his brother's side when the heron took wing; andGaspar de Montsoreau glad of an opportunity of marking his discontenttowards his brother, spurred on his horse with an angry "Pshaw!" andgalloped after the falcons as fast as possible.In an instant every bridle was let loose, every face turned towardsthe sky, every horse at full speed. We must except, indeed, Charles ofMontsoreau, for his first thought was of Marie de Clairvaut. His mindhad been greatly depressed during the morning: he had thought much ofher; he had felt a vague impression that some accident would happen toher; and though he had endeavoured to laugh at himself for giving wayto such a feeling, yet the feeling had remained so strongly as to makehim refuse to go upon the expedition which his brother had proposed tohim. He turned then his horse rapidly to the spot where he had lefther; but she was no longer there."The lady has gone on at full speed, Count Charles," cried the voiceof Gondrin, the huntsman: "That way, sir, that way, to the right. Itseems as if she knew the country well, and was sure the heron wouldtake back again to the river."Charles of Montsoreau spurred on at full speed in the directionpointed out; but, from the woody nature of the ground, it was sometime before he caught even a glance of the horse that bore the lady.That glance was intercepted immediately by fresh trees and low bushesof osiers, and all that he could see was, that there was nobody withher, and that her horse was at full speed. The country was difficult,the road dangerous from numerous breaks and cuts. To set off at such apace and alone, seemed to him unlike the calm, sweet character ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut; and he heard, or fancied he heard, soundingas from the path before him, a cry, lost in the whoops and halloos ofthose who were following the flight of the birds along the stream.The sport was forgotten in a moment: he spurred vehemently on upon theroad which Marie de Clairvaut had taken, while almost all the rest ofthe people in the field crossed the stream by a bridge to the left,and pursued the flight of the birds across a meadow round which theriver circled before it took a sharp turn to the right. All the moreeagerly did the young nobleman spur forward, knowing that about aquarter of a mile in advance the path which he followed separated intotwo, and that he might lose sight of the fair girl altogether if hedid not overtake her before she reached the point of separation.When he arrived at it, however, she was not to be seen; but one glanceat the ground showed him the deep footmarks of the jennet followingthe road to the right, which led far away from the point towards whichthe heron seemed to have directed its flight, and to a dangerous partof the river about a mile beyond. He now urged his horse onvehemently--furiously.The road wound in and out round the lower projections of the hill, andthrough the thinner part of the forest that skirted its base; butthough he, who was generally tender and kind to every thing that fellbeneath his care, now dyed the rowels of his spurs in blood from hishorse's sides, he came not up with the swift jennet which carriedMademoiselle de Clairvaut. He gradually caught the sound of its feet,indeed; and the sound became more and more distinct, showing that hegained upon it.But this slight success in the headlong race which he was pursuing wasnot enough to calm the mind of the young cavalier. It was now evidentthat the horse, frightened by the whoop and halloo of the falconers,had run away with its fair burden; and every step that they advancedbrought the horses and their riders nearer to a part of the riverwhich was only to be passed in the hottest and driest days of summer,and then with difficulty.Oh, how the heart of Charles of Montsoreau beat when, at the distanceof about a hundred yards from the brink of the river, the trees beganto break away, and left the ground somewhat more open. But before hecould see any thing distinctly but a figure passing like lightningacross the distant bolls of the trees, he heard a loud scream, and asudden plunge into the water, and then another loud shriek.He galloped to the very brink, so that his horse's feet dashed thestones from the top of the high bank into the water, and then he gazedwith a glance of agony upon the stream. The sleeve of a velvet robeand a hawking-glove rose to the surface of the water.He cast down the rein--he sprang from his horse--he plunged at oncefrom the bank into the stream--he dived at the spot where he had seenthe glove, and, in a moment, his arms were round the object of hissearch. At that instant he would have given rank, and station, and allhis wide domains, to have felt her clasp him with that convulsivegrasp which sometimes proves fatal to both under such circumstances.But she remained still and calm; and bearing her rapidly to thesurface, and then to the lower part of the bank, he laid her down uponthe turf, and gazed for an instant on her fair face. Oh, how deep, andterrible, and indescribable was the pain that he felt at that moment.Sensations that he knew not to be in his heart--that he did not--thathe would not before believe to exist therein--now rushed upon him, tofill up the cup of agony and sorrow to the brim; and, kneeling besidethe form of the beautiful girl he had just borne from the dark tomb ofthe waters, he unclasped her garments, he chafed her hands, he raisedher head, he did all that he could think of to recall her toanimation; and then, pressing her wildly to his bosom, while unwontedtears came rapidly into his eyes, he called her by every tender andendearing name, adding still, "She is dead! she is dead!"As he did so, as she was pressed most closely and most fondly to hisheart, as her hand was clasped in his, as her head leaned upon hisshoulder, he thought he felt that hand press slightly on his own; hethought he felt the pulse of life beat in her temples. He lifted hishead for a moment--her eyes were open and fixed upon him. The colourwas coming back into her cheek. She spoke not, she made no effort toescape from the embrace in which he held her: but it was evident thatshe marked his actions, and heard his words; and if any thing had beenwanting to tell her how dear she was to his heart, it would have beenthe joy, the almost frantic joy, with which he beheld the signs ofreturning consciousness. Eagerly, actively, however, he ceased not togive her whatever assistance he could, and then bent over her again tolift her in his arms, saying, "Forgive me, forgive me! But I willcarry you to a cottage not far off, where you can have bettertending."She raised her arm, however, and took his hand kindly in hers, makinghim a sign to bend down his head."A thousand thanks," she said in a low voice; "but I am not so ill asyou suppose. I foolishly fainted with terror when the horse plungedover, and I remember nothing from that moment till just now. But Ifeel I shall soon be better."It was not a moment in which Charles of Montsoreau could put muchrestraint upon himself, for joy succeeding terror had alreadydisplayed so much of the real feelings of his heart, that any attemptat concealment must have been vain. He gave not way, indeed, to thesame ebullitions of feeling which he had before suffered to appear,while he thought her dead; but every word and every action told thesame tale. He gazed eagerly, tenderly, joyfully in her eyes; he chafedthe small hands in his own; he wrung out the water from the beautifulhair; he smoothed it back from the fair forehead; and he did it allwith words of tenderness and affection, that could not be mistaken.Thus kneeling by her side, he again besought her to let him carry herto the nearest cottage; but she pointed to the small hunting hornwhich hung at his side, asking, "Will not that bring some one?"He was not called upon to use it, however, for before he could raiseit to his lips, the sound of a horse's feet was heard coming from thesame path which they themselves had pursued; and in a moment after,the good forester Gondrin emerged from the wood, with no slightanxiety on his frank and honest countenance. His young lord supportingMarie de Clairvaut as she lay partly stretched upon the ground, partlyresting on his arm, with the count's horse cropping the herbage closeby, instantly caught his attention, and riding up with prompt andunquestioning alacrity, he gave every assistance in his power, seemingto comprehend the whole without any explanation. His own cloak anddoublet were instantly stripped off, to wrap the chilled limbs of thefair girl who lay before him, and scarcely five words were spokenbetween him and his master. They were: "Bourgeios' cottage is closeby, my lord: shall we carry her there?"--"Is it nearer thanHenriot's?"--"Oh, by a quarter of a mile."--"There, then, there."But without suffering the forester to give him any assistance incarrying her, the young lord raised Marie de Clairvaut in his arms,and bore her on into the wood, looking down in her face from time totime, with a smile, as if to tell her how easy and how joyful was thetask.Gondrin followed, leading the horses; but as he came on, he asked, ina low voice, "Where is the jennet. Sir?""Drowned, I fancy," replied Charles of Montsoreau--"drowned, and nogreat loss, after such doings as to-day."The cottage was soon gained, and there every assistance was procuredfor Marie de Clairvaut, which was necessary to restore fully thediminished powers of life. A sort of hand litter was speedily formed;some of the peasantry procured as bearers; and, stretched thereon,dressed in the coarse, but warm and dry habiliments of a country girl;the beautiful child of the lordly house of Guise was borne backtowards the chteau of Montsoreau with him who had rescued her from awatery grave, gazing down upon her, and thinking that she looked evenmore lovely in that humble attire than in the garb of her own station.As they approached the chteau, horns, and whoops, and shouts madethemselves heard; and it was evident that the absence of the younglord and the fair guest had at length been remarked by other than thecareful eye of Gondrin. Horseman after horseman came up one by one,and at length Gaspar himself appeared with Madame de Saulny and one ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut's women, who had followed her mistress tothe field; but, as was common with women of all classes in those days,had forgotten every thing but the falcons and their quarry, the momentthat the birds took wing.[1]---------------------[Footnote 1: So extraordinary and remarkable was the passion forfalconry amongst the women of that day, that Catherine de Mediciherself, engaged as she was in all the wiles of policy during herwhole life, found time to pursue this sport day after day, and hadcourage enough to follow it after having not only received severalsevere falls, but after having once broken her leg and once fracturedher skull, by the imprudent habit of galloping at full speed after thebirds, with the eyes fixed upon them, and inattentive to every thingelse. The moment that the falcons were flown, every thing on earth wasforgotten, and the most serious accidents were of daily occurrence.]---------------------A multitude of questions and exclamations now took place; and withoutsuffering the bearers of the litter to stop, Charles explained in fewwords what had occurred, dwelling upon the peril which their fairguest had been in, and merely adding, that he had been fortunateenough to arrive in time to rescue her from the water.The brow of Gaspar de Montsoreau grew as dark as night, and forgettingthat, in his ill humour, he had voluntarily quitted her side, hemuttered to himself, "There seems a fate in it, that he should renderher every service, and I none."He sprang off from his horse, however, and walked forward on the otherside of the litter, addressing all sorts of courteous speeches toMarie de Clairvaut, who was now well enough to reply. Madame deSaulny, however, had no great difficulty in persuading her to retireat once to bed: not that she felt any corporeal disability to sit upthrough the rest of the day; but her mind had many matters forcontemplation, and she insisted upon being left quite alone, with nofarther attendance than that of one of her women stationed in theante-room.CHAP. VI.The windows were half closed, the room was silent, no sound reachedthe ear of Marie de Clairvaut, but the sweet wintry song of a robinperched upon the castle wall. Her first thoughts were of gratitude toHeaven for her escape from death, her next, of gratitude to him whohad risked his life to save her. But after that came somewhat anxiousand troublous thoughts.She recollected the moment when she woke to consciousness, and foundherself clasped in his arms, with his heart beating against her bosom,with his cheek touching hers; she recollected that he had unclaspedthe collar round her neck; that he had chafed and warmed her hands inhis; that he had dried her hair; that he had braided it back from herforehead; that he had borne her in his arms close to his heart: sherecollected that her own hand, from the impulse of her heart, hadpressed his; and that she herself had felt happy while resting on hisbosom. As she thought of all these things, so different from any ofthe ideas that usually filled her mind, the warm blood rose in hercheek, though no one could see her; and turning round, she buried hereyes in the pillow with feelings of ingenuous shame; and yet even thenthe image of Charles of Montsoreau rose before her. She saw him, asshe had beheld him when first they met, galloping down to aid herattendants in her defence; she saw him pointing the cannon of thecastle against her pursuers; she saw him bearing with calm dignity theill humour of his brother; she saw him, with passionate tenderness andgrief, bending over her, and weeping when he thought her dead. She sawall this, and a consciousness came over her that there was no otherbeing on all the earth on whose bosom she could rest with suchhappiness as on his.Nor did love want the advocates of nature and reason to support hiscause. First came the thought of gratitude: she was grateful to God asthe great cause of her deliverance; but ought she not to be gratefulto him also, she asked herself, who was indeed--as every other humanbeing is--an agent in the hand of the Almighty, but who was carriedforward to that agency by every kindly, noble, and generous feeling,the contempt of danger and of death, and all those sensations andimpulses which show most clearly the divinity that stirs within us?In being grateful to him, she felt that she was grateful to God; andit was easy for Marie de Clairvaut to believe that such gratitudeshould only be bounded by the vast extent of the service rendered.She did not exactly, in clear and distinct terms, ask herself whethershe could refuse to devote to him the life that he had saved; but herheart answered the same question indirectly, and she thought that shecould have no right to refuse him any thing that he might choose toask as the recompense of the great benefit which he had conferred.What might he not ask? was her next question; and then came back thememory of every look which she had seen, of every word which she hadheard, at the moment when she was just recovering; and those memoriesat once told her what he might and would seek as his guerdon. Was itpainful for her to think that he might even crave herself as theboon?--Oh no! A week before, indeed, she would have shrunk from thevery idea with pain. The only alternative she could have seen wouldhave been to be miserable herself, or to make him miserable.Now such feelings were all changed and gone; and Marie deClairvaut--having entertained those feelings sincerely, candidly, andwithout the slightest affectation--might feel surprised, and, perhaps,a little alarmed, at the change within herself; but she was by nomeans one to cling with any degree of pride or vanity to thoughts andpurposes that were changed.It is true that those thoughts and purposes had been changinggradually towards Charles of Montsoreau. But it was the events of thatday which suddenly and strangely had completed the alteration. Thenear approach of death--the plunge, as it were, into the jaws of thegrave, from which she had been rescued as by a miracle--had seemed towaken in her new sensations towards all the warm relationships oflife, a clinging to her kindred beings of the world, a tenderer, anearer affection for the thrilling ties of human life.Then again, as regarded her young deliverer, and that nearfamiliarity, from which the habit of her thoughts and the coldness ofa heart unenlightened by love, had made her hitherto shrink withsomething more than maiden modesty:--in regard to these, her feelingshad been suddenly and entirely changed by the circumstances in whichshe had been placed. It seemed as if to him, and for him, the first ofall those icy barriers had been broken down, and was cast away forever. She had been clasped in his arms--she had been pressed to hisbosom--the warmth of his breath seemed still to play upon hercheek--her hand seemed still grasped in his; and when her mindreturned to those ideas, after more than an hour of solitary thought,the memories--which at first had called the blood into her cheek, andmade her hide her eyes for shame--were sweet and consoling. Shethought that it was well to be thus--that it was well, as she couldnot but consent out of mere gratitude, to be the wife of Charles ofMontsoreau if he sought her hand, that he should be the only man shecould have ever made up her mind to wed; and that she could wed himwith happiness.Such was the character of the thoughts that occupied her during therest of the day. Her mind might, indeed, turn from time to time to herrelations of the lordly house of Guise, and she might inquire whatwould be their opinion in regard to her marriage with the young Countof Logres. The first time that she thus questioned herself, she wassomewhat startled to find that she entertained some apprehensions ofopposition, for those apprehensions showed her, more than aught elsehad done before, how entirely changed her feelings were towardsCharles of Montsoreau. They made her feel that it was no longer a merecold consent she had to give to her marriage with him; but that it wasa hope and expectation which would be painful to lose.The apprehensions themselves soon died away: she remembered theanxiety of both the Duke of Guise and the Duke of Mayenne that sheshould give her hand to some one, and she remembered, also, the halfangry, half jesting remonstrances of both on her declaring herintention of entering a convent. She called to mind how they had urgedher, some eight months before, to make a choice, representing to herthat it was needful for their family to strengthen itself by everypossible tie, and promising in no degree to thwart her inclinations ifshe chose one who would attach himself to them.From the words of admiration and respect which she had more than onceheard Charles of Montsoreau employ in speaking of her uncles, shedoubted not that the only condition which they had made, would beeasily fulfilled in his case; and thus she lay in calm thought, herfancy more busy than ever it had been before, and new but happyfeelings in her heart, agitating her, certainly, but gently andsweetly. Glad visions, growing up one by one as she grew more familiarwith such contemplations, came up to gild the future days--visions ofpeace, and home, and happiness--while the blessed blindness of ourmortal being shut out from her sight the pangs, the cares, thehorrors, the sorrows into which she was about to plunge.She was like some traveller bewildered in a mountain mist, fancyingthat he sees before him the clear road to bright and smiling lands,when his footsteps are on the edge of the precipice that is to swallowhim up.When she rose and left her chamber on the following morning, Marie deClairvaut was greeted with glad smiles from every one. Perhaps herfair cheek was a little paler than ordinary, perhaps her bright eyewas softer and less lustrous: but the change proceeded not from theconsequences of either the fear or the danger she had undergone theday before. The slight paleness of the cheek, the slight languor ofthe eye, and the night without sleep, which gave rise to both, had asweeter cause in bright and happy thoughts which had shaken the softburden of slumber from her eyelids.All present gazed upon her with interest. Madame de Saulny was loud inher gratulations; Gaspar de Montsoreau himself showed a brow without acloud, and his brother smiled brightly with scarcely a shadow ofmelancholy left upon his countenance. Her first act was to repeat thethanks which she had given to the latter on the preceding day--torepeat them warmly, tenderly, and enthusiastically; and Gaspar deMontsoreau, who loved not to hear such words, or see such looks uponher countenance, turned towards one of the windows, and spoke eagerlywith the Abb de Boisguerin, while wise Madame de Saulny drew a fewsteps back, and gave some orders to one of Marie's attendants."Do not thank me, sweet Marie," said Charles of Montsoreau, as soon ashe saw that he could speak unnoticed by any other ears but her own: "Ihave not an opportunity of answering you now, as I ought to answeryou. After my return this evening I shall seek to be heard for a fewmoments, for I have matter for your private ear."He saw the warm blood coming up into her cheek, and her eyes castdown, and he added, "I have to excuse part of my conduct yesterday--Ihave to see if you will forgive me.""Forgive you!" she exclaimed, raising her bright eyes to his, andspeaking eagerly, though low, "Oh, there is nothing in any part ofyour conduct to forgive--every thing to be grateful for: whether yourdevotion and courage in saving me from death--or your care andtenderness," she added in a still lower voice, "after you had savedme."The eyes of Gaspar de Montsoreau were upon them both; he marked thedowncast look, the rising colour in Marie de Clairvaut's cheek; hemarked the sudden raising of her eyes, and the tender light with whichthey looked in the face of her young deliverer. He marked the beamingexpression of joy and gratitude that came over his brother'scountenance, and it was scarcely possible for him to restrain thefiery feelings in his own bosom, and prevent himself from rushing likea madman between them. Two or three low deep-toned words from theAbb, however, recalled him to himself, and advancing with a graceful,though a somewhat agitated air, he offered Mademoiselle de Clairvauthis hand to conduct her to the hall where the morning meal wasprepared."We are somewhat earlier than usual this morning," he said, "becausemy fair brother, with our noble and excellent friend the Abb here,have a long ride before them, to visit a relation who we hear issick.""And do you not go yourself, my lord?" demanded Marie. "Pray let notmy being in the chteau act as any restraint upon you.""Oh no," replied the Marquis; "it is as well that one of us shouldremain here in these troublous times; and this relation, this Count deMorly, is an old man in his eightieth year, who may well expect thathealth should fail, ay, and life too.""Ay," said Marie; "but I should think that at that period, when lifeitself is fleeting away from us, and almost all the bright things ofthis existence are gone, any signs of human friendship, andtenderness, and affection, must be a thousand fold more dear andcheering, more valuable in every way, than when the energetic powersof life are at their full. Then we want few companionships, for we aresufficient to ourselves: but in the winter of our age, close by theicy tomb, the warmth of human affection is all that we have to cheerus; the voice of friendship, like the song of a spring bird in thechill months of the early year, must seem prophetic of a brighterseason, when the cold days of earth are passed, and all glad soundsand happy sights shall be renewed in a fresh summer. Oh, the tongue ofyouth and health, speaking friendly sounds to the ear of sickness andage, must be the last, the brightest, the sweetest of all things whichcan smooth the soul's passage to eternity!"There was an implied reproof in the words of Marie de Clairvaut, whichwas not pleasant to the ear of Gaspar de Montsoreau; but it did not inany degree alter his purpose; and merely saying that, if possible, hewould go on the following day, he led his fair guest on to the hall,and gladly saw the meal concluded, and his brother quit the table withthe Abb to proceed upon their way.As soon as they were gone, a burden seemed off his mind; he becamegay, and bright, and pleasing; and his conversation resumed its usualtone. The stores of his mind once put forth, and there were sufficientindications of kind and generous feelings to give his society thatcharm without which all other attractions are poor--the charm of theheart. Towards Marie de Clairvaut his manner assumed a warmth and atenderness which alarmed and pained her; and with the new insight intoher own heart, which she had obtained, she was enabled at once todecide upon her conduct towards him. She remained in conversation,indeed, for some time after breakfast, and though grave and serious,was by no means repulsive: but anxious to avoid any privatecommunication whatsoever with the young Marquis, no sooner did she seeMadame de Saulny make some movement as if about to quit the room, thanputting her arm through that of her relation, she said, "Come, mabonne de Saulny, I want to have a long conversation with you, andafter that I think I shall lie down and rest for an hour or two, for Iam much fatigued."Madame de Saulny accompanied her to her apartments, leaving the youngMarquis of Montsoreau standing in moody silence in the midst of thehall; and when, some hours afterwards, he sent up to inquire ifMademoiselle de Clairvaut would not go forth to see some game taken inthe nets, the reply given by one of her maids in the anteroom was,that finding herself somewhat indisposed, she had lain down to rest,and was asleep. At this answer he broke away with an expression ofbitter anger, and mounting his horse, rode out with a furious pace.He had been gone about an hour and a half, when Marie came down intothe room which we have described as the lady's bower, accompanied byMadame de Saulny, and employed herself in somewhat listless mood withthe various occupations of a lady of that day. For a short space sheplied the busy needle at the embroidery frame, and then took up thelute and played and sang; but the music was broken, and came but byfits and starts; and it was evident that impatient expectation marredthe power of present enjoyment or occupation. At length the clatteringof horses' feet was heard below, and fain would she have looked forthfrom the window to ascertain which of the two brothers it was that hadreturned. At length, however, there was a step upon the stairs, andher beating heart decided the matter in a moment. It was Charles ofMontsoreau that entered: but he was deadly pale, and that apparentlyfrom no temporary cause; for though he spoke calmly and tranquilly toMarie de Clairvaut and Madame de Saulny, the colour did not returninto his cheek.Marie, on her part, was anxious and agitated; she spoke low, for shefeared that her voice might tremble if she used a louder tone. Her eyefell beneath that of her lover, and the colour came and went in hercheek like light quivering on the wings of a bird; and yet she was thefirst to propose that they should go forth together."Your brother is absent," she said, "and I understand sent up sometime ago, while I was asleep, to ask if I would go out to see somegame taken in the nets. Would it please you to go and join him?""Much," replied the young nobleman. "He is not far; I know where thenets were to be laid.""Then we will walk thither," she said: "I fear I shall be afraid ofhorses for many a long day. Madame de Saulny, you will come with us,will you not?"But Madame de Saulny declined; and Charles of Montsoreau and Marie deClairvaut went forth, followed by two of her maids, and some otherattendants, at a respectful distance. The hearts of both beat evenpainfully; and for some steps from the castle gates they proceeded insilence, till at length she inquired how he had found the friend hewent to visit. The young nobleman replied that he feared he was dying;and, after a few words more on that subject, the conversation againdropped.At length, as they descended the side of the hill, Charles ofMontsoreau lifted his eyes to the face of his fair companion, sayingin a low tone, "I told you this morning, Mademoiselle de Clairvaut,that I should ask a few minutes' audience of you. Let me offer you myarm--nay, be not agitated, I have nothing to say which should moveyou. I have to apologise, as I told you, for some parts of my conductyesterday, and to ask you to forgive me.""Oh, I told you," she replied, "and I tell you again, that there isnothing to apologise for, nothing that I have to forgive; every thingthat I have to be grateful for, every thing that will make me thankfulto you through my whole life.""Would that I could believe it were so!" replied Charles ofMontsoreau. "But I remember that in the first agony of thinking youlost for ever, of thinking that bright spirit gone, that gentle heartcold, that beautiful form inanimate for ever, I gave way to transportsof grief and sorrow, I spoke words, I used actions, that I neitherwould have dared to speak or use towards you, if I had known that youwere then living and conscious. And yet I am sure, quite sure, thatyou knew, and saw, and heard those words and actions; and I fear thatthey may have offended you.""Oh no, no, indeed!" replied Marie de Clairvaut, with her eyes bentdown, her hand trembling upon his arm, and the colour glowing brightin her cheek--"Oh no, no, indeed! I did see, I did hear; but----"In the course of that bright and beautiful thing called Love, veryoften between two beings in every respect worthy of each other therecomes a moment when the very slightest touch of that pardonablehypocrisy in woman, which, from a combination of many bright andbeautiful feelings, teaches her in some degree to veil or hide thepassion of her heart--when the slightest touch of that hypocrisy, Isay, at a moment when it should be all cast away together, and thebosom of love laid bare to the eye of love--when the slightest touchof that hypocrisy seals the misery of both for ever.It was such a moment then with Charles of Montsoreau and Marie deClairvaut. She knew not all that was in his heart at that moment, shecould not know it; but she knew herself beloved, and might well haveacknowledged her love in return. Had she done so, had she acknowledgedthat her own feelings towards him had rendered the caresses which hebestowed upon what he thought her dead form easily pardonable, thepassionate grief for her death deeply touching to her heart--had shedone this, their course might have gone on in brightness. But she knewnot all that was in his heart at that moment, she could not know it;and the first impulse was to give way to woman's habitual hypocrisy,to cast a veil over the true feelings of her heart, and to hide thetimid love of her bosom till it was drawn forth by him."Oh no, no, indeed!" she said; "I did see, I did hear; but--I thoughtit was but natural grief for one under your charge and protection thatyou thought lost in so terrible a manner----"She hesitated to go on; she feared that she spoke coldly; and shethought of adding some word or two more which might take from thechilliness of such an answer, and let her real feelings more trulyappear. Before she could collect herself to do so, however, Charles ofMontsoreau answered, with a deep sigh, "You thought it was butnatural, Mademoiselle de Clairvaut; you thought it was but natural;and so, indeed----"But as he spoke, his brother turned the angle of the little woodthrough which they were proceeding down the hill, and came towardsthem, followed by several of the huntsmen. There was a frown uponhis brow, a fire in his dark eye, which Charles of Montsoreau sawand understood full well. But he met his brother calmly andsteadfastly--with deep and bitter grief in his heart, it is true, butwith grief which he had power over himself to conceal.The angry feelings of the heart of Gaspar de Montsoreau were not soeasily repressed, and he spoke in a tone and manner well calculated toproduce angry words between himself and his brother."Why, how now, Charles!" he exclaimed; "are you back so soon? Where isthe Abb? Montsoreau seems to possess greater attractions for you thanMorly.""Of course," replied Charles of Montsoreau, calmly; "but even if itdid not, I should have returned in haste. The Abb I left behind atMorly, as he has no other occupation here.""And you have pleasant occupation," rejoined his brother, with a tonein which assumed courtesy but covered ill the intended sneer--"and youhave pleasant occupation as squire to this fairest of all fairladies.""It is, indeed, so sweet to attend upon her," replied Charles, "that Igrieve I must lose the task so soon. In consideration of variouscircumstances, my dear Gaspar, I find that it will be absolutelynecessary for me to proceed to Logres immediately. I have lingeredtoo long here already. My people will think that I neglect them; and Ihave determined to set off by dawn to-morrow morning."The first expression that came upon the countenance of Gaspar deMontsoreau was undoubtedly that of satisfaction; but, with the pauseof a single instant, better feelings sprang up, and he grasped hisbrother's hand with a look of real anxiety, exclaiming, "Good God,Charles, at this season of the year! In this disturbed state of thecountry! Remember, Logres is more than a hundred and fifty leaguesdistant!""If this fair lady undertook as long a journey," replied Charles ofMontsoreau with a melancholy smile, "in still severer weather, merelyfor the sake of doing what she thought was right, should I hesitate,Gaspar? Fie; she will think us all a household of priests and friars,who go not forth but when the sun shines, and think an easterly windexcuse sufficient for not visiting the neighbouring village. I willnot diminish your garrison, either, very much, my dear brother. Youmust give me Gondrin with me, as he comes originally from Logres;but, besides him, I shall only take my own ordinary attendants, and Iwill find means to fight my way through, depend upon it."Gaspar de Montsoreau was easily reconciled to this arrangement. Hestill raised some objections, indeed; but, when he looked at Marie deClairvaut, those objections became more and more faint in their tone,and he could scarcely refrain from a gaiety so different from thegloom of the morning, as to mark painfully how little he wished forhis brother's stay. Marie de Clairvaut returned to the chteau insadness and grief. She knew not, indeed, to the full extent, how muchthe departure of Charles of Montsoreau was attributable to her ownwords; but she felt that it was so, in some degree. She blamed herselfmore bitterly than she even deserved; and, hastening to her own room,she locked the door, and wept long and bitterly.After some time, she was visited by Madame de Saulny, who pressed soeagerly for admittance, that she could not refuse her. Tears werestill in her eyes, and traces of those she had shed fresh upon hercheeks; but Marie would give no explanation; and it was not till aboutan hour after, when the good marquise heard of Charles of Montsoreau'sintended departure for Logres, that she divined the cause of heryoung relation's grief.When she did so, Madame de Saulny felt that, in some degree, sheherself might have been instrumental in producing it. But it was onegood trait in the character of that lady, that, if she committed anerror, she was sorry for it with her whole heart, and sought to remedyit. She loved Marie de Clairvaut deeply and truly; she grieved much tosee her grieve; but she hoped that there was no such great cause forgrief, and that the matter might be easily remedied.CHAP. VII.The conduct which, as we have seen, was pursued by Charles ofMontsoreau, had not been framed alone upon the supposition that hislove for Marie de Clairvaut was without return. That belief, indeed,ultimately decided his determination; but a thousand otherconsiderations had previously led him up to a point, where it wantedbut one word to change the balance in either direction.He had set out that morning for Morly full of hope and joy. He wasnot, indeed, confident that he was beloved; but he was confident thatMarie de Clairvaut herself saw his affection, and had done nothing tocheck it. From all that he knew of her himself--from all that he hadheard of her--from the casual conversation of Madame de Saulny, he wasvery, very sure, that the conduct of Marie de Clairvaut would havebeen quite different, if she had not felt a sufficient degree ofregard for him, to know that love might follow if he sought it. Thiswas quite enough to give him hope and happiness. He had, indeed,remarked his brother's ill humour upon many occasions, and he hadattributed it justly to the disappointment of a desire to engross alltheir fair guest's conversation; but he had not the slightest idea ofthe eager and fiery passions that were rising up in the breast ofGaspar of Montsoreau.When he mounted his horse, then, to visit the old Count de Morly--onewho, though only distantly related to his family, had been hisfather's dearest friend and wisest counsellor--Charles of Montsoreaulooked forward to his return in the evening, and to the audience hehad craved of Marie de Clairvaut, with a heart full of joyfulemotions, and with fear bearing a very small proportion to hope. Therewas much happiness in his whole air; but it was thoughtful happiness,and for two or three miles he rode on in silence.His companion, the Abb de Boisguerin, was silent too, and thoughtful,and from time to time, as they rode along, he gazed upon his formerpupil with a look of contemplative earnestness, a slight frown uponhis calm, cold brow, and the thin nostril raised with somethingbetween triumph and scorn in the expression. He said not a single wordtill he saw that Charles of Montsoreau himself began to feel his ownsilence strange, and looked round as if about to commence someconversation. Then, however, the Abb spoke."If you are awake, Charles," he said, "I should wish some conferencewith you; if you are dreaming, dream on: Heaven forbid that I shoulddisturb you, for your visions seem pleasant ones.""They were, dear friend," replied Charles, with a smile; "but I cangive them up for a time, in the hopes of their being realised.""Visions are often realised," replied the Abb."Indeed!" exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau; "you surely are jesting, mysage friend. I thought to hear you reprove such idle fancies, and tellme that visions, however specious, were seldom, if ever, realised.""No, far from it," replied the Abb: "the visions of a strong,sensible, and reasoning mind like yours, Charles, are, on thecontrary, very often realised; for they are seldom formed but uponsome sufficient basis. But still I must have my lesson; and I willtell you, my dear Charles, that the visions which we have formed uponthe best grounds, and which are consequently often realised in alltheir parts, are not unfrequently those productive of the utmostmisery to ourselves, even when we thought them the most hopeful, themost happy. It is, Charles, that a thousand other things mingle withthe realisation of our dreams, which in our dreams we dreamt not of,turning as with a fairy's wand the pure gold to dross, rendering thesweetness bitter, and changing wholesome food to poison. Look at thatdistant hill--the Peak of Geran--how soft, and blue, and smooth, andbeautiful it looks, and yet you and I know that the small sharp stoneswith which it is covered will cut, till they bleed, the feet of theperson who attempts to climb it. That soft blue mountain in thedistance, Charles, is as the vision of an eager mind, and the roughimpracticable stony side, as the realisation of the dream itself. Iwould always ask every one who indulges in a vision--Have youcalculated beyond all question of doubt what may be the concomitantpangs, sorrows, and evils that even probably will accompany therealisation of that which you desire?--I would ask everyone thisquestion, Charles; and I now ask you.""I should think, my dear friend," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "thatit would be utterly impossible for any one to answer such a questionin the affirmative. The very fallibility of our human nature wouldprevent our doing so with truth. Good and evil must, of course, bealways mingled in this world; and all that we can do is to thinkcalmly, and endeavour to judge rationally, of that which is the bestfor our ultimate happiness. We must prepare ourselves to take theconsequences, be they what they may. If you ask me the question youhave mentioned, I should at once reply--No, I have not calculated alleven of the probable evils which might attend the realisation of thevisions with which I was occupied, because my mind is not capable ofdiscovering one half of the chances attending any future event."Charles spoke somewhat warmly; for there is always a degree ofbitterness to the confident mind of youth in any words that tend toshadow the bright promises of hope, and to teach us by doctrine thatwhich we can only learn by experience, the fallacy of expectations,the mingled nature of our best pleasures, the dust and ashes of humanenjoyment. The Abb gazed upon his face for a moment ere he replied;but then said, "I would put my question closer to you, Charles ofMontsoreau, and I will put it seriously. Have you calculated all theself-evident evils that would attend the realisation of the visionswhich you were pondering?""Why, my dear Abb," replied Charles with a smile, "it would seem byyour serious aspect, that to-day you had turned prophet as well aspreacher, could divine my thoughts, and see their results.""I can divine your thoughts, Charles, and do," replied the Abb; "andas it is a subject on which, however unwillingly, I must speak, I willtell you at once what these thoughts were. The results are in the handof God, and in the hand of God alone. But I can and will show you someof the probable results.""Nay, then," replied Charles, seeing that the Abb spoke quiteseriously, "such being the case, my dear Abb, I need not tell you,that if you speak to me with warning, as your words imply, I willlisten to you with every sort of deference. Speak, I beg you, andspeak freely. Though no longer your pupil in name, I will gladly be soin reality. So now let me hear entirely what you have to say.""Well, then, Charles," replied the Abb, "what I have to say is this,and simply this. Your visions were of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. Youfancied that by the various services which you have rendered her youhave obtained a strong hold upon her regard, a claim even upon herhand; that she showed a fondness for your society, a degree ofaffection for your person, which promised you fair in every respect;and, in fact, believing--and with some degree of justice--that youyourself love her deeply, you saw every prospect of that love beinggratified by obtaining hers, and ultimately, perhaps, her hand. Now,Charles, was this, or was this not, the matter in your thoughts? wasthis the vision upon which your mind was bent? were not these theprospects which you contemplated just now?""They were," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "I do not deny it.""Well, then," replied the Abb, "I will not now dwell for even asingle moment upon difficulties, obstacles, obstructions, upon thepride of the race of Guise, upon the views of self-interest andambition, upon the probability of their treating your love for theirniece with contempt, and rejecting your proffered alliance with scorn.I will not pause for a moment on such things; but I will speak of thematter with which we began; namely, of the probable, the self-evidentevils which must attend the realisation of your hopes and wishes.Charles of Montsoreau, have you thought of your brother?"The blood came somewhat warmly up into Charles's countenance. "I havethought of him," he replied, "most assuredly; but I have merelythought, my excellent friend, that though he might have some degree ofadmiration for Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, yet he has neither had theopportunities, nor the occasion, if I may use the term, of feelingtowards her as I do. Fate has willed it that I should be the person toaid her upon all occasions; fate has established between us links ofconnection which do not exist between her and Gaspar.""But fate has not willed it," replied the Abb sternly, "that youshould love her a bit better than he does. On the contrary, Charles,fate has willed that he should love her deeply, passionately,strongly, with the whole intensity of feeling of which he is capable.This has been the will of fate, Charles of Montsoreau, and let not theselfishness of passion blind you. In your pursuit of Marie deClairvaut, you are the rival of your brother."Charles of Montsoreau cast down his eyes as they rode along, and forseveral minutes remained in deep silence. "You mean to say," hereplied at length, "that my brother is my rival, for I first lovedher, I first won her regard: he strives to snatch her from me, not Ifrom him, and why should I hesitate at the consequences? He must learnto overcome his passion, a passion which is evidently not returned. Igo on with hope; and in love, thank God, at least, there is no elderbrother's right to bar us from success.""If such be your thoughts and feelings, Charles," replied the Abb, ina slow and solemn manner, "I see no hope but strife, contention,misery--perhaps bloodshed! between two brothers, who were born tolove, to succour, to support each other. And now they will draw theirswords upon each other for a woman's smile.""Heaven forbid!" exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau. "Fear not that,Abb! My sword shall never be drawn against my brother, were he tourge me to the utmost. But you view this matter too gravely, youdeceive yourself, I am sure. In the first place, though angry, andmortified, and somewhat jealous, perhaps, that I have hadopportunities of serving Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, which he has notobtained--though somewhat charmed with her beauty, and captivated withher graces--I do not, I cannot, believe that Gaspar feels that lovetowards her which cannot easily be conquered. He feels not, Abb, as Ifeel--he cannot feel as I feel towards her.""Charles, you deceive yourself," replied the Abb, "nay more, youdeceive yourself wilfully. Last night in the great hall, after you hadretired to rest, your brother walked up and down with me in a statealmost of frenzy. He told me how deeply, how passionately, heloved her; he poured forth into the bosom which has been accustomedto receive all his thoughts, his grief, his agony, his madnessitself--for I can call it nothing but madness. He spoke of you--ofyou, the brother of his love, the being who has gone on nurtured withhim from infancy till now without one harsh word or angry feelingbetween you--he spoke of you, I say, with hatred and abhorrence; helonged to imbrue his hands in your blood; he called you the destroyerof his peace, the obstacle of his happiness, the being who had drivenhim to wretchedness and despair."Charles of Montsoreau dropped the bridle on his horse's neck,and covered his eyes with his hands. "This is very terrible!" hesaid--"this is very terrible!""It is terrible," replied the Abb--"it is very terrible, Charles; butit is no less true. Your brother so mild, so kind-hearted as he was,is now changed by his rivalry with you, is now full of the feelings ofa murderer, is now ready to become a second Cain, and slay hisbrother, because his offering has not found favour in the sight of thebeing he worships, as yours has done! Of all this you knew not, andtherefore you could not judge; but when I said you were deceivingyourself wilfully, Charles, I said not so without cause. Think of whatyour brother was, one bare fortnight ago--all gay, all cheerful, allgood-humoured, bearing contradiction with a smile, laughing at thethought of care, putting you always in the first place before himself.See what he is now, Charles, even when restrained by the eyes of manyupon him--moody, irritable, passionate, evidently abhorring thebrother he so lately loved. Can this entire change have come over aman's nature, I ask you, this sad, this terrible, this blightingchange, without some strong and overpowering passion? and will youtell me you do not see he loves, loves with all the intensity of aneager, a warm, a fiery heart, loves passionately, loves to madness?"Again Charles of Montsoreau bent his eyes down upon the ground, againhe remained silent for a considerable space of time; and in thatspace, terrible was the conflict which went on within him. At lengthhe raised his eyes gravely, even sternly, to the face of the Abb deBoisguerin, and demanded, "Abb, what would you have me do?""It is not for me to dictate, Charles," said the Abb, in a sad andsolemn tone. "You are your own master, you are lord of princely landsand great wealth, you are lord also of yourself. It is not for me tosay what you shall do. But I can tell you, Charles of Montsoreau, whatyou would do if you were the same generous, noble, kind-hearted,self-denying youth that was once under my charge. You would labourzealously, constantly, firmly, to overcome a passion which can producenothing but misery.""What!" exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau, "and see the woman I lovebecome the bride of my brother! What! witness their union, when sheloves me rather than him! Why is this to be put upon me, Abb?--why,when there is every right on my side, and none on his? Why am I to bethe sacrifice rather than Gaspar? Why do you address these words ofexhortation to me rather than to him?""In the first place," replied the Abb, "what you fear--what youseem most to fear, what it would be almost too much to demand fromyou--never will, never can take place. Marie de Clairvaut will neverbe your brother's bride. She loves him not; she rather dislikes him:that is evident. You cannot suppose, Charles, that she will ever behis. So I remove that from all consideration. You next ask me why Iput the hard task on you rather than him; why I exhort you rather thanhim. I will tell you, Charles; because with you I believe exhortationwill have effect; with him it will have none. I have told you before,this passion with him is a madness. He is more violent, he is lessgenerous, in his nature than you are, Charles; and if you would knowmore, know that I have already exhorted him, and found my exhortationsvain. If you persist in your passion, if you, too, do not make a greateffort to conquer it, misery, agony, and bloodshed will be theconsequence. The despair, the death of him who hung at the samebosom with yourself will lie heavy on your head. You, you will bemore to blame than he is; for you are acting with determinate reasonand forethought, when I tell you that his reason is gone. And,moreover----""Then," exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau, interrupting him, "then Iought to become a madman, too, to put myself in the right! Abb, yourreasoning is not just; but I understand and feel your motives, thoughI cannot admit your arguments--hear me, hear me out. Were my ownfeelings and my own happiness alone concerned, I could--yes, I think Icould--sacrifice them all to my brother, if by so doing I thought Icould secure his peace. But, in the first place, you do not even holdout to me the supposition that any sacrifice on my part would securehis happiness; and, in the next place, I have to remember that thereis another whose feelings and whose comfort are to be considered. Muchmay have passed between Mademoiselle de Clairvaut and myself to makeme sure that she knows my love, and to make me hope that she returnsit. And, if such be the case, I have no right to draw back a singlestep, nor will I for any consideration upon earth. If I love herwithout her loving me, I can struggle against my love, though I cannever overcome it; but if she love me too, I will trifle with herhappiness for no man upon earth--no, not my brother!"The Abb remained silent for a moment or two; and then replied,"Charles, your hopes are deceiving you. Mademoiselle de Clairvaut'sfeelings may be favourable to you, may be kindly; but, believe me," headded, and a very slight appearance of a sneering smile hung about hislip--"but, believe me, there is no chance of your injuring herhappiness by ceasing to seek her love. I speak from good authority,Charles; as it is not two days ago, from Madame de Saulny's ownaccount, that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut declared her intention to bestronger than ever of going into a convent. It is very natural, mydear Charles, that you, knowing and feeling the passion in your ownbreast, should think it equally evident to her. Very likely you mayhave addressed to her words of passion and of love, displayed signs oftenderness and affection, which you think fully sufficient to convinceher; and yet she may not have the slightest idea that your feelingsare any thing but those of common courtesy and kindness. You mustremember, that a pure and fine-minded woman shuns the very idea of anyman being in love with her, till his absolute assurance that such isthe case, leaves her no longer any room to doubt. Pure, modest, andretiring, as Mademoiselle de Clairvaut is, such, depend upon it, areher feelings; and be you perfectly sure that nothing you have done forher has been construed by her in any other light than that of commonkindness and courtesy.""I will soon know that," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "I will knowthat this very night; and if I find that I have been deceiving myself,I will make any sacrifice for my brother. I will quit the place; Iwill stand in his way no longer; although you yourself," he addedbitterly, "give me no hope that, by any of the sacrifices you demand,I shall contribute in the least to my brother's happiness.""I think," replied the Abb, "that you will contribute greatly to thehappiness of both; or, at all events, remove those causes ofdissension which would have made you both miserable. Your ownhappiness, too, may be served in the end more than you imagine. Theobstacles to your brother's happiness will come from her, not fromyou. He may grow wearied of a pursuit that he finds to be fruitless;he may conquer a passion which he sees can never be returned. Yourgenerosity and forbearance may, in turn, have their natural effectupon his heart; and he may learn to see with pleasure your union withher who never could be his. Thus, in fact, by making a sacrifice, youmay make none; and by seeming to abandon, may win but the moresurely.""No!" replied the young nobleman--"No, Abb! I will do nothing byhalves. I will act upon no motives but straightforward ones. I believethat Marie de Clairvaut knows, has seen, and returns my affection. Ifshe love me, if her happiness is implicated, nothing on earth shallmake me abandon her. I will love her, and seek her unto death. But ifI find that I have deceived myself; if I learn that she has not seenand does not return my love, I will fly from her at once. To-morrow'ssunset shall see me far away; and then I will do every thing that liesin my power to contribute to my brother's happiness. He shall beforced to say that I have laboured for his gratification and my owndisappointment, though he has embittered his heart towards hisbrother, and suffered passion to turn the milk of our mother intogall. Let us ride on, Abb, let us ride on: my determinations aretaken. It is better to know our fate at once. I shall stay but a shorttime with the good Count de Morly; and I will then leave you with him,and ride back with all speed.""Nay, my dear Charles," replied the Abb, "I will go back with you. Icannot suffer you to tread a long road companioned by such painfulthoughts as I fear you will have.""No, no," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "I would rather go alone. Imust deal with this business singly, Abb; and, besides, some of usshould stay awhile with the good count. He is your cousin as well asours, you know; and, as he has no other relations, may leave you allhis wealth."The Abb turned quickly round, with an inquiring and half-angry look,as if there was something in his own bosom told him that he might finda sneer upon the countenance of his young companion. Such, however,was not the case. All was clear and calm upon the face of Charles ofMontsoreau, except a melancholy smile, as if the motives which hejestingly attributed to the Abb were too absurd for any one tobelieve he spoke in earnest. They conversed no more on a subject sopainful as that which they had already discussed, but rode on quicklyand in silence. Such had been the conversation which preceded theinterview between Charles of Montsoreau and Marie de Clairvaut.CHAP. VIII.It was in the grey of the dawn, that about ten horses were assembledin the court-yard of the chteau of Montsoreau, on the followingmorning. Six were saddled and bridled, as if for instant departure;and the men who stood by the sides of those six were armed up to theteeth. Steel-caps, then called salads, crowned the head of each; andlong swords slung high up on the hip, with the point of the scabbardalmost touching the ground, showed a preparation for desperateresistance in case of attack; while the small pistols in the girdlewere accompanied by several others attached to the saddle, so as togive every man an opportunity of firing five or six shots without thenecessity of pausing to reload.The other four horses were burdened with various packages; and afterthe whole had been assembled for a few minutes in the court-yard,Charles of Montsoreau himself, accompanied by his brother and the Abbde Boisguerin, descended the steps from the great hall, while his ownstrong charger was led forth, together with a spare horse to be led inhand by one of the grooms.The countenance of the young nobleman was pale as the day before, anddeep emotions were certainly busy in his bosom. But his aspect wascalm and collected; and he gazed round the chteau of his fathers,from which he was going forth, perhaps for the last time, with an airof grave and tranquil resolution, which contrasted strongly andstrangely with the agitation evident on the countenance of hisbrother. He grasped the hand of the Abb de Boisguerin in silence;then spoke a few words, and made a few inquiries of his attendants;and at length turning to his brother, extended his hand to him, fixinghis full eyes upon his countenance, and saying, "Farewell, Gaspar!"The Marquis pressed his hand eagerly, but he did not speak, for he wasagitated in a very terrible degree; and his brother put his foot intothe stirrup, and slowly threw himself into the saddle, in a mannervery different from that light and buoyant one with which he usuallymounted his horse to go forth from the same walls.As he was passing through the archway, however, something suddenlyseemed to strike him; and he turned his horse round to say to hisbrother, "Remember my poor dog Lupo, and be kind to him, Gaspar," andhis eye ran for a moment over the upper windows, at one of which thecurtain was partly drawn back, though neither the hand that drew it,nor the eyes which gazed from behind it, were visible to the sight ofthose below.Charles of Montsoreau turned his horse again, and rode through thearchway.--"God bless you, sir!" said the warder who stood near;--"Godprosper you, my noble young count," said the porter of the gates--andin another minute Charles was riding away from his home.At the bridge across the stream, the party which thus left the chteauof Montsoreau found another horseman waiting to join them on theirway; no other than the blithe-looking forester, Gondrin, who, with allhis earthly goods enclosed in a large pack behind him, and mounted ona powerful horse which had borne him many a mile in various forestsports, looked not a whit the less cheerful--not a whit the moredepressed--at quitting the place which he had made his home forseveral years, than he did upon going out in the morning to track thefootsteps of a boar or deer in the course of his usual occupations.The truth is, that Gondrin was one of those men who are withoutattachments absolutely local. There was far more of the dog than ofthe cat in his nature. Where those he loved were, there was his home;and if those he loved had not been with him, he would have felt astranger even in his birthplace. Our local attachments, indeed, are inthemselves almost all made up of associations; the pleasures that wehave tasted--the happy hours that we have known--the friends that wehave loved--the sports, the pastimes, the little incidents--ay, evensome of the pains of life are woven by memory and association intoties to bind our affections to certain places. Our loves and ourfriendships almost always derive the vigour of their bonds from thepresent and the past together--the ties of local attachments are allfound in the past.On the present occasion, Gondrin had with him the great object of hislove and admiration: his young lord, the Count of Logres. He had withhim, too, in the train of his master, more than one old companion ofhis forest sports. Two of the under piqueurs were to follow him assoon as safe-conducts could be obtained for them, with six dogs, whichwere the special joy of his heart; so that--with the abatement of acertain degree of anxiety regarding the temporal welfare of theaforesaid hounds--Gondrin was as happy as he could be; and whether onhis horse's back, or reposing in the inn-kitchen, or resting by theroadside, he considered himself just as much at home as in his cottageunder the castle of Montsoreau.He bowed low to his lord as the young nobleman came up, and would havespoken to him also with his usual frank cheerfulness, but Gondrin wasas shrewd an observer of men's faces as he was of beasts' footmarks;and he saw on the countenance of Charles of Montsoreau suchindubitable traces of care and thought, that he judged it better tofall back at once amongst his companions in the rear, whose gay voicesand merry laughter soon showed the effect of his presence.Of his young lord, Gondrin had judged rightly, when he thoughtthat he was in no mood to be interrupted in pursuing the current ofhis own ideas. The heart of Charles of Montsoreau was too sadand sorrowful--too full of bitter memories--too full of darkanticipations--to bear any interruption with patience. He had partedfrom Marie de Clairvaut--he had parted from her probably for ever--hehad been disappointed in his hopes of love returned--he hadvoluntarily sacrificed the chance of winning her--he had cast away thebright and golden opportunity--he had cast away the delight of hersociety--he had left behind him the home of his infancy, a placefilled with every sweet memory--he had parted, too, from his brother,the object of all his early affections, and had parted from him withfeelings changed, and with a heart wounded and bleeding.Yet on his way he was borne up by the consciousness of rectitude, andby the vigour of high resolves. He had determined resolutely andfirmly, not only to put down in his bosom any vain hopes of everobtaining the hand of her he loved, but, as far as possible, toconquer that affection--not only to leave his brother full opportunityof striving for her hand himself, but to aid, as far as it was in hispower, by every exertion and by every thought, to remove all ordinarydifficulties from his brother's path. He had already laid out hisplans, he had already made up his mind to his course of action. Hewould go to Logres, he thought; he would call out the numerousretainers which were then at his disposal; he would take a part in thestrifes of the day; he would attach himself to the Princes of thehouse of Guise; and he doubted not to be enabled to render suchservice to their cause, as to obviate all opposition, on their part,to the union of his brother with the daughter of one of the youngerbranches of their family.He hoped that it might be so; and he trusted that it might be so. Hecould not, indeed, deceive himself into a belief that he could wishMarie de Clairvaut to return his brother's love. That he could not do:but if his brother won that love, he could at least contribute, hethought, to his gaining her hand also; for there was something in hisbosom which told him--though they had never yet competed for any greatstake--that he possessed energies and powers which would enable him toaccomplish more, far more, than Gaspar could achieve in the eagerstrife of the world.Such were his views, and such his determinations; but it need hardlybe said, that in forming those views and determinations, there ranthrough the whole web of his thoughts the dark and mournful threads ofdisappointment, and care, and regret. He was gloomy then, andmelancholy; and though to all who approached him, he spokekindly--though he was ever considerate and thoughtful for theircomfort, he uttered not one word uncalled for, and ever fell back intosilent thought as soon as he had uttered any order or direction.The scene through which he passed was certainly not one wellcalculated to dissipate gloomy thoughts. After the first four or fivemiles, it subsided into a flat watery country, with manifold streamsand marshes, and long rows of stunted osiers and low woods seen in dimstraight lines for many miles over the horizon, with nothing breakingthe continuity of brown but thin white mists rising up from the dellsand hollows, and looking cold, and sickly, and mysterious. The palegrey overhanging sky vouchsafed but little light to the earth; andthough the sun at one period struggled to break through, his radiantcountenance looked wan and faint. The road itself was heavy andtiresome for the horses, and relieved by nothing but an occasionalplashy meadow; while ever and anon a wild duck flapped heavily up fromthe morass, or a snipe started away at the sound of the horses' feetwith a shrill, low cry.Seldom, if ever, does it happen that the aspect of the scene throughwhich we pass has not some effect upon us. When deeply absorbed in ourown thoughts; when filled with grief, or care, or anxiety; or evenwhen occupied altogether with thoughts of joy and happiness to come,we know not, we do not perceive the scene around us stealing into ourspirit, mingling with, and giving a colouring to, all our thoughts andfeelings, softening or deepening, rendering brighter or more dark, thecolouring of all our affections at the moment. But still it does so:still every object that our eyes rest upon, every sound that greetsour ear, has its effect upon the mood of the moment; and the sadnessof Charles of Montsoreau, the dark disappointment, the bitter regret,the withering of all his hopes, the casting behind him of his home andall sweet associations, were rendered darker, more painful, moreterrible than they otherwise would have been, by the sky, which seemedto frown back the frown of fate, and by the misty prospect, as dim, asvague, as cheerless as the future of life appeared to his mind's eye.At length, between ten and eleven o'clock, a little village presenteditself; but the population was few and scanty, while a sickly shade,as if from the bad air of the place, pervaded more or less almostevery countenance, and bespoke the marshy nature of the soil. In themiddle of this little place, where in England would have been avillage green, was an old stone cross covered with lichens, andexactly opposite to it, at the side, appeared a large stone buildingwith a bush over the door, and written above it, "The Inn forTravellers on horseback.--Dinner at fourteen sols a head."The horses and the servants wanted both rest and food, and Charles ofMontsoreau turned in thither. He himself, however, ate nothing, andcontinued walking up and down before the door, musing bitterly of thefuture. It mattered not to the innkeeper, indeed, whether the youngnobleman ate his viands or not; for though he had a certain pridetherein, he charged as much for each man that entered the doors,whether they ate or not, as if they had consumed the best of hislarder; and though he would fain have bestowed the solace of hiscompany upon the young traveller, the manner of Charles of Montsoreau,joined with a few words, soon showed him that his company would beburdensome, and he wisely desisted.Peace and quietness, however, were not to be the portion of Charles ofMontsoreau; for scarcely had the aubergiste left him to his ownreflections, when a number of gay sounds made themselves heard fromthe other side of the village, and looking that way, the young countsaw a company of itinerant musicians, who, even in that time of warand bloodshed, did not cease to practise their merry avocation,wandering in gay dresses from city to city, sometimes exposed toplunder and injury, but often strong enough and well enough armed todefend themselves, or perhaps to pillage others.To tell the truth, these traders in sweet sounds did not altogetherbear the very best of characters; and yet, in that time of discord andtumult, when the greater part of men's time was given up to painfulthoughts of self-defence, or the fierce struggles of civil contention,the wandering musicians were generally received with a glad heart toevery abode, and obtained payment of some kind, either in food ormoney, for the temporary enjoyment they afforded.The party which now approached consisted of two men, a woman, and aboy. The two men were ferocious-looking persons enough, with dressesof gay colours, embroidered with tinsel, and each bearing in hisgirdle a dagger, the meretricious ornaments of which seemed adoptedfor the purpose of persuading people that it was there only for show,though in reality the sharp broad blade of highly tempered steel wasvery well calculated to effect any murderous purpose. The woman hadonce, perhaps, been pretty, and she now decked out charms, blightedperhaps by vice as much as faded by time, with every ornament withinher reach. The boy, however, was the personage of the group certainlythe most interesting. He preceded his brethren along the street,playing on a small pipe, from which he produced most exquisite sounds;while a small spaniel dog ran on before him, and from time to timestood upon his hind legs, much to the amusement of the children andwomen that followed the musicians.The truth is, the whole band had been lodging at the other end of thevillage, in one of those little public houses called, in those days,Rpues; but hearing of the arrival of a body of gay cavaliers at thelarger inn, they were coming up in haste to see how many sous theirmusic could extract from the pockets of the troop. The two elder menand the woman were pushing in at once into the auberge, without takingany note of the young Count de Logres, whom they looked upon as amere idler at an inn-door; but the boy stopped, and, uncovering hisdark curly head, gazed for a moment in the count's face, with eyesfull of fire and intelligence.He had scarcely paused a moment, however, when one of the menreturning, caught him violently by the arm, exclaiming, "What are youlingering for, idle fool?" and struck him a blow upon the face withthe open hand, which left the print of his fingers upon the boy'syoung cheek. The boy neither wept nor complained, but stood with hishands by his sides, a dark and bitter frown upon his brow, and aflashing fire in his eye, which showed that his passive calmnessproceeded from no want of indignant sensibility to the injury. Theblow might very likely have been repeated, had not the man's eye, atthat moment, fallen upon Charles of Montsoreau, and perceived in hiscountenance a look of angry indignation, while his apparel and bearingat once showed that he was superior to the party whom the musicianshad met with within."Come in, Ignati," cried the musician, with somewhat of a foreignaccent; "either play on your pipe to the gentleman here, or come andhelp us to sing to the company within doors.""I will not go in," said the boy, "unless you make me; but I will singthe gentleman a song here, if he likes it.""Ay, do, do," said the man; "sing him that Gaillard song with thechorus.""I am in no mood, my poor boy," said Charles of Montsoreau, "to takepleasure in your music. My heart is too sad for your gay sounds. Thereis something for you, however. Go in, and sing to the lighter heartswithin."And giving him a small piece of money, he was turning away; but theboy drew closer to him, and looking up in his face with a sweet andkindly smile, pressed him to hear his music."Oh let me sing to you," he said, "let me sing to you, noblegentleman. You don't know what music can do for a sad heart. It oftenmakes mine less heavy; and I will choose you a song, where even thegay words are sad, so that they shall not be harsh to the mostsorrowful ear.""Well, my good boy," replied the count, "if you must sing, let it beso; but you must expect me to listen but lightly, for I have manythings to think of."The boy instantly laid down his pipe on a bench by the door, andlifting his two hands gracefully, which had before been claspedtogether, he looked up for a minute to the sky, and then began hissong, as follows:--SONG.Gu, gu, well-a-day!Dost thou remember brighter hoursShining upon thy happy way,Like morning sunshine upon dewy flowers?Oh, join my lay,And with me say,Gu, gu, well-a-day!Gu, gu, well-a-day!Has fortune's favour left thee(Ebbing fast away),Like stranded vessel by a summer sea?Oh, join my lay,And with me say,Gu, gu, well-a-day!Gu, gu, well-a-day!Have the eyes that once were smilingNow learnt to stray,Other hearts as fond as thine beguiling?Then join my lay,And with me say,Gu, gu, well-a-day!Gu, gu, well-a-day!Has love's blossom suffer'd blight'Neath misfortune grey,Like flow'rs in the frost of a wintry night?Oh, join my lay,And with me say,Gu, gu, well-a-day!The boy's music had contrived to fix the attention of Charles ofMontsoreau, and awakened an unexpected interest in the fate of theyouth, who seemed capable, not only of the mere mechanical art ofsinging the words of others, or, like a taught bird, whistling musicby rote, but of feeling every word and every tone that he uttered. Asthe young nobleman looked from his face to that of the man whom heaccompanied, and who sat by his side on the bench at the door, gazingat him with an affected smile upon his coarse assassin-like features,he could not but think that it must be a hard fate for that poor,sensitive-looking boy to wander on under the domination of a harshbeing like that, and he almost longed to deliver him from it. He gavethe boy some additional money, however, which made the man's eyesgleam; and he was proceeding to ask some questions regarding the fateand history of the whole party, when Gondrin and the rest of theservants issued forth with the horses, and Charles of Montsoreauprepared to mount."These are the vagabonds, my lord," said Gondrin, "who were up at thecastle gates on the day you saved Mademoiselle de Clairvaut fromdrowning.""I did not see them," replied Charles of Montsoreau with somesurprise--"I did not remark any one there.""No," answered the boy with a light smile, "no, you were thinking toomuch of some one else.""You must have made speed to get here before me," said Charles ofMontsoreau."Ay, we go by paths, sir, that you cannot go on horseback," joined inthe man; "and we will be at the next inn gate before you to-night, ifyou would like to hear the boy's music again.""Perhaps I may," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "at all events, youshan't go without reward.""We will be there, we will be there," replied the man; and the Counthaving ascertained that the reckoning was paid, rode on upon his way.The little incident which had broken in upon the train of hismelancholy thoughts did not very long occupy his mind. "This must be ashrewd boy," he thought, "to adapt his song so well to thecircumstances; for it is clearly from what he saw at the castle gatesthat he judged of the nature of my feelings, and sang accordingly."Thus thinking, he rode on, and his mind readily reverted to the darkertopics which had before occupied it. When he arrived at the sleepingplace, which were in those days called Gtes, he found a large andcomfortable inn, such as was scarcely ever to be met with in any othercountry but France in those days. He looked naturally for the band ofmusicians at the door; but it seemed that they had either forgottentheir promise, or had not yet arrived; and the young count had enteredthe hall and commenced his supper before there was a sign of theirapproach.The first thing that gave him any intimation of their coming was thesound of voices speaking sharp and angrily in the Italian language;and he thought he heard amongst them the tones of the boy uttering afew, but indignant, words of remonstrance.Rising from the table at which he sat, the young count approached thewindow, and found that he was right in supposing the party ofmusicians had arrived. The boy was standing in the midst, and thewoman, as well as the two men, were bending over him, talking to himearnestly, with vehement grimaces on the countenance of each, whilethe clenched fist of the elder man shaken unceasingly, though notraised even so high as his own girdle, showed that some threats werebeing used to the boy, in order, apparently, to drive him tosomething, to do which he was unwilling. Although the window was on alevel with their heads, the count could not distinguish what theysaid, for they were now speaking low, though still eagerly. Theyraised their voices, indeed, almost to a scream, when they utteredsome wild Italian exclamation, but it was meaningless without thecontext. At length, however, to the surprise of Charles of Montsoreau,the boy seemed moved by a sudden fit of rage; and lifting the handwhich held his pipe, he dashed the instrument of music upon theground, shivering it to atoms, and exclaiming, "Never! never! I willneither sing nor play a note!"At that instant the elder man struck him a blow on the side of thehead, which knocked him at once down upon the road; and Charles ofMontsoreau opening the window, leaped out, and interfered, whileseveral of his attendants followed him from the supper room.The faces of the Italians fell when they saw him; and there was a sortof confused and guilty look about them, which might well have made anyone of a suspicious nature believe that they had been planning no verygood schemes, when the obstinacy of the boy had obstructed them."You treat this youth ill," said Charles of Montsoreau, frowning uponthe man who had struck him. "Are you his father?""No, the blessed Virgin be thanked!" exclaimed the Italian; "his nameis Carlo Ignatius Morone, though we call him Ignati. No, obstinatelittle brute! he is no child of mine! I bought him of his mother tosing and dance for us. A bad bargain I made of it too, for he does notgain his own bread with his whims. His mother was a courtezan ofGenoa.""She was not my mother!" cried the boy in an indignant tone. "My motherwas dead long before that. But whatever she was, Paulina Morone wasalways kind to me; and she would never have sold me to you, if I hadnot asked her, when she had no bread to eat herself, and had given methe last crust she had to give.""This is a sad history," said Charles of Montsoreau; "and as you saythe boy does not gain his own bread, you will, doubtless, be gladenough to sell him to me, my good friend."The man hesitated. "I don't know that exactly," he said, "noble lord.The boy can sing well, if he likes it, as you know; and he can playwell both upon the pipe and the lute when he likes it and is notobstinate; and he is as active as a Basque, and can dance better thanany one I ever saw. Would you like to see him dance, my lord? I'llmake him dance fast enough. That I can always do with a good stoutstick, though sing he won't unless he likes it.""I wonder not at it," replied the count. "But you shall not make himdance for me. What I wish to know is, will you sell him to me? Yousaid you had made a bad bargain, and that he did not gain his ownbread, much less repay you.""Not here in the provinces, sir," replied the man. "But I am sure if Itook him to Paris, I could make a good sum by showing him to the lordsand ladies there. However, I will sell him, if I can make something byhim, sooner than be burdened with him any more.""What do you demand?" said Charles of Montsoreau. "If you aremoderate, perhaps I may give it to you, for I like to hear the boysing.""I will have," said the man, "I will have at least a hundred and fiftycrowns of gold, crowns of the sun, sir, remember, or I'll not partwith the boy.""That is three times as much as you gave to the Morone," cried theboy--"you know it is.""Ay, little villain," answered the man; "but have I not brought youfrom Italy since, and fed you for more than a year?""And spent a fortune in cudgels too upon him," said the woman.Charles of Montsoreau gave her a glance of contempt, and then turnedhis look towards the boy, whose eyes were full of tears. The sum thatwas asked for him was, in fact, considerable, each gold crown being inthat day worth sixty sous, and the value of money itself, as comparedwith produce, being about five times that which it is at present. Butthe young nobleman, unaccustomed to traffic in human flesh, that mostodious and horrible of all the rites of Mammon, looked upon the sum tobe given as a mere trifle when compared with the boy's deliverancefrom the hands into which he had fallen."You shall have the money," he said.--"Gondrin, bid Martin bring methe leathern bag which he carries, and I will pay the sumimmediately."The first sensation of the Italian was joy, at having over-reached theyoung French nobleman, the second was equally natural to the people,and the class to which he belonged, sorrow at not having contrived toover-reach him to a greater extent. The money, however, beingproduced, and the sum paid, the boy demanded and received from theyounger man, who carried a pack upon his shoulders, some littlearticles of property belonging, he said, to himself."The boy is now yours, my Lord," said the Italian, looking wistfullyat the closing mouth of the bag; "but surely your Lordship will giveme another crown for the bargain's sake.""I will tell you what I will give you," replied Charles ofMontsoreau:--"if you and your base companions do not take yourselvesout of the place as fast as your legs can carry you, I will order myhorsemen to flog you for a mile along the road with their stirrupleathers."The man put his hand, with a meaning look, to the gilded hilt of hisdagger; but, in an instant, one buffet from the hand of Charles ofMontsoreau replied to the mute sign, by laying him prostrate on theground. A loud laugh echoed from the inn door at this conclusion ofthe scene; and starting on his feet again, the Italian and hiscompanions hurried away as fast as possible, the elder one onlypausing for a moment, at about a hundred yards' distance, to shake hisclenched fist at the young nobleman, with a meaning look."Come, my boy," said the Count, "come and get thee some supper. Thoushalt be better treated at least with me than with them."The boy caught his hand, and kissed it a thousand times, and the youngnobleman led him towards the house, asking him as they went, "What wasit they wished you to do when I came out to stop them from maltreatingyou?""To sing and play to you, and engage all your thoughts," replied theboy, "while they stole the jewel out of your hat, and put a piece ofglass in its place."CHAP. IX.The sweetest of all balms to a hurt mind is the doing a good action;and with that for his consolation, Charles of Montsoreau retired torest, and, though he slept not well, certainly, he obtained morerepose than he had expected. On the following morning, he found--thatwhich we so often find--that things done for kindly and benevolentpurposes bear with them sources of recompense to ourselves which wenever calculated upon. The unfortunate boy whom he had delivered fromthe hands of his persecutors on the preceding day, afforded the youngcount a subject of interest and occupation, that withdrew his thoughtsfrom more painful themes, and gave him a degree of relief, which,though merely temporary, was in itself a blessing.The boy stood by his side while he took his breakfast, and looked sofull of joy, that Charles of Montsoreau could not help congratulatinghimself upon what he had done, though he was not sufficiently ignorantof the world to suppose that, for the sum of a hundred and fiftycrowns, he had bought himself a treasure of high qualities, such asthe best education can hardly bestow upon the best disposition.He had made the boy over entirely to the care of Gondrin, and told theshrewd huntsman to watch his disposition well, and let him know allthe peculiarities thereof. He was himself too much occupied withgloomy thoughts, to investigate the matter fully; and, as the boystood by him, he confined his questions to some points of his formerhistory, and to the various accomplishments which he possessed.To a question as to whether he could ride, the boy only replied with asmile; and it appeared afterwards that, while with the Italians, thewhole of the first part of their journey through Italy and France hadbeen performed on horseback, till some acts of dishonesty, committedin the town of Grenoble, forced them to fly on foot with all speed,and leave their beasts behind them.The purchase of a fresh horse for the boy, and of some suits ofclothes better fitted to a nobleman's page than the gay and mountebankcostume in which he had come to his new master, occupied aconsiderable part of the morning; and by the time Charles ofMontsoreau issued forth to proceed upon his journey, the mists of theearly day had cleared away; the grey veil of clouds which had obscuredthe sky during the preceding day had been scattered into smallfeathery fragments by the sun and the wind; there was a feeling ofspring in the breath of the air, and a look of hope and joyfulnessupon all the world around.As the boy Ignati stood by his master's stirrup for a moment beforethey set out, he lifted his fine dark eyes to the countenance of theyoung nobleman with a look of love and gratitude that was not to bemistaken. It is true that a man may smile, and smile, and be avillain; it is true that the language of looks may often be as falseas the words of the tongue; it is true that no human mode ofexpression may not be poisoned by hypocrisy, and that even actionsthemselves are often as false as looks and words. But there aremoments when the free soul bursts forth through all the bonds of habitor of cunning, and sports, if it be but for a single instant, atliberty; and in those times, though the words may still be false, orat the best regulated with deliberate skill, yet there are momentaryexpressions that cross the countenance--lights that beam up in theeye--smiles that flutter round the lip--which betray the secret of theheart's feelings, notwithstanding the most careful guard.Charles of Montsoreau looked down, and laid his hand upon the boy'shead."You know, Ignati," he said, "that you are a freeman, and not a slave.I paid your price to the Italians to give you liberty, and not topurchase you myself; so you are free to come and to go, to stay withme, or to leave me, as you like.""I will go with you through the world," replied the boy; and though hesaid no more, he said it in such a tone as to leave no doubt upon themind of Charles of Montsoreau that he was sincere for the time atleast.The boy sprang into his saddle with alacrity and grace; and the firsthorseman of the court of France could not have sat his horse with moreease and vigour. His whole demeanour seemed changed from the formerday, as if slavery and the degrading trade to which he had beenpreviously bound had bowed down his spirit, and with it his corporealframe. There was a lightness, a joyous fire in his look, which spokethe consciousness of freedom and of dawning hopes. Before, he had beenbut a handsome, sullen boy; while, now, he looked older than before,and all was quickness and activity.The sky, we have said, was brighter, the day more cheerful, and thescenery itself gradually assuming a finer and a bolder character.Entering that hilly district which lies between Limoges and Tulle, theroad was constantly ascending or descending. Wide woods and moors,broken by rocks and streams, were seen on either side; while now asoft green meadow covered the slope, now a rich-coloured fallow fieldshowed traces of man's industrious hand. Here and there, too, acottage appeared, with its little garden and orchard round about it;here and there a forge, while the castellated houses of many of thesmall provincial nobility showed their glittering weathercocks abovethe grey woods. The aspect of the whole scene was very peaceful; andso, indeed, that part of the country was at the time; for no towns ofsufficient consequence were near to render it, though extremelydefensible, worth the while of any of the various parties which torethe state to defend it against the rest. Through these scenes theyoung count and his attendants rode on during the day, till they cameto their gte for the night, at the pleasant-named town of St. Germainles belles Filles.When the young Count de Logres sat down to supper, with none but onehabitual attendant near him--while the rest of his train dined at atable at the other end of the hall--his mind drew up the short summaryof what changes of feeling his heart had undergone, which we arealmost always inclined to make unconsciously, when we come to the endof a day's journey.It were vain to say that the scenes through which he had passed, orthe aspect of the day, or the occupation of his thoughts by the boythat he had freed, had made his heart lighter; but they had, perhaps,taught that heart to bear its load more firmly. He still thought ofMarie de Clairvaut with the intense passion of first, true, ardentlove. He felt but the more convinced, at every step he took away fromher, that that love would last throughout his being. He felt that,without her, life was now a blank, void of the grand pointing interestof existence--void of all sustaining power, but a knowledge ofrectitude, and a purpose of endurance. It was hard, far more hard, fora young heart like his, that had seldom, if ever, tasted sorrowbefore, or known affliction, to undergo at once the extinction of thatbrightest of life's lights, the hope of mutual affection. We value notour minor sorrows sufficiently: there are great ones to be endured byevery man on earth; and did not the lesser ones prepare us gently forthe burden, we should be crushed under the first mighty misfortunethat befall us. But Charles of Montsoreau had known few, so few, thathe felt, as it were, stunned and benumbed by the weight of grief thatnow came upon him. He had been deprived of the belief that hepossessed the love of Marie de Clairvaut; he had abandoned the hopeand task of winning that love; and, at the same time, the deep, warmconfidence which he had ever till that moment possessed in hisbrother's strong, unalterable affection, had been swept away too. Hecould regard Gaspar de Montsoreau no longer as he had regarded him; hecould think of him no longer as he had thought; he could not respector esteem him as heretofore; and all the fraternal love that remainedin his bosom towards his brother, rendered him but the more sorrowful,that his brother was less worthy than he thought.He was sad and gloomy then, and that sadness was seen in every lookand action: he seemed scarcely to know what were the meats placedbefore him, and only mechanically to taste of that which was next tohim. After he had eaten as much as was necessary to satisfy merenature, he leaned his head upon his hand, and fell into deep thought,which was only interrupted by the low sweet voice of the boy, who hadcome quietly up to his side, saying, "May I not sing to you, sircount? I have seen a song prove better sauce to a poor meal than aduke's kitchen could produce.""It would not be so with me, Ignati," replied the Count. "You shallnot sing to me to-night, my good boy; but go to bed, and rest youryoung limbs."Though he refused him, yet the voluntary offer the boy had made camesweetly; for, on the first sweep of disappointment's heavy wing, asort of misanthropy is cast upon us which we own not even to our ownhearts. We doubt, without our will, that there is such a thing asaffection, or gratitude, or kindly feeling, or generous sensibilityleft upon earth; and it is sweet, and happy, and consoling when anything happens, however light or small, to show us feelingly that ourdark judgment of the world was wrong. He still refused the boy'smusic, however, though kindly; for he was busy with his own thoughts,and wished to pursue them undisturbed.On the following morning he continued his journey: nor is it worthwhile to follow him day by day, while, taking his way by Bourges andChalons, he approached the north-eastern frontier of France. Thejourney was long and tedious, but it was accomplished without anyaccident or interruption; and, indeed, till he approached near thefrontiers of Lorraine, the traces of the war which desolated Francewere comparatively small. Commerce, indeed, there was little or nonethroughout the land; but agriculture was pursued with less difficulty;and in those districts where the strife was not actually going on, thefirst return of spring saw the husbandman again in the field.The neighbourhood of Troyes and Chalons, however, began to showevident marks of the ravages of war: the fields were uncultivated; thetowns guarded with rigorous strictness; no tall ricks of corn wereseen near the farm-house; the cattle lowed not in the plains; theshepherd turned anxiously round at every sound of a horse's steps;and, in many places, the vineyards themselves showed the marks offire, and the vines were seen cut down and piled up for fuel. Whereverthe traveller stopped and inquired what was the cause of thedestruction he beheld, he was told that a body of reiters had pillagedhere, or a horde of Germans wasted there; and, although there weresome who ventured, in the angry indignation of their heart, to curseboth the house of Guise and the house of La Mark, and to express theirhorror of all parties alike, yet it was evident that the chivalrousspirit of the Guises, their gracious demeanour, and their heroicactions against a foreign enemy, had in general won the love of thepeople, so that they were greatly preferred to the Protestant princesof Sedan, who had led an army of thirty thousand strangers to theinvasion of their native country.Charles of Montsoreau learned all these tales as he passed; and ateach inn where he stopped he received some warning not to advancerashly in this direction, or in that, lest he should meet with some ofthe scattered bands who had turned their swords into reaping hooks ina very different sense from the pacific one, and were gathering in aharvest which they had not sown, from the fears and necessities of thecountry.Thus it happened in setting out from Chalons, the good aubergiste, whohad taken care to extract from the purse of the young nobleman as muchas could be obtained with any appearance of honesty, counselled himstrongly, instead of pursuing the high road towards Rheims, to followthe way along the river towards Mareuil, and thence across thecountry. "For," said he, "there is a band of at least fifty reitershave been watching the Rheims' gate for the last ten days, and havetaken toll of every one that passed, be he citizen or gentleman. Yourtrain, too, is so scanty, young sir, that one sees evidently you comefrom a quieter place. Why, no one here ever thinks of riding withoutforty men at least; and the good Duke of Guise dare not go himselffrom one chteau to another without a hundred salads at his back."As Charles of Montsoreau was not by any means well satisfied with thepeculiar species of honesty of his host, he made no reply to hiscounsels, but followed his former purpose, and took the high road. Erehe had pursued it two miles, however, the merry huntsman Gondrin rodeup, with the boy Ignati by his side, and some eagerness on hiscountenance."My Lord," he said, "the boy declares that he saw the gleaming ofspear-heads upon the side of the hill a mile on.""Indeed, Ignati!" said the Count--"your eyes must be sharp. Point outto me these spears; for I have seen nothing of them, though I havebeen watching anxiously.""I can't show them to you now, sir," replied the boy, "for they havegone slowly behind the wood; but I saw them, believe me, and I am notmistaken."Even while he was speaking a peasant was seen coming along the roadupon an ass which he was beating forward to as fast a pace as thebrute's natural indocility would admit. The moment, however, that hesaw the count's troop drawn up in the midst of the road, he suddenlypaused in his course, with a look of some alarm, which did not seem atall to subside upon the young nobleman riding up to him with Gondrinand the boy, and insisting upon his stopping; for he was nowendeavouring to drive his beast into one of the by-paths through thecountry.He was soon re-assured, however; and no sooner did he find that theparty he had met with was not calculated to be an object of terror,than he endeavoured to inspire the persons of whom it was composedwith the same fears which had taken possession of himself, informingthe young count that he had just himself passed the reiters, who,though they had left him the vegetables that he was carrying in hispanniers to the market at Chalons, had taken from him all his poultryand eggs. He magnified their number and their ferocity very greatly;and as it was evident that they would not prove the most agreeable ofcompanions on the road he was about to travel, Charles of Montsoreauobtained more correct information of the peasant as to the way toMareuil, and struck back again from the high road towards the courseof the Marne.The circuit that he had made, however, and the time that had been lostby one interruption or another, rendered it late before he reached thevillage of Cond, and it was dark before he approached Mareuil. Theplace was unfortified, and, as far as he could judge in passingthrough the little narrow street by which he first entered it, had anair of greater tranquillity and comfort than he had lately seen.No house of public entertainment was apparent till he reached an openpart of the street, near the centre of the little town, where a largestone building stood back from the rest, and displayed a wide front,with windows few and far between, and a single large archway for adoor. Over this swung the sign of the inn, under a highly ornamentedand gilded grating of iron-work; and as soon as the feet of horseswere heard in the dusty open space before the building, mine host andtwo of his palefreniers rushed forth to receive the new guests.The night was clear, and the moon was up; and what between theassistance of the fair planet and the host's lantern, a verysufficient knowledge could be obtained in a moment of the persons ofthe strangers. That knowledge seemed in some degree to surprise andpuzzle the landlord; and had Charles of Montsoreau remarked veryacutely, he would have perceived that some one else had been expectedin his place.He noted not the demeanour of the landlord at all, however; but,springing from his horse, entered the archway, and passed through adoor which stood ajar to the right, showing through the crevice a welllighted room within. It was one of the large open halls of an oldFrench inn, the rafters low and black with smoke, the chimney wide andstretching out far into the room, the andirons, on which were piled upimmense masses of wood, containing each more than one hundred weightof iron, and the table in the midst fit to support viands for forty orfifty people. The light which the young nobleman had seen proceededboth from the fire which was blazing and crackling cheerfully, andfrom two large sconces of polished brass hung in different parts ofthe room.The hall possessed at the moment of the Count's entrance only onetenant, of whom he could see little more, than that he was dressed ingrey of the most ordinary kind. His hat was on, and differed a gooddeal from the cap and feather then common at the court of France,being tall in the crown, broad in the brim, and decorated by a singlecock's feather raising itself from the button on the right side. Largeuntanned riding-boots were drawn up above his knees, a light sword wasby his side, as if he felt himself in perfect security; and he wore afalling collar of lace over his doublet, instead of the ruff, whichwas ordinary at that period. The buttons of the grey suit were of jet,and on the middle finger of his right hand was a large seal ring, ofapparently coarse manufacture. He was sitting at one of the farthercorners of the table, with an inkhorn before him and a pen in hishand, busily writing on a sheet of coarse paper, which had beensupplied to him by the host; so that looking at him as he sat, onemight very well have taken him for some public notary of aneighbouring town, in not the best practice in the world.Such, indeed, would have been the interpretation which Charles ofMontsoreau would have put upon his appearance, had it not been for thesomewhat Spanish cut of his hat, and the singular fashion of hiscollar, which puzzled him a good deal; for, notwithstanding theoccupation of his mind with other thoughts, and the very ordinaryapparel of the stranger, there was something in his form and aspectwhich attracted attention and excited curiosity in the young nobleman,he neither knew why nor how.As soon as he heard a step entering the room, the stranger turnedpartially round and half rose from his seat; but a momentary glancewas sufficient to show him that the person who appeared was unknown tohim; and, turning towards the table again, he pursued his occupation.The young count advanced slowly to the fire, and drawing a settlenear, stretched out his feet to warm himself, turning his back to thestranger so as to avoid any air of scanning his proceedings. Gondrinand the other attendants came and went, asking him questions anddirections as he thus sat; and from time to time the writer turnedround his head and examined their movements and appearance, butwithout uttering a word. The aubergiste himself at length approachedthe fireplace, in order, it seemed, to consult with the younggentleman regarding his supper. There was but little, he said, in thehouse, and at that late hour it was impossible to procure much more.However, he would do his best, he added, and assured his new guest ofat least giving him good wine.Charles of Montsoreau informed him that he was easily satisfied, anddoubted not that every thing would be good and abundant. But somewhatto his surprise--for such things were not at all customary in thatday--the aubergiste proceeded to demand whether he would not preferhaving a chamber apart to sup in, rather than take his meal in thecommon hall. He was in the act of replying in the negative, when thevoice of the stranger who was writing at the table made itself heardfor the first time, exclaiming, in an authoritative tone, "PierreJean."The innkeeper instantly flew to his side, and the other addressed himin a low tone, to which the innkeeper replied almost in a whisper."As you will, Matre Henri, as you will," said the landlord inconclusion. "But I think it very strange they have not come."The other merely nodded his head in reply, and then folding up thepaper he had written, he put it in his pocket, and approached the firewith an air of being quite at home. He was a man of about six or sevenand thirty years of age, and, as he now stood before Charles ofMontsoreau at his full height, appeared to the eyes of the youngnobleman one of the most powerful men he had ever beheld. His chestwas at once broad and deep, his limbs muscular and long, the headsmall, the flanks thin, and the foot and hand well formed. Everyindication was there of great strength and great activity, and thecountenance also harmonised perfectly well with the figure, the broadhigh forehead giving that air of a powerful and active mind which weare all, whether physiognomists or not, inclined by nature to see inthe expanse which covers and seems to represent the great instrumentof the human intellect. He wore the mustachio somewhat long, and thebeard pointed, but small. The eyes were large and fine, the eyebrowsstrongly marked, the nose was beautifully formed, displaying the wideexpansive nostril, generally reckoned a sign of generous feelings; andthough there was a cut upon his brow scarcely healed, and a deep scarin his cheek of a more remote date, yet they did not at all detractfrom the handsomeness of the countenance, which, notwithstanding theplainness of his dress and appearance, was peculiarly striking andattractive."This is a cold night, young gentleman," he said, as he approached thefire, "and you ride out somewhat late for a traveller in these partsof the world.""Oh, I fear not the cold," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "and thoughI certainly prefer not the night to travel in, yet, when I must betakemyself to it, I do so without much discomfort or hesitation.""Ay; but there are other things sweep over this country besides thewind," said the stranger, "things more cutting and more sharp, I canassure you.""Oh, against those I go pretty well prepared also," replied Charles ofMontsoreau; "every French gentleman is a soldier, you know; and we arenot unwilling or unable to make use of our arms when it may beneedful.""You have served, I suppose," said the stranger, "perhaps at Coutras,with the Duke of Joyeuse, or with Harry of Navarre and his Huguenots."Charles of Montsoreau looked up with a smile. "If we begin talking ofwhere we served, and on what causes, good sir," he said, "we shallhave our worthy host, Pierre Jean, requiring us to give up our swordsinto his safe keeping till we set out again, as indeed he is bound bylaw to do.""Oh, no fear, no fear," replied the stranger, laughing. "We shall notquarrel and cut each other's throats, depend upon it. You are here, ayoung lord, with, it seems to me, a dozen or two of attendants, and Iam alone, a poor Escribano, by name Matre Henri, as you just heard.""And yet," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "the poor Escribano, Ishould judge, had seen some service in his day, and that not very manyyears ago either.""Oh, you judge from that cut upon my forehead. That is but the scratchof a cat.""Well, then," answered Charles, "if you will tell me sincerely whetherthat cat's claw was a reiter's estramaon, or the spear of a De laMark, I will tell you whether I drew my sword at Coutras, and on whatpart."The stranger gazed at him for several moments, with an inquiring andyet half laughing-glance."You are as keen," he said at length, "as a Gascon; perhaps, for aughtI know, as ambitious as a Guise, as hardy and obstinate as a La Mark,and as politic and secret as a Brisson. The last, at least, I am sureof; and I can tell you, my good youth, if I judge right, we are notlikely to part so soon as we both expected when you entered thisroom.""Perhaps not, Matre Henri," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "for, if Ijudge rightly, and you are, as you say, alone, I am not likely toleave you till I see you safe on the other side of Rheims. There lie astrong body of reiters on the Chalons road; and there is one man inFrance for whom I have much love and respect, but who is somewhat toofamous for exposing himself unnecessarily. I have but few men with me;but, well led, and with a great purpose, those few may do much."The expression which the stranger's countenance assumed, as helistened to this speech, was strange and mingled. There was a smilecame upon it, as if half amused, half touched; and yet there was adegree of doubt hung wavering upon his brow, while he firstscrutinised the countenance of his companion closely, and then,casting down his eyes, fell into a deep fit of thought. After a shortpause, however, he replied,--"You fought at Coutras, sir, neither forHenry of Navarre nor Anne of Joyeuse, that is clear. Am I not right?""Quite, Matre Henri," replied the young count, with an air ofindifference and a smile; "I fought neither for the heretics, because,Heaven be praised, I am a good Catholic, nor for the minions, becausethe hero of Jarnac and Montcoutour has passed away into a lover of petpuppies and a pedant in cosmetics."A sarcastic smile curled the lip of his companion while he spoke. "Twogood, wise, and sufficient reasons," he said, "such as a notary mayapprove of. But tell me, young gentleman, have we ever met before?""Never," answered Charles of Montsoreau, "unless we met before we wereborn. But, however, Matre Henri, to put an end to all doubts, that Isee are in your mind, my name is Charles of Montsoreau, Count ofLogres, whom you may have heard of, perhaps, though he has yet tomake a name in history, and hopes to do so with his sword."The stranger instantly extended his hand to him, exclaiming, "Indeed,young friend, indeed! How came you here? What brought you to this partof the world?""I came for two purposes," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "In thefirst place, it is long since I have seen Logres; my tenantry need mypresence; and it is time that I should take the management of thoseestates out of the hands of underlings, and defend, protect, anddirect them myself."While he spoke, several of his attendants returned to the room,accompanied by the host, to make preparation for the visiter's supper,and the stranger instantly resumed the position he had at first beenstanding in, after he approached the fire, while Charles of Montsoreauwent on, taking a hint to be cautious from his companion's eyes. "Inthe next place," he continued, "my second purpose was to visit thegood Duke of Guise, who, I understand, is at Soissons, or in thatneighbourhood.""He was at Nancy but a week or two ago," replied the other; "but,after all, you may very likely find him at Soissons, for he iscontinually moving about the country; and there was a report not longago, that he was to hold a private conference one of these days withMonsieur de Bellievre, sent on the part of the king. But there islittle trust in this Henry, and Heaven knows whether he will send ornot.--Shall we sup together, sir?""With all my heart," replied the young count, not a little to thesurprise of some of his attendants who were in the room, and who didnot at all comprehend how their lord, whom they were themselvesaccustomed to treat with much reverence and respect, came to sit downwith a person of such plain apparel.Their astonishment was not less when they beheld the young nobleman,after supper had been placed upon the table, wait till the other wasseated, before he took his own place. The only one who seemed tounderstand the whole was the boy Ignati, who said, in an under voice,to Gondrin, "He has forgotten himself, master huntsman! Or is MatreHenri gone for to-night?""And who is Matre Henri?" demanded Gondrin, in the same tone."I could tell, if I would," answered the boy, "but our lord knows him,if you do not."Before he had well ended, a servant, dressed like his master, in grey,entered the room in haste, and placed a written paper in the hands ofMatre Henri, who read it with attention, and then bending over thetable towards Charles of Montsoreau, demanded, in a low tone, "Howmany men have you with you, my young friend?""Only seven," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "besides myself and thepage. But they are all well-armed, resolute, and determined, and I,the eighth, trust not to be behind any of them.""Eleven!" said his companion, musing. "We should but muster eleven ifwe were to set off this moment; for though we counted six amongst uswhen I arrived, I have sent off three to a distance, and they cannotbe back ere the morning. No, we had better wait till daylight. I mustgive them till twelve o'clock, too, to see if they will keep theirword with me: though, by these tidings, it seems to be brokenalready.--Hark ye," he continued, speaking to the servant who hadbrought him the paper, and who still stood beside his chair--"hark ye;bend down your ear."The man did as he was bidden; and, after whispering to him for severalminutes, the stranger added, in a louder tone, "If you go by Lespetites Loges, you will pass them. Tell him that fifty will do. I wantno more, and we must not leave any point weak."After he had thus spoken, he tore off a bit of the paper he hadreceived, wrote a few words down upon it in a careless way, and tossedit over to Charles of Montsoreau. Those words were, "Schelandre, whoyou know is as brave as a lion and as cunning as a fox, is looking outfor me, with two squadrons, on the road by Hautvilliers. He has gotnews of my coming by some means--very likely from Henry himself."Charles turned an inquiring look upon his companion's face, as if toask, what is to be done? But the other glanced his eye over hisshoulder towards the attendants, and proceeded with his supper,commenting upon the landlord's good cheer, praising his wine, andlaughing and talking gaily, as if there were no such thing as perilupon the earth.CHAP. X.It was in the grey of the morning on the following day that a party ofhorsemen, now amounting in all to the number of fifteen or sixteen,was seen winding through the little wood, which at that time occupiedthe ground in the neighbourhood of Chaumizy, a spot which in thepresent day sends forth many an excellent bottle of sparkling wine, towarm the hearts of many a distant potator.To any eye which watched the progress of that party from a height--andthere was an eye which did so--the movements of the band might seemcomplicated and curious,--now turning to the east, now winding to thewest--now marching on straight forward to the north. One thing,however, was evident, that those horsemen affected by-paths and shadyroads, never crossing a hill where they could take their way throughthe valley, never choosing the open ground where they could go throughthe wood. Sometimes the eye which, as we have said, watched them fromthe most elevated ground in the neighbourhood, lost them for severalminutes amongst the trees and vineyards, sometimes saw them emergewhen it least expected them, sometimes was baffled altogether inregard to a conception of their onward course, by the strange turnsand windings which they took.Nevertheless the band still continued to advance in its own way,winding amidst the brown leafless woods, with Charles of Montsoreaucompletely armed at its head; Gondrin, little less formidably equippedby his side on the right hand, and the boy Ignati, now dressedcompletely as a page, with pistols at his saddlebow, and a strongdagger on his thigh, upon the left hand of the young nobleman. Thencame, mixed together, the attendants of the Count--all as we havedescribed them before, strongly armed;--two or three strangers ofmilitary appearance, clothed in general in grey suits with a doubleblack cross observable on some parts of their garments; and two orthree hardy spirits from the little village of Mareuil, who had beenhired to swell the numbers of the Count's train, as they passed acrossthe dangerous part of the country between Chalons and Rheims.Amongst the rest of the persons thus mixed together, might be observedMatre Henri, dressed precisely as he had been the night before,though most of the other personages in grey had contrived to purchasein the village of Mareuil several pieces of defensive and offensivearmour, such as steel caps, called salads, breast plates, and thelarge heavy swords then in use against cavalry, which, like theattendants of Charles of Montsoreau, they bore naked in their hands.Very few words were uttered as the band rode along: sometimes an orderwas given in a low voice by the young count, sometimes, while the restcontinued to advance, he rode back, to speak to some one in the rear,sometimes he addressed a few words to Gondrin or the page; but ingeneral all passed in silence."Are you sure you know your way?" he demanded at length of the boyIgnati, on their suddenly taking a path which appeared more thanusually out of the direct course."As well as I know the lines on my own hand, sir," replied the boy inthe Italian language, which he had discovered that his masterunderstood. "I would rather lose my eyes than lead you or him a stepwrong.""Who do you mean by him?" demanded Charles of Montsoreau, in the sametongue."I mean him with the scar," replied the boy."Why, what is he to thee?" asked his master."Why, he is the only one in all the land," replied the boy, "that everwas kind to me before yourself; and I remember seven months ago, whenthey made me dance and sing at a great banquet in the town of Nancy,he patted my head, and called me a good youth, and while all the restshowered money into the box my master carried round, he gave me abroad piece, and told me it was for myself. They took it from meafterwards: but he did not know that.""Then recollect him, and you know him?" demanded his master."Grey cloth and brown baize will not hide him from me," replied theboy, with an intelligent smile, "though when I saw him, it was crimsonvelvet and gold. The heart has its eyes, dear lord, as well as thehead, and the heart's eyes never forget.""Well then, Ignati," replied the Count, "in case of any attack--whichwe cannot be sure will not take place--you attach yourself to hisside, quit him not for a moment, serve him in every thing; but in thevery first place guide him on towards Rheims, by the safest paths thatyou know.""But must I leave you?" demanded the boy--"must I leave you in thehands of the enemy?""Never mind me," replied his master--"I will defend myself, goodIgnati. Besides, they can scarcely be called my enemies, as I havetaken no service against them."Just as he spoke, the band issued forth from the little by-path whichthey had been pursuing, into one of the main roads through the wood,and saw before them, at the distance of about a hundred yards, an oldgrey stone cross, raised upon several steps, in the very centre of theroad, marking the spot where two ways crossed. When first they camewithin sight of that memento of past years, the ground around it wascompletely solitary: but before they reached it, five or six heavyarmed horsemen came at a quick pace up the road leading to the leftand planted themselves round the cross. The moment they reached it,one of their party took off his steel cap, and waved it in the air,looking at the same time down the road by which he had come, as ifgiving a signal to some persons who followed him.To the eyes of Charles of Montsoreau and his companions theseindications wanted no explanation, nor was any consultation necessary;for it was evident that there was but one thing to be done, namely, toendeavour to force a passage through this little advanced party of thereiters before the main body could come up."Quick to the side of Matre Henri," exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau,speaking to the page. "You, Gondrin, too, attach yourself to him.Leave nothing undone to secure his escape; and now forward, my men!Upon them!"He turned one anxious glance round in the direction of his newlyacquired companion; but saw--with some surprise, perhaps--nothing buta calm, unperturbed smile on his countenance. Matre Henri was quietlydrawing his sword from its sheath, and in answer to the anxious lookof Charles of Montsoreau, only gave a familiar nod, saying, "Go on!"The young count's orders had been already given, and his horse wasinstantly put into the gallop. The reiters on their part seemed torequire neither parley nor explanation any more than the young count;and instantly separating into two parties, they occupied the road oneither side of the cross: he, who was evidently the commander, againwaving his steel cap in the same direction as before.Charles of Montsoreau saw that all depended upon speed, and the promptexecution of his commands; and, turning to the man who followedimmediately behind him, he exclaimed, without at all checking his paceas he did so, "Pass round to the right of the cross with two others;but where the passage is forced, attach yourself to drive back the menon the left of the cross, up the road to the left; while I with therest bar that road against those that are coming up."The man seemed to understand at a word; and in a moment more they wereat the spot where the two roads crossed. As he came up, Charles ofMontsoreau turned his head for an instant, and, to his greatsatisfaction, saw that a large body of horse, which was coming down atfull speed, was still at a considerable distance.That turning of his head, however, had nearly cost him his life; forthe three men immediately behind him, having been detached to theother side, one of the reiters, emboldened by this circumstance,spurred suddenly forward, and aimed a long heavy stroke at the head ofthe young nobleman, which struck him upon the neck, and had it notbeen for the goodness of his arms, must inevitably have killed him onthe spot. As it was, the blow made the count bend almost to hissaddle-bow: but it was only to raise himself again immediately, and toreturn the blow with a force and vigour which cast the reiter headlongfrom his horse.At the same time the three men whom he had detached, passed round tothe right of the cross. The reiters, who were opposed to them on thatside, prepared to stop their progress; but as they were about to doso, they perceived Gondrin, the page, and Matre Henri, with one ofhis attendants, advancing at full speed a little further to the right.This was enough to make them desist their opposition to the others,and turn to close the path on that side, while the three followers ofCharles of Montsoreau, taking advantage of the space thus left,wheeled upon the men on the left side of the cross, and drove themback, trampling upon their fallen companion.The young nobleman, as soon as he saw the success of this man[oe]uvre,drew in his rein for a moment, in order to suffer it to be fullyexecuted, and the reiters to be driven back into the road up whichthey had come. On the other hand, they, finding themselves decidedlyovermatched, suffered this to be accomplished with ease, and made thebest of their way back towards the larger body of their comrades, whowere now coming down at full speed to their support.The moment that Charles of Montsoreau saw this accomplished, he turnedhis head once more to Matre Henri, exclaiming, "On, on, with allspeed! I will insure you at least ten minutes:". and then, withoutwaiting for any answer, he brought the greater part of his men intothe road down which the chief body of the reiters was advancing, andprepared, as best he might, to stand the coming shock, which wascertain to be tremendous.In the mean while, Matre Henri, with Gondrin on one side, and the boyon the other, had advanced at full speed towards the three reiters onthe right of the cross. One of the stranger's own attendants followedonly a step behind; but as they came up, a fierce-looking, powerfulman, from amongst their opponents, aimed his petronel right at thehead of Matre Henri, exclaiming, "I know thee! I know thee!" and wasin the very act of firing, when the page, making his horse springforward, endeavoured to grasp the muzzle of the piece.He did not succeed entirely, but was enabled to turn the weapon insome degree, so that the ball passed through the tall Spanish hat ofMatre Henri; and being fired from the higher ground on which thecross stood, entered the head of the attendant who was coming upbehind, and killed him on the spot. The contest at that point was thusrendered a very unequal one, there being but two men, and one of thosenearly unarmed, with a boy of fourteen or fifteen, opposed to threestrong and well-armed men.As all knew, however, that the party headed by Charles of Montsoreaucould maintain the road but a very short time against the force comingdown upon him, the gain or loss of a minute was every thing to thosewho were struggling on the right of the cross. The long heavy swordusually borne by the reiter was but feebly opposed by the light weaponof Matre Henri; but that light weapon was used with a degree ofskill, coolness, and presence of mind which made up for the disparity;and, with the page still close to his side, he was driving back hisimmediate opponent, warding off every sweep of his heavy blade,pressing him so hard whenever he paused for a moment, as to preventhim from snatching one of the pistols from his saddle-bow, andgradually urging his own charger onward, till he had very nearlycleared the road before him, when one of the other two reiters--whohad hitherto attached themselves to Gondrin, as the only completelyequipped man-at-arms of the opposite party--turned suddenly uponMatre Henri, and assailed him on the right, while the other rapidlyrecovered his ground upon the left.Never, however, did skill, strength, and presence of mind, do so muchfor one individual as they did for the man in grey. For a moment ortwo he applied himself solely to the defensive, wheeling his horsefrom the one to the other, as they attacked him with the mostextraordinary rapidity and skill,--now parrying one blow, now parryinganother, and still watching for an opportunity of resuming theoffensive. At length the reiter who was assailing him on his righthand, seeing that their other companion had by this time been wellnigh mastered by Gondrin, determined to end all by killing the horseof the man opposed to him, and with the bridle in his teeth, and hissword in both hands, aimed a tremendous blow at the poor animal'shead; but Matre Henri instantly divining his intention, turned thespur sharply into the horse's side, and reined him to the left at thesame time.The noble animal, practised for years to comprehend the slightestindication of its rider's will, instantly took a demivolte, as it wascalled, to the left with a sharp spring. The reiter's sword descendedwith tremendous force; but the object at which he had aimed was justbeyond his reach, and the weight of the sword, with the impetus he hadgiven the blow, nearly threw him from the saddle, making him bend downto his saddle-bow. The opportunity was all that his opponent desired;his horse was turned like lightning, and before the man could raisehimself, he received a severe wound in the back of the neck, whichmade heaven and earth, and the whole scene around, swim dizzily beforehis eyes.The other reiter on the left, however, was upon the successfulswordsman in a moment. By this time his pistol was in his hand, and avery slight movement brought the muzzle within a foot of MatreHenri's bosom.That advantage retained for one single second more might have changedthe destiny of many thousands of human beings; but at the very momentthat he was sure of his aim, and about to draw the trigger, a strong,well-aimed, unhesitating blow from the hand of the page, drove thedagger, with which he was armed, under the very arm which held thepistol, between it and his corselet. So strong, so determined was thatblow, that the weapon entered to the very haft, and there remained,fixed between the corselet and the brassard, so that the boy could notwithdraw it.But that mattered not, the weapon had cut through many a vital part inits passage; the sick faintness of death came upon the man's heart andbrain; the pistol and the reins dropped from his hands; and, after areeling attempt to keep the saddle, he fell headlong to the ground.One glance of the eye had shown Matre Henri all that took place; andwithout uttering a word, he continued the fight with his otherantagonist, taking advantage of the wound he had given him, andpressing him so hard, that at length the horse, reined back upon theslippery ground of the forest road, reared, and fell over with hisrider, crushing him under its weight.By this time, though the space that had elapsed was very short,Gondrin had so far got the better of his antagonist, that the man'ssteel cap had fallen off under the repeated blows of the huntsman, anda deep bleeding wound in the forehead showed that the protection ofthe casque was not a little wanting. The sight of one of hiscompanions dead upon the ground, and of the horse falling over withthe other, did not give him any very great encouragement to pursue thestrife; and he was making the best of his way, closely pursued byGondrin, towards the branch of the road which led up to the right,when the voice of Matre Henri attracted the huntsman's ear,exclaiming, "Leave him, leave him! Let us make our way onward, withall speed, now that the road is clear."Gondrin certainly asked himself, "Is it fair and right to leave mynoble master thus?" But the orders of that master had been distinct,and he obeyed at all risks, following Matre Henri, who galloped onwith a degree of speed which, to the eyes of the huntsman, seemedsomewhat unseemly. At the distance of about a mile and a half,however, the road took a turn to the left; and, in a moment, a largebody of horse was before the eyes of the fugitives, advancing at asomewhat quick pace towards the scene where the late contest had takenplace. On the left breast of each corselet appeared a double cross;and, without drawing his rein for a moment, Matre Henri galloped uptowards them, while a loud shout of "The Duke! the Duke!" burst fromthe ranks of the soldiery.Few, however, were the words which the man in grey spoke. He wheeledhis horse at their head, bade Gondrin and the page get into the rear;adding, "You have had fighting enough for to-day, my friends,"--and ina moment the whole body was put to full speed, and advancing towardsthe cross, in the heart of the wood.They came but up in time, however; for Charles of Montsoreau, thoughcontending pertinaciously for every inch of ground, from a knowledgeof how needful was each moment to his companion, had been driven backby superior numbers into the other road, and, though still keeping hisface to the enemy, and closing the path against them, was losingground rapidly.In the first shock with the reiters, he had turned his head toascertain that there was no space left for the passage of the enemy,and had beheld, to his surprise, that two or three of Matre Henri'sservants had remained with him, instead of following their master. Inanswer to an exclamation expressive of his surprise, however, one ofthe men merely replied, "It was his order;" and the fierceness of thestruggle that ensued left no room for farther inquiry.The number of reiters amounted to at least fifty men; and had thespace been open, the young cavalier must have been overpowered in amoment. But the arrival, nay, the very sight, of the strong body thatnow came down to his assistance, changed in a moment the aspect of thewhole scene.At a single word from the lips of Matre Henri, the lances of thethree first lines of his horsemen were levelled in an instant; thereiters halted in mid-career; and Charles of Montsoreau, at oncecomprehending what had occurred, opened the way, as far as possible,by drawing his wounded and weary followers out of the road, andplunging their horses, where they could, in amongst the trees. Thereiters wavered for a moment, as if hesitating whether to retreat atonce, or endeavour to make a stand; but so sudden and unexpected wasthe appearance of the adverse horse, that nothing had been preparedfor retreat; and the commander found himself forced to maintain hisground for a time, till the ranks that followed could be wheeled andwithdrawn.In the mean time, with loud cries of "Lorraine! Lorraine[2]! A Guise!a Guise!" the adverse cavalry came down; but the German horse couldnot stand for a moment before the long lances of the men-at-arms, andin a few minutes all was confusion, flight, and pursuit.---------------------[Footnote 2: The Duke of Guise was at this time employing severalbodies of troops levied in Lorraine, against the Princes of Sedan.]---------------------As soon as the cavalry of Lorraine had passed by, Charles ofMontsoreau drew his men out again from the wood, and, perfectly securefrom any further annoyance, began to count his loss, and to examineinto the state of the wounded men who had continued to fight on by hisside. He himself was bleeding from a sharp wound in the head, receivedfrom so strong a blow of one of the reiter's heavy swords, that noteven his steel cap had been able to protect him. He had another wound,also, from a pistol ball in the left arm; but it was very slight, andhad not prevented him from managing his horse with ease. Almost everyman about him was more or less wounded, and some severely, but onlytwo had been left on the ground from which he had been driven; and hehastened on after the two parties still engaged in conflict, to seefor those who were thus missing.Luckily, the reiters, in their retreat, had followed the straight roadbehind them, instead of taking that by which they came; otherwise thewhole force of charging cavalry must have passed over the youngcount's two followers.One of them was still living, and afterwards recovered, though he wasat the time so severely wounded in the leg that he could not move fromthe spot where he lay. The other was quite dead, a pistol ball havingpassed through his head.The road through the wood was now, for a minute or two, turned into anhospital; and all that was possible was done to stanch the bleeding ofthe wounds which had been received, and to put the men in a state topursue their onward journey towards Rheims. Nor were the woundedreiters themselves neglected; for Charles of Montsoreau was not one toforget, as soon as the eagerness of the actual strife was over, thathis adversaries were his fellow-men.This had been scarcely completed, and the young count once more onhorseback again, when the sound of distant trumpets ringing merrilythrough the wood gave notice that the horsemen of Lorraine were ontheir return; and in a few minutes after a group of some six or sevencavaliers, with Matre Henri at their head, appeared coming up theroad, followed at the distance of a couple of hundred yards by thebody of cavalry he had met with so opportunely. All was laughter andmerriment amongst the little group of officers; and, though MatreHenri himself was not loud in his mirth, he came on smiling at thejests and gibes of the others, and sometimes answering them in thesame strain, though with a manner somewhat chastened and stately.At the distance of about twenty or five and twenty yards from theyoung count, he held up his hand to the troops that followed,pronouncing die word "Halt!" Then riding up with his group ofofficers, he grasped Charles of Montsoreau warmly by the hand; and,turning to those who followed, said, "Noble lords, to this gallantgentleman, to his courage, skill, determination, and good faith, I owelife or liberty. You are witnesses that, in the fullest manner, Iacknowledge the debt, and that in no manner will I fail to pay it,when he chooses to call upon me.""Your highness is too generous in your consideration of the service,"replied Charles of Montsoreau. "I came from a distant part of Franceto seek you, in order to offer you my poor services--perhaps somewhattardily--in your efforts to chase from the soil of our native countrybands of foreign adventurers who have no business to meddle with ourintestine quarrels. I found you likely to be surprised by accident byone of those bands; and what could I do less than assist you to theutmost of my power?""Our views of the extent of the service," replied the Duke of Guise,with the bright smile of his house playing on his lip, "must besomewhat different, I fear, my young friend. But now we have met, wewill not part speedily. You must be my guest, and go on with me, firstto Rheims, and then to Soissons, with all speed. There we will talk ofour future alliance; for the Count de Logres and the Duke of Guiseshall treat together as crown to crown, and nobody call it treason. Ihave," he continued in a lower voice, but with a marked and meaningsmile--"I have to ask you many questions in regard to a fair child ofour house, who has, according to her letters and to yours, receivedthe same protection and defence at your hands which you have this dayafforded her uncle. Perhaps it may be on her account that you come toseek me. Is it so, good friend?"The words of the Duke--those words which, under other circumstances,might have been the brightest and the dearest to the heart of Charlesof Montsoreau--now entered into his spirit like a sword. The beamingsmile of his race upon the lip of the princely Guise called upbefore the eye of fancy in a moment the form of the beautiful andbeloved being on whose countenance he had first seen it. All histenderness--all his affection for her--all the deep, unchangeableattachment of his heart--were felt at that moment more deeply, morepowerfully, than ever; but, at the same time, strong upon his mind,came the bitter resolution he had taken to yield his hopes ofhappiness, to cast away his chance, his most probable chance, of thebrightest joy that fancy could dream of, and to yield to the brotherwho had ill-treated him all those advantages which he himself of rightpossessed.The blood fled from his cheek to his heart, as if to strengthen itagainst the pains and against the temptations of that moment; and theDuke of Guise, seeing him turn very pale, judged, perhaps, wrongly ofhis feelings, and again grasped him by the hand, saying, "Fear not,fear not, good friend. Come, let us on upon our way. I may meet withtidings at Rheims to hasten my progress onwards."CHAP. XI.During the two days that followed the events recorded in the last fewpages, Charles of Montsoreau had scarcely any opportunity of speakingwith the Duke of Guise, without that multitude of listeners around,which renders all conversation general and frequently insignificant.It is true he dwelt in the same splendid hotel which served the Dukefor his residence in the city of Rheims; that he dined with him at thesame table; that he was present on every occasion when he received thenobles who flocked around him. But the continual press of business ofvarious kinds, the constant coming and going of couriers from and toParis and Nancy; the writing of letters that seemed innumerable, andthe almost hourly consultations with different members of the clergyand officers of the army, seemed to occupy the whole private time ofthe Duke of Guise, and to leave him no space for either thought orrepose.At length on the third morning, when the young nobleman hadbreakfasted with the Duke in company with the Duke of Nemours, theBaron d'Aussonville, the bailiff of St. Michael, and a number of othergentlemen, with two or three ladies of the good town of Rheims--whoseemed not a little anxious to attract the attention of theDuke--Guise, on rising to proceed to other business, drew his youngfriend aside for a moment, and asked him some questions concerning thewounded men. The Count replied that they all bade fair to recover; andafter a few words more, spoken in the same tone, and evidentlyintended for the ears of those around, though apparently addressed tohim in private, the Duke dropped his voice nearly to a whisper,saying, "I have much to talk with you about. Sup with me aloneto-night at nine o'clock, when I trust we shall have time to make allour arrangements."Charles of Montsoreau did not miss the hour; but descending from theapartments which had been assigned to him, and which were immediatelyover those of the Duke, he proceeded to the hall where he had usuallyfound him, but in which he now met with no one but a solitarylute-player, a great favourite with the Duke of Guise. The musicianwas now seated with his instrument in his hand, with one of his feetraised upon the huge andirons of the fireplace, and his hands employedin striking from time to time a few low and listless sounds from theinstrument that lay upon his knee. The man had thus been apparentlyleft solitary for some time; for no sooner did Charles of Montsoreauappear, than, seizing him by one of the buttons of his doublet, hebegan to tell him a long story, of not the most interesting kind, fromwhich the young count would willingly have delivered himself.Perhaps the greatest art of human benevolence that can be conceived,is that of listening with a tolerable appearance of satisfaction to atiresome tale; and Charles of Montsoreau, whose heart was really kindand gentle, and who had not yet learned in the great wise school ofthe world the lesson of treading upon the feelings of others, did hisbest to seem interested, till one of the Duke's servants entered theroom, and, after a glance around, retired without any furtherannouncement. A moment or two after, while the young nobleman wasstill in the sort of durance in which the lute-player held him, theservant again made his appearance, and, walking straight up to him,informed him that the Duke wished to speak with him in his cabinet."Show me the way," said the young nobleman, detaching his button fromthe grasp of the musician--"show me the way, and I will comedirectly.""Oh, I will go with you, and show you the way," exclaimed thelute-player: "I've no idea of staying here all by myself, asmelancholy as a rat in a rat-trap.""His Highness particularly said," observed the servant in a dry tone,"that he wished to converse with Monsieur de Logres alone."The lute-player looked confounded and mortified; but Charles ofMontsoreau, not a little pleased to be rid of his company, followedthe attendant, and in a few moments was ushered into the Duke'scabinet. It was a small but somewhat lengthened octangular room, linedthroughout with dark black oak, carved in the most exquisite manner.From the centre of the ceiling hung a silver chain, bearing a largelamp of the same material, with eight burners. At the further end ofthe room was the fireplace, and in the midst a small table with twocovers and a number of dishes and cups of silver, some plain, somejewelled at the rim.The Duke himself was standing at the farther side with his back to thefire, reading a letter by the light of a small lamp which shed itsrays over his shoulder; and certainly as he stood there, now dressedin the magnificent costume of those days, partially reclining againstthe projecting chimney, with the letter raised in his hand, the lightof the lamp streaming over his shoulder, but catching brightly uponhis cheek and lip, and on the rich brown beard and mustachio, with thedeep carved oak behind him, and a certain sort of gloomy splendourround that part of the room, there probably never was any thing sograceful, so princely, so dignified, as his whole appearance.He folded up the letter as soon as Charles of Montsoreau's stepsounded in the cabinet, and banishing a slight frown which had beenupon his brow while reading, he advanced to the table with a smilesaying, "Our viands are getting cold, Monsieur le Comte.""I went into the usual hall," replied the young nobleman, "not knowingwhere to find your Highness, and fearful of intruding upon you.""I should have told you, I should have told you, dear friend," repliedthe Duke: "when I wish to have an hour in private for conversationwith any of my most confidential friends, I sup in my own cabinet,which is the only place to which my worthy countrymen andacquaintances will grant the right of sanctuary.--Now Martinez," hecontinued, speaking to the servant, "uncover the dishes, put us downsome good wine, bring me in a naquet to hold our dirty platters, andthen leave us.""The attendant did as he was commanded, removed the tops of thedishes, put several bottles of wine down by the side of the Duke, andafter bringing in a sort of buffet on a small scale, somewhat likewhat we now call a dumb waiter, but which was then called by the nameof naquet, (though that word was only properly applied to the markerof a tennis-court), he retired, shutting the door closely behind him."This is an hour of relief," said the Duke, as soon as the man wasgone; "for our business to-night, dear count, must of course be lightand easy to us both--light to you, because you have nothing to do butto express your wishes and desires to Henry of Guise, and light to me,as nothing can be more joyful to my heart than to show my gratitudefor the services that you have rendered me, and to express, in everymanner in my power, my esteem and regard for yourself, and myadmiration for your conduct."[3]---------------------[Footnote 3: Those who may be inclined to suppose such languageinconsistent with the character of the proud, ambitious politician,which Guise is often represented to have been, need but read any ofhis letters to Bassonpierre, or any other of his personal friends, tosee with what openhearted affection he dealt with them.]---------------------"Oh, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "I thought you hadforgotten by this time to use such high-flown expressions towards me.""Call them not high-flown, good friend," replied the Duke: "personssituated as I am, dealing with and often obliged of sheer necessity toexcite the worst passions of our fellow-creatures, meet so rarely withfrank, disinterested service, that when it comes upon us in the suddenway that yours has come upon me, without claim, without expectation,without any previous notice, it strikes us as something both wonderfuland beautiful; and we admire, as we would the visit of an angel, thatwhich gives us a view of a fairer state of being than the one withwhich our daily thoughts are familiar. Besides, if I must own thetruth, too, there was something in the frankness--some of my adulatorswould call it the bluntness--with which you dealt with me in thelittle inn at Mareuil, evidently knowing me all the time, but stilltreating me as the comrade of an inn dining-room, which, as you maysuppose, struck me not a little. But a truce to all fine speeches: letus begin our supper; and after doing justice to what Matre Lanecquehas set before us, we will discuss the matter further at our ease."Although the cookery of that day, as exemplified in a small butrefined supper of the Duke of Guise, might well astonish, both fromits materials and its combinations, any of the culinary artists of thepresent day, both the Duke and his young friend found it excellent,and every thing was praised as it deserved. The wine also was of thefinest kind that could be procured, and the Duke was liberal of it;but Charles of Montsoreau was not one to be tempted by any vintage todrink more than was beneficial to him either corporeally or mentally;and though the Duke of Guise drank more than himself, he pressed notthe ruby juice of the grape upon his young friend after he once sawthat it might become disagreeable to him.Towards Charles of Montsoreau, indeed, he had none of those designswhich lead wily politicians sometimes to press the wine-cup upon atyro. He might, it is true, be somewhat surprised at the easy andcourtly grace with which a young nobleman, educated almost entirely inthe provinces, met and mingled with the highest and most stately inthe land; and he might, consequently, be a little inclined to see himoff his guard; but when he found that he was not disposed to take anymore, he abstained from asking him, and pursued the subject of theirformer discourse, interrupted by various little remarks upon things ofan ordinary character, touching them, however, with grace and ease,which raised them all, and made them harmonise with graver discourse."Now, Monsieur de Logres," he said, as soon as he had passed to hisyoung friend the dish at his end of the table with which theycommenced the meal, "tell me clearly and exactly what were yourmotives and your views in coming hither from so far to seek me; for itwould seem that you have been acting entirely independently of yourbrother. Speak to me, my good friend, without reserve of any kind, asto a brother--as to a father, if you will--for I am old enough surely,both in years and experience, to claim that title, though indeed it isnot I who have given you life, but you to whom I owe it.""It is scarcely either needful or possible, my Lord," replied theyoung count, "for me to tell your Highness more than I have alreadytold. In the first place, I came to see my lands of Logres, which, asyou well know, lie not above forty or fifty miles from this spot--along day's journey. I have only seen them once since the death of myfather. I have withdrawn but a small part of the revenues from theimprovement of the territory, and the encouragement of the peasantry;and it is time that I should now see what is the state of the whole.At the same time, I thought and believed that I had remained somewhattoo long a spectator of the contentions which distract my native land.Now, my Lord Duke, I had to choose between three personages, the greatleaders of the present day--Henry of Navarre, Henry of France, andHenry Duke of Guise, The first seemed to me out of the question,though a gallant and a noble prince; for, waging war as he does, forthe advancement of heresy, it was not for me to draw my sword in sucha cause. Between the other two there could surely be no question; forthough I may not think your Highness always right in every thing thatyou have done, yet as a gallant and a knightly leader, as one whom abrave and true-hearted man may follow, there is none whom I know thatI could choose against yourself from one end of Europe to the other.In attaching myself to you, too, I trust and am sure that I do not illserve my king; and, to say but the truth, I would far rather serve hisMajesty under another, than come within the reach of his perfumes andcosmetics."The Duke of Guise smiled, and leaning his arm upon the table, gazeddown for a moment or two in a meditative mood, not a little struck andsurprised at the calm and reasoning, but bold and straight-forwardfrankness with which his young companion spoke. Perhaps, too, hetraced back into the past the various motives and views with which thedifferent distinguished men, who appeared as followers of the threeleaders mentioned, had chosen their party, and he might find noneamongst them all who were actuated by such feelings as the young manbefore him. He was silent for several moments then; and the firstthing that roused him was the young count adding, to what he had said,"Indeed, my Lord, this was my pure and simple motive.""I doubt it not. Monsieur de Logres," replied the Duke, drawingtowards him another dish--"I doubt it not; and this is a pure andsimple salmi, and apparently as good a one as ever was cooked; butstill, if you were to ask Matre Lanecque to analyse it--try it, goodfriend, you will find it an antidote against all the poisons and evilsof the inn at Mareuil, and other such pestiferous places--but, as Iwas saying, if you were to ask Matre Lanecque to analyse this simplesalmi, you would find it composed of some hundreds of different thingsbesides the woodcock, which is the basis of the whole. All theseaccessories are admirable in themselves, and contribute to make thewoodcock better. And thus it is in life. Every human motive is asalmi, cooked by a skilful artist, for our own palates as well asthose that observe them. There is one grand and apparent cause ofaction, which may be considered as the woodcock, but there are athousand minor motives, incentives, and inducements, the condiments,the gravies, the truffles, the toast, which nobody ever thinks ofcounting, which pass, in fact, under cover of the woodcock, and which,nevertheless, all tend to make the salmi what it is. Now, I have nodoubt on earth, my dear young friend, that the great motive of yourcoming hither was what you say; but were there not other motivesjoined therewith--feelings, designs, views, and purposes of your own,all mingling together, to aid and strengthen your original motive--infact, to make up the salmi?"Charles of Montsoreau knew and felt that there were; for he could nothelp remembering the real cause of his quitting his brother's dwellingin such haste, and the resolutions then taken, which were still strongwithin him, to be generous, even to the utmost extent of humangenerosity, towards one who had been ungenerous to him. He now lookeddown thoughtfully for a moment; but he was by nature far too frank andopen to conceal his thoughts from one who sought them in the way whichthey were sought by the Duke of Guise."My Lord," he said, "if your Highness means to ask, whether there wereor were not private feelings which induced me at once to plunge intocontentions from which I had long withheld myself, and combined withthe general public motives which otherwise called upon me so to do, Iby no means deny that there were such feelings; and had it not beenfor them--though I certainly think I should have joined your Highnessbefore many months were over--yet it might not have been so early orso opportunely as it has turned out."The Duke smiled frankly, and replied, "I thought so, Monsieur deLogres. You are always candid and true, and you shall see at once, bymy next question, why I asked you this so particularly. Tell me, hasnot a fair relation of mine, who has found a place of refuge in thecastle of Montsoreau--has she not something to do with the motivesthat you speak of?""She has, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau--"but not in the waywhich I see you imagine."The Duke laughed. "What!" he exclaimed,--"pretty Mistress Marie ofClairvaut has, I suppose, been acting the prude with you, as usual,and gave you warning, when it was too late, that she intended toplunge herself into a convent. Take heart of grace, man--take heart ofgrace. Though she has ever yet shown herself, in these affairs oflove, as cold as the top of the Vosges, and as hard as thenether-millstone, yet she is always candid and true, poor girl; and intwo letters which have reached me from her hand, the one sent by yourown courier, the other arriving to-day, she speaks of you, and of yourservices towards her, in terms that admit of no mistake. I do not meanto say you know that you have won her heart, because her heart is notone easily won, but I do most assuredly think that you may win it; andif you do, as far as Henry of Guise's power goes, you win her too."There is nothing so terrible on earth, as when some friendly handapproaches to our lips the cup of joy, seeing not, knowing not, thatwe must not, that we dare not, that we cannot drink, when accidentalwords, perhaps most kindly spoken, present to the eye of fancy, incolours more vivid than ever, the pictures that were once painted bythe hand of hope, after every fair reality that they represented isdone away, and nothing remains but the memory and the endurance.Terrible, indeed, was the temptation of Charles of Montsoreau, andterrible the struggle in his bosom. Not the arch-fiend himself couldexhort man to break high resolutions more powerfully, than did thewords spoken with the best intentions by the Duke of Guise. Butamongst those words were a few, which, by recalling to the mind of theyoung nobleman most strongly the circumstances on which hisdetermination was founded, gave him strength to endure. Had the Dukesaid that he knew her heart was won, those few words would have putall his resolutions to an end; but he implied that her heart was notwon, and it was upon that persuasion that all his purposes had beenhitherto framed.The Duke of Guise saw him once more turn very pale, and was not alittle puzzled to divine the cause. "Why do you not answer?" hedemanded, after pausing for a moment or two. "In consideration of avast service, I have spoken to you as I would to no other man under aprince's dignity in Europe.""And I am most grateful, my Lord," replied the Count; "but yourHighness has mistaken me. My pretensions to the hand of Mademoisellede Clairvaut are too small, too few to be thought of even by myself.My brother, indeed, may have greater pretensions. Your Highness knowsthat his estates in the south are considerable; that his race, thoughcertainly not equal to that of the princely house of Guise, is as oldand as pure as any in France; but he has a thousand high qualitiesthat you do not know. He is brave, skilful, with far more experiencethan myself, faithful and true in his attachments, and even morezealous and eager than I am in every thing he undertakes. Let anylittle services of mine, my Lord, be attributed to him; let him alsoserve and attach himself to your Highness; and let the sum of theaffection and zeal of both in your cause induce you to look favourablyupon his suit, even should he aspire to the hand of Mademoiselle deClairvaut.""By my faith," exclaimed the Duke of Guise, pushing the glass of winewhich he was just about to drink away from him--"By my faith, this isthe most extraordinary piece of business, I think, I ever heard of!"And he paused, thoughtfully gazing down upon the table. "You are astrange youth," he continued, "and there is something under this whichI do not understand. But, be you sure, Matre Charles, that MatreHenri will unriddle it. And now let me tell you something that you donot know yourself. I have this very morning received an epistle fromyour brother; an epistle which, though eloquent enough, well written,clear, and masterly, yet I love not altogether. He tells me, that thepassports for my niece, from Henri of Navarre, have arrived; but thathe judges it best, seeing the troubled state of the country, to escorther towards Soissons himself, with a sufficient band to protect heragainst any attack. He speaks of you, too, as 'a brother of his,'and gives as a reason for delaying a day or two ere he sets out, thatyou had taken with you on your journey some men from the castle, sothat it is necessary for him to increase his numbers ere he departs.""That was hardly generous of him," said Charles of Montsoreau, calmly;"for I took no more than my own immediate retainers, except, indeed,the one man, Gondrin, whom your Highness knows, and who was born uponmy own lands of Logres.""Oh, I know him well, indeed," replied the Duke, "and owe him much. Wewill have him and the page in before we part, that I may thank them.And so, Monsieur de Logres, you will let me do nothing for you.""Say not so, my Lord," replied the Count, "I ask you much, when I askyou for the honour and the pleasure of serving under you, and alsoexpress the hope that you will always treat me and consider me asnow.""Oh, such requests are easily granted," said the Duke: "you shallcommand a company of my Albanians, and be ever near my person; butstill I shall consider that there is a debt to be paid, and shallreserve the payment thereof for a year; and if you name not your ownboon by that time, I shall force my gratitude upon you. There is somemystery in your conduct which at present I do not understand. But allearthly mysteries disappear, my good young friend. When theyrepresented Time, they would have done well to put a torch in his handas well as a scythe, for he throws light upon all things. I will writeabout the Albanian company this night.""Your pardon, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau--"but I wouldfain serve you at the head of my own people. Give me but a month awayfrom you, and I will bring you a hundred steel-caps from Logres,mounted, armed, and trained as well as any cavaliers in France. Allthe tenantry are bred to arms there from their infancy, so that but ashort space will suffice.""You are resolved to make me still more your debtor," said the Duke;"and I will acknowledge, that at the present moment the assistance ofevery brave and true-hearted man in France is needful to Henry ofGuise; for oh, my young friend, I have to deal with as wily a serpentas ever was hatched in the Asiatic deserts. Were it but Henry ofNavarre I had to deal with, the contest in this country would soon besettled, for as gallant a knight, and as noble a gentleman is he, asever lived; frank, generous, and true; and with our lances in ourhands and our helmets on our heads, we could decide the fate of Francebetween us in an hour. But when I have to deal with one who,professing love and friendship, would poison the chalice, or arm theassassin's hand against me; who, while he feigns to listen to mycounsel, deals secretly with every enemy of his state and of hiscountry; who betrays every secret that is intrusted to him as soon ashe finds an interest in so doing; and who only sinks from the activityof evil-doing into voluptuous, effeminate, indecent repose;--when Ihave to deal with such a man as that, I say, the support of every trueman in France is needful to me, to free my country from the evils thatafflict her--never forgetting my duty to the crown. Go, my youngfriend, arm your vassals, bring to me every man that you can command,and you shall find Henry of Lorraine as deeply grateful to you forthis new service as he is for that which is past. I will make nofurther professions to you. What I have said already ought to beenough to convince you, that with me, at least, neither the pride northe ambition, of which they unjustly accuse our race, can stand in theway of gratitude. Now, however, let us have in your man Gondrin andyour little page. He speaks, it seems to me, with a foreign accent.Where did you get him?"As he spoke, the Duke rang a silver bell which stood by his side, andgave orders to the servant who appeared to seek for the two attendantsof the young Count, and bring them before him. While he was absent,Charles of Montsoreau gave him a full account of his accidentalmeeting with the boy Ignati, and of his redeeming him from the handsof the Italians. The tale seemed to interest the Duke not a little;and, after musing for a moment, he said, "You see, my young friend,how kindness and services always render men greedy. I would to heaventhat you would give me these two who have gone with me through such amoment of peril. I feel as if that boy were destined again to do mesome great service.""Take him, my Lord, with all my heart," replied Charles of Montsoreau,"not that I put any great faith in such presentiments; but as Iredeemed the boy from these men only for his own good, far be it fromme to stay him in any way from advancement. Your Highness remembers,however, that he is not noble, and therefore can scarcely be yourpage.""Oh, we set our foot upon such things now," replied the Duke--"theservice of the Guise shall make him noble. But here they are. Comehither, good youth," he added, as the boy and Gondrin entered--"let melook in your face: it seems to me as if I had seen you somewherebefore. Your look pleases me, and memory seems to bring it back withpleasure. Where have I beheld you?"The boy looked up in the Duke's face, with his colour slightlyheightened, but his manner calm and self-possessed. "You have seen me,my Lord," he said, "in the good town of Nancy, in the palace of thenoble Duke of Lorraine, upon the night of a high festival, where manya gallant lord and many a bright lady sat around you; and a poorItalian boy was brought in to dance and sing before the high table atwhich you feasted. The princes, and the nobles round, the beautifulwomen, and the politic matrons, poured their money into the cap whichmy hard taskmaster handed round; but the Duke of Guise alone called uppoor Ignati to his side, laid his hand upon his head, thanked him forhis music, and gave him a broad piece of gold for himself.""I remember," said the Duke, thoughtfully, "I remember. Well, boy, bythat kind word, and that broad piece, it seems I have purchasedservice that never was bought at so light a rate. My good Lord ofLogres, when the pistol of a reiter was within a foot of my breast,his finger on the trigger, and my life apparently at his mercy, withnothing but a grey doublet between, me and destruction, this boyproved better to me than a breastplate of Milan steel, and, by drivinghis dagger into the heart of my adversary, saved the life of Henry ofGuise, for whatever period God in his grace may grant it further. Willyou give me this youth, my Lord, to be my page?"The young Count bowed his head in token of assent, and the Duke wenton. "What say you, boy? would you willingly serve me?"The boy paused, and looked down, while the tears rose in his eyes.Then, turning his look to Charles of Montsoreau, he said, "He has beenvery kind to me!""Come, come, Ignati," said the young Count, "I will not have your heartspoil your fortunes, my good youth. I took you for your own service,not for mine; and though I like you well, and would willingly have youwith me, yet this is a noble offer, and must not be refused."The boy then knelt down and kissed the Duke of Guise's hand, saying,"I am your Highness's servant.""So shalt thou be, Ignati," replied the Duke, with one of the brightsmiles of the Guise. "But I will tell thee what thou shalt do. Thoushalt go with this young lord to his lands of Logres, and be my spyupon all his actions and his thoughts. Then, if thou findest out thatthing on all the earth which he most wishes and desires to possess,and bringest me the tidings thereof, thou shalt have a purse of broadpieces for thy pains. When he comes back, thou shalt come to be of myhousehold; and, as I trust that he will be ever near me, thou mayestfind many a way of serving him also.--Now, good soldier," hecontinued, turning to Gondrin, "you, too, have aided me well in amoment of great need: what recompense shall the Duke of Guise offeryou? Will you take service with him, and he will care for yourfortunes?""I thank you, my Lord," replied Gondrin, bluntly. "But on this younggentleman's lands was I born, his race have I served, his forestsports have I tended through all my life, and I think I will not leavehim now, unless he dismount me out of his troop; and then, pardie! Ithink I shall follow him on foot. What I did for your Highness wasdone by his orders. I knew you but as Matre Henri, with a greydoublet and a cock's feather, so that I deserve neither thanks norrecompense, though I will gladly serve your Highness under him, if Godand the good Count so will it.""Would that there were many such as thou art!" said the Duke of Guise,thoughtfully. "There are few who will not quit old kindness for newpreferment. Here, my friend, take you that ring, in memory of Henry ofGuise. It is a diamond, for which the goldsmiths will give fivehundred crowns; but, should you ever want money, he who now gives itwill gladly give a thousand crowns for it back again."CHAP. XII.The rock which it meets with in its course turns the impetuous riverfrom the way it was pursuing, even when it comes down in all the furyof the mountain torrent. The slight slope of a green hill, the rise ofa grassy bank at an after-period, bends the calm stream hither andthither through the plains, offering the most beautiful image of theeffect of circumstances on the course of human life. Some streams alsobecome coloured by the earth they pass over, or mingle readily withthe waters that flow into theirs. But there are a few--and they arealways the mightiest and most profound--which retain their originalhue and character, receive the tribute of other streams, pass overrocks and mountains, and through the midst of deep lakes, without theRhone losing its glossy blue in the bosom of Lake Leman, or the Rhinemingling its clear stream with the waters of Constance or the currentof the Maine.The firm and powerful mind may be affected in its operations bycircumstances, but not in its nature, and the depths of originalcharacter remain unchanged from the beginning to the end of life. Evenstrong feelings in such hearts, like objects cast upon a grand andrapid river, are borne along with the current through all scenes andcircumstances, till with the waters themselves they plunge into theocean of eternity.Neither by nature nor by the period of his life was Charles ofMontsoreau likely to retain and nourish long any light feelings ofdisappointment, but such was not the case with deep sorrows or withstrong affections. His heart was of that firm and tenacious kind thatit lost not readily any thing once strongly impressed upon it. Thelove of Marie de Clairvaut was one of those things never to beforgotten; the sorrows by which that love had been followed were neverto be obliterated from his mind.In the gay scenes of the sort of second court which the Duke of Guiseheld for some days in the city of Rheims, Charles of Montsoreaumingled without any apparent grief weighing upon his mind, or any darkand gloomy memory seeming to oppress his spirit. He smiled with thosewho smiled, he admired all that was fine, and bright, and beautiful;and if he felt for a moment coming over him the deep melancholy withwhich he had quitted his own home, and which had now concentrateditself in his heart, he struggled against it and banished the outwardappearance of it speedily, deriving only from those deeper feelingswhich lay concealed within, that degree of indifference towards thepleasures and amusements of youth which is seldom obtained but byexperience. He forgot not Marie de Clairvaut, however--he forgot notthe painful task which he had imposed upon himself; but he gladlyoccupied his immediate thoughts with the objects around him, andremained for some days well pleased himself, and not un-noted byothers for his calm and graceful demeanour, amongst all the proudnobles who now surrounded the princely Guise.At length, however, all his attendants but two, whose wounds promiseda tedious convalescence, were sufficiently recovered to enable him topursue his journey to Logres; and he set out, with his trainincreased by six or seven veteran soldiers, whom the Duke spared tohim, for the purpose of completing, as rapidly as possible, thediscipline and training of his own retainers. As the distance was notfar, and the Duke of Guise had given him more than one hint that notime was to be lost, he resolved to accomplish the march in one day;and, setting off early in the morning, approached Logres towardssunset upon a short spring day.It was a wild and wooded country, on the borders of the ancientArdennes, with the scene continually varying in minor points, butnever changing the character of rough, solitary nature, which thatpart of France, and indeed many other parts, at that time displayed.Here the ground was rocky and mountainous, shooting up into tall hillscovered with old woods; there, smooth and even, with the feet of theprimeval oaks carpeted with green turf. Then, again, came deep dells,and banks, and ravines, and dingles, so thick that the boar couldscarcely force his way through the bushes; and then the trees fellback, and left the wild stream wandering through green meadows, orsporting amongst the masses of stone. If a village appeared, it wasperched high up above the road, as if afraid of the passing strangers;if a cottage, it was nested in the brown wood, and scarcely to bedistinguished from the surrounding banks. The air was now as warm asMay, and all the sweet things that haunt the first dream of summer hadcome forth: the birds were tuning their earliest songs; the flowerswere gathering round the roots of the trees, and the branches abovethem were making an effort, though but faint, to cast away the browncloak of winter, and put on the green garmenture of the spring.The evening sunshine was clear and smiling. Pouring from under a lightcloud, which covered a part of the sky, it streamed in amongst thebolls and branches of the trees; it gilded the green turf, and dancedupon the yellow banks: and what between the wild music of theblackbird, and the thrush, and the woodlark, the flowers upon theground, the balminess of the air, the spring sunshine, and thepeaceful scene, Charles of Montsoreau felt his sorrows softened; andthough not less deeply melancholy than before, yet owned the influenceof that season, which is so near akin to youth and hope, and rode onwith a vague, but sweet feeling, that brighter hours might come.He had spent many a happy youthful day at Logres; and though he hadforgotten much, so that the charm of novelty was not altogetherwanting, he remembered enough to make his heart beat with the thrillof memory, while many an object, once familiar to his eye, rose up, asif to greet him on his return. At length, the road passing straightover a ridge of rising-ground, showed him his own little village, inthe sweet valley below, with the chteau rising on a tall hill thatstarted up from the side of the little town, unconnected with any ofthe other heights around. The clouds that were in the zenith at thatmoment were pouring forth a light shower of spring rain; the sun wasshining bright near the edge of the horizon, catching on theweathercocks, and turrets, and windows of the chteau; while spanningover the castle and the village, and wavering on the face of the lightgrey cloud above was seen the radiant bow of heaven, the pledge ofbrightness for the days to come.The young Count, as he paused for a moment to gaze, could hear gaydistant voices, borne on the wind, rising up from the village in thevalley. It was a cheerful sound; but, more than any thing else, itrecalled the former times, and wove between them and the present atissue of associations both sweet and melancholy. He thought of thegallant father, by whose knee he had played in those very scenes inother days; he thought of the mother, whose inheritance those landshad been; he thought of the mutual love and harmony that had subsistedbetween them all, and how death had taken two, and how disunion hadarisen between the two that remained. He thought of all this; and hethought of how--if fate had willed it otherwise--he might have led ahappy bride to those glittering towers, have listened with her to theglad voices of the rejoicing peasantry, and have pointed to thesunshine that lit their dwelling, and the rainbow that waved acrosstheir sky, as auguries of hope, and happiness, and mutual love. Hethought of all this, and how it was all in vain: and the tears filledhis eyes, as he rode on towards the dwelling before him.The two servants, whom he had sent on the day before, had spread thenews, and given the probable hour of his coming; the street of thevillage was thronged with people, in their holy-day attire; the oldgrey cross, and the rude stone fountain, were decked with flowers; thelight-hearted peasantry echoed his name with shouts when he appeared,and greetings and gratulations poured forth upon him: but the heart ofthe young Count of Logres was sad. The face of nature reviving fromthe wintry cold, the voices of the birds, the eloquence of sunshineand of flowers, had soothed, and calmed, and inspirited his heart; butthe rejoicings of fellow-beings like himself--he knew not why, and hewas angry to feel it--made him even more melancholy than before.The elders of the village, conscious of dignity, the Count's ownintendant, and the seneschal of his lands, came forward to greet him,and conduct him on his way, while Gondrin lingered behind, shakinghands with many an old friend, and inquiring after many an oldacquaintance, vaunting the high deeds and noble qualities of his lord,and gladdening the hearts of the villagers with the promise of greatdoings at Logres.Such was Charles of Montsoreau's arrival on his own estates; but theaspect of the interior of his dwelling again recalled bitter feelingsand manifold regrets. But we must pass over such things, and merelynotice briefly what followed after his arrival. Immediate inquiryshowed him a state of things which few lords who absent themselveslong from their own lands can ever hope to find:--his tenantry, hisvassals, were in general contented and happy; no one had been pressedhard upon by his officers in his absence; no one brought forward anyaccusation of extortion or oppression; and though there were many whohad their little petition to present, or their request to make for thefuture, there was none who found occasion to complain of the past. Atthe same time, he found that considerable sums, and a considerablequantity of produce, had accumulated for his own use; that there werelarge woods, the trees of which required to be thinned; that the woolof many years yet remained to be sold; that some distant mines hadpoured unexpected wealth into his coffers; and that, in fact, greatriches, which seemed still greater to an inexperienced eye, wereimmediately at his command.The secret of all this was, that those left in authority behind himwere all old tried and attached servants of his mother's house; andthe feudal system had that advantage at least, if it had no other,that it created an identity of interests between a lord and hisservants, which nothing but blindness and folly could break through oneither part.On speaking with the old seneschal in regard to the military capacityand disposition of the people, the old man smiled at the question ifhe could raise a hundred strong troopers within the ensuing month."The ringing, sir, of the old ban-cloque," he said, "which, thank God,I have heard but once in my day, would bring double the number ofwell-armed lads round your gate in an hour. They are only angrybecause, in all the feuds that have lately fallen out, I would neverlet them go to join either one party or another, if I could help it.Your own orders upon that head were strict; and I certainly thought itvery wise, as long as they judged fit to leave us at peace here, toavoid all occasion of bringing feuds upon ourselves. Some of the youngmen stole away, indeed, whether I would or not, and took service withthe good Duke of Guise against the reiters. They have almost all comeback now; but the tales they bring of battles here and there, anddriving the Germans out of France like sheep, are not likely to makethose that remained more fond of home.""I have no wish," replied the Count, "to drain the place of itspeasantry, good seneschal. A hundred men will be enough for mypurpose, and of those, none but such as are willing. I would rather,of course, have those who have served already, if they are inclined toserve again under their own lord's banner. And now let this bearranged with all speed, for I have promised the Duke of Guise not todelay a day longer than necessary."No delay or obstruction of any kind was met with by the young Count inhis proceedings. Though neither very populous nor very productive,except in wood and pasture, his territories were very extensive; andno sooner were his wishes known, than many more volunteers flocked into serve beneath his banner than he was willing to receive. With theold soldiers who accompanied him, and the aid of such of his peasantryas had served before, whatever was wanting to the discipline of therest was soon accomplished. The providing them with arms and horsesoccupied a some--what longer time; but every thing was in activepreparation, when, at the expiration of about a fortnight, a courierfrom the Duke of Guise arrived at Logres, bearing a letter dated fromSoissons, and addressed to the young Count."I fear," the letter said, "that this will not find you in such astate of preparation as to enable you to join me at once, at thelittle town of Gonnesse, with all the men you promised. If you could,however, advance at once towards that place, with whatever men you cancommand at the moment, you might render the greatest of services toHenry of Guise."It would be as well," he continued in a postscript, "if you couldcross the Aisne. My presence is required, with all speed, in theneighbourhood of Paris. I have not fifty men with me; and,notwithstanding the defeat of Auneau, I hear that a strong band ofreiters has been seen in the neighbourhood of La Fert sous Jouarre.If you can set off before night to-morrow, send me tidings that suchis the case by the messenger who bears this letter; but do not gofarther than Montigny before you hear more. God have you in his goodkeeping."Henry of Guise."The consultation of Charles of Montsoreau with his seneschal was butshort. He well knew that the field is the place to make good soldiers,and that but little more preparation was needful. He therefore causedhis band to pass before the courier of the duke, and bade him tellthat Prince what he saw, directing him to add, that he would, on thefollowing day, make his first march towards La Fert with fifty men;and that, in four days more, the rest would follow, if by anypossibility their arms could be prepared by that time. With thismessage he mounted him afresh, and sent him back to Soissons.A night of bustle and preparation succeeded, which left little timefor that indulgence of calm thought during which the heart broods overits own griefs, and but increases them by contemplation. The firstday's march was performed without danger or difficulty; and, not alittle to the satisfaction of Charles of Montsoreau, the soldiers whomhe had raised, being bred amongst a rural population, demeanedthemselves peaceably and orderly amongst the inhabitants of thevillage where they halted for the night, so that no complaint washeard in the morning; and when they departed, many a villager was seenshaking hands with, and bidding God speed, the acquaintance of theevening before.On the second day's march, which brought them to Grisolles, rumoursand reports of the band of reiters which the Duke of Guise hadmentioned began to reach their ears. The peasantry showed every signof rejoicing on their appearance; and as they rode through the variousvillages, the young Count's horse was often surrounded by thepeasantry, giving him this report or that, and expressing a hope thathe had come to deliver them from the marauding strangers. On the thirdday's march towards Montigny, more accurate information was obtainedconcerning the real position and proceedings of the band of Germanadventurers, who were represented as lying further down towards theMarne, in the woods and hamlets about Gland and La Fern, interceptingthe passengers on the roads between Chteau Thierry, Epernay, and LaFert: the lower part of which latter town they were said to haveattacked and plundered. Manifold were the entreaties now addressed toCharles of Montsoreau by the wealthy farmers and proprietors of thatrich tract of country to go at once against the marauders, and drivethem across the Marne. But he adhered firmly to his resolution ofobeying the Duke's orders; and after halting for some hours to refreshhis horses and men at Gandelu, he again began his march towards threeo'clock in the evening, expecting to arrive at Montigny beforenightfall.On the whole of the road he had received no greater service from anyone than from the boy Ignati, whose light weight and arms did notfatigue his horse so much as those of the other horsemen, and who wasconstantly riding hither and thither through the country obtainingintelligence, and bringing it rapidly to the young Count. He had leftthe little village of Gandelu about a quarter of an hour before therest of the troop, and was not seen again for nearly an hour and ahalf after it had recommenced its march. The Count had asked for himmore than once, and had become somewhat apprehensive regarding him,when, as they were passing through the wood of Ampon, his anxietyregarding the boy was not diminished by hearing a discharge offire-arms at some distance, but apparently in advance. He was relievedon Ignati's account, however, in a moment after, by seeing him comingat full speed through the wood in apparent excitement and alarm."Quick! quick, my Lord!" he cried: "down in the meadow there, theSchwartz reiters have attacked a gallant little band just crossing asmall stream, and are driving them back towards the Marne. I saw someladies in a carriage, too; and they must have fallen by this time intothe hands of the enemy."No further inducement was wanting to Charles of Montsoreau. Givingorders to quicken his men's pace, he himself advanced at still greaterspeed, till he reached the point where the road issued forth from thewood upon the meadow, where he had at once before him, at the distanceof scarcely three hundred yards, the whole scene which the boy haddescribed, though it was, of course, somewhat changed in aspect duringthe time which had since elapsed.On the bank of the small stream which, flowing through a slight hollowin the meadow, proceeded towards the Marne, was seen a party of somethirty or forty horsemen, the greater part of them well armed, makinga gallant but ineffectual stand against a body of reiters nearlydouble their number, which charged them on every side, and seemedlikely to overpower them in a few minutes. That, however, which struckCharles of Montsoreau the most, was to see, in the very front of theparty who opposed the reiters, a man dressed in a clerical habit, whoseemed, with the utmost coolness, skill, and determination, to bedirecting the movements of those around him, for the purpose ofextricating a heavy carriage which was embarrassed in the bed of therivulet.The forms of the reiters passing here and there obscured the view ofhis person from time to time; but Charles of Montsoreau felt sure thathis eyes could not deceive him, when they told him that there, in themidst of the fight, was the form of his old preceptor, the Abb deBoisguerin. A moment after, he caught sight of his brother also, andprepared, without the loss of an instant, to extricate the whole partyfrom their perilous situation.The numbers which he brought were hardly sufficient to make his band,even when united with that of his brother, equal numerically to thatof the reiters. But he knew that there was much in surprise; and,though he did not exactly despise his enemy, yet he by no means lookedupon each reiter as a match for one of his own men at arms. Histroopers had followed him at all speed; and, the moment they came up,his orders were given, the lances levelled, the spurs struck intoevery horse's sides, and down the gentle slope they went, against theflank of the enemy, with a speed and determination that proved for themoment quite irresistible. The commander of the foreigners hadscarcely time to wheel a part of his force to receive the charge ofthis new adversary, before the troops of Logres were upon him, and,in a moment, he was driven down the stream for nearly fifty yards.But the marauders had one great advantage over ordinary troops.Accustomed to fight in small parties, and even hand to hand, they werefully as much, if not more, in their element when their ranks werebroken than when they were in a compact mass, and Charles ofMontsoreau now found that the success of his first onset by no meansdispirited them; but that, superior in numbers to his own soldiery,they met his troopers man to man, and that a body was even detached topursue the carriage, which by this time had been extricated; whileneither his brother nor the Abb de Boisguerin, embarrassed inprotecting the unarmed persons of their own party, thought it needfulto give him the slightest assistance in his contention with thereiters.Under these circumstances, the only thing that appeared to be left forhim to do, was to keep his men in the most perfect order, and fallgradually back, covering his brother's band, and sending to demand hisco-operation for their mutual benefit. The reiters, however, in themean time, made every effort to frustrate this purpose, which they atonce divined, and by repeated charges endeavoured to break his line,and force him to fight after their own manner. In pursuing this plan,however, they committed the oversight of making a part of their bodycross the stream in order to take him on the flank.With a quickness of perception, which he generally displayed in timesof difficulty and danger, he had remarked, even while in the act ofcharging the enemy, that the stream higher up grew deeper, and thebanks more steep. He now saw that, by falling back a little fartherthan he had at first intended, he could deal with the Germans inseparate bodies, and in all probability rout them band by band.To do so, however, obliged him to leave his brother's party, thecarriage, and those whom he knew it contained, to struggle unassistedwith the little force which had been detached from the reiters, aswell as they might, and for a moment he remained in a state ofsuspense which almost lost him the advantage. The hour, however, waslate; the shades of evening were beginning to fall: one look to theother side of the field showed him that the first attack of thereiters on his brother's party had been repulsed, apparently withconsiderable loss, and he accordingly took his resolution, and gaveorders to retreat slowly up the stream, preparing his men, however, tocharge again the moment that he found it expedient so to do.The reiters, thinking him defeated and intimidated, pursued himfiercely, and those on the right bank of the stream galloped quicklyon to cut him off from a retreat by the high road. But the othersimmediately in front of him were surprised, and somewhat astounded, tofind that as soon as he perceived the stream was deep enough, and thebank was high enough--if not to prevent the other body of reiters fromcrossing, at all events to embarrass and to delay them--the order wasgiven to the French troopers to charge, and the young Count and hisband came down upon them with a shock which scattered them before himin an instant.He was now, in turn, superior to that party in numbers, and knowingthat not a moment was to be lost, he exerted every energy of mind andbody. With his own hand he struck the commander from his horse, andurging on his men with all speed, drove a number of the scatteredparties over the banks into the stream. Some escaped unhurt to theother side, but in many instances the horses fell, and rolled overinto the water with their riders; and in the mean time terrible havocwas going on amongst those who remained upon the bank.The pistols and musketoons of the German soldiery had been dischargedin the first contest with his brother; but the troops of Logres,charging with the lance, had still their fire-arms loaded: and seeingthat the struggle with the sword might be protracted till the otherparty came up, the young commander shouted loudly to his men to usetheir fire-arms. His voice was heard even in the midst of the strife;and now mingled as the two parties were with each other, the effect ofthe pistol was terrible. A number of the enemy were killed and thrownfrom their horses on the spot, a number were wounded, and unable tocontinue the conflict, and the rest, seized with panic, were flyingamain, when the other band, seeing the error that had been committed,endeavoured to repair it by crossing the stream and attacking Charlesof Montsoreau in the rear.Though they succeeded in their first object, it was with difficultyand in disorder, some choosing one place, some, not liking to venturetoo far, seeking a safer passage; and heavily armed as were bothhorses and men, the task was certainly one of great danger. In themidst of the strife which he was carrying on, the young Count had notfailed to watch eagerly, from time to time, the movements of the partyon the other bank.The body immediately opposed to him was by this time completelyrouted, and in full flight; and wheeling his men to encounter theother, he calmly brought them once more into good order, and led themto the charge.But the leader of the enemy in that part of the field seeing that hehad come too late, and that his men were in no condition to protractthe struggle with success, was wise enough not to attempt to play outa losing game. Giving orders for instant retreat, he kept a firm faceto his adversary, till his men had recovered from the disorder ofcrossing the water, and then marched firmly up the hill, facing roundevery two or three minutes to receive the charge of the Frenchtroopers, and not suffering his pace to be hurried, though he lostseveral men as he went.The sight, however, of a group of peasantry, watching the strife froma part of the road above, seemed to strike the reiters, who probablymistook them for a fresh band of soldiers, with panic and dismay.Their leader lost all command over them; and though he was seen invain endeavouring to rally them, and keep them in their ranks, theyfled down the road at full speed, pursued by Charles of Montsoreau andhis band for some time, till the coming on of night rendered ituseless to protract the chase any farther.The young officer then caused the recall to be sounded, and turned hisbridle rein towards the field where the skirmish had taken place, inorder both to ascertain what was the amount of his own loss, and togive assistance to the wounded. He found a number of peasants on thefield; and though in all instances they were giving the tenderest careand attention to the wounded troopers of Logres, there was too goodreason to suspect that the knife of the boor had been employed withoutmercy to end the course of any of the wounded Germans who had falleninto their hands. Only two were found alive upon the field, and it isprobable that they owed their lives to the return of Charles ofMontsoreau.His own loss in persons actually killed was very slight, but a numberwere severely wounded; and in order to gain some assistance for thesepoor men, it was necessary, of course, to proceed to the nearest town.On inquiring what that was, the peasantry replied that none was nearerthan La Fert sous Jouarre, and thither the young Count bent hissteps, as soon as some litters and carriages could be procured to bearthe wounded men.CHAP. XIII.Night had fallen heavily over the world, ere Charles of Montsoreau andhis party approached the town of La Fert: but the moon was coming outheavily from behind the clouds, and cast a silvery radiance over allthat part of the sky which lay behind the heights of Jouarre, throwingout a part of the towers and pinnacles of the old abbey in clearrelief, as they rose above the shoulder of the hill.But there were other lights in the prospect of a different hue, whichnot a little puzzled Charles of Montsoreau, as he rode on at the headof his men. What seemed to be torches, by the red and heavy glare theygave, were seen moving about fitfully amongst the banks and vineyardson the heights, and, in a minute or two after, a horseman passed theyoung Count at full speed.He turned suddenly from the path, however, and plunged his horse downthe banks into the neighbouring meadow, as soon as he saw the body ofmen at arms; but though the young Count judged it useless to pursuehim, the faint light that was in the sky was quite sufficient toenable him to judge that he belonged to a part of the marauding bandwhich had been defeated in the morning. He concluded, naturally andrightly, that he was one of those who had followed the party of hisbrother Gaspar, and had probably pursued it towards Jouarre. A momentor two after, the sound of coming horses again met his ear; and,ordering some of his men to advance, and cut off the way into themeadow, he halted the rest of the troop, and waited in listeningexpectation.At the end of a few minutes, three more horsemen appeared, and dashedinto the very midst of the ambush that the young Count had laid forthem."Halt, and surrender!" he cried in a loud tone, ordering his men atthe same time to close round them; and the reiters, for such indeedthey were, finding escape impossible, yielded without resistance. Fromthem Charles of Montsoreau found that his suspicions were true, andthat they formed part of the band which had pursued his brothertowards La Fert. He could gain no further information, however, fromthe men he had taken, except that the Marquis had effected his retreatin safety, and that a large body of armed burghers, coming out from LaFert, had forced the reiters to fly with all speed.Having given the prisoners in charge to those who would not lose sightof them, Charles of Montsoreau resumed his march; and, as his bandapproached La Fert, their trumpet sang cheerily out in the clearnight, giving notice to the citizens of the arrival of a friendlyparty.The streets were now full of horses and people, the red light of thetorches flashing upon the eager and excited countenances of those whohad taken part in the affray; and, by the glare, Charles of Montsoreaueasily distinguished the chief inn, with a number of horses heldaround the door, and a group of fifteen or sixteen persons gatheredtogether round one, in whom he at once recognised his brother.Perhaps Charles of Montsoreau had not any cause to be more satisfiedwith that brother's conduct during the eventful day which had justpassed, than he had been with that which preceded his departure fromMontsoreau. But fraternal affection was strong at his heart, andhalting his men in the market-place, he rode up with the page and twoor three others to gratulate his brother, and ask how he fared afterthe perils he had undergone. He was surprised, however, as he camenear, to see a heavy cloud lowering on the Marquis's brow, and hiseyes rolling with an expression both fierce and anxious."So, Charles of Montsoreau," he exclaimed in a loud harsh tone, evenbefore his brother could dismount, "so you have come to render anaccount of your conduct this day, I trust, and to explain away thetreachery which is but too evident."The young Count heard him with surprise, as may be well supposed; buthe saw that he was under the excitement of some strong passion, andinstantly dismounting from his horse, he walked up to his brotherthrough the crowd, holding out his hand, and saying, "Gaspar, you areunder some mistake. How do you fare? You shall explain to me what isthe matter within."But the Marquis put his hand angrily by, exclaiming, "I take no handstained with such treachery, even though it be my brother's. I carenot who sees or who hears. I suppose, sir, you have brought the Ladywith you, whom you have contrived to rescue once more, by firstleading her into danger, that you might then deliver her from it.""I can hardly suppose you sane, Gaspar de Montsoreau," replied hisbrother at length. "What danger have I led you or any one else into?though you say true, when you say that I have delivered you, even whenyou thought fit to give me no assistance. But I ask again, What dangerhave I led you into, or any one else? What is it that you mean?""Pshaw!" exclaimed his brother, turning away with a look of contempt,which was very hard to bear. "You had better bring the Lady into thehouse, sir, and let her take some repose; and if she be not altogetherblinded, I will take care to explain to her how all this day'sbrilliant achievements have been brought about.""In the name of God, Gaspar of Montsoreau!" exclaimed his brother, atlength, "what is it that you mean? What Lady? Where is Mademoiselle deClairvaut? What madness has seized upon you now?"Gaspar of Montsoreau took a step forward, till he almost touched hisbrother, and demanded in a voice that was loud, but that trembled withpassion, "Did I not see your page, that very page who is holding yourhorse now--that very page, who was pointed out to me by one that knowshim well, as your bought bondsman--did I not see him--can you denyit?--did I not see him with the reiters at the moment that theycharged down the hill upon us? And then I saw him by your side fiveminutes after, when you came pretending to assist us.""The man's mad, or drunk!" said the boy aloud; but Charles ofMontsoreau turned upon him sharply, exclaiming, "Hush! Remember, sir,he is my brother!""I am sorry that he is, sir," replied the boy. "He might see menear the reiters, but he never saw me with them, for I had beenwatching them for half an hour, concealed behind a great mass ofbushes, and not daring to stir for my very life, till I saw thembegin to ride down the hill, when I came out and galloped as fast as Icould to tell my noble Lord, and bring him up to attack them.--Outupon it!--Pretending to help any one, when there is scarcely a man inthe troop unwounded!--Out upon it!--Pretending to attack the reiters,when he has well nigh cut them to pieces, and not left two mentogether of the whole band!"The boy spoke loud and indignantly, and at the joyful news of themarauders being cut to pieces, a glad shout burst from the town'speople, who had gathered round, listening with no small surprise tothe dispute between the two brothers."For Heaven's sake, Gaspar," said Charles of Montsoreau, "govern yourfeelings for a few minutes. I am here on the service of the noble Dukeof Guise, and set out from Logres only three days ago. I had heard ofthe reiters by the way, and determined to fight them if I met them.The first moment that I saw or had any communication with them--on myhonour and on my soul!-was that when I ordered my men to level theirlances, and charge them in the flank. You have nothing to do buteither to look at the banks of the stream, where they lay by dozens,to speak to the prisoners I have brought in, or to take one glanceinto those litters and those carts that carry my own wounded, to showyou that it was no feigned strife, as you have wildly fancied, thatwent on between us. And now believing this, and feeling that you havedone me wrong, tell me where is Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, for yourwords alarm and agitate me concerning her? Where is she, Gaspar? I saywhere is she?""I know not," said the Marquis, turning sullenly away, "I know not,Charles. In the last charge of the reiters, which happened nearly atnight-fall, they drove us beyond the carriage, and I have seen no moreof her. The Abb, however, was with her, and he has not come upeither; two or three of the men, too, were there.""Bring up the prisoners," exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau, with adegree of agony of mind that it is impossible to conceive. "These mencan give us information, for we took them on the road just now.--Bringup those prisoners."With their arms tied, and their heads uncovered, the three Germans,who had endeavoured, as was customary with many of their bands, tomake themselves look as fierce and terrible as possible, by sufferingtheir hair and beards to grow in confused and tangled masses, were nowbrought before the young commander; and gazing sternly upon them, hesaid, "You are here not as fair and open enemies, but as plunderersand marauders, after the generals who brought you here have retreatedfrom the land, and entered into a treaty with the King of thiscountry. Your only way, then, of obtaining any portion of mercy is, byanswering the questions I am going to ask you distinctly and truly;for if I catch the slightest wavering or falsehood in your replies, Iwill have you shot one by one within the next five minutes, as a justpunishment for the crimes that you have committed."His words seemed to make little or no impression upon men accustomedto the daily contemplation of death. They all seemed to understandhim, however, though it was with difficulty that they answered him inhis own language, mingling German with French, so as to render itnearly unintelligible."We will tell you the truth to be sure," replied one of the men. "Whatshould we tell you a lie for? All that ought to be lied about you knowalready; so we can do no harm by telling you the truth, and may do ourown throats harm by telling you a lie. Hundred thousand! Ask yourquestions, and you shall have truth."It was in vain, however, that Charles of Montsoreau questioned the mansternly and strictly in regard to what had become of Marie deClairvaut, and those who were with her. It was evident that he knewnothing. He admitted that they had driven the party of the Marquisbeyond the carriage, and had passed it themselves in the eagerness ofpursuit; but the sudden appearance of the armed burghers of La Ferthad caused them, he said, to retreat in great haste, and in separateparties. He and those who were with him had not taken the same road bywhich they came, and had seen nothing of the carriage.This information, though so scanty, afforded Charles of Montsoreau ahope. "If the road," he exclaimed eagerly, "on which these men werecaptured, is not the same on which the carriage was left, it may stillbe there, and Mademoiselle de Clairvaut safe."But his brother shook his head with an air of sullen grief anddespair. "No!" he said, "No, the carriage is not there! I have beenout myself to seek it, and have passed the spot. Not a trace of it wasto be seen, and I only returned when I heard your trumpets, believingthat you were bringing in your prize in triumph.""You have learnt, Gaspar," said his brother, "I know not why or how,to do me sad injustice. However, it is the duty of both of us not toclose an eye till we have discovered what has become of the young Ladywhom you undertook to conduct in safety till she was under theprotection of her relations.""I see not how it is your duty, Charles," replied his brother,sharply. "I, as you say, undertook to conduct her, and therefore it ismy duty; but you, it seems to me, have nothing to do with it.""It is my duty, Gaspar," replied his brother, "as a gentleman, and asa man of honour; and it is also my duty as an attached friend of theDuke of Guise; so that I shall seek for her this very instant. Let usboth to horse again; let us obtain guides who know the country well.You take one circuit, I will take another; and as there is now nofarther fear of any attack from the reiters, we can suffer the greaterpart of our men to repose, and meeting here in the morning, report toeach other what we have done, and concert together what steps arefarther to be taken.--And oh, Gaspar," he continued, "let us, Ibeseech you, let us act together in a brotherly spirit; do justice tomy motives and intentions, for they have been all what is kind andbrotherly towards yourself.""Doubtless," said the Marquis of Montsoreau, with one of those bittersneers, which the determination of persisting in wrong too oftensupplies to the uncandid and ungenerous: "doubtless your motives andintentions were good and brotherly, when the first thing that you didafter learning from the Abb de Boisguerin my feelings, wishes, andhopes, was instantly to seek the Duke of Guise for the purpose ofprepossessing him in your favour, and against my suit.""In this, as in all else, you do me wrong, Gaspar," replied hisbrother; "and so you will find it when you see the Duke: but Icannot pause to explain all this. We lose time, precious andinvaluable.--Gondrin, call out ten of our freshest and best mountedmen. Let surgeons be obtained immediately to dress the wounds of thehurt, and tell Alain and Mortier to provide for the comfort andrefreshment of the rest, according to the orders I gave them as wecame along. Take this German with us, as a sure guide to show us thespot where the carriage was last seen. If I might advise you, Gaspar,you will go round under Jouarre, and stretch out till you reachMontreuil. The carriage cannot have passed the Marne except by thisbridge, so that----""I shall follow my own plan, Charles of Montsoreau," said the Marquissullenly; "I want not an instructor as well as a rival in my youngerbrother." And thus saying, he turned away to give his own orders tosome of those who surrounded him.In the mean time his brother remounted his horse in haste; and,followed by Gondrin, and the ten men who had been selected, he set outupon his search. That search, however, proved utterly vain. No tidingswhatsoever of Marie de Clairvaut, or those who accompanied her, wereto be obtained; the peasantry, in terror of the reiters, had kept alltheir cottages closed and defended as best they could; and, with fewif any of them, Charles of Montsoreau could open a communication, asevery door that they applied to was shut, and in general nothing butsullen silence was returned to his application for admittance orinformation. In the few instances where the sound of his voice,speaking in the French tongue, obtained for him any answer, the replywas still the same, that they had kept all closed, from fear of thereiters, and had neither seen nor heard of any one passing sincenightfall.With horses and men wearied and exhausted by their fruitless search,and with his own brow aching, and his heart sad and anxious, Charlesof Montsoreau returned towards daybreak to the town of La Fert. Hisbrother, he found, had arrived some time before him, and had retiredto rest without waiting for his arrival. The young nobleman arguedfrom that fact, that though the Marquis had not absolutely broughtback the carriage with him to La Fert, he must have obtained somesatisfactory intelligence concerning it; and, unbuckling his arms,without, however, casting off the dress he wore beneath, he casthimself down to rest in the apartment which had been prepared for him.Though much fatigued, however, and with a mind and body both exhaustedby all the events and anxieties of the day, sleep refused to visit hiseyelids. His busy thoughts turned to every painful theme that memorycould supply from the past, or despondency call up out of the future;and finding that it was in vain to seek repose at that moment, heapproached the deep casement, threw open the window, and gazed outinto the market-square, which lay directly beneath his apartments.The morning was advancing brightly; the spring sunshine sparklingdown the principal street, through an opening in which the Marne wasseen flowing gaily on, with the open country rising up behind. Thelittle market-cross was surrounded by the carts and litters in whichhe had brought in the wounded men, and some of the early townsmenwere already seen walking hither and thither, while peasants andcountry-women in gay dresses came in one by one, now driving a horseor an ass loaded with the produce of their farms, now bearing thewhole of their little store in a basket on their shoulders or theirarm. Most of them paused to consider and to comment upon the array ofvehicles round the cross, talking in a low voice, as if fearful ofbreaking the stillness of the morning hour. The scene was calm, andquiet, and soothing; and feeling tranquilised after gazing at it forsome minutes, the young Count again turned to his couch, and wooed theblessing of slumber not now in vain. He slept profoundly, and mighthave gone on for many hours, had he not been awakened about nineo'clock by the page Ignati pulling him by the arm."What is the matter, Ignati?" he cried, starting up. "You seem inhaste and agitated.""Your brother is on horseback, and setting out," cried the boy; "andhe has learned tidings of the Lady, which will fit ill with yourwishes or those of the Duke.""What tidings, Ignati?" exclaimed the young Count eagerly. "Quick boy,do not keep me in suspense.""See your brother, and he will tell you," said the boy. "If he doesnot, I will. But, quick, or he will be away; run down at once, even asyou are."Charles of Montsoreau hastened towards the door, dressed as he was inthe buff coat which he wore beneath his armour; and from the stairsheard sounds that hastened all his movements. There was the tramplingof horses, and the noise of many tongues in the court-yard, but aboveall the voice of his brother, ordering his men as if for instantdeparture.When he reached the foot of the staircase, which led into the greatcourt of the inn, he found that those sounds had not deceived him.Gaspar de Montsoreau was on horseback, with his men drawn up in lineready to depart; and a cart containing two or three wounded men, andall the baggage which had not fallen into the hands of the reiters,was in the act of issuing forth through the archway into themarketplace. There was an air of eager and somewhat scornful triumphon the face of the Marquis de Montsoreau; and, at the very moment ofthe young Count's appearance, he was turning to speak with awell-dressed cavalier by his side, whom his brother had never beforebeheld.As soon as the eyes of the two brothers met, the Marquis exclaimedaloud, in a scoffing tone, addressing his new companion, "Ha, Monsieurde Colombel! By Heaven here comes my good young brother of Logres!We must put spurs to our horses and ride quick, for he has takenservice, it seems, with the Duke of Guise--commands a band of stoutmen-at-arms, enough to overpower us here--and may think fit toarrest us on the spot, if he finds that we are not of the sameparty as himself. He is not one to be stopped by brotherly love orconsideration, I can assure you.""Nay!" replied the cavalier whom he addressed, speaking with a courtlybut significant smile, "the Duke of Guise is King Henry's dear friendand faithful cousin, and professes every sort of reverence for thecrown of France."The whole of this was spoken, as Charles of Montsoreau advancedtowards them, with an evident intention that he should hear it; but hetook not the slightest notice, and walking up calmly to the side ofhis brother's horse, he said, "This is not kind of you, Gaspar, toquit the place thus early, without giving me an opportunity ofexplaining to you things which you have misinterpreted and takenamiss.""As you said to me last night, Charles," replied his brother, "I havenot time for long explanations now; every minute is precious andinvaluable. You can write to me if you have any thing to explain.""You will inform me at least then," said his brother, "whether youhave obtained any news of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, and where sheis.""I am in haste! I am in haste, good brother!" replied the Marquis,"and can only wait to tell you that she is in safe hands and well,which must be enough to satisfy you.""Not quite," answered Charles of Montsoreau. "As I am now upon my wayto meet the Duke of Guise, and shall most likely reach him before youdo, it will be but courteous of you to send him some fullerinformation regarding a Lady so nearly connected with himself.""If you do not reach him before I do," replied his brother with a grimsmile, "you and he will be long parted from each other, my goodbrother; and as to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, she is in safe hands,and will be well taken care of. Fare you well, my brother. Now march,my men!" And without waiting for any other reply, he shook his bridleand rode out of the court.The patience of Charles of Montsoreau was nearly at an end, and hepaused, gazing upon the ground for a minute or two, before he couldovercome the pain and indignation that he felt. He then turned to hisown chamber again, beckoning to the boy Ignati, who was still upon thestairs, to follow him thither."Now, Ignati," he said, "What is the meaning of all this? You haveprobably heard all that has passed. Give me what information you can,without loss of time.""This is all that I know," replied the boy; "but it is enough.Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, the Lady whom you were asking about lastnight, has met with a party of the King's troops which had been sentagainst the reiters, and has by them been carried to Chteau Thiery,whence she sent that cavalier whom you saw with your brother, to tellhim what had become of her. All those facts I heard the cavalierhimself relate: but from the page he brought with him, who was in theroom, or at least at the door, when his master and the Marquis werespeaking, I gathered, that this Monsieur de Colombel--by the advice ofsome priest who accompanied Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, I know notwhom--has persuaded your brother to join the party of the King,telling him that Henry would certainly hold Mademoiselle de Clairvautas a hostage for the Duke's good conduct, and would most likely bestowher upon any one he thought fit."Charles of Montsoreau pressed his hand firmly upon his brow for two orthree minutes. He had been learning for some time those dark andpainful lessons of human nature which come so bitterly to a nobleand a generous heart, when first the world, the contentions ofself-interest, and the strife of passion, teaches us how few, how veryfew, there are who have any thought or motive in all their actions butthe mean ungenerous ones of self--those bitter lessons which fix uponmature life the sad, the dark, the horrible companionship of doubt andsuspicion."Can I," he muttered, speaking to himself, "can I have been mistakenin the Abb de Boisguerin? Can I have trusted, and believed, andreverenced, where neither trust, nor belief, nor reverence wasdue?--It cannot be! No, it cannot be!" And after thinking again overall that the page had said, he added aloud, "The King's troops atChteau Thiery!--The Duke at Gonesse!--We must lose no time, but getto Montigny as speedily as possible."END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.CHAPTER I.All was bustle round the door of the little inn of Montigny; twenty orthirty horses employed the hands and attention of as many grooms andstable-boys; and while they put their heads together, and talked overthe perfections or imperfections of the beasts they held, sixty orseventy respectable citizens, the great cloth merchant, and thewholesale dealer in millstones, the cur of the little town, thebailiff of the high-justiciary, the ironmonger, the grocer, and thebutcher, stood in knots on the outside, discussing more importantparticulars than the appearance of the horses. The sign of the inn wasthe Croix de Lorraine, and the name of the Duke of Guise wasfrequently heard mingling in the conversation of the people round thedoor."A great pity," cries one, "that his Highness does not stay here thenight.""Some say that the King's troops are pursuing him," replied another."Sure enough he came at full speed," said a third; "but I heard hispeople talk about the reiters.""Oh, we would protect him against the reiters," cried one of the boldcitizens of Montigny."Well," said another, "if he be likely to bring the reiters upon us, Ithink his Highness very wise to go. How could we defend an open town?and he has not twenty men behind him.""I will tell you something, my masters," said another, with an air ofimportance, and a low bow:--"When my boy was over towards Montreuilto-night, he heard a report of the reiters having been defeated nearGandelu.""Oh, nonsense!" replied the courageous burgher; "who should defeatthem if the Duke was not there?""But hark!" cried another, "I hear trumpets, as I live. Now, if theseshould be the King's troops we will defend the Duke at the peril ofour lives. But let us look out and see.""Come up to my windows," cried one."Go up the tower of the church," said the cur.But another remarked that the sounds did not come from the side ofParis; and, in a minute or two after, a well-dressed citizen likethemselves rode gaily in amongst them, jumped from his horse, threw uphis cap in the air, and exclaimed, "Long life to the Duke of Guise!The reiters have been cut to pieces!""What is that you say, young man?" exclaimed a voice from one of thewindows of the inn above; and looking up, the citizen saw a young andgay-looking man sitting in the open casement, and leaning out with hisarm round the iron bar that ran up the centre."I said, my Lord," replied the man, "that the reiters have been cut topieces, and I saw the troops that defeated them bring in the woundedand prisoners last night into La Fert.""Ventre bleu! This is news indeed," cried the other; and instantlyturning, he quitted the window and advanced into the room.While this conversation had been going on without, a quick conferencehad been going on between the personages whose horses were heldwithout. The chamber in which they were assembled was an upstairs'room, with two beds in two several corners, and a table in the midstcovered with a clean white table-cloth, and ornamented in the centrewith a mustard-pot, a salt-seller, and a small bottle of vinegar,while four or five spoons were ranged around.At the side of the table appeared the Duke of Guise, dining with asgood an appetite off a large piece of unsalted boiled beef, as off anyof the fine stews and salmis of his cook Matre Lanecque. Five or sixother gentlemen were around, diligently employed in the sameoccupation; and one who had finished two bowls of soup at a placewhere they had previously stopped, now declaring that he had noappetite, had taken his seat in the window. The servants of the Dukeand of his companions were at dinner below, and the landlord himselfwas excluded from the room, that dining and consultation might go onat the same time."It is most unfortunate," said the Duke of Guise, as soon as he hadseated himself at the table, "it is most unfortunate that this youthhas not kept his word with me. Our horses and men are both fatigued todeath; and yet, after what happened the other day at Mareuil, it wouldbe madness to remain here all night with only twenty horsemen.""You have got timid, fair cousin," replied one of the gentlemenpresent. "We shall have you wrapping yourself up in a velvet gown, andsetting up a confrrie, in imitation of our excellent, noble, andmanly king."The Duke w as habitually rash enough to be justified in laughing atthe charge, and he replied, "It is on your account, my pretty cousin,that I fear the most. You know what the reiters have sworn to do withyou, if they catch you.""It is most unfortunate indeed," said an older and a graver man; "mostunfortunate, that this Count de Logres should have deceived you. Itmight have been better, perhaps, to trust to some more tried andexperienced friend.""Oh, you do him wrong, Laval; you do him wrong," replied the Duke. "Itis neither want of faith or good will, I can be sworn. Some accident,such as may happen to any of us, has detained him. I am very anxiousabout him, and somewhat reproach myself for having made him march withonly half his numbers. Had his whole band been with him, he might havemade head against the reiters, if he met with them. But now he hasless than half their reputed number. Nevertheless," he continued, "hisabsence is, as you say, most unfortunate; for--with these Germans onour left, and the movements of Henry's Swiss upon our right--theymight catch us as the Gascons do wild ducks, in the net, through themeshes of which we have been foolish enough to thrust our own heads. Ipray thee, Brissac, go down to mine host of the house, and gathertogether some of the notable men of the place, to see if we cannot byany means purchase horses to carry us on. Who are you speaking to,Aumale?" he continued, raising his voice, and addressing the youth whosat in the window."Good news, good news!" cried the young man springing down, and comingforward into the room. "The reiters have been cut to pieces nearGandelu. There is a fellow below who has seen the victorious troops,and the wounded and the prisoners.""My young falcon for a thousand crowns!" cried the Duke of Guise. "Ifthat be the case, we shall soon hear more of him. Hark! are not thosetrumpets? Yet go out, Brissac; go out. We must not suffer ourselves tobe surprised whatever we do. Aumale, have the horses ready. If theyshould prove the Swiss, we must march out at the one gate while theymarch in at the other."But at that moment Brissac, who had run down at a word, and was bythis time in the street, held up his hand to one of the others who waslooking out of the window, exclaiming, "Crosses of Lorraine, crossesof Lorraine! A gallant body of some fifty spears; but all crosses ofLorraine.--Ay, and I can see the arms of Montsoreau and Logres! Allis right, tell the Duke; all is right!" And thus saying he advancedalong the street to meet the troops that were approaching.The Duke of Guise, who had risen from the table, seated himself againquietly, drew a deep breath as a man relieved from some embarrassment,and filling the glass that stood beside him, half full of the goodsmall wine of Beaugency, rested his head upon his hand, and remainedin thought for several minutes.While he remained in this meditative mood the sounds of the trumpetsbecame louder and louder; the trampling of horses' feet were heardbefore the inn, and then was given, in a loud tone, the order to halt.Several of the companions of the Duke had gone down stairs to witnessthe arrival of the troops, and in a minute or two after, feet wereheard coming up, and the Duke turned his head to welcome the youngCount on his arrival. He was somewhat surprised, however, to see anold white-headed man, who had doffed his steel cap to enter the Duke'spresence, come in between Brissac and Laval, and make him a lowinclination of the head."Who are you, my good friend?" demanded the Duke. "And where is theyoung Count of Logres?""I know not, your Highness," replied the other. "I am the Count'sseneschal, and expected to find him here. He set off four days agowith one half of his men, commanding me to join him at Montigny withthe rest, as soon as their arms arrived from Rhetel. They came soonerthan we expected, so I followed him the day after.""Then is it to you, my worthy old friend," said the Duke, "that thecountry is obliged for the defeat of this band of marauders?""No, your Highness," replied the old man bluntly. "I have not had thegood fortune to meet with any thing to defeat, though, indeed, weheard of something of the kind this morning as we passed byGrisolles.""I hope the news is true," said the Duke; "I have heard of many avictory in my day, where it turned out that the victors werevanquished; and I hear that these reiters numbered from a hundred to ahundred and fifty men. How many had your Lord with him, goodseneschal?""He had fifty-one men at arms," replied the old soldier, "besides somelackeys and a page; and some men leading horses with the baggage hecould not do without.""I shall not be easy till I hear more of him," said the Duke, walkingup and down the room. "However, your coming, good seneschal, willenable us to make good this place against any force that may bebrought against it. Quick, send me up the aubergiste. We must despatchsome one to bring us in intelligence: and now, good seneschal, restand refresh your horses, get your men some food, and have every thingready to put foot in stirrup again at a moment's notice; for if wefind that your Lord has fallen into the hands of these reiters, wemust mount to deliver him. Let their numbers be what they may, Henryof Guise cannot make up his mind to leave a noble friend in the handsof the foemen.""We are all ready this minute, my Lord," replied the old seneschal."There is not a man of Logres who is not ready to ride forty miles,and fight two reiters this very night in defence of his Lord.""The old cock's not behind the young one," said the Chevalier d'Aumaleto Brissac. But the Duke of Guise overruled the zealous eagerness ofthe old soldier; and as soon as the aubergiste appeared, directed himto send off a boy in the direction of Montreuil and La Fert, in orderto gain intelligence of the movements of the Count de Logres, and toascertain whether the report of the defeat of the reiters was corrector not. His own horses he ordered now to be unsaddled, and casting offhis corselet, gave himself up to repose for the evening.During the next hour, or hour and a half, manifold were the reportswhich reached the town concerning the conflict which had taken placebetween the Count of Logres and the reiters on the preceding evening.All sorts of stories were told: every peasant that brought in a basketof apples had his own version of the affair; and the accounts were themost opposite, as well as the most various. The Duke of Guise,however, was too much accustomed to sifting the various rumours of theday, not to be able to glean some true information from the midst ofthese conflicting statements. It seemed clear to him that the reitershad been defeated, and without having any very certain cause for hisbelief, he felt convinced that Charles of Montsoreau was already uponhis way towards Montigny."Come," he added, after expressing these opinions to the Chevalierd'Aumale, "we must at least give our young champion a good meal on hisarrival. See to it, Brissac; see to it. You, who are a connoisseur insuch things, deal with our worthy landlord of the Cross, and see if hecannot procure something for supper more dainty than he gave us fordinner.""The poor man was taken by surprise," replied Brissac; "but since heheard that you were to remain here, there has been such a cackling andscreaming in the court-yard, and such a riot in the dovecote, that Idoubt not all the luxuries of Montigny will be poured forth this nightupon the table."In less than an hour after this order was given, the arrival of freshhorses was heard; and Laval, who went to the window, announced, thatas well as he could see through the increasing darkness, for it wasnow night, this new party consisted only of five or six persons. In afew minutes, however, the door was thrown open by the aubergiste, andCharles of Montsoreau himself appeared, dusty with the march, and withbut few traces of triumph or satisfaction on his countenance."What, my young hero!" cried the Duke, rising and taking him by thehand; "you look as gloomy as if you had suffered a defeat, rather thangained a victory. Are the tidings which we have heard not true then,or are they exaggerated? If you have even brought off your forces safefrom the reiters, that is a great thing, so overmatched as you were.""It is not that, your Highness," replied Charles of Montsoreau: "thenumbers were not very disproportionate, but the reiters have certainlysuffered a complete rout, and I do not think that they will ever meetin a body again. They lost a good many men on the field, and I fearthe peasantry have murdered all the wounded.""So much the better," cried the Chevalier d'Aumale; "so much thebetter. One could have done nothing with them but hang them.""I fear then," said the Duke of Guise, addressing the Count, "I fearthen that your own loss has been severe by the gloominess of yourcountenance, Logres.""There are a good many severely wounded, sir," replied the Count; "butvery few killed. This, however, is not the cause of my vexation, whichI must explain to your Highness alone. I have, however, to apologiseto you for not being here last night, as I fully intended. I did notgo to seek the reiters, but fell in with them accidentally, and afterthe skirmish I was forced to turn towards La Fert instead of cominghere, in order to get surgeons to my wounded men. I find, however,sir," he continued, "that my good old seneschal has made more speedthan his master, and has arrived here with his band before me. I mustgo and take order for the comfort of my people, and prepare lodgingfor the rest who are coming up, for I rode on at all speed as soon asI met with the messenger whom you had sent out to seek me. After thatI will return and crave a few minutes' audience of your Grace alone.""Come back to supper, dear friend," replied the Duke; "we must let ourgay friends now sup with us; but then we will drive them to theirbeds, and hold solitary council together, and be not long Logres, foryou need both refreshment and repose."When the young Count returned to the apartments of the Duke, after hehad seen the rest of his troop arrive, and had taken every measure tosecure the comfort of the men under his command, he found that Princestanding in one of the deep windows speaking in a low tone with thepage Ignati, while his own officers were gathered together in thewindow on the other side.The Duke instantly took him by the hand as he approached, and said ina low but kindly tone, "You see I have been questioning the spy I setupon you, Logres, and he has let me into a number of your secrets;but you must not be angry with him on that account, for Henry of Guisewill not abuse the trust. Come, let us sit down to table, and we willafterwards find an opportunity of talking over all these affairs. Youhave acted nobly and gallantly, my young friend, and have served yourcountry while you benefited me. For your brother's conduct you are notresponsible: but I think this morning's events, if the boy speakscorrectly, must bar your tongue from speaking his praises for thefuture.""Indeed, my Lord," exclaimed the young Count, "my brother may----""Hush! hush!" cried the Duke. "There is nothing sits so ill upon thelips of a noble-hearted man as an excuse for bad actions, either inhimself or others. It is false generosity, Charles of Montsoreau, tosay the least of it. But let us to table. Come, Aumale. See! our goodAubergiste looks reproachfully at you for letting his fragrant ragoutsgrow cold. Come, we will to meat, gentlemen. Sit down, sit down, Wewill have no ceremony here at the Cross of Lorraine."Thus saying, the Duke seated himself at table, and the rest took theirplaces around. The supper proved better than had been expected, andwine and good appetites supplied the place of all deficiencies. TheChevalier d'Aumale indeed had every now and then a light jest at someof the various dishes: he declared that a certain capon had bluntedhis dagger, and asked Charles of Montsoreau whether it was not tougherthan a veteran reiter. He declared that a matelote d'anguille whichwas placed before him, had a strong flavour of a hedge; but added,that as his own appetite was viperous, he must get through it as besthe might. He was not without a profane jest either, upon a dish ofpigeons; but though he addressed the greater part of these gaily tothe young Count de Logres, he could hardly wring a smile from one whoin former days would have laughed with the best, but whose heart wasnow anxiously occupied with many a bitter feeling.Charles of Montsoreau was eager, too, that the meal should be over,for he longed for that private communication with the Duke whichweighed upon his mind in anticipation. He felt that it would bedifficult to exculpate his brother; and yet, in pursuance of his ownhigh resolutions, he longed to do so: and then again he eagerly hopedthat the powerful prince beside whom he sat would find some means ofdelivering Marie de Clairvaut from the hands into which she hadfallen; and yet he feared, from all he heard and saw, that thatdeliverance might be difficult and remote.Thus the banquet passed somewhat cheerlessly to him; and it was notvery much enlivened by a little incident which happened towards theclose of supper, when the landlord, who had come into the roomfollowed by a man dressed in the garb of a surgeon, whisperedsomething in the Duke's ear which called his attention immediately."How many did you say?" demanded the Duke."Only two at present, your Highness," replied the surgeon; "but threemore sinking, I think.""All in the same house?" said the Duke."No, my Lord, in different houses," replied the man; "but near thesame spot.""The only thing to be done," replied the Duke, "is to draw a barrieracross the end of that street, and mark the houses with a whitecross.""What is the matter, your Highness?" said Laval, from the other end ofthe table."Oh, nothing," replied the Duke of Guise, "only a few cases of theplague; and because it was very bad last autumn at Morfontaine, thepeople here have got into a fright."The Duke of Guise concluded his supper as lightly and gaily as ifnothing had happened, for his mind had become so accustomed to dealwith and to contemplate things of great moment, that they made notthat impression upon him which they do upon those whose course is laidin a smoother and evener path.Charles of Montsoreau, however, could not feel in the same way. "Warand pestilence!" he thought, "bloodshed and death! These are thecommon every-day ideas of men in this unhappy country, now. Perhapsfamine may be added some day soon, and yet there will be lightlaughter, and merriment, and jest. Well, let it be so. Why should wecast away enjoyment because it can but be small? Life is at best butmade up of chequered visions: let us enjoy the bright ones while wemay, and make the dark ones short if we can."While he thus thought, the Duke of Guise whispered a word or two tothe Count of Brissac, and that gentleman nodded to Laval. Shortlyafter, both rose; and, with an air of affected unwillingness, theChevalier d'Aumale followed their example. The two or three othergentlemen who had partaken of the meal, but who either from inferiorsituation or natural taciturnity had mingled but little in theconversation, left the table at the same time, and accompanied theothers out of the room, so that the Duke of Guise and the young Countwere left alone.CHAP. II.The weak-minded and the vulgar are cowed by the aspect of highstation; the humble in mind, and the moderate in talent, are subduedby high genius, and bend lowly to the majesty of mind; the powerful,the firm, and the elevated spring up to meet their like, and with themthere is nothing earthly that can overawe but a consciousness of evilin themselves, or a sensation of abasement for those they love.Such was the case with Charles of Montsoreau, who undoubtedly was aman of high and powerful mind. He was in his first youth, it is true;he had no great or intimate knowledge of the world, except thatknowledge of the world which, in a few rare instances, comes as itwere by intuition. He had been bred up from his youth in love andadmiration for the princes of the House of Lorraine, and especially ofHenry, Duke of Guise; and yet, when he had met him for the first time,and recognised him at once in the inn at Mareuil, he felt nodiffidence--no alarm. Nor had this confidence in himself any thingwhatsoever to do with conceit: he thought not of himself for a moment;he thought only of the Duke of Guise and his situation, and impulseguided by habit did the rest. Seeing that the Duke had assumed aninferior character, he treated him accordingly; and acting as naturedictated to him, he acted right.Neither, at Rheims, when the Duke appeared surrounded by pomp andsplendour, did the young nobleman feel differently. He paid everytribute of external reverence to the Prince's station and high renown;but he conferred with him upon equal terms, feeling that if in mind hewas not absolutely equal to that great leader, he was competent toappreciate his character, and was not inferior to him in elevation ofthought and purpose.But now, how changed were all his feelings, when, sitting by one whomhe venerated and respected--more than perhaps was deserved--he had todiscuss with him the painful subject of a brother's errors, andtorture imagination to find excuses which judgment would not ratify!He sat humiliated, and pained, and hesitating: he knew not what tosay, and he felt that any thing he could say was vain.For a few minutes after the rest of the party quitted the room, theDuke of Guise remained silent, sometimes gazing down, as was hishabit, upon his clasped hands, sometimes raising his eyes for a singlemoment to the countenance of his young companion. He seemed to feelfor him, indeed; and when he did speak, led the conversation to thesubject gradually and delicately."Well, my dear Count," he said, "let us speak of this affair of thereiters. You made me as many excuses but now, for defeating ourenemies, as if you had let them defeat you. Such gallant actions areeasily pardoned, Logres; and if you but proceed to commit many suchfaults, Henry of Navarre and Henry of Guise had both need look totheir renown. There was a third Henry once," he continued, halfclosing his eyes, and speaking with a sigh, as he thought of HenryIII. and fair promises of his youth; "there was a third Henry once,who might perhaps have borne the meed of fame away from us both: butthat light has gone out in the socket, and left nothing but anunsavory smell behind. However, there was no excuse needed, goodfriend, for cutting to pieces double your own number of Germanmarauders.""My excuse was not for that," replied the Count, calmly, "but yourHighness directed me to go no farther than Montigny, and I went to LaFert, on account of the wounded men.""That is easily excused too," said the Duke. "But now give me your ownaccount of the affair. The boy told me the story but imperfectly. Howfell you in with the reiters at first?"Charles of Montsoreau did as the Prince required, giving a full andminute, but modest, account of all that had taken place. But when hespoke of retreating up the river to the spot where the banks weredeeper, and the stream more profound, Guise caught him by the hand,exclaiming eagerly, "Did you know that the banks were steeper? Did yousee that they would guard your flank?""That was my object, my Lord," replied the young Count, somewhatsurprised. "I noticed the nature of the ground as we charged them atfirst.""Kneel down!" cried the Duke; "kneel down! Would to God that I were aBayard for thy sake!--In the name of God, St. Michael and St. George,I dub thee knight;" and drawing his sword he struck him on the collarwith the blade, adding with a smile, in which melancholy was blendedwith gaiety, "Perchance this may be the last chivalrous knighthoodconferred in France. Indeed, as matters go, I think it will be: but ifit should, I can but say that it never was won more nobly."The young Count rose with sparkling eyes. The memory of the chivalrousages was not yet obliterated by dust and lichens; the fire of a moreenthusiastic epoch was not yet quite extinct; and he felt as if whathad passed gave him greater strength to go through what was to come.The Duke, however, relaxing soon into his former manner, made him asign to proceed; and Charles of Montsoreau went on to detail thecomplete defeat and dispersion of the different bodies of reiters. Hethen began to hesitate again: but Guise was determined to hear all,and said, "But your brother; where did you find your brother? Be frankwith me, Logres."Thus pressed, the young Count went on to say, that he did not againmeet with his brother till he found him in the market-place at LaFert. "My brother," he continued, "having been driven by the partythat pursued him beyond the carriage, and judging that I was coming upwith a superior force, imagined that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut and herattendants had fallen under my protection: but finding that such wasnot the case, he mounted his horse again, and proceeded to seek forher during the greater part of the night, while I did the same inanother direction."He was then hurrying on as fast as possible to speak of the followingmorning, but the Duke interrupted him, demanding, "There was a sharpdispute in the market-place, I think; was there not, Monsieur deLogres? Pray let me hear the particulars."But Charles of Montsoreau, driven to the point, answered boldly and atonce, "It was a dispute between two brothers, my Lord; in regard towhich none but God and their own consciences can judge. You willtherefore pardon me if I keep that which is private to my privatebosom."Guise gazed at him for a long--a very long time, with eyes full ofdeep feeling, and then replied, "By Heaven! you are one of the mostextraordinary young men I ever met with. I know the whole, Monsieur deLogres; and the words there spoken let me into the secrets of yourbosom which I wished to know. I now understand how to deal with you;and while I do my best to secure your happiness, trust to the Duke ofGuise to avoid, as far as possible, any thing that is painful to youin the course. But go on; let me hear the rest.""If you know all, my Lord," said Charles of Montsoreau, a good dealaffected by the Duke's kindness, "will you not spare me the telling ofthat which must be painful to me?""I fear I must ask you to go on," replied the Duke. "What you have nowto tell me is the most important part of all to me at the presentmoment, for by it must my conduct be regulated, in regard to themeasures for rescuing our poor Marie from the hands of that----." Hechecked himself suddenly, and then added, "the King, in short. Asingle word may cause a difference in our view of the matter; andtherefore I would fain hear you tell it, if you will do me thatfavour.""All that I know, my Lord, I will tell," replied the Count; "but of myown knowledge I have little to tell, for the principal part of myinformation was derived from the boy with whom you have alreadyspoken. All then that I personally know is, that, having slept longfrom great fatigue, I was roused by the boy in the morning; that hetold me my brother was about to depart; and that, on descending, Ifound his report true. My brother was already on horseback, and histroop in the act of setting out; but he was accompanied by a gentlemanwhom I had never seen before, whose name is Colombel, and who, I foundafterwards, is an officer in the service of the King.""Oh yes," said the Duke of Guise; "I have heard him named; a person ofno great repute, but some cunning.""My conversation with my brother," continued the Count, "was not themost agreeable. On his side it was all taunts; but the only part ofwhich it is needful to inform your Highness, was, that when I askedtidings of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, he would afford me noinformation, except that she was in safe hands. I am grieved, also, tobe compelled to say that he told me, if I did not join you before hedid, I should be long parted from you.""We have lost an ally," replied the Duke; "but one which, to saysooth, I do not covet. If he be not treacherous, he is at bestunsteady; but I cannot help fearing, Charles of Montsoreau, that yourbrother himself, apprehending that my regard for you might not suithis purposes, has had some share in suffering Marie to fall into thehands of Henry.""Oh no, my Lord, oh no!" exclaimed Charles of Montsoreau; "you do himwrong, believe me. My Lord, a few words will explain to you the causeof his conduct. He is possessed with a passion for Mademoiselle deClairvaut, so strong, so vehement, so intense, as to have a portion ofmadness in it,--a sufficient portion to make him cast away his formernature altogether, to hate his brother, to abandon his friends, toabjure all the thoughts and feelings of his youth, and to follow herstill where-ever she goes, seeking to obtain her by means which thevery blindness of his passion prevents him from seeing are those whichmust insure his losing her.""This is the passion of a weak and unstable mind," said the Duke."Love, my young friend, is in itself a grand and ennobling thing,leading us to do great actions for the esteem and approbation of herwe love. The love of a bright woman," he added, "the love of a brightwoman--I speak it with all due reverence," and he put his hand to hishat, "is the next finest sensation, the next grand mover in humanactions, to the love of God. The object is undoubtedly inferior, butthe course is the same, namely, the striving to do high and excellentthings for the approbation of a being that we love and venerate. Alasthat it should be so! but in this world I fear the love of woman isamongst us the strongest mover of the two: the other is so remote, sohigh, so pure, that our dull senses strain their wings in reaching it.The love of woman appeals to the earthly as well as to the heavenlypart of man's nature, and consequently is heard more easily.Perhaps--and Heaven grant it!--that, as some of our fathers held, theone love may lead us on to the other, and the perishable be but a stepto the immortal. However," he added, "such love as that which you saypossesses your brother, will certainly never lead him on to any thingthat is great, or high, or noble. Most certainly it will not lead himto the hand of Marie de Clairvaut as long as Henry of Guise can draw asword. If he have not betrayed me, he has abandoned me; if he have notshown himself a coward, he has shown himself a weak defender of thoseintrusted to his charge; and under such circumstances, had he thewealth of either India and the power of Csar, he should never wedMarie de Clairvaut." He laid his hand upon the shoulder of Charles ofMontsoreau, and he said, "You have heard my words, good friend; thosewords are irrevocable: and now knowing that your brother can never bereally your rival, act as you will. I would fain have your confidence,Charles, but I will not wring it from you. This girl is beautiful andsweet and fascinating; and if I judge right, you love her not less butmore nobly than your brother. Tell me, or tell me not as you will, butwe all feel pleased with confidence.""Oh, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "how can I deny you myconfidence when you load me with such proofs of your goodness? I dolove Mademoiselle de Clairvaut as deeply, as intensely, aspassionately, as my brother,--more, more a thousand fold than he orany body else, I believe, is capable of loving. I had someopportunities of rendering her services, and on one of those occasionsI was betrayed into words and actions which I fancied must have madeher acquainted with all my feelings. It was after that I discovered,my Lord, how madly my brother loved her: it was after that Idiscovered that the pursuit of my love must bring contention anddestruction on my father's house. Had I believed that she loved me,nothing should have made me yield her to any one; for I had the priorclaim, I had the prior right: but when I had reason to believe thatshe had not marked, and did not comprehend all the signs of myaffection; when I felt that I could quit her without the appearance oftrifling with her regard, though not without the continued misery ofmy own life, my determination was taken in a moment, and I determinedto make the sacrifice, be the consequences what they might. Such, myLord, is the simple truth; such is the only secret of all my actions."The Duke of Guise bent down his eyes upon the ground with a smile, inthe expression of which there was a degree of cynical bitterness. Itwas somewhat like one of the smiles of the Abb de Boisguerin; but theDuke's words explained it at once, which the Abb's never did."I fear, my young friend," he said, "that the science of women'shearts is a more difficult one than the science of war. You havelearnt the one, it would seem, by intuition; in the other you are yeta novice. However, you shall pursue your own course, bearing with youthe remembrance that I swear by my own honour--""Oh swear not, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "circumstancesmay change; she may love him; her love may alter him, and lead himback to noble things."The Duke smiled again. "What I have said," he answered, "is as good assworn. But have it your own way; I thank you for the confidence youhave reposed in me. And now, to show you how I can return it, I have atask to put upon you, an adventure on which to send forth my new madeknight. I do not think that Henry either will or dare refuse to giveup to me my own relation and ward. The king and I are great friends,God wot! But still I must demand her, and somebody must take a journeyto Paris for that purpose. To the capital, doubtless, they haveconveyed her; and I trust, my good Logres, that you will not think itbelow your dignity and merit to seek and bring back a daughter of theHouse of Guise."Charles of Montsoreau paused thoughtfully for a moment, ere hereplied. All the difficulties and dangers to which he might beexposed, in acting against the views of the King of France, were tohim as nothing; but the difficulties and dangers which might arisefrom his opposition to his own brother, were painful and fearful tohim to contemplate. He saw not, however, how he could refuse the task;and it cannot be denied that love for Marie de Clairvaut had its sharealso in making him accept it. He doubted not for a moment, that if shewere in the hands of the King, she was there against her own will; andcould he, he asked himself, could he even hesitate to aid indelivering her from a situation of difficulty, danger, and distress?The thought of aiding her, the thought of seeing her again, thethought of hearing the sweet tones of that beloved voice, the thoughtof once more soothing and supporting her, all had their share; thevery contemplation made his heart beat; and lifting his eyes, he foundthose of the Duke of Guise fixed upon his countenance, reading all thepassing emotions, the shadows of which were brought across him bythose thoughts. The colour mounted slightly into his cheek as hereplied, "My Lord, I will do your bidding to the best of my ability.When shall I march?""Oh, you mistake," said the Duke, laughing; "you are not to go at thehead of your men, armed cap--pie, to deliver the damsel from thegiant's castle; but in the quality of my envoy to Henry; first of alldemanding, quietly and gently, where the Lady is, and then requiringhim to deliver her into your hands, for the purpose of escorting herto me, where-ever I may be. You shall have full powers for the latterpurpose; but you must keep them concealed till such time as you havediscovered, either from the King's own lips--though no sinceritydwells upon them--or by your own private inquiries and investigations,where this poor girl is. Then you may produce to the King your powersfrom me, and to herself I will give you a letter, requesting her tofollow your directions in all things. Now, you must show yourself asgreat a diplomatist as a soldier, for I can assure you that you willhave to deal with as artful and as wily a man as any now living inEurope.""I will do my best, my Lord; and to enable me to deal with them beforeall their plans are prepared, I had better set out at break of dayto-morrow, with as many men as your Highness thinks fit shouldaccompany me."The Duke mused for a moment or two; "No," he said, "no; I must not letyou go, Logres, without providing for your safety. You have riskedyour life sufficiently for me and mine already. You go into newscenes, with which you are unacquainted; into dangers, with which youmay find it more difficult to cope than any that you have hitherto metwith. I cannot then suffer you to depart without such passports andsafeguards as may diminish those dangers as far as possible.""Oh, I fear not, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau, "the Kingand your Highness are not at war. I have done nothing to offend,and--""It cannot be, it cannot be," replied the Duke. "You must go back withme to Soissons. I will send a messenger from this place to demand thenecessary passports for you. No great time will be lost, for a commoncourier can pass where you or I would be stopped. Then," he continued,"as to the men that you should take with you, I should say, the fewerthe better. Mark me," he continued, with a smile, "there are secretsprings in all things; and I will give you letters to people in Paris,which will put at your disposal five hundred men on the notice of halfan hour. Ay, more, should you require them. But use not these lettersexcept in the last necessity, for they might hurry on events which Iwould rather see advance slowly till they were forced upon me, than doaught to bring them forward myself. No; you shall go back with me toSoissons, guarding me with your band; and I doubt not, our messengerfrom Paris will not be many hours after us. Now leave me, and to rest,good Logres, and send in the servant, whom you will find half waydown the stairs."The young Count withdrew without another word, and he found that whilethe conversation between himself and the Duke had been going on, a manhad been stationed, both above and below the door of the apartment, asif to insure that nobody approached to listen. Such were the sadprecautions necessary in those days.Early on the following morning the whole party mounted their horses,the wounded men of Logres were left under the care and attendance ofthe good townsmen of Montigny, and the young Count riding with theparty of the Duke of Guise, proceeded on the road to Soissons. Noadventure occurred to disturb their progress; and, as so constantlyhappens in the midst of scenes of danger, pain, and difficulty, almostevery one of the whole party endeavoured to compensate for thefrequent endurance of peril and pain by filling up the intervals withlight laughter and unthinking gaiety. The Duke of Guise himself wasnot the least cheerful of the party, though occasionally the cloud ofthought would settle again upon his brow, and a pause of deepmeditation would interrupt the jest or the sally. It was late at nightwhen they arrived at Soissons, and the Duke, after supping with theCardinal de Bourbon, retired to rest, without conversing with any ofhis party. It was about eight o'clock on the following morning, andwhile, by the dull grey light of a cloudy spring day, Charles ofMontsoreau was dressing himself, with the aid of one of his servants,that the door opened without any previous announcement, and the Dukeof Guise, clad in a dressing-gown of crimson velvet trimmed withminiver, entered the room, bearing in his hand a packet of sealedletters, and one open one. A page followed him with something wrappedup in a skin of leather, which he placed upon one of the stools, andinstantly retired."Send away your man, Count," said the Duke, seating himself; "resumeyour dressing-gown, and kindly give me your full attention forhalf an hour. You will be so good," he continued, turning to the manwho was quitting the chamber, "as to take your stand on the firstlanding-place below this door. You will tell any body whom you seecoming up to pass by the other staircase; any one you may see comingdown, you will direct to pass by this door quickly."There was a stern command in the eye of the Duke of Guise which had astrong effect upon those it rested on; and the man to whom he nowspoke made his exit from the room, stumbling over twenty things in hishaste to obey. As soon as he was gone, the Duke turned to his youngfriend, and continued, "Here is the King's safeguard under his ownhand, and the necessary passports for yourself and two attendants.Here is your letter of credit to him in my name, requiring him to giveyou every sort of information which he may be possessed of regardingthe subjects which you will mention to him; and here is a thirdletter giving you full power to demand at his hands the person ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut, for the purpose of escorting her andplacing her under my protection. This, again, is to Mary herself,bidding her follow your counsels and direction in every thing; andthese others are to certain citizens of Paris, whose names you willfind written thereon. If you will take my advice, you will again takewith you the boy Ignati, and one stout man-at-arms, unarmed, however,except in such a manner as the dangers of the road require. Youunderstand, I think, clearly, all that I wish.""I believe, my Lord, I do," replied the Count. "But how am I to insuresafety for Mademoiselle de Clairvaut on the road, without an adequateforce?""Write to me but one word," replied the Duke of Guise, "as soon as sheis delivered into your hands, and I will send you with all speedwhatever forces I can spare. But I have one or two things tocommunicate to you, which it is necessary for you to know, both foryour own security and the success of your mission. The principal partof my niece's lands lie in the neighbourhood of Chateauneuf, betweenDreux and Mortagne in Normandy. It is not at all unlikely, that, ifdriven to remove her from your sight, Henry may be tempted to send herthither, well knowing that it is what I have always opposed, and thatI preferred rather that she should dwell even in Languedoc than be inthat neighbourhood. For this I had a reason; and that reason is thenear relationship in which her father stood to the most daring and themost dangerous man in France. One of the first of those whom you willsee near the person of the King, the man who governs and rules him tohis own infamy and destruction, in whose hands the minions are buttools and Henry an instrument, who, more than any one else, has tendedto change a gracious prince, a skilful general, and a brave man, intoan effeminate and vicious king, is Ren de Villequier, Baron ofClairvaut. He was first cousin to Marie de Clairvaut's father, and heis consequently her nearest male relation out of the family of Guise.He has, indeed, sometimes hinted at a right to share in theguardianship of his cousin's daughter. But such things a Guise permitsnot. However, with this claim upon the disposal of her hand, Henrymay, perhaps, hesitate to yield her, unless with the consent ofVillequier. With him, then, you may be called upon to deal; butVillequier, I think, knows the hand of a Guise too well to call down ablow from it unnecessarily. However, he is as daring as he is artful,and impunity in crime has rendered him perfectly careless ofcommitting it. He is Governor of Paris, one of the King's ministers, aKnight of the Holy Ghost. Now hear what he has done to merit all this.More than one assassin broken on the wheel has avowed himself theinstrument of Villequier, sent to administer poison to those he didnot love. Complaisant in every thing to his King, he sought tosacrifice to him the honour of his wife: but she differed from him inher tastes; and, on the eighteenth of last September, in broaddaylight, in the midst of an effeminate court, he murdered her withhis own hand at her dressing-table. Nor was this all: there was agirl--a young sweet girl--the natural daughter of a noble house, whowas holding before the unhappy lady a mirror to arrange her dress whenthe fatal blow was struck. The fiend's taste for blood was roused. Onevictim was not enough, and he murdered the wretched girl by the sideof her dead mistress. This was done in open day, was never disowned,was known to every one, and was rewarded by the order of the HolyGhost--an insult to God, to France, and to humanity.[1] However, aswith this man you may have to deal, I have to give you two cautions.Never drink wine with him, or eat food at his table; never go into hispresence without wearing under your other dress the bosom friend whichI have brought you there;" and he took from the leathern skin in whichit was wrapped, a shirt of mail, made of rings linked together, sofine that it seemed the lightest stroke would have broken it, and yetso strong, that the best tempered poinard, driven by the most powerfulhand, could not have pierced it. "Have also in your bosom," continuedthe Duke of Guise, "a small pistol; and if the villain attempts to layhis hand upon you, kill him like a dog. This is the only way to dealwith Ren de Villequier."---------------------[Footnote 1: All these charges were but too true.]---------------------The young Count smiled: "And is it needful my Lord Duke," he asked,"to take all these precautions in the courtly world of Paris?--Do youyourself take them, my Lord?--I fear not sufficiently.""Oh! with regard to myself," replied the Duke, it is different. "I amso marked out and noted, they dare not do any thing against me. Theywould raise up a thousand vengeful hands against them in a moment, andthey know that, too well to run such a risk. Neither Henry norVillequier would hold their lives by an hour's tenure after Guise wasdead. But you must take these precautions, my young friend. And now Ihave nothing more to say, except that, whatever you do to withdrawMarie de Clairvaut from the hands into which she has fallen, I willjustify. If any ill befall you, I will avenge you as my brother; andif you deliver her from those whom she hates and abhors, she shall,give you any testimony of her gratitude that she pleases, without aman in France saying you nay.""Oh, my Lord, it is not for that I go!" exclaimed Charles ofMontsoreau, with the blood rushing up again into his cheek. "It isnot; surely you believe--""Hush! hush!" replied the Duke. "I have fallen into the foolish errorof saying too much, my good young friend. But now, fare you well. Makeyour arrangements as speedily as you can; mount your horse, and onwardto Paris, while I apply myself to matters which may well occupy everyminute and every thought."CHAP. III.It was about nine o'clock at night, in the spring of the year 1588,that Charles of Montsoreau, with two companions, his faithful Gondrinand the little page, presented himself at the gate of Paris whichopened upon the Soissons road. A surly arquebusier with a steel cap onhis head, his gun upon his shoulder, and the rest thereof in his hand,was the first person that he encountered at the bridge over the fosse.Some other soldiers were sitting before the guardhouse; and thewicket-gate of the city itself was open, with an armed head protrudedthrough, talking to a country girl with a basket on her arm, who hadjust passed out of the gate, none the better probably for her visit tothe city.The arquebusier planted himself immediately in the way of the youngcavalier and his followers, and seemed prepared to stop them, thoughon the young Count applying to him for admission, he replied in asurly tone, "I have nothing to do with it. Ask the lieutenant at thegate."To him, in the next place, then, Charles of Montsoreau applied; butthough his tone was somewhat more civil than that of the soldier, hemade a great many difficulties, examining the young nobleman all over,and looking as if he thought him a very suspicious personage. TheCount after a certain time grew impatient, and asked, "You do notmean, I suppose, to refuse the passport of the King?""No," replied the other grinning. "We won't refuse the passport of theKing, or the King's passport; but in order that the passport may beverified, it were as well, young gentleman, that you come to the gatesby day. You can sleep in the faubourg for one night I take it.""Certainly not without great inconvenience to myself," replied theCount, "and more inconvenience to the affairs of the Duke of Guise.""The Duke of Guise!" said the man starting. "Your tongue has not thetwang of Lorraine.""But nevertheless," replied the Count, "the business I come upon isthat of the Duke of Guise, which you would have seen if you had readthe passport and safe-conduct. Does it not direct therein, to giveroom and free passage, safeguard, and protection to one gentleman ofnoble birth and two attendants, coming and going hither and thither inall parts of the realm of France, on the especial business of our trueand well-beloved cousin, Henry, Duke of Guise? and is there notwritten in the Duke's own hand underneath, 'Given to our faithfulfriend and counsellor, Charles of Montsoreau, Count of Logres, forthe purposes above written, by me, Henry of Guise?'"The man held the paper for a moment to a lantern that hung up againstthe heavy stonework of the arch, and then exclaimed in a loud voice,"Throw open the gates there, bring the keys. Monseigneur, I beg you athousand pardons for detaining you a minute. If I had but seen thewriting of the Duke of Guise the doors would have been openedinstantly."As rapidly as possible the heavy gates, which had remained immoveableat the order of the King, swang back at the name of the Guise, and oneof the attendants and the captain of the night running by the side ofthe Count's horse to prevent all obstruction, caused the second gateto be opened as rapidly, and the Count entered the capital city of hisnative country for the first time in his life.The streets were dark and gloomy, narrow and high; and as one rodealong them looking up from time to time towards the sky, the smallgolden stars were seen twinkling above the deep walls of the houses,as if beheld from the bottom of a well. Charles of Montsoreau had notchosen to ask his way at the gate, and though utterly unacquaintedwith the great city in which he now plunged, he rode on, trusting tofind some shop still open where he might inquire his way without thechance of being deceived. Every booth and shop was then shut, however;and for a very long way up the street which he had first entered, hemet with not a single living creature to whom he could apply fordirection. At length, however, that street ended abruptly in anotherturning to the left, and a sudden glare of light burst upon his eyes,proceeding from a building about a hundred yards farther on, whichseemed to be on fire.There was no bustle, however, or indication of any thing unusual inthe street; and Charles of Montsoreau riding on, found that the blazeproceeded from a dozen or more of flambeaus planted in a sort ofwooden barricade[2] before a large mansion, which fell back some yardsfrom the general faade of the street, while a fat porter clothed inmanifold colours, with a broad shoulder-belt and a sword by his side,walked to and fro in the light, trimming the torches with statelydignity. The young Count then remembered having heard of the custom ofthus illuminating the barriers, which were before all the principalmansions in Paris during the first part of every night; and riding uptowards the porter, he demanded whose hotel it was, and begged to bedirected to one of the best inns in the neighbourhood.---------------------[Footnote 2: One or two of these houses with barriers were stillexisting in Paris not many years ago.]---------------------The man gazed at him for a moment with the evident purpose of lookingupon him as a bumpkin; but the porters of that day were required to beextremely discriminating, and the air and appearance of the youngCount were not to be mistaken, and bowing low he replied, "I see youare a stranger, sir. This is the house of Monsieur d'Aumont. As to thebest inn, inns are always but poor places; but I have heard a goodaccount of the White House in the next street, at the sign of theCrown of France. If you go on quite to the end of this street and thenturn to your right, you will come into another street as large andlonger, at the very end of which, just looking down to the Pont Neuf,you will see a large white house with a gateway and the crown hangingover it. I have heard that every thing is good there, and the hostcivil; but he will make you pay for what you have.""That is but just," replied the young Count; and giving the porterthanks for his information, he rode on and took up his abode at thesign of the Crown of France.The aspect of the inn was very different from that of an auberge inthe country; for, though the court-yard into which Charles ofMontsoreau rode was littered with straw, and a large and splendidstable appeared behind, it was not now grooms and stable-boys thatappeared on the first notice of a traveller's approach, but cooks andscullions and turnspits; while the master himself with a snow-whitecap upon his head, a jacket of white cloth, and a white apron turnedup sufficiently to show his black breeches and stockings with redclocks, appeared more like what he really was, the head of thekitchen, than the master of the house.He looked a little suspiciously, at first, at the young strangerarriving with only two attendants, and with no other baggage than asmall valise upon each horse, and an additional upon that of Ignati,to render the boy's weight equal to that of his fellow travellers. Butthe host was accustomed to deal with many kinds of men; and like theporter, after examining the Count for a moment, seeing some goldembroidery, but not much, upon his riding-dress, gilded spurs over hislarge boots of untanned leather, and a sword, the hilt and sheath ofwhich were of no slight value, he also made a lowly reverence, andconducted him to one of the best apartments in his house. It consistedof three rooms, each entering into the other with a small cabinetbeyond the chief bed-room; and the arrangements which the Count madeat once--placing Gondrin's bed in the antechamber, and having thepage's truckle-bed removed from his own bed-side to occupy the cabinetbeyond--gave the host of the Crown of France a still greater idea ofhis importance.Charles of Montsoreau did not fail to examine the face of theaubergiste, and to remark his proceedings with as much accuracy. Theman's countenance was intelligent, his eyes quick and piercing, butwithal there was an air of straightforward frankness, tempered bycivility and habitual politeness, which was prepossessing; and as theyoung Count knew that he might have occasion to make use of him invarious ways during his stay in Paris, he resolved to try him withthose things which were the most immediately necessary, and which atthe same time were of the least importance."Stop a minute, my good host," he said, as the man was about towithdraw to order fires to be lighted and suppers to be cooked. "Thereare some things which press for attention, and in which I must haveyour assistance.""This youngster speaks with a tone of authority," thought theaubergiste; but he bowed low and said nothing, whilst the young Countwent on, "What is your name, my good friend?" demanded Charles ofMontsoreau."I am called Gamin la Chaise," replied the aubergiste with a smile."Well then, Master la Chaise, as you see," he continued, "I have comehither to Paris on some business which required a certain degree ofdespatch, and have ventured with few attendants and little baggage. Ashowever the business on which I did come will call me into sceneswhere some greater degree of splendour is necessary than perhapseither suits my taste or my general convenience, I must before I goforth to-morrow morning, have my train increased by at least sixattendants, who are always to be found in Paris ready fashioned Iknow; and therefore I must beseech you to find them for me in propertime, having them equipped in my proper colours and livery, accordingas the same shall be described to you by my good friend Gondrin here.This is the first service you must do me, my good host.""Sir," replied the landlord, "the six lackeys shall be found andequipped in less time than would roast a woodcock. They are as plentyas sparrows or house-rats, and are caught in a moment.""Yes, but my good host," answered the Count, "there is one greatdifficulty which you will understand in a moment. Amongst the six, Iwant you to find me one honest man if it be possible."The landlord raised his shoulders above his ears, stuck out his twohands horizontally from his sides, and assumed an appearance ofdespair at the unheard of proposition of the Count, which had nearlybrought a smile into the young nobleman's countenance. "That indeed,sir," he said, "is another affair; and I believe you might just aswell ask me to catch you a wild roe in the garden of the Louvre, as tofind you the thing that you demand. Nevertheless, labour andperseverance conquer all difficulties: and now I think of it, there isa youth who may answer your purpose; he knows Paris well too; but,strange to say, by some unaccountable fit of obstinacy, he would nottell a lie the other day to the Duke of Epernon in order to pass anitem of the intendant's accounts, which would have come in for a goodround sum every month if he would but have sworn that he used fivequarts of milk every week to whiten the leather of his master's boots.He would not swear to this, and therefore the intendant dischargedhim, as he was a hired servant.""Let me have him; let me have him," cried the Count. "I will only askhim to tell the truth, and hope he may not find that so difficult."The Count then proceeded to speak about horses, and the host readilyundertook, finding that money was abundant, to procure all thehorse-dealers in Paris with their best steeds, before nine o'clock onthe following day. The demeanour of the young nobleman, it must beconfessed, puzzled the good aubergiste a good deal; and on going downto his own abode, he acknowledged to his wife, what he seldomacknowledged to any one, that he could not make his guest out at all."I should think," he said, "from the plenty of money, and theexpensive way in which he seems inclined to deal, that he was somewild stripling from the provinces, the son of a rich president oradvocate lately dead, who came hither to call himself Count, and spendhis patrimony in haste. But then, again, in some things he is asshrewd as an old hawk, and can jest withal about rogues and honestmen, while he keeps his own secrets close, and lets no one ask him aquestion."On the following morning, at an early hour, the six attendants whom hehad required were brought before him in array, exhibiting, with oneexception, as sweet a congregation of roguish faces as the greatcapital of roguery ever yet produced. The countenance of the lad whohad been discharged from the service of the Duke of Epernon pleasedthe young Count much, and without waiting till he was fartherequipped, he put Gondrin under his charge for the purpose of notifyingat the palace of the Louvre that he had arrived in the capital,bearing a letter from the Duke of Guise to the King, and of begging tohave an hour named for its delivery. He found, however, with somemortification--for his eager spirit and his anxiety brooked nodelay--that the King was at Vincennes; and his only consolation wasthat the communication which he had sent to the palace, bearing thefearful name of the Duke of Guise, was certain to be communicated tothe monarch as soon as possible. Some short time was expended in thepurchase of horses, and in making various additions to his ownapparel, well knowing the ostentatious splendour of the court he wasabout to visit.We have indeed remarked that there was perhaps a touch of foppery inhis own nature, though it was but slight. Nevertheless, splendour ofappearance certainly pleased him, even while a natural good taste ledhim to admire, and to seek in his own dress, all that was graceful andharmonising, rather than that which was rich or brilliant.He was thus engaged, with several tradesmen around him, ordering thematerials for various suits of apparel, which a tailor standing byengaged to produce in a miraculously short time, when the door of hisapartment was opened, and a somewhat fat pursy man in black wasadmitted, entering with an air of importance, and receiving the lowlysalutations of the good citizens who were present. Charles ofMontsoreau gazed at him as a stranger; but the good man, with an airof importance, and an affectation of courtly breeding, besought him tofinish what he was about, adding, that he had a word for his privateear which he would communicate afterwards. The young Count, withoutfurther ceremony, continued to give his orders, examining his newvisiter from time to time, and with no very great feelings ofsatisfaction.The countenance was fat, reddish, and, upon the whole, stupid, with anair of indecision about it which was very strongly marked, thoughthere was every now and then a certain drawing in of the fringelesseyelids round the small black eyes, which gave the expression ofintense cunning to features otherwise dull and flat.When he had completely done with his mercers, and tailors, andcloth-makers--who had occupied him some time, for he did not hurryhimself--Charles of Montsoreau dismissed them; and turning to hisvisiter said, "Now, sir, may I have the happiness of knowing yourbusiness with me?""Sir," replied the other, rising and speaking in a low andconfidential tone, "my name is Nicolas Poulain. I am Lieutenant of thePrvt de l'Isle."He stopped short at this announcement; and the Count, after waiting amoment for something more, replied somewhat angrily, "Well, sir, I amvery happy to hear it. I hope the office suits Nicolas Poulain, andNicolas Poulain suits the office."A slight redness came into the man's face, rendering it a shade deeperthan it ordinarily was; but finding it necessary to reply, as theCount, without sitting down, remained looking him stedfastly in theface, he answered, "I thought, sir,--indeed I took it for granted,sir, that you might have some communication for me from the Duke ofGuise.""None whatever, sir," replied the young Count drily. "Have you anything to tell me, Monsieur Nicolas Poulain, on the part of hisHighness?""No, sir, no," replied the other, attempting to assume an air ofspirit which did not become him. "If you have not seen him more latelythan I have, I am misinformed.""And pray, my good sir," demanded the Count, "who was it that took thetrouble of informing you of any thing regarding me?""That question is soon answered, sir," replied Nicolas Poulain,"though you seem to make so much difficulty in regard to answeringmine. The person who informed me of your arrival was good MasterChapelle Marteau, who saw you last night at the gates when youentered."The name immediately struck the young Count as the same with one ofthose written on the letters which the Duke of Guise had given him tobe used in case of need; but feeling how necessary it was to dealcarefully with any of the faction of the Sixteen, to which bothChapelle Marteau and Nicolas Poulain belonged, he determined to saynot one word upon the subject of his mission to any one. Much less,indeed, was he inclined to do so in the case of Nicolas Poulain, inwhose face nature had stamped deceit and roguery in such legiblecharacters, that the young Count, had he been forced to trust him withany secret, would have felt sure that the whole would be betrayedwithin an hour. All, then, that he replied to Master Nicolas Poulainwas, that though he knew well the personage he mentioned by name, hehad not the pleasure of his personal acquaintance.The answers were so short, the tone and manner so dry, that the worthycitizen found it expedient to make his retreat; and taking a short andunceremonious leave of one who had given him so cool a reception, heleft the Count's apartments, and descended the stairs. The moment hewas gone, some suspicion, which crossed the young cavalier's mindsuddenly, made him call the page, and bid him follow his late visitertill he marked the house which Master Nicolas entered, taking care toremember the way back.The boy set off without a word, and returned in less than half anhour, informing the young Count that he had tracked Master NicolasPoulain into a large house, which, on inquiry, he found to be theprivate dwelling of the Lord of Villequier."The Duke is betrayed by some of these leaguers,--that is clearenough!" thought the young Count. "I have heard that many of his bestenterprises have been frustrated by some unknown means. Who is thereon earth that one can trust?" And leaning his head upon his hand hefell into deep thought, for to him the question of whom he could trustwas at that moment one, not only entirely new, but one of deep andvital importance also. In his journey to Paris he had two great andall-important objects before him. To find out his brother, and, ifpossible, to persuade him to change a course of conduct which he feltto be dishonourable to himself and to his house, was one of theseobjects; and he doubted not that--if he could fully explain, and makethe Marquis comprehend, his own conduct and his purposes--if he couldshow him that his only chance of obtaining the hand of Marie deClairvaut was by attaching himself to the House of Guise, and that hehad not a brother's rivalry to fear--Gaspar de Montsoreau might beinduced to return to the party he had quitted, and not finally tocommit himself to conduct so little to his own interest as that whichhe was pursuing.The other object, however, was much more important even than that, tothe heart of Charles of Montsoreau; and the feelings which wereconnected with it--as so often happens with the feelings which affectevery one in human life--were sadly at variance with other purposes.That object was to discover and guide to the court of the Duke ofGuise, her whom he himself loved best on all the earth; to free herfrom the hands of the base and dangerous people into whose power shehad fallen, and to leave her in security, if not in happiness.When he thought of seeing her again,--when he thought of passing dayswith her on the journey, of being her guide, her protector, hercompanion, the overpowering longing and thirst for such a joyful timeshook and agitated him, made his heart thrill and his brain reel; and,bending down his face upon his hands, he gave himself up for a longtime to whirling dreams of happiness. But then again he asked himselfif, after such hours, he could ever quit her; if--following the firmpurpose with which he had left Montsoreau--he could resist alltemptation to seek her love further, and after plunging into thecontentions of the day could dedicate his sword and his life, as hehad intended, to warfare against the infidels in the order of St.John? There was a great struggle in his mind when he asked himself thequestion--a great and terrible struggle; but at length he answered itin the affirmative. "Yes," he said; "yes, I can do so!" But there wasa condition attached to that decision. "I can do so," he said, "if Ifind that there is a chance of her wedding him; if I find that, inreality and truth, the first bright hopes I entertained were indeedfallacious."To say the truth, doubts had come over his mind as to whether he hadconstrued Marie de Clairvaut's conduct rightly. Those doubts had beeninstilled into his imagination by the words of the Duke of Guise.Fancy lingered round them: shall we say that Hope, too, playedwith them? If she did so, it was against his will; for he was inthat sad and painful situation where hope, reproved by the highestfeelings of the heart, dare scarcely point to the objects of desire.Terrible--terrible is that situation where Virtue, or Honour, orGenerosity bind down imagination, silence even hope, and shut againstus the gates of that paradise we see, but must not enter. These,indeed, are the angels with the flaming swords.Charles of Montsoreau would not suffer himself to hope any thing thatmight make his brother's misery; but yet fancy would conjure up brightdreams; and knowing and feeling that if those dreams were realised, acomplete change must come over his actions and his conduct, he sawthat it would be needful to use guarded language to his brother,--orrather to use only the guard of perfect frankness. He resolved, then,to tell him fully his purposes, but to tell him at the same time theconditions under which those circumstances were to be executed.As he pondered, however, and thought over the changed demeanour of hisbrother, over the fiery impetuosity and impatience of his whole temperand conduct, he remembered that it might be with difficulty that hecould obtain a hearing for a sufficient length of time to explainhimself fully, and he consequently determined to write clearly andexplicitly, so that there might be no error or mistake whatever, andthat his conduct might remain clear and undoubted; and sitting down atonce, he did as he proposed, that he might have the letter ready tosend or to deliver as soon as he discovered where his brother was.The epistle was short, but it was distinct. He referred boldly anddirectly to his conversation with the Abb de Boisguerin; he explainedhis conduct since; and he told his decided and unchangeable purpose ofseeking in no way the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, unless he hadreason to believe that the deep attachment which he felt andacknowledged towards her were already returned. He ended by exhortinghis brother to do that which his pledges and professions to the Dukeof Guise had bound him to do, to guide back Mademoiselle de Clairvauthimself to the protection of her uncle, and to avert the necessity ofhis seeking her and conducting her to Soissons.In thus letting his thoughts flow on in collateral channels fromsubject to subject, he had deviated from the original object of hiscontemplations, which was, the method to be pursued for institutingprivate inquiries throughout the city, in regard to the arrival, bothof his brother and Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. Unacquainted with anypersons in Paris, he knew not how to set on foot the inquiry; and hismind had just reverted to the subject, which appeared more and moreembarrassing each time he thought of it, when he was informed, with anair of great importance, by the host, that Monsieur Chapelle Marteaudemanded humbly to have the honour of paying him his respects.The Count ordered him instantly to be ushered in; and, during thebrief moment that intervened before he appeared, considered hastily,whether he should employ this personage in any way in making theinquiries that were necessary. He knew that he was highly esteemed bythe Duke of Guise; but yet it was evident that, by some of the membersof, or the followers of, the League in Paris, the Duke was himselfentirely deceived; and yet Charles of Montsoreau was more inclined totrust this man's sincerity than that of the person who had left himsome short time before, inasmuch as the Duke had addressed one of theprivate letters we have before mentioned to him, while he had nevernamed the other. The countenance and appearance of Chapelle Marteauconfirmed any prepossession in his favour. It was quick, andintelligent, and frank, though somewhat stern; and he had moreover theair and bearing of a man in the higher ranks of life, although he heldbut an office which was then considered inferior, that of one of theMasters in the Chamber of Accounts."I come, sir," he said, as soon as the first civilities were over, "toask your pardon for some quickness on my part in refusing youadmittance at the gates last night. The fact is, that bad-intentionedpeople have been endeavouring to introduce into the city of Paris,under the King's name, a multitude of soldiery, in twos and threes,for the purpose of overawing us in the pursuit of our rights andliberties.""Say no more, say no more, Monsieur Chapelle," said the Count; "Idoubt not you had very good reasons for what you did."He then paused, leaving his companion to pursue the subject as hemight think fit; and the leaguer seemed somewhat embarrassed as to howhe should proceed, though his embarrassment showed itself in adifferent manner from that of Master Nicolas Poulain. At length hesaid, "I entertained some hope, sir, that you might bring me acommunication from the Duke of Guise, as, when I had the honour ofseeing him at Gonesse three days ago, he gave me the hope that hewould write to me ere long.""No, Monsieur Chapelle," replied the Count deliberately; "I have nomessage for you. His Highness directed me indeed to apply to you incase of need; and I know that he has the highest esteem for you,believing you to be a zealous defender of our holy faith, and a manwell worthy of every consideration;--but I have no present message toyou from the Duke; and the case in which it may be necessary to applyto you for assistance, according to his Highness's direction, has notyet arrived.""Most delighted shall I be, my Lord[3] Count," replied the leaguer,"to afford you any aid or assistance or council in my power, both onaccount of his Highness the Duke of Guise and on your own. Might I askwhat is the case foreseen, in which you are to apply to me?"---------------------[Footnote 3: The word Monseigneur, my Lord, which in the days of LouisXIV. had become restricted to a very few high dignitaries, or onlygiven to other noblemen by their own servants and tenantry, was in thereign of Henry III. commonly used to all high noblemen, and we findconstantly titles addressed A mon tres illustre et tres honorSeigneur le Marquis; or, A l'illustre Seigneur, Monseigneur le Comtede ----.]---------------------The Count smiled. "In case, Monsieur Chapelle," he said, "that I donot succeed in objects which the Duke has entrusted to me by othermeans, you shall know. At present, however, I have had no opportunityof ascertaining what may be necessary to be done, finding that theKing is at Vincennes. In the mean time I am employing myself aboutsome personal business of my own, which I am afraid is likely to giveme trouble."He spoke quite calmly; but a look of intelligence came immediatelyover the countenance of Chapelle Marteau, and he said, "Perhaps Imight be enabled to assist your Lordship. My knowledge of Paris, andall that is transacted therein, is very extensive.""You are very kind," replied the Count, "and I take advantage of youroffer with the greatest pleasure. The matter is a very simple one. Myelder brother, the Marquis de Montsoreau, set out some time ago tojoin the Duke of Guise, having under his charge and escort a younglady, named Mademoiselle de Clairvaut.""Daughter of the Duke of Guise's niece," said Chapelle Marteau withsome emphasis."I believe that is the relationship," answered the young nobleman."But, however, the facts are these: I have reason to believe that mybrother was interrupted in his journey by the attack of a party ofreiters, and was obliged in consequence to put himself andMademoiselle de Clairvaut under the protection of a body of the King'stroops coming to Paris. Now, my wish is, to ascertain whether he orany of his party, either separately or together, are now in Paris, andwhere they are to be found."The leaguer gazed in his face for a minute or two with an inquiringlook, and then replied, "I can tell you at once, my Lord, that noconsiderable party whatever has entered the gates of Paris under theprotection of the King's troops for the last ten days, no party ofeven ten in number having the ensigns of Valois having appeared duringthat time. But the party you mention may have come in by themselveswithout the King's troops; and I rather suspect that they have sodone. However, I will let you know the exact particulars within fourand twenty hours from this moment, and every other information that Ican by any means glean regarding the persons you speak of; for I verywell understand, my Lord, that there may be more intelligence requiredabout them than you choose to ask for at once."The young Count smiled again, but merely replied, "Any informationthat you can obtain for me, Monsieur Chapelle, will be received by memost gratefully; and in the mean time will you do me the honour ofpartaking my poor dinner which is about to be served?"The leaguer, however, declined the high honour, alleging importantbusiness as his excuse; and, after having dined, the young Count rodeout through the streets of Paris, endeavouring to make himselfsomewhat familiar with them, and feeling all those sensations whichthe sight of that great capital might well produce on one who hadnever beheld it before. On those sensations, however, we must notpause, as matters of more importance are before us. A couple of hoursafter nightfall he received a note to the following effect:--"The Marquis de Montsoreau, with a body of horsemen, bearing nobadge or ensign, entered Paris yesterday at about four o'clock, andlodged at the Fleur-de-lis. He is not there now, however, and issupposed to have quitted Paris. Mademoiselle de Clairvaut is not knownto have entered the capital; but a carriage, containing ladies andwaiting-women, was escorted to Vincennes this morning by a body oftroops of Valois. The name of one of the ladies was ascertained to bethe Marquise de Saulny."Charles of Montsoreau received these tidings with a beating heart, andsleep did not visit his eyelids till the clock of a neighbouringchurch had struck five in the morning.CHAP. IV.Dark heavy clouds hung over the world, and totally obscured the faceof the sky; the morning was chill, the air keen, and the eye of thepeasant was often turned up towards the leaden-looking masses ofvapour above his head, as if to inquire whether their stores would bepoured forth in lightning or in snow; and as Charles of Montsoreaurode on through the park to the Donjon of Vincennes, he felt thegloomy aspect of the whole scene more than he might have done at anyother time.There, before his eyes, with the whole face of nature harmonising wellwith its dark and frowning aspect, rose the grey gigantic keep, whichthe vanquished opponent of Edward III., the rash and half-insanefounder of the race of Valois, erected at an early period of hismelancholy reign. Story above story, the large quadrangular mass, withits flanking towers, rose up till it seemed to touch the gloomy skyabove; but in those days it had at least the beauty of harmony, for noone had added to the harsh and solemn features of the feudalarchitecture the gewgaw ornaments of a later age. The gallery of Mariede Medici was not built, and nothing was seen but the antique form ofthe Donjon itself, with the mass of walls surrounding its base withtheir flanking turrets, a pinnacle or two rising above--as if fromsome low Gothic building within the walls--and the still dark fossesurrounding the whole.We form but a faint idea to ourselves--a very very faint idea of themanners and customs of feudal times; but still less, perhaps, can weform any just idea of the every-day enormities, crimes, and vices,that were committed at the period we now speak of, and of what it wasto live familiarly in the midst of such scenes, and to hear daily ofsuch occurrences. The mind of most men got hardened, callous, orindifferent to acts of darkness and of shame, even if they did notcommit them themselves; and the world of Paris heard with scarcely anemotion that this nobleman had been poisoned by another--that the handof the assassin had delivered one high lord of this troublesome friendor that pertinacious enemy--that the husband had "drugged the posset"for the wife, or the wife for the husband--or that persons obnoxiouslywise or virtuous disappeared within the walls of such places asVincennes, and passed suddenly with their good acts into that oblivionwhich is the general recompense of all that is excellent upon earth.No one noted such deeds; the sword of justice started from thescabbard once or twice in a century, but that was all; and the worldlaughed as merrily--the jest and the repartee went on--sport, love,and folly revelled as gaily through the streets of Paris, as if it hadbeen a world of gentleness, and security, and peace.Though of course Charles of Montsoreau felt in some degree the spiritof the day--though he thought it nothing at all extraordinary to beattacked by reiters in his own chteau, or stopped by fifty or sixtyplunderers on the broad highway--though it seemed perfectly natural tohim that man should live as in a state of continual warfare, always onhis defence, yet the whole of his previous life having passed far fromthe daily occurrence of still more revolting scenes, in spots wherecalm nature and God's handiwork were still at hand to purify and healmen's thoughts, he had very different feelings in regard to the eventsand customs of the day from those which were generally entertained bythe people of the metropolis. Thus, when he gazed up at the gloomytower of Vincennes, and thought of the deeds which had been committedwithin its walls, together with the crimes and follies that were dailythere enacted, a feeling of mingled horror and disgust took possessionof his bosom; and had he not been impelled by a sense of duty, hewould not have set his foot upon the threshold of those pollutedgates.The order to appear before the King at Vincennes had been communicatedto him early in the morning, and notice of his coming had been givento the officers at the gates of the castle. He was punctual to amoment at the appointed time, and was instantly led into the chteau,and conducted up a long, darksome, winding stone staircase in one ofthe towers. Everything took place almost in silence; few persons wereto be seen moving about in the building; and, while winding up thosestairs, nothing was heard but the footfalls of himself and theattendant who conducted him.Charles of Montsoreau certainly felt neither awe nor fear as he thusadvanced, though some of the warnings of the Duke of Guise might crosshis mind at the moment; but at the end of what seemed to be the firststory, the attendant said, "Wait a moment;" and, pushing open a door,entered a room to the right. There was another door beyond, but bothwere left partly unclosed, and the previous silence was certainly nolonger to be complained of, for such a jabbering, and screaming, andyelling, and howling, as was now heard, was probably never known inthe palace of a king, before or since.Human sounds they seemed certainly not to be, and yet words in variouslanguages were to be distinguished, so that conjecture was quite putat fault, till after an absence of several minutes the attendantreturned, and, bidding the young nobleman follow him, led the way oncemore into this den of noise and confusion.The scene that then burst upon the eyes of Charles of Montsoreau wasas curious as can well be conceived. Innumerable parrots, macaws, andcockatoos were ranged on perches and in cages along the sides of alarge apartment, with intervals of monkeys and apes rattling theirchains, springing forward at every object near them, mouthing,chattering, and writhing themselves into fantastic forms; six or sevensmall beautiful dogs of a peculiar breed were running about on thefloor, snarling at one another, barking at the stranger, or teazingthe other animals in the same room with themselves; baskets filledwith litters of puppies were in every corner of the room; and severalmen and women were engaged in tending the winged and quadrupedfavourites of the King. Not only, however, were the regular attendantspresent, but, as one of the known ways to Henry's regard, a greatnumber of other persons were always to be found busily engaged intending the monkeys, parrots, and dogs. Amongst the rest here present,were no less than five dwarfs, four others being in actual attendanceupon the King. None were above three feet and a half in height, andsome were deformed and distorted in the most fearful manner, while onewas perfectly and beautifully formed, and seemed to hold the others ingreat contempt. The voices of almost all of them, however, werecracked and screaming; and it was the sounds of their tongues, mingledwith the yelping of the dogs, the chattering of the monkeys, and thevarious words repeated in different languages by the loquacious birdsalong the wall, which had made the Babel of sounds that reached theears of Charles of Montsoreau while he stood without.Passing through this room, with the envious eyes of the dwarfs staringupon his fine figure, the young Count entered the chamber of thepages--where, as if for the sake of contrast, a number of beautifulyouths were seen--and was thence led on into the royal apartments, inwhich every thing was calm splendour and magnificence. Here and therevarious officers of the royal household were found lounging away theidle hours as they waited for the King's commands; and at length, inan ante-room, the young Count was bade to wait again, while theattendant once more notified his coming to the King. He was scarcelydetained a moment now, however; but, the door being opened, he wasushered into the monarch's presence.Henry on the present occasion presented an aspect different from thatwhich the young Count had expected to behold. The Monarch hadrecalled, for a moment or two, the princely and commanding air of hisyouth, and received the young Count with dignity and grace. His personwas handsome, his figure fine, and his dress in the most exquisitetaste that it was possible to conceive. It was neither so effeminatenor so overcharged with ornament as it sometimes was; and the blackvelvet slashed and laced with gold, the toque with a single largediamond on his head, the long snowy-white ostrich feather, and thecollar of one or two high orders round his neck, became him well, andharmonised with the air of dignity he assumed.There were two or three gentlemen who stood around him more gaudilydressed than himself, and amongst them was the Duke of Epernon, whomCharles of Montsoreau remembered to have seen at his father's chteausome years before. All, however, held back so as to allow the monarcha full view of the young cavalier, as he advanced."You are welcome to Vincennes, Monsieur de Logres," said the King."Our noble and princely cousin of Guise has notified to us that he hassent you to Paris on business of importance; and, having given youthat praise which we are sure you must merit, has besought us to putevery sort of trust and confidence in you, and to listen to you as tohimself, while you speak with us upon the affairs which have broughtyou hither. We beseech you, therefore, to inform us of that which hehas left dark, and tell us how we may pleasure our fair cousin, whichis always our first inclination to do--the good of our state and thewelfare of our subjects considered.""His Highness the Duke of Guise, Sire," replied Charles of Montsoreau,not in the slightest degree abashed by the many eyes that were fixedupon him, scrutinising his person and his dress in the mostunceremonious manner, "his Highness the Duke of Guise, Sire, has sentme to your Majesty, to ask information regarding a young lady, hisnear relation, who, he has reason to believe, was protected by a bodyof your Majesty's troops in a situation of some difficulty, for whichprotection the Duke is most grateful. She was then, he understood,conducted to this your Majesty's castle of Vincennes, doubtless forthe purpose of affording her a safe asylum till you could restore herto his Highness, who is her guardian."Henry turned with a sneering smile towards a dark but handsome man,with a somewhat sinister expression of countenance, on his left hand,saying, in an under tone, "Quick travelling, Villequier! to Soissonsand back to Paris in four and twenty hours, ha! Had the swallow everwings like rumour?"This was said affectedly aside, but quite loud enough for the youngnobleman to hear the whole. He, of course, made no reply, as the wordswere not addressed to him; but waited, with his eyes bent down,apparently in thoughtful meditation, till the King should give him hisanswer."You have given us, Monsieur le Comte de Logres," said the King, "buta faint idea of this business; and, as unhappily the commanders of ourtroops are but too little accustomed to afford us any very fullaccount of their proceedings, we are ignorant of the occasion on whichany one of them rendered this service to the young lady you mention."This affected unconsciousness, displayed absolutely in conjunctionwith a scarcely concealed knowledge of the whole affair, Charles ofMontsoreau felt to be trifling and insulting: but he lost not hisreverence for the kingly authority; and he replied, with everyappearance of deference, "I had imagined, Sire, that the quick wingsof rumour must have carried the whole particulars to your Majesty,otherwise I should have been more particular in my account. Theservice was rendered to the young lady very lately, between Jouarreand Gandelu. I am not absolutely aware of the name of the officer incommand of the troops at the time, but one gentleman present bore thename of Colombel.""And pray what was the name of the young lady herself?" demanded theKing, with a sneer. "The Duke of Guise has many she relations, as wesometimes find to our cost. It could not be our pretty, mild, andvirtuous friend, the Duchess of Montpensier, nor the delicate andfair-favoured Mademoiselle de St. Beuve; for the one is staying inParis in disobedience to the orders of the King, and the other isremaining there, waiting for the tender consolations of the Chevalierd'Aumale."The young Count turned somewhat red, both at the coarseness and thescornfulness of the King's reply. "The young lady," he answered,however, still keeping the same tone, "is named Mademoiselle deClairvaut, daughter of the late Count de Clairvaut.""Your first cousin, Villequier," said the King, turning to hisminister. "You should know something of this affair?""Not more than your Majesty," replied Villequier, bowing low, andperceiving very clearly that Henry had maliciously wished to embarrasshim.The King smiled at the double-meaning answer, and then, turning to theyoung Count, replied, "Well, sir, you have fulfilled your mission, andmay tell the Duke of Guise, our true and well-beloved cousin, that wewill cause immediate inquiry and investigation to be made into thewhole affair; and let him know the particulars as soon as we aresufficiently well-informed to speak upon it with that accuracy whichbecomes our character. You may retire."This was of course not the conclusion of the affair to which Charlesof Montsoreau was inclined to submit; and it was evident to him thatthe King and his minions presumed upon his apparent youth andinexperience. But there was a firm decision in his character whichthey were not prepared for; and after pausing for a moment in thought,during which time the King's brows began to bend angrily upon him, heraised his eyes, looking Henry calmly and stedfastly in the face, andreplying, "Your Majesty must pardon me if I do not take instantadvantage of your permission to retire, as you have conceived a falseimpression when you imagine that my mission is fulfilled."The King looked with an air of astonishment, first to Epernon and thento Villequier: but the former turned away his head with a look ofdissatisfaction; while the latter bit his lip, let his hand fall upona jewelled dagger in his belt, and said nothing.Charles of Montsoreau, however, went on in the same calm butdetermined tone. "His Highness the Duke of Guise," he said, "directedme to inform your Majesty of the facts I have mentioned, and to beg ingeneral terms information regarding them; but in case the generalinformation that I obtained was not sufficiently accurate to enable meto write to him distinctly that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut is in thisplace, or in that place, he further directed me humbly to request thatyour Majesty would answer in plain terms the following plainquestions:--Is Mademoiselle de Clairvaut in the chteau of Vincennes?Is she under the charge and protection of your Majesty? Does yourMajesty know where she is?""By the Lord that lives," exclaimed Henry, "this Duke of Guise chooseshimself bold ambassadors to his King!""Do you dare, malapert boy," exclaimed Villequier, "with that boldbrow, to cross-question your sovereign?""I do dare, sir," answered Charles of Montsoreau, "to ask mysovereign, in the name of the Duke of Guise, these plain questions,which, as he is a just and noble monarch, he can neither find anydifficulty in answering, nor feel any anger in hearing.""And what if I refuse to answer, sir?" demanded the King. "What is tobe the consequence then? Is the doughty messenger charged to make adeclaration of war on the part of our obedient subject, the Duke ofGuise?"The young Count was not prepared for this question, and hesitated howto answer it, though a full knowledge of how terrible the Duke ofGuise was to the weak and effeminate monarch he addressed, brought asmile over his countenance, which had in reality more effect than anywords he could have spoken. After a pause, however, he replied,--"Ohno, Sire. The Duke of Guise is, as you say, your Majesty's mostdevoted and obedient subject; and never conceiving it possible thatyou would refuse to answer his humble questions, he gave me noinstructions what to say in a case that he did not foresee. I can onlysuppose," he added, with a low and reverent bow to the King, "that theDuke will be obliged to come to Paris himself to make those inquiriesand investigations, concerning his young relation, in which I have notbeen successful."Charles of Montsoreau could see, notwithstanding the paint, whichdelicately furnished the King with a more stable complexion than hisown, that at the very thought of the Duke of Guise coming to Paris theweak monarch turned deadly pale. The same signs also were visible toVillequier, who whispered, "No fear, Sire; no fear; he will not come!"The King answered sharply, however, and sufficiently loud for theyoung nobleman to hear, "We must give him no excuse, Ren! we mustgive him no excuse! Monsieur de Logres," he continued, putting on amore placable air than before, "we are glad to find that neither theDuke of Guise nor his envoy presumes to threaten us; and inconsideration of the questions being put in a proper manner, we arewilling to answer them to the best of our abilities."Villequier, at these words, laid his hand gently upon the King'scloak; but Henry twitched it away from his grasp with an air ofimpatience, and continued, "I shall therefore answer you frankly andfreely, young gentleman; telling you that the Lady whom you are sentto seek is in fact not at Vincennes; nor, to the best of our knowledgeand belief, in our good city of Paris; neither do we know or have anycorrect information of where she may be found, though it is not by anymeans to be denied that she has visited this our castle of Vincennes."The first part of the King's speech had considerably relieved the mindof Villequier; but when he proceeded to make the somewhat unnecessaryadmission, that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut had visited Vincennes, theminister again attempted to interrupt the King, saying, "You know,Sire, her pause at Vincennes was merely momentary, and absolutelynecessary for those passports and safeguards without which it might bedangerous to travel, in the distracted state of the country.""Perfectly true," replied Henry: but the King's apprehension of theDuke of Guise appearing in Paris was much stronger than his respectfor his minister's opinion; and he proceeded with what he had to say,in spite of every sign or hint that could be given him."You must know, Monsieur de Logres," he said, "that, as I beforeobserved, she did visit Vincennes for a brief space; but, there beingsomething embarrassing in the whole business, we were, to say thetruth--albeit not insensible to beauty--we were not at all sorry tosee her depart."Although Charles of Montsoreau judged rightly that the abode ofVincennes, to the high and pure-minded girl whom he sought, could onlyhave been one of horror, he could not conceive any thing in hersituation which should have proved embarrassing to the King, and heanswered bluntly, "Then your Majesty of course has caused her to beescorted in safety to the Duke of Guise, as the means of relievingyourself from all embarrassment concerning her.""Not so, not so, Monsieur de Logres," replied the King. "Youngdiplomatists and young greyhounds run fast and overleap the game. Itso happens that there are various claims regarding the wardship ofthis young Lady. She has many relations, as near or nearer than theDuke of Guise. The care and guidance of her, too, under theauthorisation of the Duke himself, has been claimed by a youngnobleman whom you may have heard of, called the Marquis ofMontsoreau;" and he fixed his eyes meaningly upon the young Count'sface. "All these circumstances rendered the matter embarrassing; andas I was not called upon to decide the matter judicially; and theLady, if not quite of an age by law to judge for herself, being verynearly so, I thought it far better to leave the whole business to herown discretion, and let her take what course she thought fit, offeringher every assistance and protection in my power, which, however, shedeclined. You may therefore assure the Duke of Guise, on my part, thatshe is not at Vincennes, and that I am unacquainted with where she isat this moment. I now think, therefore, that all your questions areanswered, and the business is at an end.""I fear I must intrude upon your Majesty still farther," replied theyoung Count; "for besides the letter from the Duke of Guise, which Ihave had the honour of delivering to your Majesty, he has alsofurnished me with this document, giving me full power and authority toinquire, seek for, and require, at the hands of any person in whosepower she may be, the young Lady whom he claims as his ward. He hasdirected me to request your Majesty's approbation of the same,expressed by your signature to that effect, giving me authority tosearch for her in your name also, and to require the aid andassistance of all your officers, civil and military, in executing thesaid task."Henry looked both agitated and angry; and Villequier spoke for amoment to Epernon behind the King's back."Monsieur de Logres," exclaimed the latter, taking a step forward,"this is too much. I can hardly suppose that his Highness the Duke ofGuise has authorised you to make such a demand.""My Lord Duke of Epernon," replied the Count, "were it not that I holdin my hand the Duke's authority for that which I state, I would callupon you to put your insinuation in plainer terms, that I might giveit the lie as plainly as I would do any other unjust accusation."The Duke turned very red; but he replied, "And you would be treated,sir Count, as a petty boy of the low nobility of this realm deserves,for using such language to one so much above yourself.""There is no one in France so much above myself, sir," replied theCount, gazing on him sternly, and with a look of some contempt, "as todare to insult me with impunity; and though you be now High-admiral ofFrance, Colonel-general of Infantry, Governor of half the provinces ofthis country, Duke, Peer, and hold many another rich and honourableoffice besides, I tell you, John of Nogaret, that when the Baron deCaumont dined at my father's table, he sat nearer the salt thanperhaps now may suit the proud Duke of Epernon to remember.""Silence!" exclaimed the King, rousing himself for a moment from hiseffeminate apathy, while, for a brief space, an expression of powerand dignity came over his countenance, such as that which haddistinguished him while Duke of Anjou. "Silence, insolent boy!Silence, Epernon! I forbid you, on pain of my utmost displeasure, totake notice, even by a word, of what this young man has said. You wereyourself wrong to answer for the King in the King's presence. The Dukeof Guise shall have no just occasion to complain of us," he added, thebrightness which had come upon him gradually dying away like the falsepromising gleam of sunshine which sometimes breaks for a momentthrough a rainy autumnal day, and fades away again as soon, amidst thedull grey clouds; "the Duke of Guise shall have no occasion tocomplain of us. We will give this young man the authority which he hasso insolently demanded, to seek for Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, andhaving found her--if she have not joined the Duke of Guise longbefore--to escort her in safety to our cousin's care. But, Monsieur deLogres, you show your ignorance of every custom of the court andstate, by supposing that the King of France can write down at thebottom of the powers given you by the Duke of Guise his name inconfirmation of the same, like a steward at the bottom of a butcher'sbill. The authority which we give you must pass through the office ofour secretary of state, and it shall be drawn out and sent to you asspeedily as possible. I think that Monsieur de Villequier alreadyknows where to send this authority. You may now retire; and restassured that it shall reach you as soon as possible. At the same timewe pardon you for your conduct in this presence, which much needspardon, though it does not merit it."Charles of Montsoreau bowed low, and retired from the King's presence,fully convinced that Henry was deceiving him; that he knew, or, at allevents, had every means of judging, where Marie de Clairvaut was; andthat he had not the slightest intention of sending him theauthorisation he had promised, unless absolutely driven to do so.The moment that the young Count had quitted the presence, the Kingturned angrily to Villequier, exclaiming, "Are you mad, Villequier, torisk bringing that fiery and ambitious pest upon us? 'Tis but fourdays ago he was within ten miles of Paris!""Pshaw, Sire!" replied Villequier; "there is not the slightest chanceof his coming. Did I not tell you when he was at Gonesse that I wouldfind means to make him run like a frightened hare back again toSoissons? I fear your Majesty has ruined all our plans by promisingthis authority to that malapert youth, who doubtless already knows, oreasily divines, that he is deceived.""I have not deceived him," said the King: "I told him the girl was notat Vincennes; nor is she. I told him that I did not know where she isat this moment; nor do I; for she may be three miles on this side ofMeulan, or three miles on that, for aught I know. It depends upon thequickness of the horses, and the state of the roads. I promised himthe authority to seek her; and he shall have it in good due form, ifhe live long enough, and wait in Paris a sufficient time.""If he have it not within three days," replied Villequier, "be yousure, Sire, that he will write to the Duke of Guise.""But, Villequier," said the King in a soft tone, "could you not findmeans to prevent his making use of pen and ink to such bad purposes?In short, friend Ren, it is altogether your affair. You seem to thinkthat the fact of this girl falling into our hands is quite thediscovery of a treasure which may fix on our side this young Marquisof Montsoreau and the crafty Abb that you talk of, and I don't knowhow many more people besides. Now I told you from the beginning thatyou should manage it all yourself: so look to it, good Villequier;look to it.""He has let me manage it all myself, truly!" said Villequier, in a lowtone, "But I wish to know more precisely, your Majesty," he addedaloud, "what am I to do with this youth and the girl? Is he to havethe authorisation, or not? Am I, or am I not, to give her up when hedemands her?""Now, good faith," replied the King, "would not one think, Epernon,that our well-beloved friend and minister here was a mere novice outof a convent of young girls, a tender and scrupulous little thing,thinking evil, in every stray look or soft word addressed to her. Hewho has dealt with so many in his day, diplomatists and warriors andstatesmen, has not wit enough to deal with a raw boy, whom, doubtless,our fair and crafty cousin of Guise has sent upon a fool's errand toget him out of the way.""Certainly," replied the Duke of Epernon, "our wise friend Villequierseems to be somewhat prudent and cautious this morning. The young ladyis in your hands, I think, Villequier; is she not? and you have senther off into Normandy, I think you told me, with an escort of fifty ofyour archers. She goes there, doubtless, as his Majesty has said, withher own will and consent, and by her own choice, for there is a softpersuasiveness in fifty archers which it is very difficult for awoman's heart to resist; and, doubtless, by the same cogent arguments,you will induce her to marry whom you please. Come, tell us who it isto be; the hand of a rich heiress to dispose of, may be made aprofitable thing, under such management as yours, Villequier.""I have not discovered the philosopher's stone, like you, Monsieurd'Epernon," replied the other.The King laughed gaily, for Epernon's extraordinary cupidity was nosecret even to the monarch that fed it. But the Duke was proof to alljest upon that score; and looking at Villequier with the same sort ofmusing expression which he had before borne, he repeated his question,saying, "Come, come, disinterested chevalier, tell us to whom do youintend to give her?""Perhaps to my own nephew," replied the other. "What think you ofthat, Monsieur le Duc?"The brow of Epernon grew clouded in a moment. "I think," he said,"that you will not do it, for two reasons: in the first place, youdestine your nephew for your daughter Charlotte.""Not I," replied the Marquis; "I never dreamt of such a thing. Sheshall wed higher than that, or not at all. But what is your secondreason, Monsieur d'Epernon?""Because you dare not," replied the Duc d'Epernon: and he added,speaking in a low tone, "You dare not, Villequier, mingle your racewith that of Guise. The moment you do, your object will be clear, andyour ruin certain.""It is a curious thing, Sire," said Villequier, turning to the Kingwith a smile, "it is a curious thing to see how my good Lord ofEpernon grudges any little advantage to us mean men. However, to sethis Grace's mind at ease, I neither destine Mademoiselle de Clairvautfor one nor for the other; but I think she may prove a wonderful goodbait for the wild young Marquis of Montsoreau. By the promise of herhand, as far as my interest and influence is concerned, he will notonly be bound to your Majesty's cause on every occasion, but willexert himself more zealously and potently for that, than any otherinducement could lead him to do. Even if he should fail in thetrial--for we must acknowledge that he shows himself somewhat unstablein his purposes--he will, at all events, have so far committed himselfas to give your Majesty good cause for confiscating all his land,cutting down all his timber, and seizing upon all his wealth. However,I must think, in the first place, of how to deal with this brother ofhis.""No very difficult task, I should judge," said the Duke of Epernon,"for one so practised in the art of catching gudgeons as you,Villequier.""I don't know that," answered Villequier; "I would fain detach thatyouth, also, from the Guises. You see, most noble Duke, I am thinkingof the King's interest all the time, while you are thinking of yourown. However, I must find a way to manage him, for, as their wonderfulfriend and tutor, this wise Abb de Boisguerin, admitted to me lastnight, there are three means all powerful in dealing with ourneighbours--love, interest, and ambition; and we might thus exemplifyit,--the King would do any thing for the first, the Duke of Epernonany thing for the second, and his Highness of Guise any thing for thethird.""There are two other implements frequently used, which I wonderMonsieur de Villequier did not add," said the Duke, "as I ratherexpect he may have to use one or other of them on the presentoccasion; and men say he is fully as skilful in using them as inemploying love, interest, or ambition, for his ends.""Pray what are those?" demanded Villequier, somewhat sharply."Vicenza daggers," replied the Duke of Epernon, "and wine that splitsa Venice glass!""Come, come, Epernon," cried the King, "you and Villequier shall notquarrel. Come away from him, come away from him, or you will be usingyour daggers on each other presently:" and, throwing his armfamiliarly round his neck, he drew the Duke away.CHAP. V.Charles of Montsoreau rode homeward in painful and anxious thought: hehad flattered himself vainly, before he had proceeded to Vincennes,that the redoubted name of Henry of Guise would be found fullysufficient immediately to cause the restoration of Marie de Clairvautto him, who had naturally a right to protect her. It less frequentlyhappens that youth fails to reckon upon the fiery contention it isdestined to meet with from adversaries, than that it miscalculates theforce of the dull and inert opposition which circumstances continuallyoffer to its eager course, throwing upon it a heavy, slow, continualweight, which, like a clog upon a powerful horse, seems but a nothingfor the moment, but in the end checks its speed entirely. None knewbetter than Henry III. that it is by casting small obstacles in theway of impetuous youth, that we conquer and tame it sooner than byopposing it; and such had been his purpose with Charles of Montsoreau.In his idle carelessness he cared but little what became ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut, or into whose hands she fell. He waswilling to countenance and assist the politic schemes of his favouriteVillequier; and cared not, even in the slightest degree, whether thatpersonage employed poison or the knife to rid himself of the youngCount of Logres, provided always that he himself had nothing to dowith it. The only part that he was inclined to act was to thwart theDuke's young envoy by obstacles and long delays; and this he hadsuffered to become so far evident to Charles of Montsoreau, that hebecame angry and impatient at the very prospect before him. Hedoubted, however, whether it would be right to send off a courier withthis intelligence immediately to the Duke of Guise, or to wait for twoor three days, in order to see whether the powers promised him wereeffectually granted; and he was still pondering the matter, whileriding through the streets of Paris, when, in passing by a large andsplendid mansion in one of the principal streets, he caught a glimpseof two figures disappearing through the arched portal of the building.The faces of neither were visible to him; their figures only for amoment, and that at a distance. But he felt that he could not bemistaken--that all the thoughts and feelings and memories of youthcould not so suddenly, so magically, be called up by the sight of anyone but his brother,--and if so, that the other was the Abb deBoisguerin."Whose is that house?" he exclaimed aloud, turning to his attendants."That of Monsieur Ren de Villequier," replied the page instantly;and, springing from his horse at the gate, the young Count knockedeagerly for admission. The portals were instantly thrown open, and aporter in crimson, with a broad belt fringed with gold, appeared inanswer to the summons."I think," said the young Count, "that I saw this moment the Marquisde Montsoreau and the Abb de Boisguerin pass into this house."The porter looked dull, and shook his head, replying, "No, sir; nobodyhas passed in here but two of my noble Lord's attendants--the old AbbScargilas, and Master Nicolas Prevt, who used formerly to keep theSalle d'Armes, opposite the kennel at St. Germain."Although Charles of Montsoreau knew the existence and possibility ofsuch a thing as the lie circumstantial, yet the coolness and readinessof the porter surprised him. "Pray," he said, after a moment's pause,"is there any such person as either Monsieur de Montsoreau or the Abbde Boisguerin dwelling here at present?""None, sir," replied the man. "There is no one here but the attendantsof my Lord, who is at present absent with the King."Charles of Montsoreau would have given a good deal to have searchedthe house from top to bottom; but as it would not exactly do to stormthe dwelling of Ren de Villequier, he rode on, no less convinced thanever that his brother was at that moment in the dwelling of theminister.This conviction determined his conduct at once. That his brother wasin Paris, and in the hands of the most dangerous and intriguing man ofthat day, he had no doubt; and it seemed to him also clear, thatschemes were going on and contriving, of which the obstacles anddelays thrown in his way might be, perhaps, a part. To what theytended he could not, of course, tell directly; but he saw that theonly hope of frustrating them lay in exertion without the loss of amoment, and he accordingly dispatched his faithful attendant Gondrinto Soissons as soon as he reached the inn.We must follow, however, for a moment, the two persons whom the youngCount had seen enter the hotel of Villequier, and accompany them atonce into the chamber to which they proceeded after passing theportal. It was a splendid cabinet, filled with every sort of rare andcostly furniture, which was displayed to the greater perfection by thedark but rich tapestry that covered the walls. Another larger roomopened beyond, and through the door of that again, which was partlyopen, a long suite of bed-rooms and other apartments were seen, withdifferent rich and glittering objects placed here and there along theperspective, as if for the express purpose of catching the eye.Into one of the large arm-chairs which the cabinet contained, theMarquis of Montsoreau threw himself as if familiar with the scene."Villequier is long," he said, speaking to the Abb. "He promised tohave returned before this hour.""Impatience, Gaspar, impatience," replied the Abb, "is the vice ofyour disposition. How much have you lost already by impatience? Was itnot your impatience which hurried me forward to represent his ownsituation and that of yourself, to your brother Charles, which drovehim directly to the Duke of Guise? Was it not your impatience whichmade you speak words of love to Marie de Clairvaut before she wasprepared to hear them, drawing from her a cold and icy reply? Was itnot your impatience that made us leave behind at Provins all the tiredhorses and one half of the men, rather than wait a single day toenable them to come on with us; and did not that very fact put usalmost at the mercy of the reiters, and give your brother anopportunity of showing his gallantry and skill at our expense?""It is all true, my friend; it is all true," replied the Marquis. "Butin regard to my speaking those fiery words to Marie de Clairvaut, howcould I help that? Is it possible so to keep down the overflowingthoughts of our bosom as to prevent their bursting forth when thestone is taken off from the fountain, and when the feelings of theheart gush out, not as from the spring of some ordinary river, but,like the waters of Vaucluse, full, powerful, and abundant even attheir source.""It was that I wished you to guard against," replied the Abb. "Hadyou appeared less to seek, you would have been sought rather thanavoided. It may be true, Gaspar, what authors have said, that a woman,like some animals of the chase, takes a pleasure in being pursued; butdepend upon it, if she do so, she puts forth all her speed to insureherself against being caught. Unless you are very sure of your ownspeed and strength, you had better steal quietly onward, lest youfrighten the deer. Had she heard much from my lips, and from those ofher good but weak friend Madame de Saulny, of your high qualities, andof all those traits in your nature calculated to captivate and attractsuch a being as herself, while you seemed indifferent and somewhatcool withal, every thing--good that is in her nature would have joinedwith every thing that is less good--the love of high qualities and ofmanly daring would have combined with vanity and caprice to make herseek you, excite your attention, and court your love.""I have never yet seen in her," said the young Marquis, "either vanityor caprice; and besides, good friend, such things to me at least arenot matters of mere calculation. I act upon impulses that I cannotresist. Mine are feelings, not reasonings: I follow where they leadme, and even in the pursuit acquire intense pleasure that no reasoningcould give.""True," replied the Abb, bending down his head and answeringthoughtfully. "There is a great difference between your age and mine,Gaspar. You are at the age of passions, and at that period of theirsway when they defeat themselves by their own intensity. I hadthought, however, that my lessons might have taught you, my counselmight have shown you, that with any great object in view it isnecessary to moderate even passion in the course, in order to succeedin the end.""But there is joy in the course also," exclaimed Gaspar de Montsoreau."Think you, Abb, that even if it were possible to win the woman welove by another's voice, we could lose the joy of winning her forourselves--the great, the transcendant joy of struggling for heraffection, even though it were against her coldness, her indifference,or her anger?""I think, Gaspar," replied the Abb, "that if to a heart constitutedas yours is, there be added a mind of equal power, nothing--not eventhe strongest self-denial--will be impossible for the object ofwinning her you love. But I am not a good judge of such matters," hecontinued with a slight smile curling his lip--a smile not altogetherwithout pride. "I am no judge of such matters. The profession which Ihave chosen, and followed to a certain point, excludes them from myconsideration. All I wish to do in the present instance is to warnyou, Gaspar, against your own impetuosity in dealing with thisVillequier. Be warned against that man! be careful! Promise himnothing; commit yourself absolutely to nothing, unless upon good andsufficient proof that he too deals sincerely with you. He is not oneto be trusted, Gaspar, even in the slightest of things; and promise menot to commit yourself with him in any respect whatsoever.""Oh, fear not, fear not," replied the Marquis. "In this respect atleast, good friend, no passions hurry me on. Here I can deal calmlyand tranquilly, because, though the end is the same, I have nothingbut art to encounter, which may always be encountered by reason. WhenI am with her, Abb, it is the continual strife of passion that I haveto fear; at every word, at every action, I have to be upon my guard;and reason, like a solitary sentinel upon the walls of a city attackedon every side, opposes the foes in vain at one point, while they pourin upon a thousand others."While he was yet speaking, a servant with a noiseless foot entered theroom, and in a low sweet tone informed the Marquis, that Monsieur deVillequier had just returned from Vincennes, and desired earnestly tospeak with him, for a moment, alone in his own cabinet. The word"alone" was pronounced more loud than any other, though the whole waslow and tuneful; for Villequier used to declare that he loved to haveservants with feet like cats and voices like nightingales.The Abb marked that word distinctly, and was too wise to make theslightest attempt to accompany his former pupil. The Marquis, however,did not remark it; and, perhaps a little fearful of his own firmnessand skill, asked his friend to accompany him. But the Abb instantlydeclined. "No, Gaspar," he said, "no; it were better that you shouldsee Monsieur Villequier alone. I will wait for you here;" and, turningto the table, he took up an illuminated psalter, and examined theminiatures with as close and careful an eye as if he had been deeplyinterested in the labours of the artist.He saw not a line which had there been drawn; but after the Marquishad followed the servant from the room he muttered to himself, "So,Monsieur de Villequier, you think that I am a mean man, who may beover-reached with impunity and ease? You know me not yet, but youshall know me, and that soon." And laying down the psalter, he took upanother book of a character more suited to his mind at the moment, andread calmly till his young friend returned, which was not for near anhour.In the mean time the Marquis had proceeded to the cabinet ofVillequier, who, the moment he saw him, rose from the chair in whichhe had been seated busily writing, and pressed him warmly by the hand."My dear young friend," he said, "one learns to love the more those inwhose cause one suffers something; and, since I saw you, I have had tofight your battle manfully.""Indeed! and may I ask, my Lord, with whom?" demanded the youngMarquis."With many," answered Villequier. "With the King,--with Epernon,-withyour own brother.""With my brother?" exclaimed Gaspar of Montsoreau, while the bloodrushed up in his face. "Does he dare to oppose me after all his loudprofessions of disinterestedness and generosity? But where is he, myLord? Leave me to deal with him. Where does he dwell? Is he in Paris?"Villequier smiled, but so slightly, that it did not attract the eyesof his companion. That smile, however, was but the announcement of asudden thought that had passed through his own mind.Shrewd politicians like himself, fertile in all resources, andunscrupulous about any, feel a pride and pleasure in their ownabundance of expedients, which makes the conception of a new means totheir end as pleasant as the finding of a diamond. On the presentoccasion the subtle courtier thought to himself with a smile, as hesaw the angry blood mount into the cheek of the young Marquis ofMontsoreau at the very mention of his brother's name,--"Here were aready means of ridding ourselves, were it needful, of one if not bothof these young rash-headed nobles, by setting them to cut each other'sthroats."It suited not his plan however at the moment to follow out the idea,and he consequently replied, "No, no, Monsieur de Montsoreau. I shouldtake no small care, seeing how justly offended you are with yourbrother, to prevent your finding out his abode, as I know whatconsequences would ensue. But in all probability, by this time, he hasgone back to the Duke of Guise, having with difficulty beenfrustrated, for the King was much inclined to yield to his demands.""What did he demand?" exclaimed the Marquis vehemently. "What did hedare to demand, after the professions he made to me at La Fert?""That matters not," answered Villequier. "Suffice it that his demandswere such as would have ruined all your hopes for ever.""But why should the King support his demands," said the Marquis, "whenwell assured of how attached he is to the great head of the Leaguethat tyrannises over him?""Hush, hush!" said Villequier. "The League only tyrannises so long asthe King chooses. Henry wields not the sword at present, but the swordis still in his hands to strike when he thinks fit. But to answer yourquestion, my young friend. The King knows well, as you say, that yourbrother is attached to the Duke of Guise: but you must remember at thesame time, Monsieur de Montsoreau, that as yet he is not fully assuredthat you are attached to himself. Nay, hear me out, hear me out! TheKing's arguments, I am bound to say, were not only specious butreasonable. He had to consider, on the one hand, that the Duke ofGuise, with whom it is his strongest interest to keep fair, demandsthis young lady as his ward, which, according to the laws of the land,Henry has no right to refuse. Your brother, on the Duke's part,threatens loudly; and what have I to oppose to a demand to which itseems absolutely necessary in good policy that the King should yield?Nothing; for, on the other hand, Henry affirms that he can be in nodegree sure of yourself; that your family for long have shownattachment for the House of Guise; that you yourself were upon yourmarch to join the Duke, when this lady, falling into the hands of theKing's troops, induced you to abandon your purpose for the time; butthat the moment he favours your suit, or gives his consent to yourunion with her, you may return to your former attachments, andpurchase the pardon and good will of the Duke of Guise by returning tohis faction.""I am incapable of such a thing!" exclaimed the Marquis vehemently:but the recollection of his abandonment of the Duke's party came overhim with a glow of shame, and he remained for a moment or two withoutmaking any farther reply, while Villequier was purposely silent also,as if to let what he had said have its full effect. At length headded:"I believe you are incapable of it, Monsieur de Montsoreau, and so Iassured the King. He, however, still urged upon me that I had noproof, and that you had taken no positive engagement to serve hisMajesty. All the monarch's arguments were supported by Epernon, who, Ibelieve, wishes for the hand of the young lady for some of his ownrelations, in order to arrange for himself such an alliance with theHouse of Guise as may prove a safeguard to him in the hour of need."And again Villequier smiled at his own art in turning back upon theDuke of Epernon the suspicion which the Duke had expressed in regardto himself.The warning of the Abb de Boisguerin, however, at that moment rang inthe ears of Gaspar of Montsoreau, and he roused himself to deal withVillequier not exactly as an adversary, but certainly less as afriend."In fact, Monsieur de Villequier," he said, "his Majesty wishes that Ishould devote my sword and fortune to his service; and I am tounderstand, through you, that he holds out to me the hope of obtainingthe hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut in return. Now, it was not atall my purpose to take any part in the strifes that are agitating thecountry at this moment. I am neither Leaguer nor Huguenot, nor Zealotnor Moderate; and, though most loyal, not what is called Royalist. Iwas merely conducting Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, with a very smallforce, not the tenth part of what I can bring into the field at aweek's notice, when the events took place which brought me to Paris.Now, Monsieur, if the King does not rest satisfied with my expressionsof loyalty, and desires some express and public engagement to hisservice, I see no earthly reason why I should rest satisfied with merevague hopes of obtaining the hand of the lady I love; and though, ofcourse, I cannot deal with his Majesty upon equal terms, yet I mustdemand some full, perfect, and permanent assurance that I am not to bedisappointed in my hopes, before I draw my sword for one party oranother."Villequier gazed thoughtfully in his face for a moment or two, bitinghis under lip, and saying internally, "The Abb de Boisguerin--thiscomes from him." His next thought was, "Shall I endeavour to piquethis stripling upon his honour, and generosity, and loyalty, and allthose fine words?" But he rejected the idea the moment after thinking."No; that would do better with his brother. When a man boldly leapsover such things, it is insulting him to talk about them any more."And after a moment's farther thought, he replied, "It is all veryfair, Monsieur de Montsoreau, that you should have such assurances;though, if we were not inclined to deal straightforwardly with you inthe matter, we might very very easily refuse every thing of the kind,and leave you not in the most pleasant situation.""How so?" demanded the Marquis with some alarm. "How so?""Easily, my dear young friend," replied Villequier. "Thus: byinforming you that the King could give you no such assurance--which,indeed, is nominally true, though not really--and by showing you, atthe same time, that as the young lady is in his Majesty's hands, andhe is determined not to give her up to the Duke of Guise or to anybody else, but some tried and faithful friend, the only means by whichyou can possibly obtain her is by serving the King voluntarily, in themost devoted manner. Suppose this did not suit you, what would be yourresource? If you go to the Duke of Guise, you find the ground occupiedbefore you by your brother, and the Duke accuses you of havingbetrayed his young relation into the hands of the King--perhaps sendsyou under a guard into Lorraine, and has you tried, and your headstruck off. Such things have happened before now, Monsieur deMontsoreau. At all events, not the slightest chance exists of yourwinning the fair heiress of Clairvaut from him. But, even if you didgain his consent, she is still in the hands of the King, who wouldcertainly not give her up to one who had proved himself a determinedenemy."Gaspar of Montsoreau looked down, with somewhat of a frowning brow,upon the ground. He saw, indeed, that the alternative was one that hecould not well adopt; and, from the showing of Villequier, he fanciedhimself of less power and consequence in the matter than he reallywas. He resolved, however, not to admit the fact if he could help it."Suppose, Monsieur de Villequier," he said, "that the League were toprevail, and to force his Majesty to concede all the articles ofNancy, think you not that one thing exacted from him might well be, toyield Mademoiselle de Clairvaut to her lawful guardian?""It might," answered Villequier immediately. "But then I come in. Thequestion of guardianship has never been tried between the Duke andmyself. I stand as nearly related to her as he does; and I shouldinstantly bring the cause before the Parliament, demanding that theyoung lady should remain in the hands of the King as suzerain till thecause is decided, which might be this time ten years.""I did not know," said the young nobleman, "that the relationship wasso near, though I was aware that Clairvaut is the family name ofVillequier. However, sir, there is yet another alternative. Suppose Iwere to keep the sword in the sheath, and retire once more toMontsoreau.""Why there, then," replied Villequier with a slight sneer, "you mighthappily abide, watching the progress of events, till either theroyalist party or the League prevailed; and then, as chance oraccident might will it, see the hand of the fair Lady rewarding one ofthe King's gallant defenders, or bestowed by the Duke of Guise uponhis brave and prudent partisan, the Count of Logres."He paused for a moment or two, to let all he said have its fulleffect, and then added, in a familiar tone, "Come, come, Monsieur deMontsoreau, see the matter in its true light. There is no possiblechance of your obtaining the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, exceptby attaching yourself to the King's service, and defending the royalcause with the utmost zeal. If you persist in doing so simply as avoluntary act to be performed or remitted at pleasure, be you surethat as you make the King depend upon your good will for your servicestowards him, so will you be made to depend upon his good will, hiscaprices if you like, for the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. If,however, on the contrary, you frankly and generously determine to takeservice with the King, and bind yourself irrevocably to his cause, Ido not scruple to promise you, under his hand, his full consent toyour union with Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. I will give you the sameconsent under mine, assuming the title of her guardian. Your marriagecannot, of course, take place till the great struggle that is nowimpending is over. In a few months, nay, in a few weeks, the one partyor the other--who are now directing their efforts against each other,instead of turning, as they ought, their united forces against thecommon enemies of our religion--must have triumphed over itsadversary. I need not tell you which I feel, which I know, must besuccessful; but your part will now be, to exert yourself to theutmost, to traverse the country with all speed to Montsoreau, to raiseevery soldier that you can, and to gather every crown that you cancollect, to join the King with all your forces, wherever he may be,and, by your exertions, to render that result certain, which is,indeed, scarcely doubtful even as it is; remembering that upon thedestruction of the Duke of Guise's party, and upon the overthrow ofhis usurped and unreasonable power, depends not only the welfare ofyour King and master, but the realisation of your best and sweetesthopes.""You grant all that I demand, Monsieur de Villequier," replied Gasparof Montsoreau. "All I wish is the King's formal consent in writing,and yours, to my marriage with Marie de Clairvaut, as the condition ofmy absolute and public adhesion to the royal cause.""I know," replied Villequier, "that I grant all you demand, and I wasprepared to do so from the first, only we were led into collateraldiscussions as we went on. You will, of course, take an oath to theKing's service, and confirm it under your hand.""We will exchange the papers, Monsieur de Villequier," replied theMarquis, thinking himself extremely cautious. "But now, pray tell me,how ended the discussion with my brother?""The only way that it could end," replied Villequier, "when allparties were determined to evade his demand. The King, you may easilysuppose, was not inclined to give the young heiress of Clairvaut toany of the partisans of an enemy. Epernon knew well that if the handof a Guise were upon her shoulder, the ring of a La Valette wouldnever pass upon her finger; and I, when last we met, had half given mypromise to you, and was, at all events, determined that the questionof wardship should be settled before I parted with her. The King,therefore, evaded the demands of the young Count, though he was not alittle inclined to yield to them at one time, in order to pacify theDuke of Guise. However, I took the brunt of the business upon myself,and underwent the hot indignation of your brother, who thought to findin me an Epernon, or a Montsoreau, who would measure swords with himfor an angry word.""They had better be skilful as well as brave," said the young Marquisthoughtfully, "who measure swords with my brother Charles.""Indeed!" said Villequier, "is he then so much a master of hisweapon?""The most perfect I ever beheld--ay, more skilful now, than even ourfriend the Abb de Boisguerin; though I have heard that, some yearsago, when the Abb was studying at Padua, he challenged the famousSpanish sword-player, Bobz, to display his skill with him in theschools, in single combat, and hit him three times upon the heartwithout Bobz touching him once.""I remember, I remember!" cried Villequier. "The master broke thebuttons from the swords in anger, and the student ran him through thebody at the first pass, whereof he died within five minutes after inthe Deacon's chamber.""I never heard that he died," replied the Marquis with some surprise."He did indeed, though," replied Villequier with a meditative air."And so this was the Abb de Boisguerin. One would have thought thearmy, rather than the church, would have called such a spirit toitself.""I know not," replied the young Marquis, "but in all things he isequally skilful; and, doubtless, you know he has taken but the firststep towards entering the church, pausing as it were even on thethreshold.""Do you think," said Villequier, "that he is as skilful in conveyingintelligence as in other things?""What do you mean, my Lord?" exclaimed his young companion."Nay, I mean nothing," replied the politician, satisfied with havingsown the first seed of suspicion in the young nobleman's mind,without, perhaps, any definite design, but simply for the universalpurpose of making men doubt and distrust each other, with a view ofruling them more easily. "Nothing, except a mere question concerninghis skill. I have no latent meaning, I assure you."The brow of the Marquis grew clear again, and Villequier saw that hebelieved the latter assertion more fully than he had intended. He letthe subject pass, however, and spoke of many other things, giving hisown account of various matters which had occurred during the Count deLogres's audience of the King, and urging Gaspar de Montsoreau to setoff with all speed to raise his forces in his native province. Thenabruptly turning the conversation, he demanded, "You or the Abb toldme, I think, that you suspected your brother of having communicatedyour march to the reiters. Is it like his general character so to act?I'm sure, if it be his custom to do such things, I would much ratherthat he was upon the opposite party than our own."The Marquis bent down his head, and gazed sternly upon the ground fortwo or three moments. He then answered, with a deep sigh, "No,Monsieur de Villequier; no, it is not like Charles's character. He hasall his life been frank and free as the summer air, open, andgenerous. I fear I did him wrong to suspect him. We are rivals whereno man admits of rivalry: but I must do him justice. If he have donesuch a thing, his nature must be changed, changed indeed--changed,perhaps, as much as my own.""I thought," replied Villequier, "that he seemed frank andstraightforward enough, bold and haughty as a lion; gave the King lookfor look; bearded Epernon, and threatened to bring him to the field;and spared not me myself, whom men don't for some reason love tooffend. But he did not seem a man likely to betray his friend, orpractise treachery upon his brother. It is a very strange thing, too,"he continued in an easier tone, "that Colombel and the other officersof the King's troops at Chteau Thierry should have received news ofyour coming a day before you did cross the Marne, together with theinformation that the reiters might attack you near Gandelu. Was notthis strange?""Most strange," replied the Marquis, knitting his brows, and settinghis teeth hard. But Villequier, now seeing that he had said quiteenough, again turned the conversation; and after letting it subsidenaturally to ordinary subjects, he told the young Marquis that hewould immediately write to the King, and obtain his signature to thepaper required, before bed-time. "It is late already," he said; "Ithink even now I see a shade in the sky, so I must about my workrapidly. But remember, Monsieur de Montsoreau, nine is my supper hourexactly; and then, care and labour being past, we will sit down andenjoy ourselves, though I fear the accommodation which I can offer youin my poor dwelling must seem but rude in your eyes."The Marquis said all that such a speech required, and then withdrew.When he was gone, Villequier applied himself for some time to otherthings; but when they were concluded, he rose from his chair, andwalked once or twice thoughtfully across the cabinet."I had better," he said to himself at length, "I had better deal withhim at once, and then I can ascertain what are his demands, and how totreat them."Thus saying, he took up his bell and rang it, directing the servantwho appeared to see if he could find the Abb de Boisguerin alone, inwhich case he was to invite him to a conference. "He will be alone,"thought the wily courtier, "for I have sown seeds of those thingswhich will not suffer them to be long together."The Abb, however, was absent from the house, much to the surprise ofVillequier; and another hour had well nigh passed before he made hisappearance. The moment that he did so, he advanced towards Villequierwith his mild and graceful calmness, saying that he understood hisLordship had sent for him. Villequier pressed his hand tenderly, andwith soft and courtly words assured him that, in sending for him, hehad only sought to enjoy the pleasure of his unrivalled conversationfor a few minutes before supper.The Abb replied exactly in the same tone; that he was profoundlygrieved to have lost even a moment of the society of one whofascinated from the first, and sent away every one charmed anddelighted.A slight and bitter smile curled the lip of each as he ended hisspeech, like a seal upon a treaty, the confirmation and mockery of afalsehood.The Abb, however, added to his speech a few words more, saying thathe should have been back earlier, but that his conversation at theWhite Penitent's had been so interesting that he could not withdrawhimself earlier from her Majesty the Queen-mother.Villequier started. "Are you acquainted with the Queen?" he said."What a surprising-being Catherine is!""She is indeed," answered the Abb. "My long sojourn at Florence someyears ago made me fully acquainted with every member of the House ofMedici, and I now bring you this letter on her part, Monsieur deVillequier."Villequier took the paper that the Abb handed to him, and readapparently with some surprise. "Her Majesty," he said, "knows that Iam her devoted slave, but at the same time she cannot doubt, knowingas she does so well your high qualities, that I will do every thing toserve and assist you, and prevent all evil machinations against you.""Oh, she doubts it not; she doubts it not," replied the Abb. "Shedoubts it not, Monsieur de Villequier, any more than I do; and haswritten this note only in confirmation of your good intentions towardsme. However, there is one thing I wish you to do for me, Monsieur deVillequier.""Name it, my dear friend," exclaimed the Marquis; "but give me anopportunity of making myself happy in gratifying your wishes.""The fact is, Monsieur de Villequier," replied the Abb, "that somemalicious person has been endeavouring to persuade the young Marquisde Montsoreau, my friend, and formerly my pupil, that it was I whointimated to the reiters the course we were pursuing to meet the Dukeof Guise, and who also intimated the facts to the King's troops atChteau Thierry, that they might have an opportunity of coming up torescue us and bring us hither--though they showed no great activity indoing the first. Now, doubtless, the person who did this, if therewere any one, had the King's service solely in view, and deserved tobe highly rewarded, as he probably will be; but----""Doubtless," replied Villequier with a sneering smile. "But surely hecould not object to such honourable service being known.""Of course not," replied the Abb; "nor that he had given intimationof the facts to, and taken his measures with, her Majesty theQueen-mother; by an order, under whose hand the troops at ChteauThierry acted, and at whose suggestion Monsieur de Montsoreau andhis friends threw themselves into the hands of Monsieur deVillequier.--All this her Majesty declares he did; and he could not,of course, object to any of these things being known, except as it iscontrary to good policy and to the wishes of the Queen-mother: andmore especially contrary to every wise purpose, if he be a personpossessed of much habitual influence with the young Marquis.""Monsieur de Boisguerin," said Villequier, seeming suddenly to breakaway from the subject, but in truth following the scent as truly asany well-trained hound, "the bishopric of Seez is at present vacant. Iknow none who would fill it better than the Abb de Boisguerin."The Abb drew himself up and waved his hand. "You mistake me entirely,Monsieur de Villequier," he said. "I take no more vows. I have takentoo many already; and those, by God's grace and the good will of ourholy father the Pope, I intend to get rid of very speedily. I havenothing to request of your Lordship at present. I know, see, andunderstand your whole policy, and think you quite right in everyrespect. The promises which you and the King are to give to Monsieurde Montsoreau concerning the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut can ofcourse be broken, changed, or modified in a moment at any futuretime.""We have no intention of breaking them," replied Villequier. "We areacting in good faith, I can assure you.""Doubtless," replied the Abb, "doubtless: but they can be broken?""Of course," replied Villequier; "of course any thing on earth can bebroken.""That is sufficient," replied the Abb. "It is quite enough, Monsieurde Villequier: I only desire to know, whether you and the Kingconsider it as a final arrangement, that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut isto marry the young Lord of Montsoreau, or whether the matter is notnow as much unsettled and within your own power and grasp as ever.""Why," replied Villequier thoughtfully, "it is, as I dare say you wellknow, Monsieur l'Abb, a very difficult thing indeed to devise anysort of black lines, which, written down upon sheep skin, will provesufficiently strong to bind the actions of kings, princes, or commonmen, at a future period. But it seems to me, Monsieur l'Abb, that thetime is come when we had better be frank with each other! What is itthat you aim at? You seem not displeased to think the arrangementdoubtful or contingent; and yet I, who am not accustomed to guess verywrongly in such matters, have entertained no doubtful suspicion thatyou prompted the demand for a definite and conclusive bargain.""I did," replied the Abb. "When you asked to see him alone, I wasvery well assured that, though a game of policy skilfully played mayoccasionally afford sport to Monsieur de Villequier, you were quite aswell pleased in the present business to deal with a young andinexperienced head as with an old and a worldly one. He sought myopinion and advice, and, as I uniformly do when it is sought, I gaveit him sincerely, though it was against my own views and purposes.Now, Monsieur de Villequier, I see hovering round your lips aquestion, which, in whatever form of words you place it, whateverProteus form it may assume, will have this for its substance andobject; namely, What are the plans and purposes of the Abb deBoisguerin? Now, my plans and purposes are these,--remember, I do notsay my objects; the object of every man in life is one, though we allset out upon different roads to reach it. My purpose is to serve hisMajesty and the Queen-mother far more than I have hitherto been ableto do. What I have done is a trifle; but if I detach from the party ofthe League, separate for ever from the Duke of Guise, and bring overto the royal cause Charles of Montsoreau as well as his brother, Ishall confer no trifling service, for I can now inform you, Monsieurde Villequier, that, besides the great estates of Logres, he is lordof all the possessions lately held by the old Count de Morly, whoamassed much treasure during the avaricious part of age, and diedlittle more than a week ago, leaving this young Lord the heir of allhis wealth. I have received the intelligence this very morning; sothat, what between his riches, his skill, and his courage, he is worthany two, excepting Epernon perhaps, of the King's court.""If you do what you say, Monsieur de Boisguerin," replied the Marquisin a low, deep, sweet-toned voice, "you may command any thing youplease in France, bishoprics, abbeys----""If it rained bishoprics," replied the Abb, "I would not wear amitre. I do not pretend to say, Monsieur de Villequier, that I am moredisinterested than my neighbours; that I have not great rewards inview, and objects of importance--to me, if not to others. But theseobjects are not quite fixed or determined yet, and I am not one ofthose men, Monsieur de Villequier, who hesitate to render the servicesfirst from a fear of losing the reward afterwards. I know how to makemy claims heard when the time comes for demanding; and in the presentinstance, although I cannot distinctly promise to bring Charles ofMontsoreau absolutely and positively over to the King's cause, yet Iam sure of being able both to detach him from the Duke of Guise andseparate him from the faction of the League. I think, indeed, that allthree can be done: but nothing can be done unless the promise given tohis brother be made contingent. The one loves her as vehemently as theother; and I, who know how to deal with him, can change his wholeviews in an hour, or at least in a few days.""Indeed!" said Villequier. "He is now in Paris; the trial could bespeedily made.""I know it--" replied the Abb, seeing the Marquis fix his eyes uponhim eagerly, thinking, perhaps, 'he has promised more than he couldperform.'"I know it, and that is the precise reason why I have hurried on thismatter, and urged it to the present point. No time is to be lost, or Isee storms approaching, Monsieur de Villequier, that I think escapeyour eyes.""What do you intend to do?" demanded Villequier; "and what means doyou require to do it?""My purposes I have already told you," replied the Abb. "The means Irequire--to come to the point at once--consist of a document underyour own hand, making over to me, as far as your relationship toMademoiselle de Clairvaut goes, the right of disposing of her hand inmarriage to whomsoever I may think fit: that is to say, the voice for,or the voice against, any particular candidate for her hand, whengiven by me, is to be held as if given by yourself.""This is a great thing that you demand, Monsieur de Boisguerin,"replied Villequier, gazing in his face with no inconsiderablesurprise; "and I see not how I can give such a paper at the very sametime that I give the one which I have promised to the Marquis ofMontsoreau.""Nothing, I fear, can be done without it," replied the Abb; "but Ithink it may be done without risk or exposure of any kind, for I inreturn can bind myself not to employ that paper for nine months, bywhich time all will be complete; and in both the documents you canspeak vaguely of other promises and engagements, and can declare yourgreat object in giving me that paper to be, the final settlement ofdifficult claims, by a person in whom you have full confidence."Villequier looked in his face with a meaning and somewhat sarcasticsmile: then turned to the note which the Queen-mother, Catharine deMedici, had sent him; read it over again as if carelessly, but markingevery word as he did so; and then said, with somewhat of a sigh,"Well, Monsieur de Boisguerin, pray draw up on that paper what youthink would be required."The Abb took up the pen and ink, and wrote rapidly for a moment ortwo; while Villequier looked over his shoulder, fingering the hilt ofhis dagger as he did so, in a manner which might have made the periodsof any man but the Abb de Boisguerin, who knew as he did hiscompanion's habits and views, less rounded and eloquent than theyusually were. The Abb, however, wrote on without the slightest signof apprehension, and at length Villequier exclaimed, "That would tiemy hands sufficiently tight, Monsieur de Boisguerin.""Not quite, my Lord," replied the other. "I never make a covenantwithout a penalty; and what I am now going to add provides that, incase of your failing to confirm my decision, or attempting in any wayto rescind this paper and the power hereby given to me, you forfeit tomy use and benefit one hundred thousand golden crowns, to be sued forfrom you in any lawful court of this kingdom.""Nay, nay, nay!" cried Villequier, now absolutely laughing. "This isgoing too far, Monsieur de Boisguerin.""Faith, not a whit, my Lord," replied the Abb. "I take care when menmake me promises, that they are not such as can be trifled with, atleast if I am to act upon them.""Why, you do not suppose----" exclaimed Villequier."I suppose nothing, my Lord," interrupted the Abb, "but that you area statesman and a courtier, and must in your day have seen more thanone promise broken.""By some millions," replied Villequier. "I told you to speak frankly,Monsieur de Boisguerin, and you have done so with a vengeance. I musthave my turn, too, and tell you that neither to you nor any other manon earth will I give such a promise, without in the first place seeinga probability of the object for which it is given being accomplished,and, in fact, some steps taken towards the accomplishment of thatobject; and, in the next place, without having a distinct notion ofthe means by which it is to effect its end. That is a beautiful ringof yours," continued the statesman, suddenly breaking away from thesubject as if to announce that what he had just said was final, butperhaps in reality to consider what was to be the next step. "That isa beautiful ring of yours, Monsieur de Boisguerin, and of some verypeculiar stone it seems; a large turquoise semi-transparent.""It is an antidote against all poisons," answered the Abb coolly,"whether they be eaten in the savoury ragout, drunk in the racy cup,smelt in the odour of a sweet flower, or inhaled in the balmy air ofsome well-prepared apartment. My dear friends will not find me sotender a lamb as Jeanne d'Albret.""No, I should think not," replied Villequier with a laugh, and stillholding off from the original subject of conversation. "I should thinknot, if I may judge by some of your attendants, Monsieur deBoisguerin, for there is one of them at least, an Italian, whom Ipassed in the court but now, who looks much more like the follower ofa wolf than of a lamb. He was dressed somewhat in the guise of awandering minstrel, with a good strong dagger, which I dare say isserviceable in time of need.""I have not the slightest doubt of it," replied the Abb de Boisguerinwith the most imperturbable coolness, "though I have not had occasionto make use of him much in that way yet. But the man's a treasure,Monsieur de Villequier; and as to his garb the fact is, that I havenot had time yet to have it changed and made more becoming. You shallsee in a few days, Monsieur de Villequier, what a change can beeffected by razors, soap, cold water, and good clothing. He's acomplete treasure, I can assure you, and well worth any pains.""But," said Villequier, "if you have had him so short a time as not tobe able to clothe him yet, how do you know all these magnificentqualities?""It is a singular business enough," answered the Abb. "I knew himlong ago in Italy, where he was exercising various professions: but hehad skill enough almost to cheat me, which, of course, made me judgehighly of his abilities. One day, not long ago, he presented himselfat the Chteau de Montsoreau, where it seems he had been upon somevagabond excursion a week or a fortnight before. He had on the firstoccasion seen and recognised me, and he now came back, having spentall the money he had gained by selling a young Italian pipe-player tomy good cousin Charles, and being consequently in not the bestprovided state. He was in hopes that I would take him into my service,which, from ancient recollection of his character, I was very willingto do; dismissing, however, without much ceremony, another man and alow Italian woman whom he had brought with him. They seemed verywilling to go, it is true, and he to part with them; and my goodfriend Orbi has already shown himself on more than one occasion fullyas serviceable as I had expected he would prove. My former knowledgeof him gives me means of binding him to me by very strong ties; and Iwill acknowledge that never was there man to all appearance so wellcalculated to remove a troublesome friend or a pertinacious enemy.""Doubtless, doubtless," replied Villequier; "though he seems not to beparticularly strong in frame.""But he is active," answered the Abb, "and full of skill, andthought, and ingenuity. But to return to what we were sayingconcerning the paper, Monsieur de Villequier, which we have leftsomewhat too long," added the Abb, thinking this sort of farce hadbeen carried quite far enough. "Every objection that you have raisedcan be overthrown at once. I ask this promise, not for my own sake,but to satisfy this youth Charles of Montsoreau. He will trust you assoon as the fox will the tiger; but he will trust to me implicitly, ifhe believes that I have the power to aid him in obtaining her heloves. Thus you see at once the means by which this promise is to workto the ends that we propose. Then, as to seeing clearly what theeffect will be, I will show it to you in the very course of thisnight. Read that letter, written by the young Count of Logres to hisbrother, no later than yesterday evening! You see," the Abbcontinued, after Villequier had read, "he renounces all claimwhatsoever to the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, and this infavour of his brother. The letter was brought hither not two hoursago. Now, ere two hours more be over, you shall yourself see the wholefeelings of this young man changed, and the pursuit renewed as eagerlyas ever. If it be so, what say you? Will you go forward in the way Ipropose?--Yea or nay, Monsieur de Villequier? I trifle not, nor amtrifled with.""I will then go forward, beyond all doubt," replied the Marquis.The Abb thereupon took up the pen, wrote five lines on a sheet ofpaper, sealed them with some of the yellow wax which lay ready,addressed the note to Charles of Montsoreau, and placing it in thehands of Villequier, bade him to send it by a page, with orders torequire an answer. The page seemed winged with the wind, and in amarvellous short time he returned, bearing a note from the young Countof Logres, containing these few words:--"My renunciation was entirely conditional. If it be as you say,nothing on earth shall induce me to yield the hand of Mademoiselle deClairvaut to any man. The time that you allow me for writing does notpermit me to say more, but come to me as early as possible to-morrow,and let all things be explained; for a state of doubt and suspicionwas always to me worse than the knowledge of real evil or real wrong."The Abb gave it to Villequier, and the Minister only replied bysigning and sealing the paper which the Abb had drawn up."Now, quick! Monsieur l'Abb," said the Minister. "Go for a fewminutes to your own apartments, and then join us at supper, which Ihear is already served, as if we had not met during the evening. Youwill not need your ring, I can assure you."The Abb bowed low and retired in silence; but in his heart he said,"And this, the fool Henry holds to be a great politician."No knave can be a great politician; but every knave thinks himself so.The mistake they make is between wisdom and cunning. The knave prideshimself on deceiving others, the wise man on not deceiving himself.CHAP. VI.When the Abb de Boisguerin on the following morning entered thepresence of Charles of Montsoreau, his mind was prepared for everything he was to say and do, for every thing he was to assert orto imply. But there was one thing for which his mind was notprepared--all shrewd, keen, politic, and experienced as it was.There are points in the deep study of human nature which those whowould use that mighty science for selfish purposes almost alwaysoverlook. Amongst these are the changes, both sudden and progressive,which take place in themselves and in others, and the changes inrelative situations which they produce. In this respect it was thatthe Abb de Boisguerin, thoughtful and calculating as he was, had notprepared himself for the meeting with Charles of Montsoreau. The timewas short since they had parted. Not above six weeks had elapsed, ifso much; and the Abb had come ready to deal with a youth of keen andpenetrating mind, of quick perceptions and extensive powers; of allwhose feelings and thoughts he fancied that he knew the scope andquality; whose mind he believed that he had gauged and tested as if itwere some material substance. But he knew not at all, what an effectthe space of six weeks may have when spent in communication with greatminds, and in dealing with great events; and the moment he entered theroom he saw a change which he had never dreamt of--a change whichthrough the mind affected the body, the countenance, and thedemeanour.Charles of Montsoreau, in short, had left him a youth high-spirited,feeling, intelligent, graceful,--he stood before him a man, calm,thoughtful, grave, dignified. There were even lines of care alreadyupon his brow, which gave it a degree of sternness not natural to it;and the whole look and aspect of his former pupil was so powerfullyintellectual, that the Abb felt he must be more cautious and carefulthan he had prepared to be; that his words, his thoughts, and hislooks would not alone be tested by old affection, nor even by thesimple powers of an undoubting mind, but would be tried by experiencelikewise, and tried moreover with that degree of suspicion which ismore active within us when we first learn the painful lessons taughtby human deceit, than it is when we learn fully our own powers ofseparating truth from falsehood.He saw that it would be necessary to be more cautious than he hadproposed to be, and that, consequently, he must change much that hehad intended to say and do. The very caution affected his manner, andhis alteration of purposes caused occasional hesitation. Charles ofMontsoreau, who remembered his whole character and demeanour duringmany years, found, without seeking it, a touchstone in the past bywhich to try the present, and the conclusion in his own heart was,"This man is not true."The explanation given by the Abb of all that had occurred on theirroute did not satisfy his hearer. He told him that he had remainedwith Mademoiselle de Clairvaut and the carriage till the reiters hadpassed, and then had caused the horses to be turned into a bye-road,in the hope of escaping any returning parties: they had thusaccidentally met with the King's troops, whose offered protection, ofcourse, they could not refuse. But he touched vaguely and lightly uponthe mission of Colombel to the young Marquis de Montsoreau; and theCount de Logres did not press him upon the subject, for he feltsufficiently upon his guard, and had a repugnance openly to convictone whom he had loved of falseness and treachery.He turned then to the note which he had received on the precedingevening."You tell me now," he said, "Abb, that you have some reason tobelieve that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, as I at first supposed, hasseen my affection, and did not intend to discourage it. What are thosereasons?"The Abb stated vaguely that some words, dropped by Madame de Saulny,had produced that belief in his mind.Charles of Montsoreau mused, and made no answer. The time had beenwhen he would have replied at once, and have discussed the questionfully with his former preceptor; but now he held counsel with his ownheart in his own bosom, and said, "This man has some object in tellingme this. Her own words were sufficiently conclusive, that she did notsee, that she did not remark, the signs of affection which I hadfancied undoubted."He still maintained silence, however, towards the Abb, in regard tohis own views, his own purposes, and his own feelings. Nor could theother, though he used all his skill, draw from him the slightestindication of what he intended to do, except that he waited in Parisfor the arrangement of some affairs, which were not yet concluded,with the King. He in turn, however, questioned the Abb muchconcerning his brother, expressing not only a wish but a determinationto see him."I am happy," he said, "that my letter reached him; for--by whom orfor what reason instructed to falsify the truth, I do not know--theporter of Monsieur de Villequier denied the fact of your being in thehouse. As nothing could shake my own belief that it was Gaspar andyourself I had seen, and as both Gondrin and the page confirmed myopinion, I sent the letter at all risks: and now, good Abb, if youlove Gaspar and myself as you used to do, contrive that we may meetagain to-morrow, in order that all these clouds may be cleared awayfrom between us, and that we may feel once more as brothers ought tofeel towards each other."The Abb promised to do as the young Count desired, beseeching him,however, not to press his brother to an interview too suddenly, andassuring him that he would use every effort.The still more important subject of what had become of Mademoiselle deClairvaut remained to be discussed; and Charles of Montsoreau, thoughresolved to make the inquiry, approached it with distaste and withcaution, from a feeling that the Abb would not deal truly with him,and would only endeavour, in the course of any conversation upon thatpoint, to discover what were his secret intentions, even while heconcealed from him the true circumstances.It was as he expected. The Abb told him that, in some degree underthe care, and in some degree under the guard, of the King's troops,the whole party had been brought to the neighbourhood of Paris, wherea messenger from the monarch had conveyed to himself and the youngMarquis an invitation to take up their abode at the house ofVillequier, while Mademoiselle de Clairvaut was conveyed to Vincennes.They had done all that was possible, he said, to prevent such aseparation; but the King's commands were peremptory; and he had sincelearnt, or at least had reason to believe, that the young lady hadbeen sent in the direction of Beauvais, to the care of some distantrelations.The young Count smiled, and said nothing; and the Abb then, with anair of grave sincerity, proceeded to ask him what had best be doneunder such circumstances. He replied that he could give no advice; andmany a vain effort was again made to discover what were his purposesin regard to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. Finding that no indirect meanssucceeded, the Abb, trusting to their former familiarity, asked thequestion directly, "What do you intend to do in this business,Charles.""Indeed, my dear Abb," replied the young Count, "it is difficult totell you. I have no definite plan of action at present, and must beguided by circumstances as they arise."Thus ended their interview; and it formed a strange contrast to thatbetween the Abb and Villequier,--showing how simple honesty may oftenbaffle cunning which has succeeded against astuteness like itself. Thefollowing day passed without any communication reaching the youngCount, either from the Abb or from his brother, from the King or theDuke of Guise; and expectation of receiving tidings from some onecaused him to remain at home during the greater part of the day.On the succeeding morning, however, he determined to proceed to thehouse of Villequier, and to demand peremptorily the fulfilment of thepromise which the King had made. Ere he set out, however, he receiveda note in the hand of the Abb de Boisguerin, informing him brieflythat his brother, having determined to return to Montsoreau, was uponthe very point of setting out. He, the Abb, was to accompany him fortwo days' march upon the road, but would return to Paris in four orfive days without fail.Charles of Montsoreau read the note with a faint and melancholy smile,and again said, "This man is not true!"He rode at once, however, to the hotel of Villequier, but found thatthe minister had once more gone to Vincennes. He inquired for theMarquis of Montsoreau of the same porter who had denied the fact ofhis being there. The porter, not at all discomposed, replied that theMarquis and the Abb de Boisguerin, with their train, had set outfully two hours before for Montl'hery; which, being confirmed uponfarther inquiry by an Italian confectioner on the opposite side of thestreet, was believed by the young Count, who returned home with aheart but ill at ease.Another day was passed in gloomy and impatient expectation; but atnight Gondrin reappeared from Soissons, bringing with him a brief notefrom the Duke of Guise:--"Your interview," it said, "was such as might be expected; yourconduct all that it should have been; your view of the result right.They are endeavouring to trifle both with you and me; but we must showthem that this cannot be done. I send off a courier at once toVillequier, requiring that the King's authorisation shall beimmediately given to you. If it reach you not before to-morrow night,I pray you set off at once with the passports you possess forChateauneuf; for I have information scarcely to be doubted, that ourpoor Marie has been conveyed thither. Show her the letter which I gaveyou, requiring her to follow your directions in every thing. Endeavourto bring her at once, with what people you can collect upon her lands,across the country towards Rheims, avoiding Paris. If any one stopsyou, or attempts either to delay your progress or dispute yourpassage, show them my letter of authority, as well as the passportsthat you already possess; and if they farther molest or delay you,they shall not be forgotten, be they great or small, when they come toreckon with your friend, Henry of Guise."In a postscript was written at the bottom--"In going, avoid Dreux andMontfort, for the plague is raging there. If there be any forcestationed at Chateauneuf to prevent the removal of Mademoiselle deClairvaut, only ascertain distinctly the fact of her presence in thechteau, and come back to rejoin me with all speed."The tidings brought by Gondrin showed Charles of Montsoreau that greatevents of some kind were in preparation. Various bodies of troopsattached to the House of Lorraine were moving here and there inChampaign and the Ardennes; daily conferences were held between theDuke of Guise, the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Cardinal of Guise, and anumber of other influential noblemen; the propriety of deposing theKing was said to be openly discussed at Soissons, and ridicule andhatred were unsparingly busy with the names of Epernon, Villequier,and others. Couriers, totally independent of those which were sentupon the business that brought the young Count to Paris, were almosthourly passing between the capital and Soissons; and it was dailywhispered in the latter city, that experienced officers and smallbodies of troops were daily gliding into the capital from the armywhich the Duke had led to victory on so many previous occasions.Early on the following morning, Charles of Montsoreau again proceededto the Hotel de Villequier, in order that nothing might be wanting onhis part. But the reply once more was, that the minister was absent;and the day passed over without any tidings from either the King orhis favourite. As he passed through various parts of the city,however, the young Count remarked many things that somewhat surprisedhim. He had hitherto ridden amongst the people quite unnoticed, butnow many persons whom he met bowed low to him, and those seemingly ofthe most respectable classes of citizens. On two or three occasionsthe burgher guard saluted him as he passed; and in one place, whereseveral people were collected together, there was a cry of "Long livethe Duke of Guise!"All these indications of some approaching event of importance at anyother moment might have given him an inclination to remain in Paris:but he had other interests more deeply at heart; and having waitedtill the last moment to make sure that the King's authorisation wasstill delayed, he prepared to set out that very night, taking with himonly the number of persons specified in the passports which he hadbrought from Soissons.In a brief and hurried note which he wrote to Chapelle Marteau, heinformed him that he was about to absent himself from Paris for ashort time on business of importance; and begged him, as it was hisintention to pass out of the city by the Faubourg St. Germain thatvery night, to facilitate his so doing as quietly as possible. Thathis absence might remain for some time concealed from those who mightobstruct his proceedings, he retained his apartments at the inn, andthe servants he had hired, paying the whole for some time in advance,and directing that if any inquiries were made, the reply should be,that he was only absent for a few days.When all was prepared he set out, and at the gates found his friend ofthe Seize, with another personage, who seemed to consider himself ofgreat importance. No words, however, were spoken, no passports weredemanded, the two Leaguers bowed lowly to the Count, the gates openedas if of themselves, and, issuing forth, the young Count rode on uponthe way, anxious to place as great a distance between Paris andhimself ere the next morning as possible.It was a soft calm night in April, the sky was unclouded and filledwith stars, the dew thick upon the grass, and the air balmy; and theyoung nobleman pursued his way with a mind filled with thoughts which,though certainly in part melancholy, were still tinged with the softlight of hope. His horses were strong and fresh, and just in the greyof the morning, on the following day, he reached the small town ofRambouillet.The signs and indications of the disturbed and anxious state ofsociety in France were visible in the little town as the young Countgazed from the door of the inn, after seeing that his horses were welltaken care of. There were anxious faces and eyes regarding thestranger with the expression of doubt, and perhaps suspicion; therewere little knots gathered together and talking gloomily at thecorners of different streets; the whistle of the light-hearted peasantwas unheard; and the cart or the flock was driven forth in silence.The Count's horses required rest; none were to be procured with whichhe could pursue his journey, and he determined to take what repose hecould get ere he proceeded on his way. Casting himself down then upona bed, he closed his eyes and sought to sleep: but suddenly somethinglike a wild cry sounded from the other side of the street, andspringing up he looked out of the window. He could almost have touchedthe opposite house, so narrow was the way, and he saw completely intoa room thereof through the window that faced his own.There was a woman in it of about the middle age, kneeling by thebedside of a youth who seemed just dead; and on looking down a littlebelow he saw a man, dressed in a black serge robe, standing on aladder, and marking the front of the building with a large whitecross. On the impulse of the moment, Charles of Montsoreau ran downstairs, and approached the door of the house, intending to enter. Buthe was stopped at the door by two of the guards of the city. "Do younot see the mark of the plague?" they said. "You must not go in; or,if you go in, you must not come out again."With a sorrowful heart, Charles of Montsoreau turned back into theinn, but he found no sleep, and the image of the woman clasping herdead son still haunted him in waking visions.CHAP. VII.It was about nine o'clock at night, and the moon, rising later thanthe night before, had not yet gone down, as Charles of Montsoreaupassed through the wide forest that then surrounded Chateauneuf enThimerais. It was a beautiful moonlight scene, affording to the eyemany various and pleasant objects. The greater part of the forest,indeed, consisted of old trees far apart from each other, and onlysurrounded by brushwood in patches here and there. Occasionally,indeed, deeper and thicker parts of the forest presented themselves,where the axe had not been plied so unsparingly; but the ground washilly and broken, and the road ascended and descended continually,showing every change of the forest ground. There were manifold streamstoo in that part of the country, and small gushing fountains, while achapel or two, here and there raised by the pious inhabitants of theneighbourhood, broke the desolate appearance of the wood by showingsweet traces of human hope or gratitude. The heart, however, ofCharles of Montsoreau enjoyed not that scene as it might at any othertime, for many dark and painful reports had reached him of the stateof the country in that district, and he looked anxiously forward tohis arrival at the little village of Morvillette seated in the midstof the forest, to hear further tidings of Chateauneuf and itsneighbourhood. A party of soldiers he had already heard had passedalong some days before, escorting a carriage, and it was understoodtheir destination was Chateauneuf; but the people of Tremblay, wherehe received this intelligence, shook the head doubtingly, and added,that the traveller would hear more at Morvillette, and could there geta guide to the chteau, which was two miles from the town.At length, lying in a hollow of the woodland, the moonlight showed hima group of dark cottages; but no friendly light appeared in thewindows; and as he rode on amongst the houses, there was a sort ofawful stillness about the place, which seemed to indicate that it wasnot slumber that kept the tongues of the peasantry silent. There wereno dogs in the streets; there was no smoke curling up from any of thechimneys; all was still, and many of the doors stood wide open in thenight air, exhibiting nothing but solitude within."There must be somebody in the place," cried Gondrin, springing fromhis horse and approaching one of the cottages, the door of which wasshut.Without knocking, the man threw open the door at once, and went in asfar as the bridle of his horse would let him; but he came out againimmediately, and his master could see that his face was pale and itsexpression horrified."A man and a woman," he said in a low voice, "both dead! the one inthe bed and the other on the floor, and both of them looking as blueas a cloud."The boy Ignati pressed up his horse to hear; and the Count said, "Inall probability there may be things still more horrible before us. Ishall go on, Gondrin; I must go on: but there is no need for eitheryourself or the page to do so. You had better both go back. Make thebest of your way to Soissons, there tell the Duke what you have seen,and assure him that I will do my best to fulfil his wishes if I live.""My Lord," said the boy, "I might quit you for a kind and noble masterwhen danger was not about you, but I will only quit you now withlife.""And so say I," replied Gondrin in a somewhat reassured but stillanxious tone. "But let us ride on, my Lord, and get out of thishorrible place. We shall find no one here to show us the way.""I believe I can find it myself," replied the Count. "We turn to theleft as soon as we have passed the village. Come on!"Thus saying, he somewhat quickened his pace and rode away, the moonnow declining towards her setting, throwing longer shadows, and givingmore uncertain light. Anxiously did the young Count gaze from the browof every rise, hoping to see the form of the chteau rising upon theeminence before him. Several times he disappointed himself by fancyingthat he saw it when it was not there, so that, when at length hebeheld a single faint point of light, like the spark of a fireflyamongst the distant branches, he could scarcely believe that itafforded any true indication of that which he sought.Riding on, however, he again and again caught sight of it, till atlength the forms of the building grew more clear and defined, andafter about half a mile more he rode up the gentle slope thatconducted towards the chteau.It was situated in the midst of a wild game park, not unlike that ofVincennes, only that the ground was more irregular. The building,however, was very different: it had been erected by that Count deClairvaut who had been sent ambassador in the reign of Henry II. tothe Republic of Venice. He had formed his ideas of beauty inarchitecture under another sky, and, but that it was somewhat largerand heavier, it might have been supposed that the building had beentransported by some Geni from the banks of the Brenta. There was astrong old castellated gate, however, in the walls of the park, whichhad belonged to some former building. But the heavy iron gates werewide open, and the voice of no porter responded to the call of theyoung Count and his companions.Still, however, he saw a light in the windows of the chteau, and heeagerly rode on along the path which conducted to the principal gatesof the building. Here there was a wide flight of marble stairs, whichhad been brought ready polished at an immense expense from Italy,yellow and green with the damp, but still altogether of a differenthue and consistence from the ordinary stone of the place. From thosesteps the wide forest scene beyond was fully displayed to the eye, thechteau being built very near the highest point of the acclivity, andthe whole ground towards Dreux, Maintenon, and Chartres lying below,with the forest itself sweeping down the edge of that chain of highhills which separates the southern parts of Normandy from the northernparts and Maine.The moon at that moment was just sinking beyond the trees on the left,and poured over the woods and plains below a flood of silver light,caught and reflected here and there by some open stream or wide pieceof water, and, shining full upon the front of the marble building,which, with its pillars, its capitals, and its cornices, its widedoors and spreading porticoes, looked like the spectre of some brightenchanted palace from another land.The large doors that opened upon the terrace were ajar; and Charles ofMontsoreau, leaving his horse with the page, mounted the steps andknocked hard with the haft of his dagger. A long melancholy echo wasall the sound that was returned. He knocked again, there was noanswer; and then pushing open the door, he entered the wide marblehall. The moonlight was pouring through the tall windows, but all wassolitary; and putting his foot upon the first step of the staircase,he was beginning to ascend. At that moment, he thought he heard adistant sound as of an opening door; and a ray of light, streamingdown some long corridor at the top of the broad staircase, crossed thebalustrade and chequered the iron work with a different hue from themoonlight. He now called loudly, asking if there was any one in thebuilding.In a moment after, there were steps heard coming along towards thestaircase, and a voice replied, "There is death and pestilence in thehouse. If you come for plunder, take it quickly; if you come byaccident, fly as fast as you may, for every breath is tainted."The tones of that voice were not to be mistaken, even before Charlesof Montsoreau beheld the speaker; but, ere the last words were spoken,Marie de Clairvaut herself was at the top of the staircase, bearing asmall lamp in her hand, and Charles of Montsoreau eagerly sprang upthe steps.The lamp flashed upon the form and features which she had not at firstseen, and with a loud cry she darted forward to meet him.The next moment, however, nearly dropping the lamp, she rushed back,exclaiming, "Come not near, Charles! Dear, dear Charles, come notnear! These hands, not twelve hours ago, have closed the eyes of thedead. The plague most likely is upon me now!"But before she could add more, the arms of Charles of Montsoreau wereround her."You have called me dear," he said, "and what privilege can be dearerthan sharing your fate, whatever it may be? Dear, dear, dear Marie!oh, say those words again, and make me happy!""But I fear for you, Charles," she said; "I fear for you. All areeither dead or have fled and left me, and I shall see you dietoo,--you, you die also by the very touch, by the very breath, of oneto whom you have restored life.""I fear not, Marie," answered Charles; "I fear not; and that is thesafest guard. Certainly you shall not see me fly and leave you; and Ifear not, either, that you will see death overtake me. But oh, if evenit did, how sweet would death itself be, watched by that dear face,wept by those beloved eyes!"Marie bent down her head, and said nothing; but she strove no moreagainst the arm that was cast round her; her hand remained in his, andthe colour rose warmly into her cheek, which had before been deadlypale."If," she said at length, after a long pause, during which he hadcontinued to gaze earnestly, fondly, sadly upon her,--"If it were notthat I feared for you, your presence would indeed be a comfort and aconsolation to me: not that I fear for myself," she added; "I know notwhy, but I have never feared. It has seemed to me as if there were nodanger to myself--as if I should certainly escape. But oh, howterrible it would be to see you struck by the pestilence also!""Say no more, dear Marie; say no more," replied Charles of Montsoreau,feeling and knowing by every word that she was his own. "I fear not; Ihave no fear; and even if I had, love would trample it under foot in amoment. I would not leave you in such an hour, not if by descendingthat short flight of steps I could save myself from death: unlessindeed you told me to go, and that you loved me not."The tears sprang into Marie de Clairvaut's eyes. "I must not tell sucha falsehood," she cried, clasping her hands together, "in an hour likethis. I never told you so; indeed I never did, though Madame deSaulny, poor Madame de Saulny, with her dying lips assured me that youthought so.""There have been many errors, dear Marie," replied Charles ofMontsoreau, "which have pained both your heart and mine, I fear. Butnow, my beloved, I must call in those that are with me, for we havetravelled far and ridden hard.""Oh, call them not in!" said Marie de Clairvaut, "for they will befrightened when they see the state of the house, and catch thepestilence and die! Bid them lead their horses to the stables, andsleep there. Perhaps they may find some one still living there, forthis evening at sunset I saw my father's old groom still wanderingabout as usual; but you must go yourself to tell them, Charles, for Ido not believe that there is any one in the house but you and I. Thestables lie away to the left. I will wait here for you till you comeback. Go through the great doors," she said, as he descended, "and gonot into the rooms either to the right or left, for there is death inall of them."Charles of Montsoreau descended with a rapid step, and in a few wordsgave his directions to the servants. He then returned, and takingMarie de Clairvaut's hand in his, he pressed his lips warmly upon it,and gazed tenderly upon her as she led him along through a widecorridor to the room in which she had been sitting.It formed a strange contrast,--the aspect of that room, with thedesolate knowledge that all was death and solitude through the rest ofthe house. Beautiful pictures, rich ornaments, fine tapestry, gave itan air of life and cheerfulness, which seemed strange to the feelingsof Charles of Montsoreau. But an illuminated book of prayer that layupon the table told how Marie de Clairvaut's thoughts had beenemployed; and Charles of Montsoreau paused, and, lifting his thoughtsto Heaven, prayed earnestly, fervently, that that bright and beautifuland beloved being might still be protected by the hand of the Almightyin every scene of peril and danger which might yet await her.She sat down on the chair in which she had been reading with a look ofmelancholy thoughtfulness, and Charles of Montsoreau sat down besideher, and there was a long silent pause, for the hearts of both weretoo full of agitating feelings for words to be plentiful at first. Themoment and the circumstances, indeed, took from love all shame andhesitation. Death and deprivation and desolation gave affection abrighter, a holier light,--it was like some eternal flame burning uponthe altar of a ruined temple.Marie de Clairvaut felt that at that moment she could speak thingsthat at any other time she would have sunk into the earth to say; shefelt that--with the exception of their trust in God--his love for herand hers for him formed the grand consolation of the moment, thehealing balm, the great support of that hour of peril and of terror.She looked at him and he at her, and they mutually thought that a fewhours perhaps might see them there, dying or dead by each other'sside, with love for the only comfort of their passing hour--with thevoice of death pronouncing their eternal union, and the grave theirbridal bed.They thus thought, and it may seem strange to say, but--prepared astheir minds were for leaving the life of this earth behind them--sucha death to them appeared sweet; and neither feared it, but lookedforward upon the grim enemy of human life, not with the stern defyingfrown of the martyr, not with the fierce and angry daring of thewarrior, but with the calm sweet smile of resignation to the will ofHeaven, and hopes beyond the tomb.Thus they remained silent, or with but few words, for some time; andCharles of Montsoreau felt that he was beloved. Indeed, there was nota word, there was not a look, that did not tell him so: and yet helonged to hear more; he longed that those words should be spoken whichwould confirm, by the living voice of her he loved, the assurance ofhis happiness. Gradually he won her from conversing of the present tospeak of the past; and she gently reproached him for leaving her atMontsoreau so suddenly as he had done."Marie," he said, with that frankness which had always characterisedhim, "let me tell you all; and then see if I did right or wrong. If Idid wrong, you shall blame me still, and I will grieve and make anyatonement in my power; but if I only mistook, and did not act wrongintentionally, you shall forgive me, and tell me that you love me."Marie de Clairvaut gazed in his face, and asked, "And do you doubt itnow, Charles?""Oh, no!" he cried, "oh, no! I ought not to doubt it, for Marie deClairvaut could not speak such words as she has spoken withoutloving." And gently bending down his head over her, he pressed a kissupon that dear fair brow. "Marie," he said, "it is our fate to meet instrange scenes. The last time that I kissed that brow, the last timethat I held you to my heart, was when I thought you dead, and lost tome for ever.""And when I woke up," replied Marie de Clairvaut, "and was not onlygrateful to God and to you for having saved me, but happy in its beingyou that did save me, and happy," she added, slightly dropping hereyes, "in the signs of deep affection which I saw.""And yet," he exclaimed, "and yet, when my stay or my departure hungupon a single word from your lips, you gave me to understand that youhad not received those signs of affection as signs of affection; thatyou looked upon them but as the natural effect of my witnessing yourrestoration to life, when I thought you dead.""Oh, Charles!" exclaimed Marie de Clairvaut, with a slight smile,"could you not pardon and understand such small hypocrisy as that? Didyou not know that woman's heart is shy, and seeks many a hiding-place,even from the pursuit of one it loves?""I never loved but you, Marie," replied the Count, "and I am sadlyignorant, I fear, of woman's heart. Nevertheless, upon those few wordsand that moment depended my fate.""I knew not that," cried Marie de Clairvaut, eagerly; "I knew notthat, or, upon my honour, I would have been more sincere: but what wasit, Charles, made you take so sudden a resolution? what was it madeyou leave me, without a reply, in the hands of those who have strivenconstantly ever since to make me believe that you cared not for me?""I will tell you all," replied her lover; and, pouring forth ineloquent words all the passion of his heart towards her, he told herhow his love had grown upon him, how it had increased each hour; andmaking that the main subject of his tale, he told but as adjuncts toit the pain which his brother's conduct had inflicted upon him, andall the signs of rivalry which he had remarked. He then spoke of hisconversation with the Abb de Boisguerin on their way to visit theCount de Morly; and he told how agonised were all his feelings--howterrible was the struggle in his heart,--and what was the resolutionthat he took, to ascertain whether her affections were really gained,and by the result to shape his conduct. He next spoke of hisconversation with her immediately preceding his departure, and of thewords which had led him to believe that she was unconscious of hislove, and did not return it.As she listened, the tears rose in her eyes, and, laying her soft fairhand on his, she said, "Forgive me, Charles! oh, forgive me! but dobelieve that there is not another woman on all the earth who would nothave done the same.""Alas! dear Marie," he replied, "in such knowledge you have but achild to deal with.""Oh, be so ever, Charles!" she cried, clasping her hands and lookingup in his face. "There may be women who would love you less for beingso; but I trust and hope that you will never love any one but Marie deClairvaut, and she will value your love all the more for its being,and having ever been, entirely her own. But you were speaking of theAbb de Boisguerin, Charles--you have told me of his conversation withyou--I saw, when I was at Montsoreau, that you loved and esteemedhim."--She paused, and hesitated. "I fear," she added, "that what Imust speak, that what I ought to tell you, may pain and grieve you:--Idoubt that man, Charles--I more than doubt him.""And so do I, Marie," replied her lover with a melancholy shake of thehead; "and so do I doubt him much. Indeed, as you say, I more thandoubt him, for I know and feel that he is not true.""Alas! Charles," she replied, "I fear that in that very firstconversation with you he meditated treachery towards you. I fear much,very much, that his design and purpose even then was to separate us.""Perhaps it might be so, Marie," replied her lover: "though he hasnever shown any strong preference, I have often thought he lovesGaspar better than he does me.""But it was no love of your brother, Charles," she said; "it was nolove of your brother moved him then; for if your brother trusted him,he betrayed him too. Now hear me, Charles, and let me, as quickly aspossible, tell a tale that makes my cheek burn, for it must be told.After you were gone, I avoided your brother's presence as far as mightbe. I was never with him for a moment alone if I could help it, for Icould not but see feelings that were never to be returned. Althoughthere was something from the first in the Abb de Boisguerin that Iloved not, though I could not tell why--something in his eye that mademe shrink into myself with a kind of fear,--I now courted him to bewith me, in order to avoid the persecution of love for which I couldnot feel even grateful. At first he seemed inclined to give yourbrother opportunities; and I believe, I firmly believe, that he did sobecause he knew that those opportunities would but serve to confirmthe coldness of my feelings towards him. When he saw that I sought himto be with us, he seemed to yield, and was now with me often almostalone, when there was none but one or two of my women in the furtherend of the room. He timed his visits well; and, for a space, well didhe choose his conversation too. It was such as he knew must please myear. He told me of other lands, and of princely scenes beyond theAlps, the beauties of nature, the miracles of art, the graceful butdangerous race of the Medici, the treasures, the unrivalled treasuresof Florence and of Rome. I learned to forget the prejudices--I hadfirst taken towards him, and he saw that I listened well pleased, andthen he ventured to speak of you and of your brother. But oh, Charles,he spoke not as a friend to either. He blamed not, indeed; he evensomewhat praised; but he undervalued all and every thing. There wasnot a word of censure, but there was every now and then a light sneerin the tone, a scornful turn of the lip, and curl of the nostril. Itpleased me not, and seeing it, he wisely dropped such themes. He spokeof you no more; but he spoke of himself and of his own history. Hetold me that his was the more ancient branch of your own family, butthat reverses and misfortunes had overtaken it; and that, careless ofwealth or station, and any of the bubbles which the world's grownchildren follow, he had made no effort to raise his own branch fromthe ground to which it had fallen. But he said, however, that if hehad had an object, a great and powerful object, he felt within himselfthose capabilities of mind which might raise him over some of thehighest heads in the land: and none could hear his voice, and see thekeen astuteness of his eye, without believing that what he said wastrue. And then again he spoke of the objects, the few, the onlyobjects, which could induce a man of great and expansive intellect tomingle in the strife and turmoil of the world; and the chief of thoseobjects, Charles, was woman's love. He was a churchman, Charles, andhad taken vows which should have frozen such words upon his lips. Iwas silent, and I think turned pale, and he instantly changed theconversation to other things, speaking eloquently and nobly upon greatand fine feelings, as I have seen one of the modellers in wax cast onthe rough harsh form that he intended to give, and then soften it downwith fine and delicate touches, so as to leave it smooth and pleasantto the eye. At length we set out to join my uncle; and your brothernow had opportunities of paining me greatly by the open and therash display of feelings that grieved and hurt me. He took meanstoo to find moments to speak with me alone, which I must not dwellupon--means which were unworthy of one of your race, Charles. He triedto deceive me into such interviews by every sort of petty art; and ifthe Abb de Boisguerin came to my relief, alas! it was but now toinflict upon me worse persecution. He dared to speak to me, Charles,words that none had ever dared to speak before--words that I must notrepeat, that I must not even think of here, so near the holy calmnessof the dead. These words were not, indeed, addressed to me directly;but they were used to figure forth what were the passions which anardent and fiery heart might feel. They were intended evidently to letme know of what he himself was capable: though they breathed of love,there was somewhat of menace in them likewise. The very sound of hisvoice, the very glare of his eyes, now became terrible to me: but heseemed to consider that I was more in his power now than I had been atMontsoreau; and I need not tell you that to me the journey was aterrible one. To end it all, Charles--as I take it for granted thatyou know some part of what has taken place, even by seeing you herethis night--I feel sure that it was by his machinations that I wasbetrayed into the hands of the King, whom I have all my life beentaught to abhor, and by him given up to the power of a relation, fromwhom I have been sheltered by all my better friends as from the mostvenomous of serpents."Charles of Montsoreau had heard all in deep silence, withoutinterrupting her once. He gazed indeed, from time to time, upon herfair face, watching with love and admiration the bright but transientexpressions that came across it: but he listened with full attentionand deep thought; and when she had done, he replied, "What you havetold me, dear Marie, indignant as it well may make me, was mostnecessary for me to hear, and is most satisfactory, for it explainsall that I did not before comprehend or understand. His machinations,however, dear Marie, I now trust are at an end. What may be betweenVillequier and him I do not know; but I trust, dear Marie, I trust inthat God who never does fail them that trust in him, that I come tobring you deliverance and to lead you to happiness. It would be longand tedious to tell you, beloved, all that has happened to me since Ileft you at Montsoreau. Suffice it that I have seen the Duke of Guise;that I have spent the greater part of the time with him; that I havebeen able, Marie, to serve him--he says, to save his life; and that tome he has entrusted the charge of seeking you and bringing you to joinhim at Soissons, in despite of any one that may oppose us.""Oh, joy, joy!" cried Marie de Clairvaut. "When can we set out?" Andshe rose from her seat as if she hoped their departure might takeplace that minute. Charles of Montsoreau drew her gently to his heart,and, gazing into her deep tender eyes, he asked, "Will your joy beless, dear Marie, if you know that you go to be at once the bride ofCharles of Montsoreau, with the full consent of your princelyguardian, given by one who is well worthy to give, to one who isscarcely worthy to receive, such a jewel as yourself?"Marie de Clairvaut hid her face upon his bosom, murmuring, in ascarcely audible tone, "Can you ask me, Charles?--But oh, let us speedaway quickly; for though I, who have been here now several days, andhave seen nothing but death and desolation round me ever since I came,have become accustomed to the scene, and doubtless to the air also,yet I fear for every moment that you remain here.""I still fear not, dear Marie," replied Charles of Montsoreau."Nevertheless, most glad am I to bear you away to happier scenes; andas soon as the horses have taken some rest, we will set out. And now,dear girl," he added, "I will send you from me. You need some repose,Marie; you need some tranquillity. Leave me then, dear girl, and tryto sleep till the hour of our departure, while I will watch here foryou, and call you before break of day.""If you watch, Charles," replied Marie, "I will watch with you, for Ineed not repose. This morning, after closing the eyes of poor Madamede Saulny, and weeping long and bitterly over her and the poor girlwho was the only one that chose to remain with me, exhausted withwatching, anxiety, and grief, I fell asleep, and slept long. Beforethat, I had felt so weary and so heated, that I almost fancied--thoughwithout fearing it--that the plague might be coming upon me; but Iwoke refreshed and comforted just as the sun was going down, and Ifelt, as it were, a hope and expectation that some change would sooncome over my fate. But you need at least refreshment, Charles. In thenext room remains my last untasted meal--the last that the poorfrightened beings who abandoned me, set before their mistressyesterday. I fear not to take you there, Charles, for no one has diedin this part of the house."Charles of Montsoreau followed her, and persuaded her also to takesome light refreshment; and there they sat through the live-longnight, speaking kind words from time to time, and watching eachother's countenances with hope strong at the hearts of both, thoughsomewhat chequered by fears, each for the other.CHAP. VIII.By the time that the first grey streak chequered the dark expanse ofthe eastern sky, the horses of Charles of Montsoreau, with threeothers, were standing on the terrace at the foot of the marblesteps. The page and Gondrin were there, and also the old groom, awhite-headed man of some sixty years of age, who had booted andspurred himself, and buckled on a sword, declaring that he wouldaccompany his young mistress, if it were but to lead the sumpter horsewhich carried her baggage. A moment after, Marie herself appeared, andCharles of Montsoreau placed her on the beast that had been preparedfor her, while the old groom kissed her hand, saying, "I am glad tosee you well, dear lady. But fear not; none of your race and none ofmine ever died of the plague either, though I have seen it pass bythis place twice before now, and I remember eleven corpses lying onthose steps at once.""There are six within those chambers now," replied Marie, shaking herhead mournfully. "But I fear not, good Robin,--for myself at least.But you had better lead the way towards Chalet, for the Count tells methat Morvillette is deserted.""Oh, I will lead you safely, Lady," replied the old man; "and thoughvery likely they may keep us out of many a house on account of wherewe come from, there is my daughter's cottage where they will take usin, for they do not fear the plague there."Thus saying, he mounted his horse, and rode on before, through theforest roads, while the lady and her lover followed side by side. Asthey went on circling round the highest parts of the hills, the greystreaks gradually turned into crimson; the dim objects became moredefined in the twilight of morning; a few far distant clouds at theedge of the sky, tossed into fantastic shapes, began to glow like theburning masses of a furnace; the crimson floated like the waves of asea up towards the zenith; the fiery red next became mingled withbright streaks of gold; the forest world, just budding into lightgreen, was seen below with its multitude of hills and dales, and rocksand streams; the air blew warm and sweet, and full of all the balm ofspring; and a thousand birds burst forth on every tree, and carolledjoyous hymns to the dawning day.Never broke there a brighter morning upon earth; never rose the sun ingreater splendour; never was the air more balmy, or the voices of thebirds more sweet. It seemed as if all were destined to afford to thosetwo lovers the strongest, the strangest, the brightest contrast to thedark dull night of anxiety and emotion which they had passed withinthe palace they had just left behind them. It seemed to both as animage of the dawn of immortality after the tomb--anxiety, sorrow,danger, death, left behind, and brightness and splendour spread outbefore.Each instinctively drew in the rein as the sun's golden edge wasraised above the horizon; each gazed in the countenance of the other,as if to see that no trace of the pestilence was there; and each heldout the hand to grasp that of the being most loved on earth, and thenthey raised their eyes to Heaven in thankfulness and joy.The old man led them on with scarcely a pause towards Chalet; butabout a mile from that place he turned to a little hamlet near, where,in a good farm-house inhabited by his daughter and her husband, theyfound their first resting-place. They were gladly received andheartily welcomed, without the slightest appearance of fear, thoughthe circumstances of their flight were known. The farmer and thefarmer's wife set before them the best of all they had, the childrenserved them at the table, and the good woman of the house broughtforth a large flask of plague water, and made them drink abundantly,assuring them that it was a sovereign antidote that was never known tofail. They then assigned a room to each, and though it was stilldaylight they gladly retired to rest. Charles of Montsoreau, thoughmuch fatigued, slept not for near an hour, but the house was all keptquiet and still, and, with his thoughts full of her he loved, hefancied and trusted that she was sleeping calmly near him, and in anearnest prayer to Heaven he called down blessings on her slumber. Atlength sleep visited his own eyes, and he rose refreshed and well.Some fears, some anxieties still remained in his bosom till he againsaw the countenance of Marie de Clairvaut. When he did see it,however, fears on her account vanished altogether, for the palenesswhich had overspread her face the night before had been banished byrepose, and the soft warm glow of health was once more upon her cheek.He saw the same anxious look of inquiry upon her countenance; and oh!surely there is something not only sweet and endearing, but elevatingalso, in the knowledge of such mutual thoughts and cares for eachother; something that draws forth even from scenes of pain and peril ajoy tender and pure and high for those who love well and truly!"Fear not, dear Marie," he said; "fear not; for I feel well, and youtoo look well, so that I trust the danger is over.""Pray God it be!" said Marie de Clairvaut. "But now, when you will,Charles, I am ready to go on; we may soon reach Maintenon.""We must avoid the road by Maintenon," replied Charles of Montsoreau,"for that would bring us on the lands of the grasping Duke of Epernon,and we could not run a greater risk. Chartres itself is doubtful; butwe must take our way thither, and act according to circumstances.However, dear Marie, our next journey must be long and fatiguing:would it not be better for you to stay here to-night, and take as muchrepose as you can obtain before you go on?""Oh no," replied Marie de Clairvaut; "I am well and strong now, andeager to get forward out of all danger. The bright moon will soon berising, the sun has not yet set, and we may have five or six hours ofcalm light to pursue our way."Her wishes were followed; and they were soon once more upon their waytowards the fair old town of Chartres. Their former journey had passedgreatly in thought, for deep emotions lay fresh upon their hearts, andburthened them: but now they spoke long and frequently upon every partof their mutual situation. The history of every event that hadhappened to either, since they had parted at Montsoreau, was told anddwelt upon with all its details: and while the love of Charles ofMontsoreau for his fair companion certainly did not diminish, everyword that fell from his lips, every act that she heard him relate, andthe manner of relating it also, increased in her bosom that love whichshe had at first perceived with shame, but in which she now began totake a pride as well as a joy.Nor, indeed, did his conduct and demeanour to herself in thecircumstances which surrounded them--circumstances of some difficultyand delicacy--change one bright feeling of her heart towards him.There was very much of that tenderness in his nature, that soft, thatgentle kindness, which, when joined with courage and strength, is morepowerful on the affections of woman than, perhaps, any other quality;and her feelings were changed and rendered more devoted by beingdependent upon him for every thing--protection, and consolation, andsupport, and affection, and all those little cares and kindnesseswhich their mutual situation enabled him to show.Thus they journeyed on for several hours, and at length reached thetown of Chartres, having agreed to pass for brother and sister, as thesafest means of escaping observation. It was about eleven o'clock atnight when they reached the inn, but they were received with allkindness and hospitality, such as innkeepers ever show to those whoseem capable of paying for good treatment. No questions were asked,supper was set before them, and the night passed over again in easeand comfort. Every hour, indeed, that went by without displaying anysign of illness was in itself a joy; and there was a stillness and aquietness about the old town of Chartres which seemed to quiet allfears of annoyance or interruption.Charles of Montsoreau was early up, and was waiting for the appearanceof Marie de Clairvaut, when the landlord of the inn appeared to informhim that a horse-litter, which he had ordered to be ready for hisinspection, had been brought into the court-yard, and was waiting forhim to see. At that moment, however, there was a flourish of trumpetsin the street; and, looking forth from the window, the young Count sawa considerable band of mounted soldiers, drawn up, as if about toproceed on their march."My sister," he said, turning to the host, "has not yet risen, and shemust see the litter, too, as it is for her convenience. But who arethese gallant gentlemen before the house, and whither are they going?""Why, you might know them, sir, by their plumes and their scarfs,"replied the host. "They are a body of the light horse of the guard ofthe Queen-mother. They are easily distinguished, I ween.""Ay, but I am a rustic from the provinces," replied the youngnobleman: "but they seem gallant-looking soldiers.""The Captain was making manifold inquiries about you and the younglady who arrived last night," replied the landlord, "for he has comewith orders to seek and bring back to Paris some young lady andgentleman that have made their escape lately with eight or nineattendants. But when I told him that you were going to Paris, notcoming from it, and that you had only three servants with you, and theyoung lady was your sister, he said it was not the same, and is nowgoing on. But I must go, lest he should ask for me.""Well, well," answered the young Count with an air of indifference. "Iwill be down presently to see the litter; let it wait."He watched, however, with some anxiety the departure of the body oflight horse, for though he did not feel by any means sure that it washimself whom they sought, he did not feel at all secure till the lastfaint note of their trumpets was heard, as they issued forth from oneof the further gates of Chartres. As soon as Marie de Clairvautappeared, he purchased the litter without much hesitation, anddetermined to proceed with all speed towards Dourdan and Corbeil.The host of the inn would have fain had them stay some time longer,for the young Count had paid so readily for the litter, that he judgedsome gold might be further extracted from his purse. He asked him,therefore, whether there was nothing in the good town of Chartres toexcite his curiosity, and was beginning a long list of marvels; butCharles of Montsoreau cut him short, saying, as he looked up at thesign covered with fleurs-de-lis, "No, no, my good host. I have muchbusiness on my hands in which his Majesty is not a little concerned,and therefore I must lose no time."The host nodded his head, looked wise, and suffered the Count and hisparty to depart without further opposition.As it was not a part of their plan to follow the high road more thanthey were actually obliged to do, soon after leaving Chartres theytook a path to the left, which they were informed would lead them byGellardon to Bonnelle, through the fields and woods. Before they hadgone a league, however, the noise of dogs and horses, and the shouts,as it seemed, of huntsmen, were heard at no great distance; andturning towards Gondrin the young Count asked, "What can they behunting at this time of year?""The wolf, my Lord, the wolf," replied the man. "They hunt wolves atall times."Scarcely had he spoken, when a loud yell of the dogs was heard; andnodding his head sagaciously, as if he had seen the whole proceedingwith his mind's eye, Gondrin added, "They have killed him;" which wasconfirmed by a number of joyous morts on the horns of the huntsmen."Let us proceed as fast as possible," said Charles of Montsoreau; "weknow not who those huntsmen may be:" and he was urging the driver ofthe litter to hurry on his horses rapidly, when the whole road beforethem was suddenly filled with a gay party of cavaliers, splendidlydressed and accoutred, and coming direct towards them. There wasnothing now to be done but to pass on quietly if possible; and, takingno apparent notice, but bending his head and speaking into the litter,without even seeing of whom the other party was composed, Charles ofMontsoreau was riding on, when a loud voice was heard exclaiming "Haltthere! halt! A word with you if you please, young sir;" and, lookingup, he saw the Duke of Epernon.Without suffering the slightest surprise to appear upon hiscountenance, or the slightest apprehension, Charles of Montsoreauturned his head, demanding calmly, "Well, my Lord, what is yourpleasure with me?""My pleasure is," replied the Duke, "that you instantly turn yourhorse's head and go back to Epernon with me.""I am extremely sorry, my Lord," replied the Count, "that it is quiteimpossible for me to do what you propose, as I am upon urgent businessfor the Duke of Guise, and bear the King's passport and safe-conduct,which I presume your Lordship will not despise.""You may bear the King's passport, sir," said the Duke, "but youcertainly do not bear his authorisation to carry away from his powerthe young lady who I suppose is in that litter. As to the Duke ofGuise, your authority from him is very much doubted also.""That doubt is easily removed, my Lord," replied the Count, seeingclearly that he would be forced to yield, but fully resolved not to doso till he had tried every means to avoid it. "That doubt is easilyremoved, my Lord. Allow me to show you the authority given me by theDuke under his own hand, which I think even the Duke of Epernon mustrespect."The Duke took the paper which he tendered him, and then saying, "Iwill show you how I respect it," he tore it into a thousand pieces,and cast it beneath his horse's feet, while a laugh ran through themen that attended him. "Turn your horse's head," he continued,"without more ado, or I will have your arms tied behind your back, andthe horse led.""My Lord," replied the young Count, "I must obey, for I have no meansof resisting; but let me remind you, that the Duke of Epernon wasalways considered, even before what he is now, a gallant gentleman anda man of good feeling, who would not insult those who were too weak tooppose him, and who did their duty honourably as far as it waspossible for them to do it.""Your civility now, sir," replied the Duke, "like your rash folly aweek or two ago, is too contemptible to make any change in the Duke ofEpernon. That foolish party of light horse," he continued, speaking toone of his attendants, "must have suffered this malapert youth and hisfair charge to have passed it. Turn the litter round there; take carethat none of them escape.""The boy has made off already," replied one of the men. "Shall Igallop after him, my Lord? He may tell the Duke of Guise.""Let him!" answered Epernon. "Go not one of you; but bring the rest ofthem along hither."Without giving any intimation of his intent, Charles of Montsoreauturned his horse suddenly back to the side of the litter, and drew thecurtain back, saying to Marie de Clairvaut, who sat pale and anxiouswithin it, "You hear what has happened; there is no power ofresistance, for they are ten to one: but the boy has escaped, and willgive the Duke notice of where you are. In the mean time it is onecomfort, that now you are in the hands of one who is, at all events, aman of honour and a gentleman in feeling."What he said was intended to give comfort and consolation to Marie deClairvaut; but it reached the ear of the Duke of Epernon likewise. "Imust suffer no farther conversation," he said in a gentler tone thanhe had before used. "You will understand, Monsieur de Logres, that Ihave authority for what I do; and that I arrest you out of no personalvengeance, but because the order has been already given to thateffect.""My Lord," replied the young Count, "I care very little for my ownarrest, as I know that I can but be detained a short time: but Iconfess I am most anxious for the young lady placed under my especialcharge by the Duke of Guise, as I have shown your Lordship by thepaper you have torn. If she is to remain in your Lordship's charge, Ishall be more satisfied; but if she is to be given up to Monsieur deVillequier, the consequences will indeed be painful to all. You areperhaps not aware, my Lord, that he sent her to a place where theplague was raging at the time, where six persons of her household diedof it, and the rest fled, leaving her utterly alone."The Duke seemed moved, and after remaining silent for a minute, hereplied, "I did not know it; the man who would murder his wife, wouldmake no great scruple of killing his cousin, I suppose. However, sir,set your mind at ease: though I cannot promise that she shall remainwith the Duchess of Epernon, she shall not be given up to Villequiereither by myself or by any body in whose hands I may place her. Isthat assurance sufficient for you?""Perfectly, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "The Duke ofEpernon's promise is as good as the bond of other men.""Well, follow me, then," replied the Duke, and, riding on alone, heleft the young Count in the hands of his attendants.CHAP. IX.It was in one of the saloons of the old Cardinal de Bourbon, in thetown of Soissons, that Henry Duke of Guise, princely in his habit,princely in his aspect, with his foot raised upon a footstool ofcrimson and gold, a high plumed Spanish hat upon his head, manifoldparchments before him, and a pen in his hand, sat alone on a day inthe month of April with his eyes fixed upon a door at the other end ofthe room, as if waiting for the entrance of some one.The next moment the door was thrown wide open, and, preceded by twoservants announcing him to the Duke, appeared a small and not verystriking personage plainly habited in black velvet. The moment theDuke saw him, he rose, and for an instant uncovered his head, thencovering himself again he advanced to meet him, and took him by thehand, saying "Monsieur de Bellievre, I am delighted to see you. TheKing could not have chosen any one more gratifying to myself toreceive: in the first place, because I know that I shall hear nothingbut truth from the lips of Monsieur de Bellievre; and, in the nextplace, because I am sure no one will bear more exactly to his Majestyany reply I may have to make to the message with which I understandyou are charged.""The confidence which your Highness expresses in me," repliedBellievre, as the Duke led him towards the table, and made him seathimself beside him, "does great honour to so humble an individual asmyself. Nevertheless, I must deliver the King's message, my Lord,precisely as it was given to me; and should there be any thing in itdisagreeable to your Highness, I trust that you will excuse thebearer, and consider the matter dispassionately.""Proceed, proceed," replied the Duke; "as in duty bound I shallreceive his Majesty's communication with all deference and humility.""Well, then," replied Bellievre, "I am charged by his Majesty toassure your Highness that his personal esteem and respect for you isvery great; and that he has never, in any degree, given ear to theinjurious reports which persons inimical to your Highness have beenindustrious in circulating to your disadvantage.""Your pardon, Monsieur de Bellievre, for one moment," said the Duke,interrupting him. "To what injurious reports does his Majesty allude?I am ignorant that any one has dared to circulate injurious reports ofme; and if such be the case, it is high time that I should proceed tothe capital to confront and shame my accusers."As this was not at all the point to which the King's envoy wished tobring the Duke, he looked not a little embarrassed what to reply. Heanswered, however, after a moment's pause, "It would, indeed, berequisite for you to do so, my Lord, if I did not bear you the King'smost positive assurance that he gives no ear to such reports. But toproceed: his Majesty has bid me strongly express his full convictionof your attachment, fidelity, and affection, but has commanded me toadd that, having heard it reported your intention is immediately topresent yourself in Paris, he is unwillingly obliged, by state reasonsof the utmost importance, to request that you would forbear theexecution of that purpose."It was not without some hesitation and apparent emotion that Bellievrespoke; but the Duke heard him with perfect calmness, though with aslight contraction of the brow."The report," he answered, "of my intention of visiting Paris isperfectly correct, Monsieur de Bellievre; nor can I, indeed, refrainfrom executing that purpose, with all due deference to his Majesty,for many reasons, amongst which those that you yourself give me ofinjurious rumours being rife in the capital regarding me, are not theleast cogent. Thus, unless the King intends to signify by you,Monsieur de Bellievre, that he positively prohibits my coming intoParis--which, of course, he would not do--I see not how I can avoiddoing simple justice to myself by returning to my own dwelling in thecapital of this country.""I grieve to say, your Highness," replied Bellievre, seeing that theworst must be told, "I grieve to say, that while the King has chargedme to assure you of his regard and his confidence in you, he none theless instructed me to make the prohibition on his part absolute anddistinct."The Duke of Guise started up with his brow knit and his eyes flashing."Is this the reward," he exclaimed, "of all the services I haverendered the state? Is this the recompense for having shed my blood sooften in defence of France? to be dishonoured in the eyes of all thepeople, by being banished from the metropolis, to be excluded from thecompanionship of all my friends, to be cut off from transacting my ownprivate affairs, to be talked of and pointed at as the exiled Duke ofGuise, and to have the boys singing in the streets the woeful ditty ofmy sufferings and a King's ingratitude?" And as he spoke, the Duketook two or three rapid strides up and down the room."Indeed, indeed, your Highness," cried Bellievre, "you take it up toowarmly. The King is far from ungrateful, but most thankful for yourhigh services; but it is for the good of the state that you love, forthe safety and security of the people of the capital who are in atumultuous and highly excitable state, that he wishes you to refrainfrom coming----""That he sends me a message dishonouring to myself and to my House,"replied the Duke. "That he marks me out from the rest of the nobles ofthe land, by a prohibition which I may venture to say is unjust andunmerited. I must take some days to think of this, Monsieur deBellievre; nor can I in any way promise not to visit Paris. Were itbut to protect, support, and guide my friends and relations, I oughtto go; were it but on account of the church for which I am ready toshed my blood if it be necessary, persecuted, reviled, assailed asthat holy church is; were it but for my attendants and supporters, whoare attacked, abused, and ill-treated in the streets and public ways.""As for the church, your Highness," replied Bellievre, "none is moresincerely attached to it than the King and the King's advisers. Itwill stand long, my Lord, depend upon it, without any furtherassistance than that which you have already so ably given it. Yourrelations, my Lord, and household," he said, "are not and cannot beill-treated.""How?" exclaimed the Duke. "Is not my dear sister Margaret even now,as it were, proscribed by the King and his court? Is not every thingdone to drive her from Paris? Have not her servants been struck bythose of Villequier in the open streets?""I know," replied Bellievre, "that a month or two ago Madame deMontpensier was subject to some little annoyance, but as soon as itcame to the King's ears he had it instantly remedied, and only wishedher to quit Paris for her own security.""The House of Guise, sir, have always been secure in the capital ofFrance," replied the Duke; "and I trust always will be.""Nothing has occurred since I trust, my Lord," continued Bellievre."The King is most anxious that you should have satisfaction in everything, and will give you the strongest assurances that your family,your household, and your friends, shall be in every respect welltreated and protected, as indeed he has always wished them to be."The Duke threw himself down in his chair and rang the bell that stoodupon the table violently. "Ho! without there!" he exclaimed. "Bring inthat page that arrived hither a night or two ago, when I was absent atJamets."The attendant who had appeared retired, and the Duke sat silent,gazing with a frown at the papers on the table. "May I ask yourHighness," said Bellievre, not knowing what interpretation to put uponthis conduct, "May I ask your Highness whether I am to conceive myaudience at an end?""No, Monsieur de Bellievre, no," replied the Duke in a milder tone;"for you I have a high respect and esteem, and will listen to youupon this subject longer than I would to most men. I wish you to hearand to know how the friends of the Duke of Guise are treated, whatprotection and favour is shown to them at the court of France. Perhapsyou will hear some things that are new to you--perhaps they may be newto the King too," he added, a slight sneer curling his haughty lip."But be that as it may, Monsieur de Bellievre, I think I can show yougood cause why the Duke of Guise should be no longer absent fromParis. Come hither, boy," he added, as the page Ignati entered theroom, "Come hither, boy, and answer my questions. Thou art both wittyand honest, but give me plain straightforward replies. Stand at myknee and answer, so that this gentleman may hear."The boy advanced, and did as the Duke bade him, turning his facetowards Bellievre, with his left hand to the Duke."You went to Paris," said Guise, "with my friend the young Count ofLogres; did you not? Were you aware of the cause of his going?""He went, I understood your Highness," replied the boy, "to seek ayoung lady, a relation of your own, who had been carried to Paris by abody of the King's troops while on her way to join your Highness.""Can you tell what was Monsieur de Logres' success?" said the Duke."I know he saw the King," replied the boy, "and heard that he had beenpromised a letter to all the governors and commanders in differentplaces to aid him in seeking for the young Lady, and bringing her backto your Highness. I heard also that it was for this paper he waitedfrom day to day in Paris, but that it never came.""I beg your Highness's pardon," said Bellievre interrupting the boy,"but you will remark that this is all hearsay. He does not seem tospeak at all from his own knowledge.""That will come after," answered the Duke somewhat sharply. "Go on,Ignati. What do you know more?""What I have said," replied the boy, "is more than hearsay, my Lord,for while we staid in Paris the good Count bade us always be ready ata moment's notice to set out, for he could not tell when the letterfrom Monsieur de Villequier would arrive. It never came, however, andone night the Count having, as I understood, gained information ofwhere Mademoiselle de Clairvaut was, set out with his man Gondrin andmyself to seek her. We found that she had been brought by a body ofthe King's troops to a chteau or a palace, for it looked more like apalace than a chteau, called Morvillette, I believe near Chateauneuf,where the plague was then raging, when the King's soldiers left her.By the time we arrived the plague had reached the chteau, six orseven people were dead, and all the rest had fled, leaving the younglady with nobody in the palace, and none but one old groom in thestables."The Duke's eye fixed sternly upon the countenance of Bellievre, and hemuttered between his teeth, "This is the doing, Monsieur de Bellievre,of my excellent good friend, the King of France. Go on, boy; go on!Proceed. What happened next?""The lady was most joyous of her deliverance," continued the boy, "andeager to come to your Highness; and we set out the next morning beforeday-break, and reached Chartres, where the Count bought a litter forher greater convenience. At a short distance from Chartres, however,we were met by the Duke of Epernon and his train wolf-hunting, and theDuke immediately stopped us, and insisted upon the Count going backwith him to Epernon. The Count produced the King's passports, but theDuke said that there were doubts of his being authorised by you.""Did he not show him my own letter?" exclaimed the Duke. "Did he notshow him the authority I gave him under my own hand?""He did, my Lord; he did," replied the boy; "but the Duke of Epernonsaid he would show in what respect he held your Highness's letter, andtearing it in several pieces he threw it down under his horse's feet."Bellievre continued to look down upon the ground with a brow whichcertainly displayed but little satisfaction. The Duke of Guise,however, though he had been frowning the moment before, now onlysmiled as the boy related the incident of the letter; the smile wassomewhat contemptuous, indeed; but he said merely, "Go on, boy. Whathappened next?""Nay, my Lord," replied the boy, "what happened to them I know not,for seeing that the Duke held them prisoners, and was taking them backto Epernon, I made my escape as fast as I well could, and came hitherto tell you into whose hands the young lady and Monsieur de Logreshad fallen.""You did quite right, boy," said the Duke; "and now you may retire.You hear, Monsieur de Bellievre," he continued, "with what kindness,protection, support, and generosity the King treats the friends of theDuke of Guise! First he casts my poor niece's child into the hands ofVillequier, something worse than those of the hangman of Paris, andthen between them they send her into the midst of the pestilence; thencomes Monsieur d'Epernon to confirm all, arrests my friend bearing theKing's own passports and safeguard, seizes upon my own relation andward, and carries them both I know not whither.""Perhaps your Highness," said Bellievre, "the Duke of Epernon mighthave motives that we do not know. At all events the King----""Fie, Monsieur de Bellievre, fie!" exclaimed the Duke vehemently. "Iwill tell you what! It is time the Duke of Guise were in Paris, if butto deliver the King from such Dukes of Epernon who abuse hisauthority, disgrace his name, absorb his favours, ruin the state,overthrow the church, and dare do acts that make men blush for shame.France will no longer suffer him, sir; France will no longer sufferhim! If I free not the King from him and such as he is, the peoplewill rise up and commit some foul attempt upon the royal authority.What," he continued, with fierce scorn, "What, though he be Baron ofCaumont, Duke of Epernon, raised out of his place to sit near theprinces of the blood, Governor of Metz and Normandy, of theBoulonnais, and Aunis, of Touraine, Saintonge, and Angoumois,Colonel-general of Infantry, and Governor of Anjou, a Knight of theorder of the Holy Ghost! he shall find this simple steel sword ofHenry of Guise sufficiently sharp to cut his parchments into pieces,and send him back a beggar to the class he sprung from."The Duke spoke so rapidly, that to interrupt him was impossible; andso angrily, that Bellievre, overawed, remained silent for a moment ortwo after he had done, while the Prince bent his eyes down upon thetable, and played with the golden tassels of his sword-knot, as ifhalf ashamed of the vehemence he had displayed."I did not come here, your Highness," he said, "either as the envoy orthe advocate of the Duke of Epernon. You must well know that there isno great love between us; and I doubt not, when your Highness comes tocall him to account for his deeds, that justice will be found entirelyon your side. But I came on the part of the King; and I beseech you toconsider, my good Lord, what may be the consequences of pressing evenany severe charges against the Duke of Epernon at this moment, whenhis Majesty is contending with the heretics on the one side, and issomewhat troubled by an unruly people on the other.""Is he indeed contending with any body or any thing, Bellievre?"demanded the Duke. "Is he indeed contending against the Bearnois? Ishe contending against the indolence of his own nature, or ratheragainst the indolence into which corrupt favourites have cast him? Ishe contending against the iniquities of Villequier, or the exactionsof Epernon? Is he contending against any thing less contemptible thana spaniel puppy or an unteachable parrot? My love and attachment tothe King and his crown, Bellievre, are greater than yours; and, as myfinal reply, I beg you humbly to inform his Majesty on my part, thatif I do not promptly and entirely obey him in this matter of notcoming to Paris, it is solely because I am compelled to do as I do,for the good of the church, for the safety of the state, for thesecurity of my own relations and friends, and even for the benefit ofhis Majesty himself. This is my final reply.""Yet one word, my Lord," replied Bellievre. "At all events, if yourdetermination to visit the capital be taken, will you not at least, atmy earnest prayer, delay your journey till I myself can return toParis, and obtaining more ample explanations of the King's purposes,come back to you and confer with you farther on the subject.""I see not, Monsieur de Bellievre," said the Duke of Guise, "what goodcould be obtained by such delay. I do not at all mean to say that youwould take advantage of my confidence to prepare any evil measuresagainst me; but others might do so: and besides, my honour calls menot to leave my friends in peril for a moment, even though I calledupon my head the enmity of a whole host in stepping forward to rescuethem.""I pledge you my honour, my Lord," replied Bellievre, "that if youwill consent to delay, no measures shall be taken against you; and Iwill do the very best I can to induce the King to make any atonementin his power to your friends. As to this young Count of Logres, Inever heard of him before to-day, and know not what has been done withhim at all; and in regard to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, she isdoubtless in the hands of Villequier, who, I understand, claims theguardianship.""To which he has less right," replied the Duke angrily, "than thatfootstool; and if he contends with me, I will spurn him as I do it;"and he suited the gesture to the word. "But still I see not,"continued the Duke, "what is to be gained by this delay to eitherparty.""This, my good Lord," replied Bellievre. "I am well aware that hisMajesty the King has sent me here without sufficient powers to makeyou just and definite proposals. This I believe to have been entirelyfrom the haste in which I came away, there being no time for thought.But if you permit me to return with assurance that you will wait but afew days, I feel convinced that I shall come back to you with offersso abundant, so satisfactory, and so well secured, that your Lordshipwill change your resolution."The Duke mused for a moment or two. "Well, Monsieur de Bellievre," hesaid at length, "though I entertain no such hopes as you do, I mustyield something to my loyalty, and to my real desire of obeying theKing; although, perhaps, my duty to my country and to the church mightwell lead me to more prompt proceedings. I will, therefore, delay myjourney for a day or two; but you must use all speed, and I must haveno trifling. You know all my just grievances: those must be remedied,the church must be secured; and for the quiet and the satisfaction ofthe people who abhor and detest him, as well as for the relief of thenobles who have long been shut out from all favour by that unworthyminion, this John of Nogaret, this Duke of Epernon, must be banishedfrom the court and councils of the King, and stripped of the placesand dignities which he has won from the weak condescension of theMonarch. You understand me, Monsieur de Bellievre," he said in asterner tone, seeing that Bellievre looked somewhat dismayed at theextent of his demands. "Undertake not the mission if you think thatyou cannot succeed in it; but let me on my way without moreopposition.""My Lord, I will do my best to succeed," replied Bellievre; "and trustthat I shall do so. How many days will your Highness give me?""Nay, nay," replied the Duke; "that I cannot tell, Monsieur deBellievre. Suffice it, I will delay as long as my honour permits me;and you on your part lose not an hour in making the necessaryarrangements, and bringing the King's reply."As he spoke the Duke rose to terminate the conference; and then added,"I fear, Monsieur de Bellievre, as I am expecting every moment mybrother, the Cardinal de Guise, and his Eminence of Bourbon, to conferwith me upon matters of importance, I cannot do the honours of thehouse to you as I could wish; but Pericard, my secretary and friend,will attend upon you, and insure that you have every sort ofrefreshment. I will send for him this moment." And so doing, he placedBellievre in the hands of his secretary, and turned once more to otherbusiness.The King's envoy sped back to Paris, scarcely giving himself time totake necessary refreshment; but on his arrival in the capital he firstfound a difficulty even in seeing the Monarch; and when he did seehim, found him once more plunged in that state of luxurious andeffeminate indolence from which he was only roused by occasional fitsof excitement, which sometimes enabled him to resume the monarch andthe man, but more frequently carried him into the wildest and mostfrantic excesses of debauchery.Henry would scarcely listen to the business of Bellievre even when hegranted him an audience on the following morning. He asked many aquestion about his cousin of Guise, about his health, about hisappearance, about his dress itself; whether his shoes were pointed orsquare, and how far the haut-de-chausses came down above his knees.Bellievre was impatient, and pressed the King with some fire; butHenry only laughed, and tickled the ears of a monkey that sat upon thearm of his chair with a parrot's feather. The animal mouthed andchattered at the King, and strove to snatch the feather out of hishands; and Henry, stroking it down the head, called it "Mon Duc deGuise."Bellievre bowed low, and moved towards the door. "Come back to-morrow,Bellievre; come back to-morrow," said the King; "Villequier will behere then. You see at present how importantly I am occupied with myfair cousin of Guise here;" and he pulled the monkey's whiskers as hespoke. "Villequier has told me all about it," he added. "He says theDuke will not come, and so says my mother; and if they both say thesame thing who never agreed upon any point before, it must be true,Bellievre, you know.""I trust it may, Sire," replied Bellievre dryly, and quitted the roomwith anger and indignation at his heart. Before he had crossed theanteroom, he heard a loud laugh ringing like that of a fool from thelips of the Monarch; and although it was doubtless occasioned by somenew gambol of the monkey, it did not serve to diminish the bitterfeelings which were in the diplomatist's bosom.CHAP. X.In a small, dark, oaken cabinet with one window high up and barred, alamp hanging from the ceiling, a table with books and a musicalinstrument, several chairs, and a silver bell, Charles of Montsoreauwas seated several days after the period at which we last left him. Abedroom well furnished in every respect was beyond; the least sound ofthe silver bell produced immediate attendance; nothing was refused himthat he demanded; nothing was wanting to his comfort except libertyand the sound of some other human being's voice. Yet, strange to say,although he knew that he was in the city of Paris, he knew nothingmore of the position of the building in which he was placed. He hadbeen brought into the capital at night, had been conducted through anumber of narrow and tortuous streets, and had at length been ledthrough a deep archway and several large courts, to the place in whichhe was now confined.It may seem perhaps that such a state of imprisonment did not offermuch to complain of; and yet it had bent his spirit and bowed down hisheart. The want of all knowledge of what was passing around him, theabsence of every one that he loved, the loss of liberty, the perfectsilence, joined with anxiety for one who was dearer to him thanhimself, wore him day by day, and took from him the power of enjoyingany of those things which were provided for his convenience oramusement.The servant who attended upon him never opened his lips, he obeyed anyorders that were given to him, he brought any thing that was demanded;but he replied to no questions, he made no observations, he affordedno information even by a look. Every bolt and bar that was on theoutside of the door was invariably drawn behind him, and the highwindow in either room could only be so far reached even by standing onthe table or one of the chairs, as to enable the young nobleman toopen or shut it at pleasure, so to admit the free air from without.Such had been the condition of Charles of Montsoreau, as we have said,for many days; but he had not yet become reconciled in any degree tohis fate, though he strove, as far as possible, to while away themoments in any way that was permitted, either by books or music. Butit was with impatience and disgust that he did so, and the lute wastaken up and laid down, the book read and cast away, without remainingin his hands for the space of five minutes.The sun shone bright through the high window, and traced a moving spotof golden light upon the dark oak of the opposite wainscot; the air ofspring came sweet and pleasantly through, and gave him back thethoughts and dreams of liberty; a wild plant rooted in the stoneworkof the building without, cast its light feathery shadow on the wallwhere the sun shone, and the hum and roar of distant multitudes,pursuing their busy course in the thronged thoroughfares of the city,brought him his only tidings from the hurried and struggling scene ofhuman life.He took a pleasure in watching the leaves of the little plant as,waved about by the wind, they played against the bars of the window,and he was thus occupied on the day we have mentioned, when suddenlysomething crossed the light for a moment, as if some small bird hadflown by; but at the same instant a roll of paper fell at his feet,and taking it up, he recognised the well-known writing of the Duke ofGuise."You have suffered for my sake," the paper said, "and I hastened todeliver you. The day of the Epernons is over; your place ofimprisonment is known. Be not dispirited, therefore, for relief is athand."It cannot be told how great was the relief which this note itselfbrought to the mind of the young Count, not alone by the promise thatit held out, but by the very feeling that it gave him of not beingutterly forgotten, of being not entirely alone and desolate. He readit over two or three times, and then hearing one of the bolts of thedoor undrawn, he concealed it hastily lest the attendant should seeit.Another bolt was immediately afterwards pulled back, and then the doorwas unlocked, though far more slowly than usual. It seemed to theyoung Count that an unaccustomed hand was busy with the fastenings,and a faint hope of speedy deliverance shot across his mind.The next instant, however, the door was opened, and though itcertainly was not the usual attendant who appeared, no face presenteditself that was known to Charles of Montsoreau. The figure was that ofa woman, tall, stately, and dressed in garments of deep black, fittingtightly round the shoulders and the waist, and flowing away in amplefolds below. Her hair was entirely covered by black silk and lace, buther face was seen, and that face was one which instantly drew allattention to itself.It was not indeed the beauty which attracted, though there were greatremains of beauty too, but it was the face not only of an old woman,but of one who had been somewhat a spendthrift of youth's charms.There was, however, a keen fire in the eyes, a strong determination onthe brow, an expansion of the nostril, which gave the idea of quickand eager feelings, and a degree of sternness about the whole line ofthe features, which would have made the whole countenance commanding,but harsh and severe, had it not been for a light and playful smilethat gleamed across the whole, like some of the bright and sudden raysof light that from to time we see run across the bosom of deep stillshady waters.There was a degree of mockery in that smile, too; and yet it spokeaffections and feelings which as strangely blended with the generalcharacter of that woman's life, as the smile itself did with thegeneral expression of her countenance. The hands were beautiful anddelicately small, and the figure good, with but few signs of age aboutit.The young Count gazed upon her with some surprise as she entered, butinstantly rose from the seat in which he had been sitting whilereading the Duke of Guise's note; and the lady, with a gracefulinclination of the head, closed the door, advanced and seated herself,examining the young Count from head to foot with a look of calmconsideration, which he very well understood implied the habitualexercise of authority and power.After thus gazing at him for a moment or two, she said, "Monsieur leComte de Logres, do you know me?""If you mean, madam," he replied, "to ask me if I recognise yourperson, I believe I do; but if you would ask absolutely whether I knowyou, I must say, no."One of those light smiles passed quick across her countenance, and shesaid in a low voice, as if speaking to herself, "Who ever did knowme?" She then added, "Who then do you suppose I am?""I conclude, madam," replied the young Count, "that I stand in thepresence of her Majesty the Queen-mother.""Such is the case," replied the Queen, "and I have come to visit you,Monsieur de Logres, with views and purposes which, were I to tellthem to any person at my son's court, would hardly be believed."The Queen paused, as if waiting for an answer; and the young Countreplied, "I trust, madam, that if I am detained here by thedirections, and in the power of your Majesty, that you have come togive me liberty, which would, I suppose," he added with somewhat of asmile, "be rather marvellous to the courtiers of the King."Catharine de Medici smiled also, but at the same time shook her head."I fear I must not give you liberty," she said, "for I have promisednot: but I have come with no bad intent towards you. I knew yourmother, Monsieur de Logres, and a virtuous and beautiful woman shewas. God help us! it shows that I am growing old, my praising anywoman for her virtue. However, she was what I have said, and as unlikemyself as possible. Perhaps that was the reason that I liked her, forwe like not things that are too near ourselves. However, I have comehither to see her son, and to do him a pleasure. You play upon thelute?" she continued. "Come, 'tis a long time since I have heard thelute well played. Take up the instrument, and add your voice to it.""Alas, madam," replied the young Count, "I am but in an ill mood formusic. If I sang you a melancholy lay it would find such stirringharmonies in my own heart, that I fear I should drown the song intears; and if I sang you a gay one, it would be all discord. I wouldmuch rather open that door which you have left unlocked behind you,and go out."The Queen did not stir in the slightest degree, but gazed upon himattentively with a look of compassion, answering, "Alas! poor bird,you would find that your cage has a double door. But come, do as I bidyou; sit down there, take up the lute and sing. Let your song beneither gay nor sad! Let it be a song of love. I doubt not that such ayouth as you are, will easily find a love ditty in your heart, thoughthe present inspiration be no better than an old woman. Come, Monsieurde Logres, come: sit down and sing. I am a judge of music, I can tellyou."With a faint smile the Count did as she bade him; and taking up thelute, he ran his fingers over the chords, thought for a moment or two,and recollecting nothing better suited to the moment, he sang anItalian song of love, in which sometime before he had ventured toshadow forth to Marie de Clairvaut, when she was at Montsoreau, thefirst feelings of affection that were growing up in his heart. TheQueen sat by in the mean time, listening attentively, with her head alittle bent forward, and her hand marking the cadences on her knee."Beautifully sung, Monsieur de Logres," she said at length when heended. "Beautifully sung, and as well accompanied. You do not know howmuch pleasure you have given.--Now, let us talk of other things. Areyou sincere, man?""I trust so, madam," replied the Count. "I believe I have never borneany other character.""Who taught you to play so well on the lute?" demanded the Queenabruptly."I have had no great instruction, madam," answered the Count somewhatsurprised. "I taught myself a little in my boyhood. But afterwards mypreceptor, the Abb de Boisguerin, was my chief instructor. He hadlearned well in Italy.""Did he teach you sincerity too?" demanded the Queen with a keen look;"and did he learn that in Italy?"The Count was not a little surprised to find Catherine's questionstouch so immediately upon the late discoveries he had made of thecharacter of the Abb de Boisguerin, and he replied with somebitterness, "He could but teach me, madam, that which he possessedhimself. I trust that to my nature and my blood I owe whateversincerity may be in me. I learned it from none but from God and my ownheart.""Then you know him," said the Queen, reaching the point at once; "thatis sufficient at present on that subject. I know him too. He came tothe court of France several years ago, with letters from my faircousin the Cardinal; but he brought with him nothing that I wanted atthat time. He had a wily head, a handsome person, manifoldaccomplishments, great learning, and services for the highest bidder.We had too many such things at the court already, so I thought thatthe sooner he was out of it the better, and looked cold upon him tillhe went. He understood the matter well, and did not return till hebrought something in his hand to barter for favour. However, Monsieurde Logres, to turn to other matters; I do believe you may be sincereafter all. I shall discover in a minute, however. Will you answer me aquestion or two concerning the Duke of Guise?""It depends entirely upon what they are, madam," replied the Count atonce."Then you will not answer me every question, even if it were to gainyour liberty.""Certainly not, madam," replied the Count."Then the Duke has been speaking ill of me," said Catherine at once,"otherwise you would not be so fearful.""Not so, indeed," replied the Count, eagerly. "The Duke never, in mypresence, uttered a word against your Majesty.""Then will you tell me, as a man of honour," demanded the Queen,"exactly, word for word what you have ever heard the Duke say of me?"Charles of Montsoreau paused and thought for a moment, and thenanswered, "I may promise you to do so in safety, madam, for I neverheard the Duke speak of you but twice, and then it was in highpraise.""Indeed!" she replied. "But still I believe you, for Villequier hasbeen assuring me of the contrary, and, of course, what he says must befalse. He cannot help himself, poor man. Now, tell me what the Dukesaid, Monsieur de Logres. Perhaps I may be able to repay you sometime.""I seek for no bribe, your Majesty," replied the Count smiling; "and,indeed, the honour and the pleasure of this visit----""Nay, nay! You a courtier, young gentleman!" exclaimed the Queen,shaking her finger at him. "Another such word as that, and you willmake me doubt the whole tale.""The speech would not have been so courtier-like, madam, if it hadbeen ended," replied the Count. "I was going to have said, that thehonour and pleasure of this visit, after not having heard for manydays, many weeks I believe, the sound of a human voice, or seen anyother face but that of one attendant, is full repayment for the littlethat I have to tell. However, madam, to gratify you with regard tothe Duke, the first time that I ever heard him mention you was in thecity of Rheims, where a number of persons were collected together, andmany violent opinions were expressed, with which I will not offendyour ears; your past life was spoken of by some of the gentlemenpresent----""Pass over that, pass over that! I understand!" replied the Queen witha sarcastic smile; "I understand. But those things are not worthspeaking of. What of the present, Monsieur de Logres? What of thepresent?""Why, some one expressed an opinion, madam," the Count continued,"that in order to retain a great share of power, you did every thingyou could to keep his Majesty in the lethargic and indolent state inwhich I grieve to say he appears to the great mass of his subjects.""What said the Duke?" demanded the Queen. "What said the Duke? surelyhe knows me better.""Why, madam," replied the Count, "his eye brightened and his colourrose, and he replied indignantly that it could not be so. 'Oh no,' hesaid, 'happy had it been for France if, instead of divided power, theQueen-mother had possessed the whole power. It is by petty mindsmingling their leven with their great designs that ruin has come uponthe land. She has had to deal with great men, great events, and greatdifficulties, and she was equal to deal with, if not to bow them alldown before her, had she but been permitted to deal with themunshackled.'"[4]---------------------[Footnote 4: Such was undoubtedly the expressed opinion of the Duke ofGuise.]---------------------"Indeed!" exclaimed the Queen; "did he say so?""He did, madam, upon my honour," replied the Count."I know not whether he was right or wrong," rejoined the Queenthoughtfully; "for though perhaps, Monsieur de Logres, I possessedin some things the powers of a man--say, if you will, greater powersthan most men--yet, alas! in others, I had all the weaknesses of awoman--perhaps I should say, to balance other qualities, moreweaknesses than most women. But he must have said more. The answer wasnot pertinent to the remark, and Henry of Guise is not a man either inspeech or action ever to forget his object.""Nor did he in this instance," replied the Count; "but he said that,wearied out with seeing your best and greatest schemes frustrated bythe weakness of others, you now contented yourself with warding offevils as far as possible from your son and from the state; that it wasevident that such was your policy; and that, like Miron, the King'sphysician, unable from external circumstances to effect a cure, youtreated the diseases of the times with a course of palliatives; that,as the greatest of all evils, you knew and saw the apathy of hisMajesty, and did all that you could to rouse him, but that thepoisonous counsels of Villequier, the soft indolence of his ownnature, and the enfeebling society of Epernon and others, resisted allthat you could do, and thwarted you here likewise.""He spoke wisely, and he spoke truly," replied the Queen; "and I willtell you, Monsieur de Logres, though Henry of Guise and I can neverlove each other much, yet I felt sure that he knew me too well to sayall those things of me that have been reported by his enemies. I amsatisfied with what I have heard, Count, and shall ask no furtherquestions. But you have given me pleasure, and I will do my best toserve you. Once more, let us speak of other things. Have you all thatyou desire and want here?""No, madam," replied the young Count. "I want many things--liberty,the familiar voices of my friends, the sight of those I love. Everything that the body wants I have; and you or some of your attendantshave supplied me with books and music; but it is in such a situationas this, your Majesty, that one learns that the heart requires food aswell as the body or the mind.""The heart!" replied Catharine de Medici thoughtfully. "I once knewwhat the heart was, and I have not quite forgotten it yet. Did youmark my words after you had sung, Monsieur de Logres?""You were pleased to praise my poor singing much more than itdeserved, madam," replied the young Count."Something more than that, my good youth," replied the Queen. "I toldyou that it had given more pleasure than you knew of. I might haveadded, that it gave pleasure to more than you knew of, for there wasanother ear could hear it besides mine.""Indeed!" exclaimed the Count gazing eagerly in the Queen's face; "andpray who might that be?""One that loves you," replied Catharine de Medici. "One that lovesyou very well, Monsieur de Logres." And rising from her chair she puther hand to her brow, as if in deep thought. "Well," she said atlength; "something must be risked, and I will risk something forthat purpose. The time is not far distant, Monsieur de Logres--Isee it clearly--when by some means you will be set at liberty; but,notwithstanding that, it may be long before you find such a thing evenas an hour's happiness. You are a frank and generous man, I believe;you will not take advantage of an act of kindness to behaveungenerously. I go away from you for a moment or two, and leave thatdoor open behind me, trusting to your honour."She waited for no reply, but quitted the room; and Charles ofMontsoreau stood gazing upon the door, doubtful of what was hermeaning, and how he was to act. Some of her words might be interpretedas a hint to escape; but others had directly a contrary tendency, anda moment after he heard her unlock and pass another door, and closebut not lock it behind her.CHAP. XI."What is her meaning?" demanded Charles of Montsoreau, as he gazedearnestly upon the door; and as he thus thought his heart beatvehemently, for there was a hope in it which he would not suffer hisreason to rest upon for a moment, so improbable did it seem, and sofearful would be disappointment. "What is her meaning?" And he stillasked himself the question, as one minute flew by after another, andto his impatience it seemed long ere she returned.But a few minutes elapsed, however, in reality, ere there were stepsheard coming back, and in another minute Catharine de Medici againappeared, saying, "For one hour, remember! For one hour only!"There was somebody behind her, and the brightest hope that Charles ofMontsoreau had dared to entertain was fully realised.The Queen had drawn Marie de Clairvaut forward; and passing out again,she closed the door, leaving her alone with her lover. If his hearthad wanted any confirmation of the deep, earnest, overpoweringaffection which she entertained towards him, it might have been foundin the manner in which--apparently without the power even to moveforward, trembling, gasping for breath--she stood before him on sosuddenly seeing him again, without having been forewarned, after longand painful and anxious absence. As he had himself acknowledged, hewas ignorant in the heart of woman; but love had been a mightyinstructor, and he now needed no explanation of the agitation that hebeheld.Starting instantly forward, he threw his arms around her; and it wasthen, held to his bosom, pressed to his heart, that all Marie deClairvaut's love and tenderness burst forth. Gentle, timid, modest inher own nature as she was, love and joy triumphed over all. The agonyof mind she had been made to suffer, was greater than even he couldfancy, and the relief of that moment swept away all other thoughts:the tears, the happy but agitated tears, flowed rapidly from her eyes;but her lips sought his cheek from time to time, her arms claspedtenderly round him, and as soon as she could speak, she said, "OhCharles, Charles, do I see you again? Am I, am I held in your armsonce more; the only one that I have ever loved in life, my saviour, myprotector, my defender. For days, for weeks, I have not known whetheryou were living or dead. They had the cruelty, they had the barbaritynot even to let me know whether you had or had not escaped the plague.They have kept me in utter ignorance of where you were, of all and ofevery thing concerning you." And again she kissed his cheek, thougheven while she did so, under the overpowering emotions of her heart,the blush of shame came up into her own: and then she hid her eyesupon his bosom, and wept once more in agitation but in happiness."As they have acted to you, dearest Marie," he replied, "as they haveacted to you, so they have acted to me. The day they separated me fromyou at Epernon, was the last day that I have spoken with any livingcreature up to this morning. No answers have been returned to myquestions; not a word of intelligence could I obtain concerning yourfate; and oh, dear, dear Marie, you would feel, you would know howterrible has been that state to me, if you could tell how ardently,how deeply, how passionately I love you." And his lips met hers, andsealed the assurance there."I know it, I know it all, Charles," replied Marie. "I know it by whatI have felt; I know it by what I feel myself, for I believe, I dobelieve, from my very heart, that if it be possible for two people tofeel exactly alike, we so feel.""But tell me, dear Marie, tell me," exclaimed her lover, "tell mewhere you have been. Have they treated you kindly? Does the Duke ofGuise know where you are?""Alas, no, Charles!" replied Marie de Clairvaut; "he does not, Igrieve to say. Well treated indeed I may say that I have been, for allthat could contribute to my mere comfort has been done for me. Nothingthat I could desire or wish for, Charles, has been ungiven, and I haveever had the society of the good sisters in the neighbouring convent.But the society that I love has of course been denied me; and no news,no tidings of any kind have reached me. I have lived in short withnumbers of people surrounding me, as if I were not in the world atall, and the moment that I asked a question, a deep silence fell uponevery one, and I could obtain no reply.""This is strange indeed," said Charles, "very strange. However, wemust be grateful that our treatment has been kind indeed in somerespects.""Oh, and most grateful," replied Marie de Clairvaut, "for these brightmoments of happiness. Do you not think, Charles, do you not think,that perhaps the Queen may kindly grant us such interviews again?"Who is there that does not know how lovers while away the time? Who isthere that has not known how short is a lover's hour? But with Charlesof Montsoreau and Marie de Clairvaut that hour seemed shorter than itotherwise would have done; for it was not alone the endearing caress,the words, the acknowledgments, the hopes of love, but they had athousand things in the past to tell each other; they had cares andfears, and plans and purposes for the future, to communicate.Even had not all shyness, all timidity been done away before, that wasnot a moment in which Marie de Clairvaut could have affected aughttowards her lover; so that what between tidings of the past andthoughts of the future, and the dear dalliance of that spendthrift ofinvaluable moments, love, an envious clock in some church-tower hardby, had marked the arrival of the last quarter of an hour they were toremain together, ere one tenth part of what they had to think of or tosay was either thought or said. The sound startled them, and it becamea choice whether they should give up the brief remaining space toserious thoughts of the future, or whether they should yield it all tolove. Who is it with such a choice before him that ever hesitatedlong?The space allotted for their interview had drawn near its close, andthe very scantiness of the period that remained was causing them tospend it in regrets that it was not longer, when suddenly the generalsounds which came from the streets became louder and more loud, as ifsome door or gate had been opened which admitted the noise moredistinctly. Both Marie de Clairvaut and her lover listened, and almostat the same instant loud cries were heard of "The Duke of Guise! TheDuke of Guise! Long live the Duke of Guise! Long live the great pillarof the Catholic church! Long live the House of Lorraine!" And this wasfollowed by the noise and trampling of horses, as if entering into acourt below.Marie and her lover gazed in each other's faces, but she it was thatfirst spoke the joyful hopes that were in the heart of both."He has come to deliver us!" she cried. "Oh Charles, he has come todeliver us! Hear how gladly the people shout his well-loved name!Surely they will not deceive him, and tell him we are not here.""Oh no, dear Marie," replied her lover; "he has certain information,depend upon it, and will not be easily deceived. He has alreadydiscovered my abode, dear Marie; and this letter was thrown throughthe window this morning, though I myself know not where we are--thatis to say, I am well aware that we are now in Paris, but I know not inwhat part of the city.""Oh, that I discovered from one of the nuns," replied Marie. "We areat the house of the Black Penitents, in the Rue St. Denis. I rememberthe outside of it well; a large dark building with only two windows tothe street. Do you not remember it? You must have seen it in passing.""I am not so well acquainted with the city as you are, dear Marie,"replied Charles of Montsoreau; "but, depend upon it, where they haveconfined me is not in the house of the Black Penitents. It would be aviolation of the rules of the order which could not be.""It communicates with their dwelling," replied Marie de Clairvaut; "ofthat at least I am certain; for the Queen, when she brought me hither,took me not into the open air. She led me indeed through numerouspassages, one of which, some ten or twelve yards in length, was nearlydark, for it had no windows, and was only lighted by the door leftopen behind us. I was then placed in a little room while the Queenwent on, and a short time after I heard a voice, that made my heartbeat strangely, begin to sing a song that you once sung at Montsoreau;and when I was thinking of you Charles, and all that you had done forme--how you had first saved me from the reiters, and then rescued mefrom the deep stream, and had then come to seek me and deliver me inthe midst of death and pestilence--I was thinking of all these things,when Catherine came back, and without telling me what was herintention, led me hither.""Hark!" cried Charles of Montsoreau. "They shout again. I wonder thatwe have heard no farther tidings."And they both sat and listened for some minutes, but no indication ofany farther event took place, and they gradually resumed theirconversation, beginning in a low tone, as if afraid of losing a soundfrom without. Marie de Clairvaut had already told her lover how shehad remained at Epernon for a day or two under the protection of thewife of the Duke, and had been thence brought by her to Paris andplaced in the convent at a late hour of the evening; but as the timewore away, and their hopes of liberation did not seem about to berealized, she recurred to the subject of her arrival, saying, "Thereis one thing which makes me almost fear they will deceive him,Charles. I forgot to tell you, that as we paused before this buildingon the night that I was brought hither, while the gates were beingopened by the portress, a horseman rode up to the side of the carriageand gazed in. There were torches on the other side held by theservants round the gate, and though I could not see that horseman aswell as he could see me, yet I feel almost sure that it was the faceof the Abb de Boisguerin I beheld.""I know he was to return to Paris," said Charles of Montsoreau, "afteraccompanying my brother some part of the way back to the chteau. Butfear not him, dear Marie; he has no power or influence here.""Oh, but I fear far more wile and intrigue," cried Marie de Clairvaut,"than I do power and influence, Charles. Power is like a lion, boldand open; but when once satisfied, injures little; but art is like aserpent that stings us, without cause, when we least expect it. Buthark!" she continued again. "They are once more shouting loudly."Charles of Montsoreau listened also, and the cries, repeated again andagain, of "Long live the Duke of Guise! Long live the House ofLorraine! Long live the good Queen Catherine![5] Life to the Queen!Life to the Queen!" were heard mingled with thundering huzzas andacclamations. The heart of the young Count sank, for he judged thatthe Duke had gone forth again amongst the people, and had eitherforgotten his fate altogether in more important affairs, or had beendeceived by false information regarding himself and Mademoiselle deClairvaut.---------------------[Footnote 5: The progress of the Duke of Guise and the Queen-mother,from the convent of the Penitents to the Louvre, was in triumph. "Il yen avoit," says Auvigny, "qui se mettoient  genoux devant lui,d'autres lui baisoient les mains; quelques uns se trouvrent tropheureux de pouvoir en passant toucher son habit," A farther account ofthis famous event is given a few pages farther on.]---------------------The cries, which were at first loud and distinct, gradually sunk,till first the words could no longer be distinguished; then theacclamations became more and more faint, till the whole died away intoa distant murmur, rising and falling like the sound of the sea beatingupon a stormy shore. The young Count gazed in the countenance of Mariede Clairvaut, and saw therein written even more despairing feelingsthan were in his own heart."Fear not, dear Marie," he said pressing her to his bosom. "Fear not;the Duke must know that I am here by this letter: nor is he one to beeasily deceived. Depend upon it he will find means to deliver us erelong."Marie de Clairvaut shook her head with a deep sigh and with her eyesfilled with tears. But she had not time to reply, for steps were heardin the passage, and the moment after the door of the room was opened.It was no longer, however, the figure of Catherine de Medici thatpresented itself, but the homely person and somewhat unmeaning face ofa good lady, dressed in the habit of a prioress. Behind her, again,was a lay-sister, and beside them both the attendant who wasaccustomed to wait upon the young Count. The good lady who firstappeared looked round the scene that the opening door disclosed to herwith evident marks of curiosity and surprise; and, indeed, the wholeexpression of her countenance left little doubt that she had neverbeen in that place before.After giving up a minute to her curiosity, however, she turned toMademoiselle de Clairvaut, saying, "I have been sent by the Queen,madam, to conduct you back to your apartments.""Let me first ask one question," replied Marie de Clairvaut. "Has notthe Duke of Guise been here?"The nun answered not a word."We need no assurance of it, dear Marie," said Charles of Montsoreau,hoping to drive the Prioress to some answer. "We know that he has, andmust have been deceived in regard to your state and mine."The Prioress was still silent; and Marie de Clairvaut, after waitingfor a moment, added, "If he have been deceived, Charles, woe to thosewho have deceived him. He is not a man to pass over lightly suchconduct as has been shown to me already.""Madam," said the Prioress, "I have been sent by the Queen to show youto your apartments."It was vain to resist or to linger. Marie de Clairvaut gave her handto her lover, and they gazed in each other's faces for a moment with along and anxious glance, not knowing when they might meet again.Charles of Montsoreau could not resist; and notwithstanding thepresence of nun, prioress, and attendant, he drew the fair creaturewhose hand he held in his gently to his bosom, and pressed a partingkiss upon her lips.Marie turned away with her eyes full of tears, and leaving her hand inhis till the last moment, she slowly approached the door. She turnedfor one other look ere she departed, and then, dashing the tears fromher eyes, passed rapidly out. The door closed behind her, and Charlesof Montsoreau alone, and almost without hope, buried his face in hishands, and gave himself up to think over the sweet moments of thepast.CHAP. XII.It was on the morning of Monday, the 9th of May, 1588, at about halfpast eleven o'clock, that a party, consisting of sixteen horsemen, ofwhom eight were gentlemen and the rest grooms, appeared at the gatesof Paris. But though each of those eight persons who led the cavalcadewere strong and powerful men, in the prime of life, highly educated,and generally distinguished in appearance, yet there was one on whomall eyes rested wherever he passed, and rested with that degree ofwonder and admiration which might be well called forth by the union ofthe most perfect graces of person, with the appearance of the greatestvigour and activity, and with a dignity and beauty of expression whichbreathed not only from the countenance, but from the whole person, andshone out in every movement, as well as in every look.The gates of the city were at this time open, and though a certainnumber of guards were hanging about the buildings on either hand, yetno questions were asked of any one who came in or went out of thecity. The moment, however, that the party we have mentioned appeared,and he who was at its head paused for a moment on the inside of thegate and gazed round, as if looking for some one that he expected tosee there, one of the bystanders whispered eagerly to the other, "Itis the Duke! It is the Duke of Guise!"All hats were off in a moment; all voices cried, "The Duke! The Duke!"A loud acclamation ran round the gate, and the people from the smallhouses in the neighbourhood poured forth at the sound, rending the airwith their acclamations, and pressing forward round his horse withsuch eagerness that it was scarcely possible for him to pass along hisway. Some kissed his hand, some threw themselves upon their kneesbefore him, some satisfied themselves by merely touching his cloak, asif it had saintly virtue in it, and still the cry ran on of "The Dukeof Guise! The Duke of Guise! Long live the Duke of Guise!" while everydoor-way and alley and court-yard poured forth its multitudes, tillthe people seemed literally to crush each other in the streets, andall Paris echoed with the thundering acclamations.After that momentary pause at the gates, the Duke of Guise rode on,uncovering his splendid head, and bowing lowly to the people as hewent. His face had been flushed by exercise when he arrived, but nowthe deep excitement of such a reception had taken the colour from hischeek; he was somewhat pale, and his lip quivered with intensefeeling. But there was a fire in his eye which seemed to speak thathis heart was conscious of great purposes, and ready to fulfil itshigh emprise; and there was a degree of stern determination on thatlordly brow, which spoke also the knowledge but the contempt ofdanger, and the resolution of meeting peril and overcoming resistance.Thus passing on amidst the people, and bowing as he went to theirrepeated cheers, the Duke of Guise reached the convent of the BlackPenitents, where for the time the Queen-mother had taken up her abode.The gates of the outer court into which men were suffered to enterwere thrown open to admit him; and signifying to such of the crowd aswere nearest to the gate that they had better not follow him into thecourt, the Duke of Guise rode in with his attendants, and the gateswere again closed. The servants and the gentlemen who accompanied himremained beside their horses in the court, while he alone entered theparlour of the convent to speak with the Queen-mother.She did not detain him an instant, but came in with a countenance onwhich much alarm was painted, either by nature or by art. The Duke atonce advanced to meet her, and bending low his towering head, hekissed the hand which she held out to him."Alas! my Lord of Guise," she said, "I must not so far falsify thetruth as to say that I am glad to see you. Glad, most glad should Ihave been to see you, any where but here. But, alas! I fear you havecome at great peril to yourself, good cousin! You know not how angrythe minds of men are; you know not how much hostility reigns againstyou in the breasts of many of the highest of the land; you have notbethought you, that on every step to the throne there stands anenemy----""Who shall fall before me, madam," replied the Duke of Guise."Till you have reached the throne itself, fair cousin?" said theQueen-mother."No, madam, no," answered the Duke of Guise eagerly. "I thought yourMajesty had known me better. I have always believed that you were oneof those who felt and understood that I never dreamt of wronging mymaster and my king, or of snatching, as you now hinted, the crown fromits lawful possessor.""I have felt it, and I have understood it, cousin of Guise,"replied Catharine de Medici. "But, alas! my Lord, I know how ambitiongrows upon the heart. It begins with an acorn, Guise, but it ends withan oak. Those that watch it, the very soil that bears it, perceive notits increase; and yet it soon overshadows all things, and root it outwho can!""Madam," answered the Duke of Guise, boldly, "to follow the figurethat you have used, the axe soon reduces the oak; and may the axe beused on me, and ease me of earth's ambition for ever, if any suchdesigns as have been attributed to me exist within my bosom! You see,madam, I meet you boldly, look to ultimate consequences of ambitiousdesigns, and fear not the result. It is such accusations that I cometo repel, and it is those who have propagated them, and instilled themboth into the mind of his Majesty, and, as it would appear, your own,that I come to punish. Trusting that, humble though I be, your Majestywas the best friend I had at the court of France, I have riddenstraight hither, without even stopping at my own abode, to beseech youto accompany me to the presence of the King.""I do believe, cousin of Guise, that I am your best friend at thecourt of France," replied the Princess. "In fact, I may say, I knowthat none there loves you but myself. Nor must you think that I accuseyou of actual ambition, or believe the rumours that have beencirculated against you. I merely wish to warn you of the growth ofsuch things in your own bosom.""Dear madam," replied the Duke, "had I been ambitious, what might Inot have become? Here am I simply the Duke of Guise; a poor officer,commanding part of the King's troops, and contributing no small partof my own to swell his forces; with scarcely a place, a post, agovernment, an emolument, or a revenue, except what I derive from myown estates. Am I the most ambitious man in France? Am I so ambitiousas he who adds, to the government of Metz, the government of Normandy,and piles upon that Touraine, Anjou, Saintonge, the Angoumois, seizesupon the office of High-admiral, creates himself Colonel-general ofthe Infantry? This, lady, is the ambitious man; but of him you seem toentertain no fear.""There are two ambitions, my Lord Duke," replied the Queen: "theambition which grasps at power, and the ambition which snatches atwealth: the moment that ambition mingles itself with avarice, thegrovelling passion, chained in its own sordid bonds, is no longer tobe feared. It is where the object is power; where there is a mind toconceive the means, and a heart to dare all the risks, that there isindeed occasion for apprehension and for precaution. Still, my Lord, Ibelieve you; still I believe that the hand of Guise will never beraised to pull down the bonnet of Valois. You may strip the minionEpernon of the golden plumes with which he has decked his mid-airwings, for aught I care or think of; you may cast down the dark andplotting Villequier, and sweep the court of apes and parrots, foolsand villains, and the whole tribe of natural and human beasts, withoutmy saying one word to oppose you, or without my dreaming for a momentthat you aim at higher things; you may even soar higher still, andlike your great father become at once the guide and the defender ofthe state, and still I will not fear you. But Guise," she added in asofter tone, "I must and will still fear for you; and though I willgo with you to the King if you continue to demand it, yet I tell you,and I warn you, that every step you take is perilous, and that Icannot be your safeguard nor your surety for a moment!""Madam, I must fulfil my fate," replied the Duke of Guise looking up."I came here to justify myself; I came here to deliver and to supportmy friends; I came here to secure honour and safety to the CatholicChurch; and did I know that the daggers of a hundred assassins wouldbe in my bosom at the first step I took beyond those gates, I would goforth as resolutely as I came hither.""Then I must send to announce your coming to the King," said theQueen. "Of course I cannot take you to the Louvre unannounced."Thus saying she quitted the room for a moment, and the Duke remainedbehind with his arms crossed upon his bosom in deep thought. Shereturned in a moment, however, saying that she had sent one of hergentlemen upon the errand, and the next minute as the gates wereopened for some one to go out, long and reiterated shouts of "A Guise!A Guise! Long live the Guise!" were heard echoing round the building.Catharine de Medici smiled and looked at the Duke. "How often have Iheard," she said, "those same light Parisian tongues exclaim the nameof different princes! I remember well, Guise, when first I came frommy fair native land, how the glad multitude shouted on my way; how allthe streets were strewed with flowers; and how, if I had believed thewords I heard, I should have fancied that not a man in all the landbut would have died to serve me; and yet, not long after, I have heardexecrations murmured in the throats of the dull multitude while Ipassed by, and the name of Diana of Poitiers echoed through thestreets. Then have I not heard the names of a Francis and a Henryshouted far and wide? and after Jarnac and Moncontour, the heavenswere scarcely high enough to hold the sounds of his name who now sitsupon the throne of France. To-day it is Guise they call upon!--Whoshall it be to-morrow? And then another and another still shall come,the object of an hour's love changed into hatred in a moment.""It is too true, madam," replied the Duke. "Popularity is the mostfleeting, the most vacillating--if you will, the most contemptible--ofall those means and opportunities which Heaven gives us to be made useof for great ends. But nevertheless, madam, we must so make use ofthem all; and as this same popularity is one of the briefest of thewhole, so must we be the more ready, the more prompt, the more decidedin taking advantage of the short hour of brightness. I may be wrong inthinking," he continued after the pause of a moment or two, "I may bewrong in thinking that my well-being and that of the state and churchof this realm are intimately bound up together. It may be, andprobably is, a delusion of human vanity. Nevertheless, such being myopinion, none can say that I am wrong in taking advantage of themoment of my popularity to do the best that I can both for the churchand for the state. Such, I assure you, madam, is my object; and if Ibenefit myself at all in these transactions, it can be, and shall be,but collaterally; while in the mean time I incur perils which I knowand yet fear not."Thus went on the conversation between the Queen and the Duke of Guisefor nearly half an hour, at the end of which time the gentleman whohad been dispatched to the King returned, bearing his Majesty's reply,which was, that since his mother desired it, she might bring the Dukeof Guise to his presence, and Catherine prepared immediately to setout. Her chair was brought round; and after speaking a few words withthe superior of the convent, she placed herself in the vehicle, theDuke of Guise walking by her side. The gentlemen who had come with himgave their horses to the grooms, and followed on foot; and severalservants and attendants ran on before to clear the way through thepeople.The moment the gates were opened, a spectacle struck the eyes of theQueen and the Duke, such as no city in the world perhaps, exceptParis, could produce. In the short period which had elapsed since theDuke's arrival, the news had spread from one end of the capital to theother, and the whole of its multitudes were poured out into thestreets or lining the windows, or crowning the house-tops. With arapidity scarcely to be conceived, scaffoldings had been raised inthat short space of time in different parts of the streets, to enablethe multitude to see the Duke better as he passed[6]; in many places,velvets and rich tapestries were hung out upon the fronts of thehouses, as if some solemn procession of the church were taking place;the ladies of the higher classes at the windows, or on theirscaffolds, were generally without the masks which they usually wore inthe streets; and again, when the gates of the convent opened, and theQueen and the Duke issued forth, the air seemed actually rent with theacclamations of the people, and a long line of waving hats andhandkerchiefs was seen all the way up the Rue St. Denis.---------------------[Footnote 6: This fact is recorded in every account of the proceedingsof that day.]---------------------The same gratulations as before met the Duke on every side as hepassed along; the populace seemed absolutely inclined to worship him,and many threw themselves upon their knees as he passed. He lookedround upon the dense mass of people, upon the crowded houses, upon thewaving hands; he heard from every tongue a welcome, at every step agratulation, and it was impossible for the heart of man not to feel atthat moment a pride and a confidence fit to bear him strongly on hisperilous way.All the way down the Rue St. Denis, and through every other streetthat he passed, the same scene presented itself, the same acclamationsfollowed him, so that the shouts thundered in the ear of the King ashe sat in the Louvre.At length the Queen and those who accompanied her approached thepalace; and in the open space before it, which was at that time railedoff, was drawn up a long double line of guards, forming a lane throughwhich it was necessary to pass to the gates. The well-known Crillon,celebrated for his determination and bravery, was at their head; andthe Duke of Guise, obliged to pause in order to suffer the chair ofthe Queen-mother to pass on first, bowed to the commander, whom heknew and respected.Crillon scarcely returned his salutation, but looked frowning alongthe double row of his soldiery. The people, close by the railings,watched every movement, and a murmur of something like apprehensionfor their favourite ran through them as they watched these signs. Butnot a moment's pause marked the slightest hesitation in the Duke ofGuise. With his head raised and his eyes flashing, he drew forward thehilt of his unconquered sword ready for his hand, and holding thescabbard in his left, strode after the chair of the Queen till thegates of the Louvre closed upon him and his train.A number of officers and gentlemen were waiting in the vestibule toreceive the Queen-mother, who however gave her hand to the Duke ofGuise to assist her from her chair. On him they gazed with eyes ofwonder and of scrutiny, as if they would fain have discovered whatfeelings were in the heart of one so hated and dreaded by the King, ata moment when he stood with closed doors within a building filled withhis enemies, and surrounded by soldiers ready to massacre him at aword. But the fire which the menacing look of Crillon had brought intothe eyes of the Duke had now passed away, and all was calm dignity andeasy though grave self-possession. The eye wandered not round thehall; the lip, though not compressed, was firm and motionless, exceptwhen he smiled in saluting some of those around whom he knew, or inspeaking a few words to the Queen-mother, whose dress had becomesomewhat entangled with a mantle of sables which she had worn in thechair.As soon as it was detached, one of the officers of the household said,bowing low, "His Majesty has commanded me, Madam, to conduct you andhis Highness of Guise to the chamber of her Majesty the Queen, wherehe waits your coming." And he led the way up the stairs of the Louvreto the somewhat extraordinary audience chamber which the King hadselected.Henry, when the party entered, was sitting near the side of the bed,surrounded by several of his officers, one of whom, Alphonzo d'Ornanoby name, whispered something over the King's shoulder with his eyesfixed upon the Duke of Guise.The words, which were, "Do you hold him for your friend or yourenemy?" were spoken in such a tone as almost to reach the Dukehimself. The King did not reply, but looked up at the Duke with afrown that was quite sufficient."Speak but the word," said Ornano in a lower tone, "speak but theword, and his head shall be at your feet in a minute."The King measured Ornano and the Duke of Guise with his eyes, thenshook his head with somewhat of a scornful smile; and then, looking upto the Duke, who had by this time come near him, he said in a dullheavy tone, "What brings you here, my cousin?""My Lord," replied the Duke, "I have found it absolutely necessary topresent myself before your Majesty, in order to repel numerouscalumnies.""Stay, cousin of Guise," said the King; and turning to Bellievre, whostood amongst the persons behind him, he demanded abruptly, "Did younot tell me that he would not come to Paris?""My Lord Duke," exclaimed Bellievre, not replying directly to theKing's question, but addressing the Duke, "did not your Highnessassure me that you would delay your journey till I returned?""Yes, Monsieur de Bellievre," replied the Duke. "But you did notreturn.""But I wrote you two letters, your Highness," replied Bellievre,"reiterating his Majesty's commands for you not to come to Paris.""Those letters," replied the Duke of Guise, with a bitter smile, "likesome other letters which have been written to me upon importantoccasions, have, from some cause, failed to reach my hands.Nevertheless, Sire, believe me when I tell you, that my object incoming is solely to prove to your Majesty that I am not guilty eitherof the crimes or the designs which base and grasping men have laid tomy charge. Believe me, that after my devotion to God and our holyreligion, there is no one whom I am so anxious to serve zealously anddevotedly as your Majesty. This you will find ever, Sire, if you willbut give me the opportunity of rendering you any service."The King was about to reply, but the Queen-mother, who had advancedand stood by his side, touched his arm saying, "You have not yetspoken to me, my son." And the King turning towards her, she addedsomething in a low voice. The King replied in the same tone; and theDuke of Guise, passing through the midst of the frowning faces rangedaround the royal seat, approached the Queen-consort, the mild andunhappy Louisa, and addressed a few words to her of reverence andrespect which were gratifying to her ear. He then turned once more tothe King, who seemed to have heard what Catharine de Medici hadto say, and having given his reply, sat in moody silence. TheQueen-mother stood by with some degree of apprehension in hercountenance, as if feeling very doubtful still how the affair wouldterminate. The brows of the courtiers were gloomy and undecided, andthe few followers of the Duke of Guise ranged at some distance fromthe spot to which he had now advanced, kept their eyes fixed either onhim or on those surrounding the King, as if, at the least menacingmovement, they were ready to start forward in defence of their leader.The only one that was perfectly calm was Guise himself; but he,retreading his steps till he stood opposite the King, again addressedthe Monarch saying, "I hope, Sire, that you will give me a fullopportunity of justifying myself.""Your conduct, cousin of Guise," replied the King, "must best justifyyou for the past; and I shall judge by the event, of your intentionsfor the future.""Let it be so," replied the Duke, "and such being the case, I willhumbly take my leave of your Majesty, wishing you, from my heart,health and happiness."Thus saying he once more bowed low, and retired from the presence ofthe King, followed by the gentlemen who had accompanied him. Not anindividual of the palace stirred a step to conduct him on his way,though his rank, his services, his genius, and his vast renown,rendered the piece of neglect they showed disgraceful to themselvesrather than injurious to him. He was accompanied from the gates of theLouvre, however, and followed to the Htel de Guise, by an infinitenumber of people, who ceased not for one moment to make the streetsring with their acclamations.Nor were these by any means composed entirely of the lowest classes ofthe people, the least respectable, or the least well-informed. On thecontrary, it must, alas! be said, that the great majority of all thatwas good, upright, and noble in the city hailed his coming loudly as asecurity and a safeguard.A number, an immense number, of the inferior nobility of the realmwere mingled with the crowd that followed him, or joined the acclaimfrom the windows. The robes of the law were seen continually in thedense multitude, and almost all the courts had there numbers of theirprincipal members; while the municipal officers of the city, with theexception of two or three, were there in a mass, accompanied by alarge body of the most opulent and respectable merchants.Thus followed, the Duke of Guise proceeded to his hotel on foot as hecame, speaking from time to time with those who pressed near him withthat peculiar grace which won all hearts, and smiling with thefar-famed smile of his race, which was said never to fall upon any manwithout making him feel as if he stood in the sunshine.Already collected on the steps of the Htel de Guise, at the news thathe was returning from the Louvre, was a group of the brightest, thebravest, the most talented, and the most beautiful of the Frenchnobility,--Madame de Montpensier, Mademoiselle de St. Beuve, theChevalier d'Aumale, Brissac, and a thousand others. The servants andattendants of his household in gorgeous dresses kept back the crowdwith courteous words and kindly gestures; and when he reached thesteps that led to the high doorway of the porter's lodge, on the rightof the porte cochre, he ascended a little way amongst his gratulatingfriends, and then turned and bowed repeatedly to the people, pointingout here and there some of the most popular of the citizens andmagistrates, and whispering a word to the nearest attendant, whoinstantly made his way through the crowd to the spot where thepersonage designated stood, and in his master's name requested that hewould come in and take some refreshment.When this was over, he again bowed and retired; and while themultitude separated, he walked on into his lordly halls with a numberof persons clinging round him, whom he had not seen for months--formonths which to him had been full of activity, thought, care, andperil, and to them of anxiety for the head of their race.As he passed along, however, to a chamber where the dinner which hadbeen prepared for him had remained untouched for many an hour, his eyefell upon a boy dressed in the habit of one of his own pages; andtaking suddenly a step forward, he called the boy apart into a window,demanding eagerly, "Well, have you found your master?""I have, your Highness," replied the boy, "and have found means togive him the letter?""What!" exclaimed the Duke, "outwitted Villequier, and Pisani, andall! The wit of a page against that of a politician for a thousandcrowns!""I dressed myself as a girl, your Highness," replied the boy, "and gotinto the convent, and then through a gate into what is called therector's court, where Doctor Botholph and the Cur live, and where menare admitted, and women not shut out when they like to go in; and Igot talking to the old verger of the church by the side, and he calledme a pretty little fool, and said he dared to say I would soon beamong the penitents within there; and with that I got him to tell meevery thing, and the whole story of the young Count being broughtthere at night, and shut up in what are called the rector'sapartments."As he spoke, one or two of the higher class of those whom the Duke hadselected from the crowd below, and who felt themselves privileged topresent themselves in his private apartments, entered the hall, andinstantly caught his eye."I cannot speak with you more at present, Ignati," he said, "nor,perhaps, during the whole day, for there is business of life and deathbefore me; but come to me while I am rising to-morrow, and only tellme in the mean time where our poor Logres is, for I know not whatconvent you mean.""He is in the rector's court," replied the boy, "close by the conventof the Black Penitents, in the Rue St. Denis.""By my faith!" exclaimed the Duke in no slight surprise, "I have beenthere this very day myself, and there the Queen-mother has made herabode for the last ten days. She must be deceiving me; and yet,perhaps, the mighty matters that occupied her mind when I saw hermight have made her forget all other things. However, Logres shallnot be long so fettered. Come to me to-morrow, Ignati; come to meto-morrow, as I am rising; and in the mean time, if you can find somemeans of giving the Count intimation that he is not forgotten, it wereall the better.""I will try, my Lord," replied the boy. And the Duke hurried on towelcome his new guests, making them sit down at table with him, andcovering them with every sort of honour and distinction.CHAP. XIII.In our dealings with each other there is nothing which we so muchmiscalculate as the ever varying value of time, and indeed it is buttoo natural to look upon it as it seems to us, and not as it seems toothers. The slow idler on whose head it hangs heavy, holds the man ofbusiness by the button, and remorselessly robs him on the king'shighway of a thing ten times more valuable than the purse that wouldhang him if he took it. The man of action and of business whose daysseem but moments, forgets in his dealing with the long expectingapplicant, and the weary petitioner, that to them each moment is farlonger than his day.The hours, not one minute of which were unfilled to the Duke of Guise,passed slowly over the head of Charles of Montsoreau, and it seemed asif the brief gleam of happiness which had come across his path had buttended to make the long solitary moments seem longer and more dreary;in fact, to give full and painful effect to solitude and want ofliberty, and yet he would not have lost that gleam for all the world.He thought of it, he dwelt upon it, he called to mind each and everyparticular; and, though it was crossed, as the memory of all suchbrief meetings are, with the recollection of a thousand things whichhe could have wished to have said, but which he had forgotten, andalso by many a speculation of a painful kind concerning the visit ofthe Duke of Guise to the very place in which he was confined, withoutthe slightest effort being made for his liberation, yet it was aconsolation and a happiness and a joy to him--one of those blessingswhich have been stamped by the past with the irrevocable seal ofenjoyment, which are our own, the unalienable jewels of our fate, heldfor ever in the treasury of memory.Nothing occurred through the rest of the day to call his attention, orto rouse his feelings. He heard the distant murmur, and the shouts ofthe people from time to time; but the gates were now shut, and thesounds dull, and all passed on evenly till darkness shut up the world.In the mean time he knew--as if to make his state of imprisonment andinactivity more intolerable--that busy actions were taking placewithout, that his own fate was deciding by the hands of others, thathis happiness and that of Marie de Clairvaut formed but a small matterin the great bulk of political affairs which were then being weighedbetween the two angry parties in the capital, and might be tossed intothis scale or that, as accident, or convenience, or policy mightdirect.Though he retired to rest as usual, he slept not, and ever and anonwhen a sort of half slumber fell upon his eyes he started up, thinkinghe heard some sound, a distant shout of the people, the tolling of abell, or the roll of some far off drum. Nothing however occurred, andthe night passed over as the day.In the grey of the morning, however, just when the slow creaking of agate, or the noise of footsteps here and there breaking the previousstillness, told that the world was beginning to awake, a few sweetnotes suddenly met his ear like those of a musical instrument, and ina moment after he heard the same air which the boy Ignati had playedwith such exquisite skill just before he freed him from his Italianmasters."A blessing be upon that boy," he cried, as he instantly recognisednot only the sounds but the touch. "He has come to tell me that I amnot forgotten."Suddenly, however, before the air was half concluded, the musicstopped, and voices were heard speaking, but not so loud that thewords could be distinguished. It seemed to the young Count, and seemedtruly, that some one had sent the boy away; but though he heard nomore, those very sounds had given him hope and comfort.Driven away by the old verger, who had now discovered the trick whichhad been put upon him the day before, the boy returned with all speedto the Htel de Guise, and, according to the Duke's order, presentedhimself in his chamber at the hour of his rising. But the Duke wasalready surrounded with people, all eager to speak with him ondifferent affairs, and his brow was evidently dark and clouded by somenews that he had just heard."Send round," he was saying as the boy entered, "Send round speedilyto all the inns, and let those who are known for their fidelity beinformed that the doors of this hotel will never be shut against anyof those who have come to Paris for my service, or for that of thechurch, as long as there is a chamber vacant within. And you, my goodLords," he continued, turning to some of the gentlemen who surroundedhim, "I must call upon your hospitality, also, to provide lodging forthese poor friends of ours, whom this new and iniquitous proceeding ofthe court is likely to drive from Paris. But stay, Bussi," hecontinued, and his eye fell upon the page as he spoke; "you say yousaw the Prvt des Marchands but a minute ago in the Rue d'Anvoyeseeking out the lodgers in the inns, and ordering them to quit Parisimmediately. Hasten down after him quickly, and tell him from Henry ofGuise that there is a very dangerous prisoner and a zealous servant ofthe church lodged in the Rue St. Denis; that he had better drive himforth also; and that, if he wants direction to the place where hesojourns, one of my pages shall lead him thither. You may add,moreover, that if he do not drive him forth, I will bring him forthbefore the world be a day older."The Duke of Guise then took the pen from the ink which was standingbefore him, and, though not yet half-dressed, wrote hastily the fewfollowing words to the Queen-mother:--"Madam,"I am informed, on authority which I cannot doubt, that my friend, theyoung Count de Logres, is at present in your hands, kept underrestraint in the Rue St. Denis, after having been arrested in theexecution of business with which I charged him, while bearing apassport from the King. I beseech you to set him immediately atliberty, and also at once to order that my niece and ward,Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, be brought to the Htel de Guise without anhour's delay. Let me protest to your Majesty that you have not a morefaithful and devoted servant than"Henry of Guise.""I will not send this by you, Ignati," said the Duke; "they wouldlaugh at a boy. Here, Mestroit, bear this to the Queen-mother.Say I cast myself at her feet; and bring me back an answer withoutdelay.--Why, how now, St. Paul!" he continued, turning to a gentlemanwho had just entered. "Your brow is as dark as a thunder-cloud. Whathas happened now? Shall we be obliged to make our hotel our fortress,and defend it to the last, like gallant men?""Not so, my Lord," replied the Count of St. Paul; "not near so bad asthat: but still these are times that make men look thoughtful; and,depend upon it, the King, aided by his minions and the Politics[7], isseeking to inclose your Highness, as it were in a net."---------------------[Footnote 7: That party was so called which affected to hold thebalance between the Court and the League, without giving countenanceto the Huguenots.]---------------------"We will break through, St. Paul! We will break through!" replied theDuke with a smile. "But what are your tidings?""Why, that orders have been sent to the Swiss to come up from Corbeil,as well as those from Meulan and Chteau Thierry; also the companiesof French guards from every quarter in the neighbourhood are calledfor, and I myself saw come in, by the Faubourg St. Germain, a body oftwo hundred horse, which, upon inquiry, I found to be a new levy fromsome place in the South, led by a young Marquis of Montsoreau, whosename I never heard of before.""Whenever you hear it again, St. Paul," replied the Duke sternly,"couple with it the word 'Traitor!' and you will do him justice. Butwhat force is it said they are bringing into Paris? What stay you for,Mestroit?" he continued, seeing that the gentleman to whom he hadgiven the letter had not taken his departure. "What stay you for? Iwould have had you there now. Go with all speed! There are horsesenough saddled in the court. I would give a thousand crowns thatletter should be in the Queen's hand before this youth's coming isknown to her. It may save us much trouble hereafter. Fail not to bringme an answer quick. Now, St. Paul, how many men say you on your bestjudgment are they bringing into Paris?""Why, your Highness," replied the Count, "some say ten thousand; but,to judge more moderately from what I hear, the moment your Highness'sarrival in Paris was known, orders were sent for the march of fullseven thousand men.""We must be very formidable creatures, Brissac," cried the Duke, "thatmy coming with seven of you should need seven thousand men to meet us.On my soul, they will make me think myself a giant. I always thought Iwas a tall man--some six foot three, I believe--but, by Heavens! Imust be a Gargantua, indeed, to need seven thousand men to hold me.Seven thousand men!" he added thoughtfully: "he has not got them, St.Paul. There are not five thousand within fifty miles of Paris, unlessEpernon and Villequier have contrived to raise more of suchMontsoreaus against us. However, we must have eyes in all quarters.Send out parties to watch the coming of the troops and give us theirnumbers. Let some one speak to the inferior officers of the Frenchguards, and remind them that the Duke of Guise and the Holy League areonly striving for the maintenance of the true faith, and for theoverthrow of those minions who have swallowed up all the honours andfavours of the crown. It were well also, Brissac, that a good watchwas kept upon the proceedings in the city. I can trust, methinks, toThe Sixteen to do all that is necessary in their different quarters,and to make full reports of all that takes place; but still a militaryeye were as well here and there, from time to time, Brissac, and Iwill trust that to you."The rest of the morning passed in the same incessant activity withwhich it had begun; tidings were constantly brought in from all partsof the town and the country round concerning every movement on thepart of the court; and the hotel of the Duc de Guise was literallybesieged by his followers and partisans. Train after train of noblemenand officers, of lawyers and citizens, followed each other during thewhole day, each bringing him information, or claiming audience on someaccount. Nor were the clergy less numerous; for scarce a parish in thecapital but sent forth, in the course of that day, its train ofpriests and monks to congratulate him on his arrival, or to beseechhim to hold up the tottering church of France with a strong hand.At the same time, the order which had been given by the King in themorning, for every stranger not domiciled in Paris to quit it withinsix hours, and the proceedings of the Prvt des Marchands to executethat order had--by driving out of the inns and taverns the multitudesof the Duke's partisans who had followed him in scattered bodies intoParis--now filled the Htel de Guise with all those of the higherclasses who were thus expelled. The houses of other members of thefaction received the rest. But the stables of the hotel were allfilled to the doors; the great court itself could scarcely be crossed,on account of the number of horses; and more than once the streetbecame impassable from the multitude of carriages, chairs, horses, andattendants, who were waiting while their masters conferred with theDuke.It was near mid-day when the gentleman who had been dispatched toCatharine de Medici again presented himself; and the Duke demanded,somewhat impatiently, what had detained him so long."It was the Queen-mother, your Highness," replied Mestroit. "More thanan hour passed before I could obtain an audience; and when I wasadmitted to present your Highness's letter, I found Monsieur deVillequier with her.""Did she show the letter to that son of Satan?" demanded the Duke."No, sir," replied the other; "on the contrary, she seemed not to wishthat he should see it, for she kept it tight in her hand after she hadread it, and told me to wait a moment, that she would give me ananswer directly.""I would sooner unriddle the enigma of the sphynx," said the Duke,"than I would say from what motive any one of that woman's actsproceed; and yet she has a great mind, and a heart not altogether sovicious as it seems. What happened then, Mestroit?""Why, my Lord, Villequier seemed anxious to know what the lettercontained, and I saw his head a little raised, and his eyes turnedquietly towards it while she was reading, as I have seen a cat regarda mouse-hole towards which she was stealing upon tiptoes; and helingered long, and seem inclined to stay. The Queen, however, beggedhim not to forget the orders she had given, but to execute theminstantly; and then he went away. When he was gone, the Queen againread your Highness's letter, and replied at first, 'The Duke asks whatis not in my power. Tell my noble cousin of Guise that he has beenmisinformed; that I hold none of his friends in my power--' Then,after a moment, she bade me wait, and she would see what persuasionwould do?""She must not think to deceive me!" replied the Duke of Guise. "Butwhat more?""She went away," replied the gentleman, "and was absent for full twohours, leaving me there alone, with nothing to amuse me but the pagesand serving women that came and looked at me from time to time as at atiger in a cage. At length she came back, and bade me tell yourHighness these exact words: 'My cousin has been misinformed. I havenone of his people in my hands, or in my power. The Count of Logres,however, shall be set free before eight and forty hours are over. Hemay be set free to-morrow; but by leaving him for a few hours morewhere he is, I trust to accomplish for the Duke that which he demandsconcerning his ward, although I have no power whatever in the matter.""There is nothing upon earth," said the Duke thoughtfully, "soconvenient as to have the reality without the name of power. We havethe pleasure without the reproach! Catharine de Medici has not thepower!--Who then has?--I may have the power also, it is true, to rightmyself and those who attach themselves to me; and in this instance Iwill use it. But still it were better to wait the time she states; forI know her fair Majesty well, and she never yields any thing without adelay, to make what she grants seem more important:--and yet, the dayafter to-morrow--the day after to-morrow--who shall say what may be,ere the day after to-morrow comes? This head may be lowly in the dustere then.""Or circled with the crown of France," said the Count de St. Paul."God forbid!" exclaimed the Duke earnestly. If I thought that it wouldever produce a scheme to wrest the sceptre from the line thatrightfully holds it, I would bear it to-morrow to the foot of thethrone, myself, as my own accuser. No, no! bad kings may die or bedeposed: but there is still some one on whose brow the crown descendsby right. And let him have it."The Cardinal of Bourbon, your Highness," said an attendant entering,"has just arrived from Soissons. His Eminence is upon the stairs comingup."A smile played over the lips of most of the persons present at such anannouncement at that moment, for every one well knew that it was tothe old Cardinal de Bourbon that the party of the League looked, asthe successor to the crown on the death of Henry III., to theexclusion of the direct line of Navarre, held to be incapable ofsucceeding on account of religion. The Duke, however, advancedimmediately with open arms to meet the Cardinal, and many hours werepassed in long conferences between them and the principal officers andsupporters of the League.At the end of that time, however, towards seven o'clock, a message wasbrought into the room where they were in consultation, from Monsieurde Sainctyon, a well-known adherent of the League, begging earnestlyto speak with the Duke upon matters of deep importance. On the Dukegoing out, he found the worthy Leaguer in a state of great excitementand agitation."My Lord," he said, as soon as Guise appeared in the room where he hadbeen left alone, "I fear that they are busily labouring, at thepalace, for the destruction of your Highness and of the Holy League.""How so, Monsieur de Sainctyon?" demanded the Duke, who entertaineddoubts, it seems, of the Leaguer's sincerity, which were never whollyremoved. "Some of my friends have just returned from the palace, whotell me that all is as still and quite as the inside of a vault.""They told your Highness also, I hope," said the Leaguer, "that theyhad trebled the guard, both Swiss and French.""Yes, I was informed of that," replied the Duke. "But that shows fear,not daring, Monsieur de Sainctyon.""Perhaps so, my Lord," replied Sainctyon, who was one of the chevins,or sheriffs of the town; "but perhaps not. However, what I have now totell, shows more daring than fear. We were summoned this afternoon atfive o'clock to the Htel de Ville, where we found not only Pereuse,the Prvt, and Le Comte, who is worse than a Politic, and half aHuguenot, but the Marquis d'O----""Who is worse," said the Duke of Guise, "than minion, or Politic, orHuguenot, or reiter, equally foul in his debaucheries and hispeculations; equally impudent in his vices and his follies; fitson-in-law of Villequier; well-chosen master of the wardrobe to theKing of France! Who was there besides, Monsieur de Sainctyon? Someexpedient infamy was of course to be committed, otherwise d'O----would not have been there.""There were a number of captains and colonels of the differentquarters," replied Sainctyon, well pleased to see that the Duke nowfelt the importance of his intelligence, "and the Prvt and Le Comtebegan to speak what seemed to me at first simple nonsense, in aconfused way, saying, that it was necessary to keep guard in a verydifferent manner in Paris from that which we were accustomed to use,for that your coming had excited the minds of the people, and thatthere was hourly danger of a revolt, and that it would be better forall the captains to meet with their companies together in someparticular place, in order to see to the matter. But I replied, thatnothing could be more dangerous than that which was proposed, for thatthe companies of armed citizens would be much better as usual, each inits separate quarter, taking care of that quarter, rather than meetingaltogether in one large body of armed men, which was likely to cause atumult immediately. A number of the other colonels cried out the samething; but then Monsieur d'O---- cut us all short, saying, 'Give menone of your reasons, gentlemen. What the Prvt has stated to you isthe will of the King, and he must be obeyed. The place of yourmeeting is the Cemetery of the Innocents, and there you are allexpected to be with your companies at nine o'clock this evening.' Now,my Lord, I have come to your Highness, by the authority of all theother colonels in whom we can trust, for counsel and direction in thisbusiness, assuring you that we have heard it is the intention of theCourt to pick out from amongst us thus assembled six or seven of yourmost zealous friends and supporters, and execute them early to-morrowin the Place de Grve."The Duke paused and thought for a moment ere he replied; but he thensaid, "I thank you most sincerely, Monsieur de Sainctyon, for theintelligence you have brought me. You are mistaken, however, withregard to what are the intentions of the Court, as you will see in onemoment. The large body of men in arms which you will have with youwhen all assembled together, trebles the number of any force in Paris,so that the least attempt to do you wrong at that moment would be asignal for the overthrow of the monarchy. On the contrary, Monsieur deSainctyon, I believe the thus calling you together in one place hassolely for its object to remove you from the quarters where yourpresence would be useful in opposition to the iniquitous proceedingsof your enemies. To arrest somebody--perhaps myself--is doubtless theobject of these persons; and if you would follow my advice, the courseyou pursue would be this,--to meet as you have been ordered by theKing, having first communicated all the facts to the persons underyour command whom you can trust. Some one will come to bring youfarther orders, depend upon it; find out what those orders are, andlet them instantly be communicated to me; but on no account orconsideration suffer yourselves to be kept together in one place. Onthe contrary, as soon as you have discovered as far as possible whatthe designs of your enemies are, lead your companies to theirdifferent quarters, or wherever you may think best to station them. Ifyou want any farther assistance, send hither; and I will dispatchexperienced officers to take counsel with you as to what is to bedone. I hope your opinion coincides with mine, Monsieur de Sainctyon.""Your words always carry conviction with them, my Lord," replied thesheriff; "and I will instantly proceed to obey you."Thus saying he took his leave, and quitted the Duke, hastening withthe rest of the officers of the city to arm himself cap-a-pie, andpresent himself with the burgher guard in the Cemetery of theInnocents at the appointed hour. When that hour arrived, every thingthrough the rest of the city was dark and silent, and but little lightshone from the dim lanterns round the Cemetery upon the dark masses ofarmed men that now surrounded it. The officers commanding them lookedin each other's faces, as if expecting that some one amongst them hadorders in regard to what they were farther to do, but for severalminutes no one announced himself as empowered to direct them, and theyhad even proposed to separate, when the sheriff Le Comte arrived onhorseback at great haste from the side of the Louvre. Having calledthe colonels of the quarters together he said, "The King, having beeninformed that this night an enterprise is to be undertaken against hisauthority by his enemies, trusts entirely to his citizens of Paris forthe defence of the capital, and consequently commands you, in order tohave a strong point of resistance, to occupy this Cemetery, of which Ihave here the keys, till to-morrow morning. All the gates will be shutexcept one wicket, and in a very short time the Marquis de BeauvaisNangis, an experienced officer, will be sent down by the King tocommand you."[8]---------------------[Footnote 8: This most absurd and impudent proposal would scarcely becredited, were it not to be found in the Histoire trs veritable,&c., written by Sainctyon himself, and published by Michel Jouin inthe very year 1588.]---------------------A murmur ran through the officers and through the men, who, as LeComte spoke loud, heard every word that passed; but an old captain ofone of the quarters burst forth, a moment after, exclaiming, "What,shut myself up there, as if in a prison? They must think me mad! NotI, indeed, for any of them! I have nothing to do with you, Monsieur leComte, nor with any of you, except with the inhabitants of my ownquarter, and there I shall go directly. Those may go and shutthemselves up with you that like. Come, my men; march! Who gaveBeauvais Nangis a right to command me, I should like to know? Not thecitizens of Paris, I'm sure: so those may obey him that like him." Andputting himself at the head of his men, he marched out, followed byalmost all the other companies except one or two, who sufferedthemselves to be persuaded to enter into the Cemetery, where they werelocked up by Le Compte, to await whatever fate might befall them.In the mean time the other officers of the burgher guard held aconsultation together, and determined, instead of proceedingimmediately to their different quarters to occupy the principal pointsof the city, where they fancied that attempts might be made upon thelife or liberty of the chiefs of the League. The avenues to the Htelde Guise were strongly guarded, the Rue St. Denis was patrolled by alarge party, two companies occupied the Rue St. Honor, and theutility of these precautions was strongly demonstrated ere they hadbeen long taken.Before midnight the sound of horses was heard by the two companies inthe Rue St. Honor, and in a moment after appeared the Marquisd'O----, with as many horse arquebusiers as could be spared from thepalace. The citizens stood to their arms and barred the way, andd'O----, never very famous for his courage, demanded, in evidenttrepidation and surprise, what they did there, when they had beenordered to be in the Cemetery of the Innocents?"We came here to do our duty to our fellow-citizens," replied the sameold captain who had spoken before, "and to guard our houses and ourproperty, for which purpose we are enrolled.""Well, well, you are right," replied the Marquis, evidently confoundedand undecided; and turning his horse's rein he rode back by the sameway he came, showing evidently that he had been bound upon someattempt which had been frustrated.About the same time the party in the Rue St. Denis had been drawntowards the further end by the noise of horses and the light oftorches; and on advancing they found a number of men on horseback, anda vacant carriage, with two lights before it, just halting at theConvent of the Black Penitents. The good citizens, however, were in anactive and interfering mood, and they determined to inquire into anoccurrence which otherwise would have passed over without theslightest notice. The horsemen, however, did not wait for manyquestions; but, evidently as much surprised and embarrassed as theMarquis d'O----, turned their horses' heads, and made the best oftheir way out of the street.END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.CHAPTER I.The convent of the Black Penitents was a very different buildingindeed, and a very different establishment altogether from that whichthe imagination of the reader may have raised up from the imagesfurnished by dark and mysterious tales of Italian superstition. It wascertainly intended to be, and was, in some degree, a place ofvoluntary penitence for women who conceived that they had led apeculiarly sinful life: but there were two classes of nuns confinedthere by their own good will,--one of which consisted of persons whohad mingled long with the world, and really led an irregular lifetherein; while the other comprised a number of young women of highrank, who had never known any thing, either of the pleasures or thevices which the others now fled from, but who, either by a naturalfeeling of devotion, or the urgency of relations, had devotedthemselves at an early period to the cloister.In point of diet, fasts, prayers, and penances the order was certainlyvery strict; but the building in itself was any thing but a gloomyone, and a considerable portion of it, attached to the dwelling of thesuperior, was set apart for the occasional boarders, who took up theirabode there, or for such ladies of high rank and station as might wishto absent themselves for a time from the cares and vanities of theworld, and retire to a more intimate communion with God and their ownheart, than they could enjoy in such a capital as that of France.Such was the original intention of these apartments, and thedestination of the institution altogether; but we well know how everything entrusted to human management here is corrupted in process oftime. The rooms which at first had been furnished simply, were soondecked with every sort of ornament; the visiter's table, as it wascalled, was separated from the ordinary board of the refectory; cooksand wine-growers did their best to gratify the palate; and, with theexception of the vowed nuns, those who sought shelter in the conventof the Black Penitents were condemned to but little abstinence, andknew only this difference from the world in general, that they had anopportunity of escaping obtrusive society when they thought fit.It was in one then of the handsomest apartments of the building--tospeak truth, one far handsomer than that occupied by the Queen-motherherself--that Marie de Clairvaut made her abode during the time shewas confined in that building. No great restraint, indeed, was putupon her; but the word confinement was justified by the measures takento prevent her quitting the convent, or holding communication with anyone but the nuns themselves.To this apartment the Prioress led her back again, after putting anend to her interview with Charles of Montsoreau, and though the goodlady herself was by no means entirely weaned from the affections ofthis world, she thought it but befitting to read Mademoiselle deClairvaut a brief lecture on the necessity of attaching herself tohigher objects, and an exhortation to abandon earthly attachments, anddedicate herself to the service of Heaven. She hinted, indeed, thatthere could not be an order more worthy of entering into than the oneof which she was an unworthy member; nor, indeed, one in which so manyof the little pleasures of life could be combined with deep devotion.Marie de Clairvaut was, at that moment, far more inclined to weep thansmile; but it was scarcely possible not to feel amused at theexhortation of the Prioress; and certainly the greater degree ofknowledge which the young lady had lately acquired of conventual lifewould have banished from her mind all desire to take those irrevocablevows which she had once looked forward to with pleasure, even if lovehad not long before driven all such purposes from her mind.Glad to be freed from importunity, and left to her own thoughts, shereplied nothing to the good mother's words; and, as soon as she wasgone, gave up her whole mind to the recollection of the interviewwhich she had just had with him she loved. To her, too, that interviewwas a source of deep gratification; every memory of it was dear toher; every word that Charles of Montsoreau had spoken came back to herheart like the voice of hope, and giving way to the suggestions ofthat bright enchantress, she flattered herself with the expectation ofseeing him again and again, even if the presence of the Duke of Guisein Paris failed to restore them both to liberty.Previously to that period, she had been accustomed to see the Queenalmost every day, and indeed more than once during the day; but,during the whole of that evening she saw her not again, and though sheeagerly asked the next morning to be admitted to the presence ofCatherine de Medici, the only answer that she obtained was, thatthough the Princess was expected again in the evening, she had not yetreturned from the palace.The second day passed as the first had done, but during the morning ofthe third the excitement of the city had communicated itself even tothe inmates of the convent. The portress, the lay sisters, thevisiters, obtained the news of the hour from those without, andcommunicated it to the nuns within. Nor did two of those nuns, who hadentered into some degree of intimacy with the fair prisoner, fail tobring her, every half-hour, intelligence of what was passing without.The first news brought was that the guards in the streets of Paris hadbeen all changed and doubled during the preceding night, and that theHoly League and the Court were in continual agitation, watching eachother's movements. One of the nuns whispered that people said, it hadbeen proposed by the Duke of Epernon, to murder the Duke of Guise atthe very door of that convent, as he came to visit the Queen-mother;and others declared, she added, that the Duke had vowed he would notrest till he had taken the crown off Henry's head, and put it on thatof the Cardinal de Bourbon.Then came intelligence that a large body of the Swiss guards had justentered Paris, and were seen marching rapidly down the Rue St. Honor,with their fifes silent, and their drums still. Hourly after that camethe news of fresh troops entering the city, and fresh rumours ofmanifold designs and purposes against the life of the Duke of Guise.His house was to be attacked by the French and Swiss guards, and hishead to be struck off in the Place de Grve: he was to be shot by anassassin, placed at one of the windows of an opposite house, the firsttime he came out; and some said that Villequier had found means tobribe Lanecque, his cook, to poison him that night at supper, as wellas all who were with him.The various scenes, and the dangers and difficulties which she hadlately encountered, had given Marie de Clairvaut a far greaterknowledge of the world, and of how the important events of the worldtake place, than was possessed by any of her companions; and sheassuredly did not believe a thousandth part of all the differentrumours that reached her. The reiteration of those rumours, however,gave her some apprehensions for her great relation; and when towardsthe evening she was visited by the Prioress, and found that, beyondall doubt, every gate of the city, except the porte St. Honor, wasclosed, her fears became much greater, seeing plainly that it was thedesign of the Court to hem the Duke in, within the walls of Paris,deprived, as they believed him to be, of all assistance from hisfriends without.The night passed over, however, in tranquillity; and when, at an earlyhour, the young lady rose, she was informed, as she had expected, thata great part of the rumours of the preceding day were false orexaggerated. No Swiss, it was now said, had arrived, except a verysmall body; the Duke of Guise had been seen on horseback with theKing; and the mind of Marie de Clairvaut became reassured in regard toher uncle. The Prioress herself--though somewhat given to fear, andlike many other persons, absolutely enjoying a little apprehension indefault of other excitement--acknowledged that all seemed likely to gowell.But this state of security was soon changed. The report regarding thearrival of the Swiss had only forerun the event by a few hours, forthe sound of drums and trumpets heard from the side of the Cemetery ofthe Innocents towards seven o'clock in the morning, announced to theParisians that a large body of troops had been introduced in thenight, without the city in general knowing it; and in a few minutesafter the movements of these forces evidently showed that some grandstroke was to be struck by the Court against its enemies. The Place deGrve was next occupied by a considerable force of mixed Swiss andFrench guards, favoured in their entrance by the Prevt des Marchands,and led by the notorious Marquis d'O. Various other points, such asbridges and market-places, were seized upon by the troops; and thegreatest activity seemed to reign in the royal party, while that ofthe Duke of Guise and the League, remained perfectly still andinactive, as if thunderstruck at this sudden display of energy.News of all these proceedings reached Marie de Clairvaut in theconvent, accompanied with such circumstances of confirmation, that shecould not doubt that the intelligence was partly true. But for a shorttime after the troops were posted, every thing seemed to relapse intotranquillity, except that from time to time reports were brought tothe convent parlour, of citizens, and especially women, being treatedwith great insolence and grossness by the soldiery. Crillon himselfwas heard to swear that any citizen who came abroad with a swordshould be hung to his door-post, while worse was threatened to thewives and daughters of the burghers, if the slightest resistance wasmade to the troops. The portress brought news that all the houses andshops in the Rue St. Denis and the Rue St. Honor were closed; and thePrioress herself thought it was high time to cause the convent gatesto be shut and barred, and even that door which led into what wascalled the rector's court, and which usually stood open, to be closedand fastened with large chains.At length tidings were brought that the first open resistance of thepeople had commenced; that blood had been shed; and it was rumouredthat Crillon himself, attempting to take possession of the PlaceMaubert with two companies of Swiss and one of French guards, had beenopposed by the scholars of the University and the citizen guard, andforced to retreat without effecting his object.The terror of the Prioress was now extreme; the sound of horsesgalloping here and there with the most vehement speed, could be heardeven in the parlour of the convent, and towards nine o'clock the rollof distant musketry borne by the wind completed the terror of the poornuns.It was evident now to Marie de Clairvaut that a struggle had commencedbetween the Monarch and the people of the capital, on which dependedthe safety, perhaps the life, of the Duke of Guise, and, in a greatdegree, her own fate and happiness. In that struggle she could take nopart; and, situated as she was, she could gain no relief even fromhearing any exact account of how it proceeded from time to time.The fears of the good superior of the convent had driven her by thistime to the resource of prayer. All the nuns were ordered to assemblein the chapel; and Marie de Clairvaut, feeling that none at thatmoment had greater need of heavenly protection than herself, preparedto follow, after listening for a few minutes, alone in her chamber, tothe distant roll of musketry which still went on; when suddenly thePrioress returned in great haste with a paper in her hand, andapparently in much agitation and alarm."There, there," she said, thrusting the paper into Marie deClairvaut's hands, "that is from the Queen! Do what you like! Act asyou like! I would not go out for the whole world, for just through thegrating I have seen a Swiss officer carried by, all dropping withblood as they bore him along the streets. I will go to prayers; I willgo to prayers!"The note from the Queen-mother was very brief."You know, mademoiselle," it said, "that you have not been kept whereyou are by my orders. I would fain have set you free two nights ago byany means in my power, if meddling fools on the one side, and cowardlyfools on the other, had not frustrated my plan. I have now taken theresponsibility upon myself of ordering the gates to be opened to you.The man who brings you this is brave and to be trusted; and what Ihave to entreat of you is, if I have shown you any kindness, to gowith all speed to the hotel of my good cousin of Guise, and beseechhim to do his best to allay the tumult, so far, at least, that Imyself may come to him with safety. The scenes that you will meet withmay be terrible, but you have that blood in your veins which does noteasily shrink from the aspect of danger."Marie de Clairvaut might be more timid than Catherine de Medicibelieved; but, when she thought of freedom, and of being deliveredfrom the power of those whom she detested, to dwell once more withthose she loved, she felt that scarcely any scene would be so terribleas to deter her from seeking such a result. She remarked, however,that the Queen did not once mention the name of Charles of Montsoreau,or allude to his fate. "What," she asked herself, "is he still to bekept a prisoner, while I am set at liberty? If so, liberty is scarcelyworth having."She paused, and thought for a moment, and then the hope crossed hermind of setting him at liberty herself."Surely," she said, "I could trace my way back to his apartments. Iremember every turning well; and then, by bringing him through here,in the confusion and terror that now reign in the convent, I couldeasily give him his liberty too."The more she thought of it, the more feasible the scheme seemed to be;and catching up an ordinary veil to throw over her head, she ran downinto the apartments of the Queen, which she found, as she expected,quite vacant. She had no difficulty in discovering the corridor thatled towards the rector's court. At the end there was a door which waslocked, but the key was in it, and she passed through. Another shortpassage led her to the room where she had waited for the Queen, andwhere she had listened to Charles of Montsoreau singing; and then witha beating and an anxious heart she hurried on rapidly to the chamberwhere she had seen him last.All the bolts were shot, showing her that he was still there; butexactly opposite was an open door at the top of a small staircase,which seemed to lead to a waiting-room below, for she could distinctlyhear the tones and words of two men of the lower class talking overthe events that were taking place without.Gently closing the door at the top of the stairs, Marie de Clairvautlocked and bolted it as quietly and noiselessly as possible. Her heartbeat so violently, however, with agitation, that she could scarcelyhear any thing but its pulsation, though she listened breathlessly toascertain if the slight noise of the lock had not attracted attention.All was still, however, and she gently undid the fastenings of theopposite door.Charles of Montsoreau was seated at the table, and lifted his eyes asshe entered with a sad and despairing look, expecting to see no onebut the attendant. Marie was in his arms in a moment, however, andholding up her finger to enjoin silence, she whispered, "Not a word,Charles; but come with me, and we shall be safe! Every one is in thechapel at prayers; orders are given for my liberation; and in fiveminutes we may be at the Htel de Guise.""What are all those sounds," demanded her lover in the same tone,"those sounds which I have heard in the streets? I thought I heard thedischarge of firearms.""I fear," she answered, "that it is my uncle's party at blows withthat of the King. I know but little myself, however; only that we maymake our escape if we will. I will lead you, Charles; I will lead youthis time.""Alas!" said Charles of Montsoreau as he followed her rapidly, "theyhave taken my sword from me;" but Marie ran on with a step of light,taking care however to lock the doors behind them as she passed toprevent pursuit.As she had never been in the courtyard since the day of her firstarrival, she met with some difficulty in finding her way thither fromthe Queen's apartments: haste and agitation indeed impeding her morethan any real difficulty in the way. At length, however, it wasreached, and was found vacant of every one but the old portress, whostood gazing through a small iron grating at what was passing without."Open the door, my good sister," said Marie de Clairvaut touching herarm. "Of course the Prioress has given orders for you to let me pass.""Yes, to let you pass, my sister," replied the portress, "for Isuppose you are the young lady she meant; but not to let any body elsepass." And she ran her eye over the figure of Charles of Montsoreau."Why, surely," replied Marie de Clairvaut, "you would not stop thegentleman who is going to protect me through the streets.""Why, I do not know," replied the portress, still sturdily setting herface against their passage; "there was another person waiting on theoutside to show you the way, till just a minute ago. Where he's gone,I don't know, but he seemed the fitter person of the two, for he wasan ecclesiastic. I have heard, too, of some one being confined upabove, by Monsieur Villequier's orders, and as the rector's courtbelongs to him, they say I must take care what I am about; so I'lljust ring the bell and inquire.""I will save you the trouble of doing that, my good lady," repliedCharles of Montsoreau; and stepping quietly forward, he put her gentlybut powerfully back with his left hand, while with his right he turnedthe key in the great lock of the wicket, and threw it open. Theportress made a movement of her hand to the bell; but then thinkingbetter of it, did not ring; and Marie and her lover, without furtheropposition, passed at once into the streets of Paris.There were very few people in the Rue St. Denis, but on looking up anddown on either side, there were seen a party of horsemen, apparentlyhalted, at the farther end of the street, on the side nearest to thecountry, and a number of persons farther down, passing and repassingalong one of the cross streets. Some way farther up, between thefugitives and the party of horsemen we have mentioned, were twofigures, one of which was evidently dressed in the robes of anecclesiastic, and both gazing down towards the convent, as if watchingfor the appearance of some one.The moment the young Count and Marie de Clairvaut appeared, the twofigures walked on rapidly in a different direction, and were lostimmediately to their sight by turning down another street. There wasnothing apparent that could alarm the fugitives in any degree, andthough distant shouts and cries were borne upon the air, yet the soundof musketry had ceased, which gave greater courage to Marie deClairvaut. She needed indeed some mitigation of her apprehensions, forthe success which she met with in rescuing her lover had been far fromincreasing her courage in the same proportion that it had beendiminished by the very agitation she had gone through. Drawing thethick veil over her face, and as far as possible over her person, sheclung to Charles's arm, and hurried on with him, directing him as faras her recollection of the city of Paris would serve. It was long,however, since she had seen it; and although the general directionwhich she took was certainly right, yet many a turning did sheunnecessarily take by the way.Still, however, they hurried on, till turning suddenly into one of thesmall streets which led round into the Rue St. Honor itself, thescene of fierce contention which was going on in the capital wasdisplayed to their eyes in a moment.Across the street, within fifty yards of the turning, was drawn animmense chain from post to post, and behind it was rolled an immensenumber of barrels filled with sand and stones, and rendered fixed andimmovable, against the efforts of any party in front at least, bycarts taken off the wheels, barrows, and paving-stones. Behind thisbarrier again appeared an immense multitude of men armed with varioussorts of weapons snatched up in haste. The front row, indeed, was wellfurnished with arquebuses, while pistols, swords, daggers, and pikesgleamed in abundance behind. Several of the persons in front werecompletely armed in the defensive armour of the time; and in a smallaperture which had been left at the corner between the barricade andthe houses, sufficient only for two people to pass abreast when thechain was lowered, an officer was seen in command, with a page behindcarrying his plumed casque.The lower windows of all the houses throughout Paris were closed, andthe manifold signs, awnings, and spouts, as well as the penthouseswhich were sometimes placed to keep off the rain and wind from some ofthe principal mansions, had all been suddenly removed, in order thatany bodies of soldiery moving through the streets might be exposed,without a place of shelter, to the aim of the persons above, who mightbe seen at every window glaring down at the scene below. There toowere beheld musketoons, arquebuses, and every other sort of implementof destruction; and where these had not been found, immense piles ofpaving-stones had been carried up to cast down upon the objects ofpopular enmity.Between the two fugitives and the barricade were drawn up twocompanies of Swiss and one of French infantry; and though standing inorderly array, and displaying strongly the effects of good militarydiscipline, yet there was a certain degree of paleness over thecountenances of the men, and a look of hesitation and uncertaintyabout their officers, which showed that they felt not a little thedangerous position in which they were placed. No shots were fired oneither side however, and the only movement was amongst the people, whowere seen talking together, with their leaders stirring amongst them,while from time to time those who were below shouted up to those inthe windows above.Without the slightest apparent fear of the soldiers, who were thusheld at bay, two or three people from time to time separatedthemselves from the populace, and coming out under or over the chain,passed completely round the guards to the opposite corner of thestreet, and appeared to be laying a plan for forming another barricadein that quarter, so as completely to inclose the soldiery.At the sight of all these objects Marie de Clairvaut naturally clungcloser to the arm of her lover, and both paused for a moment in orderto judge what was best to do. An instant's consideration howeversufficed, and Charles of Montsoreau led her on to that part of thebarricade where the chain was the only obstacle to their furtherprogress, passing as he did so along the whole face of the French andSwiss soldiers, not one of whom moved or uttered a word to stop themas they proceeded. At the chain, however, they met with a more seriousobstacle. The officer whom they had seen in command at that pointhad now turned away, and was speaking to some people behind, and arough-looking citizen, armed with a steel cap and breastplate, droppedthe point of his spear to the young Count's breast saying, "Give theword, or you do not pass!""I do not know the word," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "But I prayyou let me pass, for I am one of the friends and officers of the Dukeof Guise.""If you were you would know the word," replied the man. "Keep back, orI will run the pike into you.""I could not know the word," answered the young Count, "if I had beenlong absent from the Duke, as I have been, and were hastening to joinhim, as I now am.""Keep back, I say," cried the man who was no way fond of argument."You will repent if you do not keep back."Charles of Montsoreau was about to call to the officer he saw beforehim, but at that moment the other walked on amidst the people, and wasseen no more."Let us try another street," cried Marie de Clairvaut; "let us tryanother street, Charles." And following this suggestion they hurriedback, and took another street farther to the left.They now found themselves in a new scene; no soldiers were there, butdense masses of people were beheld in every direction, and barricadesformed or forming at every quarter. Where they were not complete thelady and her lover passed without difficulty, and almost withoutnotice. One of the young citizens, indeed, as he helped her over alarge pile of stones, remarked that her small feet ran no risk ofknocking down the barricade; and an old man who was rolling up a tunto fill a vacant space, paused to let her pass, and gazing with a sortof fatherly look upon her and her lover, exclaimed, "Get ye gone home,pretty one; get ye gone home. Take her home quick, young gentleman;this is no place for such as she is."These were all the words that were addressed to them till they againreached another barrier; but there again the word was demanded with asmuch dogged sullenness as ever, and the young Count, now resolved toforce his way by some means, determined rather to be taken prisoner bythe people and to demand to be carried to the Htel de Guise, than bedriven from barrier to barrier any longer. He remembered, however, thedegree of civility which had been shown to him by Chapelle Marteausome time before, and he demanded of the man who opposed him at thechain if either that personage or Bussi le Clerc were there. The manreplied in the negative, but seemed somewhat shaken in his purpose ofexcluding him, by his demand for persons so well known and so popular.At that moment, however, Charles of Montsoreau caught the sight of ahigh plume passing amongst the people at some distance, and themomentary glance of a face that he recollected."There is Monsieur de Bois-dauphin," he cried; "in the name of Heavencall him up here, that he may put an end to all this tediousopposition." The man did not seem to know of whom it was he spoke, butpointing forward with his hand, the young Count exclaimed, "Thatgentleman with the plume! that gentleman with the tall red plume!"The word was passed on in a moment, and the officer approached thebarrier, when Charles of Montsoreau instantly addressed him by thename of Bois-dauphin, begging him to give them admittance within thebarricade, and then adding in a low voice, that he had with him theDuke's ward, Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, who had just made her escapefrom the enemies of the House of Guise, and was so terrified that shecould scarcely support herself any longer."You mistake, sir," replied the officer; "I am not Bois-dauphin, butChamois: but I remember your face well at Soissons; the Count ofLogres, if I am right."The Count gave a sign of affirmation, while Marie de Clairvaut lookedup in his face with an expression of joy and relief, and the officerimmediately added, "Down with the chain directly, my good friends. Youare keeping out the Duke's best friends and relations."The men round the chain hastened eagerly to obey, but some difficultywas experienced in removing the chain, as the barrels--or barriques,as they are called in France, and from which the barriers calledbarricades took their name--pressed heavily upon it, and prevented itfrom being unhooked.Charles of Montsoreau was just about to pass under with his faircharge as the most expeditious way, when there came a loud cry fromthe end of the same street by which they had themselves come thither,of "The Queen! the Queen! Long live the good Queen Catherine!" Androlling forward with a number of unarmed attendants came one of thehuge gilded coaches of the time, passing at great risk to itself andall that it contained, through or over the yet incomplete barriersfarther up in the street.At the barricade where Charles of Montsoreau now was, however, the sixhorses by which the vehicle was drawn were brought to a sudden stop,and notwithstanding her popularity, which, at this time, was notsmall, the citizens positively refused to remove the barricade,although the Queen entreated them in the tone of a suppliant, andassured them that she was going direct to the Htel de Guise. Somereturned nothing but a sullen answer, some assured her it wasimpossible, and would take hours to accomplish; and Monsieur deChamois, who apparently did not choose to be seen actually aiding ordirecting the people in the formation of the barricades, retreatedamongst the multitude, and left them to act for themselves.At that moment the eye of Catherine de Medici fell upon Charles ofMontsoreau, and she beckoned him eagerly towards her."You are here, of course," she said, "upon the part of the Duke.""Not so indeed, madam," he replied; "I have but this moment made myescape from that place where I have been so long and so unjustlydetained.""Your escape!" she exclaimed in a tone that could not be affected."Villequier has betrayed me. He promised you should be set at libertyyesterday morning. And you too, Marie," she said looking at the youngCount's fair companion. "You surely received the order for yourliberation that I sent.""Safely, madam," replied Marie de Clairvaut, "and thank your Majestydeeply. But they have refused to let us pass at several barriers,otherwise I should certainly have executed your Majesty's commands.""This is most unfortunate," said the Queen. But pray. Monsieur deLogres, exert your influence with these people as far as possible.The welfare, perhaps the very salvation of the state, depends upon myspeaking with the Duke of Guise directly.""I will do my best, madam," replied the young Count; "but I fear Ishall not be able to do much. I will leave her under your protection,madam, and see."The Queen made him place Marie de Clairvaut in the carriage besideher: and having done this, he turned to the barrier and spoke to thosewho surrounded that point where the chain had been lowered to let himpass, with far more effect than he had anticipated. To remove thebarricade, the people said, was utterly impossible; but if her Majestywould descend and betake herself to her chair which was seen carriedby her domestics behind her, they would do what they could to make theaperture large enough for her to pass.With this suggestion Catherine de Medici, who had no personal fears,complied at once, and seated herself in the rich gilt-covered chairwhich followed her. She was about to draw the curtains round her andbid the bearers proceed, but her eye fell upon Marie de Clairvaut; andafter a moment's hesitation between compassion and queenly state, shesaid, "Poor child, thou art evidently like to drop: come in here withme; there is room enough for thee also, and the Queen is old enoughnot to mind her garments being ruffled. Quick, quick," she added,seeing Marie hesitate; and without further words the fair girl tookher place by the Queen.Although the chairs of those times were very different in point ofsize from those which we see (and now alas! rarely see) in our own,yet Mademoiselle de Clairvaut felt that she pressed somewhatunceremoniously on her royal companion; but Catherine de Medici, nowthat the act was done, smiled kindly upon her, and told her not tomind; and the bearers taking up the chair carried it on, while thepopulace rolled away one of the tuns to permit its passing through thebarricade. The Queen's train of attendants pressed closely round thechair, and Charles of Montsoreau followed amongst them as near as hecould to the vehicle, the people shouting as they went, "Long live theQueen! Long live the good Queen Catherine!"At all the barriers a way was made for her to pass, but still themultitudes in the streets were so thick, and the obstacles so many,that nearly three quarters of an hour passed, and the Htel de Guisewas still at some distance.At length Catherine de Medici drew back the curtains of gilt leather,and beckoned the young Count to approach, saying, as soon as he wasnear, "Pray, Monsieur de Logres, go on as fast as possible, and letthe Duke know that I am coming. I fear that with all these delays hemay have gone forth ere I reach his hotel. And hark. Monsieur deLogres," she continued, "if out of pure good will I once afforded youone hour of happiness that you did not expect, remember it now; andshould chance serve, speak a word to the Duke in favour of mypurposes. You understand? Quick--go on!"Charles of Montsoreau hastened on at the Queen's bidding, and havingnow heard the pass-word often repeated amongst the citizens, met withno opposition in making his way to the Htel de Guise. The onlydifficulty that he encountered was in the neighbourhood of the mansionitself, for the street was so thickly crowded with people and withhorses, that it was scarcely possible to approach the gates. Everything was hurry and confusion too, and the dense mass of peoplecollected in that spot was not like an ordinary crowd, either fixed toone place around the object of their attention, or moving in onedirection in pursuit of a general object; but, on the contrary, it wasstruggling and agitated, by numbers of persons forcing their waythrough in every different direction, so that it was with the greatestpossible labour and loss of time that any one advanced at all. Thegreat bulk of those present were armed, and amidst corslets, andswords, and brassards, heavy boots and long spurs, Charles ofMontsoreau, totally unarmed as he was, found the greatest possibledifficulty in forcing his way, although, probably, in point of merepersonal strength he was more than equal to any one there present.Long ere he could reach the gate of the hotel, there was a loud cryof, "The Queen! the Queen! long live Queen Catherine!" And the crowdrolling back, as if by common consent, swept him away far from thespot which he had gained, and nearly crushed him by the pressure. Atsome distance he caught a sight of the Queen's chair, but it stoppedat the edge of the crowd, and the movements that he saw in that partof the mass made him believe that Catherine was descending from thevehicle, intending to proceed on foot.He doubted not that the Queen's attendants, who were very numerous,would keep off the multitude; and even the rolling back of the peopleupon himself evinced that they were inclined to show her everyrespect. But still feeling that all he loved on earth was there, henaturally strove to see over the heads of the people. It was in vainthat he did so, however, for between him and the line along which theQueen was passing was a sea of waving plumes of every height andcolour, and all that he could discover was, how far she had proceededon her way to the gates, by the rush of the people closing up behindher as soon as she had passed.Just as she was entering the mansion a considerable degree ofconfusion was created in the crowd by one of the horses, held not farfrom the place where Charles of Montsoreau stood, either frightened bythe noise, or pressed upon by the people, beginning to kick violently.The man whom he first struck was luckily well covered with defensivearmour; but he was knocked down notwithstanding, and all the restrushed back, pressing upon the others behind them in confusion anddismay.Charles of Montsoreau, however, took advantage of the opportunity tomake his way forward; but just as he was so doing he was encounteredby the Marquis de Brissac hurrying eagerly forward through the crowd.He was dressed in his ordinary clothes, and armed with nothing but hissword; but there was fire and eagerness in his eyes, and he seized theyoung Count by the hand, exclaiming, "I am delighted to have foundyou, Logres. I wanted a man of action and of a good head. Come withme! come with me quick! or we shall have more mischief done than is atall needful. They have begun firing again! There!--Don't you hear?""I hear now," replied the Count, "but I did not pay attention to itbefore. I would come with you willingly. Monsieur de Brissac, but Iwish to see the Duke. He does not know yet that I am at liberty:neither have I a sword.""The Duke cannot see you now," cried Brissac, still holding the Countby the arm. "The Queen and her people are with him. I will get you asword. Come with me, come with me. Here, fellow, give the Count yoursword." And taking hold of the baldric of one of the men near, he madehim unbuckle it, and threw it over the Count's shoulders.For Brissac, who was well known to almost every body there, the peoplenow made way at least in some degree; and followed by the young Counthe hurried on, till they both could breathe somewhat more at liberty.In the mean time the sound of the musketry was heard increasing everymoment, and Brissac after listening for a moment exclaimed, "It comesfrom the March Neuf. By Heavens! Logres, we must put a stop to this,or they will take up the same music all over the town, and we shallhave those poor devils of Swiss slaughtered to a man. Who is thatfiring at the March Neuf?" he demanded at the first barrier theyreached."Our people," replied the captain of the quarter, "are firing upon thesoldiers in the market-place I hear.""Quick, Arnault; quick!" cried Brissac. "Get the keys of theslaughter-house and bring them after me with all speed! Come on,Logres, come on!" he continued, unable to refrain from a joke even inthe exciting and terrible scene that was going on. "The King willfind, I am afraid, that he has brought these pigs to a bad market,as the good ladies of the halle say. We must save as many of them frombeing butchered as we can, however." And running on, followed by twoor three persons from the different barriers that they passed, theysoon reached the corner of the March Neuf, where an extraordinary andterrible scene was exposed to their eyes.The market, which was somewhat raised above a low street that passedby its side, was a large open space, having at that time neitherbooths nor penthouses to cover the viands, usually there exposed, fromthe sun: each vendor that thought fit spreading out his own littlecanvass tent over his goods when he brought them. On the side by whichBrissac and Charles of Montsoreau approached, there was a low wall,not a yard high, separating the market from the street which passed bythe side, with some steps up to the former, as well as two or threeopen spaces to give ingress; and on the other side was a long lowrange of covered slaughter-houses, with tall buildings overtoppingthem beyond.In the midst of this open space, cooped in by barricades on everyside, and surrounded by tall houses with innumerable windows, was abody of about eight hundred Swiss. They were standing firm in themidst of the place, forming a three-sided front, with their right andleft resting on the slaughter-houses; and while their front rankpoured a strong and well-directed but ineffectual fire upon the twobarricades opposite, the second rank endeavoured to pick off theirassailants at the different windows.In the meanwhile, however, from those windows and barricades waspoured in upon the unhappy Swiss a tremendous fire, almost every shotof which told. The people at the barriers rose, fired, and then bentdown again behind their defences, while the men at the windows kept upa still more formidable, but more irregular discharge, sometimesfiring almost altogether, as if by common consent, sometimes pickingoff, here and there, any of their enemies they might fix upon; so thatat one moment, the whole sweeping lines of the tall houses were in oneblaze of fire and cloud of smoke; and the next, the flashes would dropfrom window to window, over each face of the square, like someartificial firework.Such was the scene of confusion and destruction which burst upon theeyes of Brissac and Charles of Montsoreau when they entered the squareof the March Neuf. The fire of the barrier which they passed wasinstantly stopped, but in other places it was still going on andBrissac, without the slightest hesitation, jumped at once upon the lowwall we have mentioned, and waved his hat in the air, shouting loudlyto cease firing. Some cessation instantly took place, but still notaltogether; and Charles of Montsoreau, rapidly crossing themarketplace to command the men at the opposite barricade to stop, wasslightly wounded in the arm by a ball from one of the windows.It luckily happened that the baldric which had been procured for himby Brissac bore the colours of the League and the cross of Lorraineembroidered on the front; and the defenders of the barrier stoppedinstantly at his command. When that was accomplished, he turned torejoin Brissac, and as he went, called to the people at the lowerwindows of the houses to stop firing in the name of the Duke of Guise,and to pass the same order up to those above them. The Swiss hadceased immediately, very glad of any truce to an encounter in whichfifty or sixty of their number had already fallen, while many morewere seriously wounded.The keys which Brissac had sent for had by this time arrived; and,accompanied by the young Count, he advanced, hat in hand, to theofficer in command of the Swiss, who met him half way with a sad butcalm and determined countenance."You see, sir," said Brissac, "that it is perfectly impossible for youto contend against the force opposed to you.""Perfectly," replied the officer; "every street is a fortress, everyhouse a redoubt. But we never intended to contend, and indeed hadreceived orders to retire, but could not do so on account of thebarricades, when suddenly some shot was fired from behind thosebuildings; and whether it was a signal to commence the massacre, orwhether the people thought that we had fired, I know not, but theyinstantly began to attack us; and here are more than sixty of my poorfellows butchered without cause.""There is only one plan to be pursued, sir," replied Brissac, "inorder to save you. You must instantly lay down your arms.""Were the people opposed to me soldiers, sir," replied the officer, "Iwould do so at a word; but the people seem in a state of madness, andthe moment we are disarmed they might fall upon us all, and butcher usin cold blood--yourself and all, for aught I know.""I have provided against that, sir," replied Brissac. "Here are thekeys of those buildings, which will shelter you from all attack, Imust not put in your hands a fortress against the citizens of Paris;so that while you retain your weapons you cannot enter; but the momentyou lay down your arms, I will give you that shelter, and pledge myword for your protection."The joy which spread over the officer's countenance at this offerplainly showed, what neither word nor look had done before, how deeplyhe had felt the terrible situation in which he was placed."It shall be done this instant," he said; and returning to his men,while Brissac unlocked the gates, he made them pile their arms in themarket-place, amidst a deafening shout from the people on all sides.The Swiss then marched, rank by rank, into the place of shelter thusafforded them; and Brissac, bowing low to the commander, who enteredthe last, said with a smile, which the other returned but faintly, "Inname, my dear sir, the exchange you are just making is not anagreeable one; but I am sure you will find that this slaughterhouse israther a more comfortable position than the one from which I have justdelivered you."The Marquis then caused a guard of the citizens to be placed over thearms of the Swiss; and turning to Charles of Montsoreau, he said,"Come, let us quick to the new bridge. The King used to say of me,Monsieur de Logres, that I was good for nothing, either on the sea oron the land. I think he will find to-day that I am good for somethingon the pavement."Thus saying he led the way back through the barrier; and Charles ofMontsoreau, having more leisure now than before to observe thecountenances and demeanour of the different people around, could nothelp thinking that older and more skilful soldiers than the citizensof Paris could boast were busy in directing the operations of thepopulace in different parts of the city. The scene was a strange andextraordinary one altogether; the streets were absolutely swarmingwith people, and crowds were hurrying hither and thither through everyopen space, but were still kept in dense masses by the constantobstruction of the barricades.Hastening on through the midst of these masses with Brissac, the youngnobleman's eye ran hastily over all the crowds that he passed, whensuddenly, at the end of one of the largest streets, which rose betweenthe dark gigantic houses on either side, with a gentle acclivity fromthe spot where he then stood, he saw amongst the various groups whichwere moving rapidly along or across it, one which attracted hisattention more particularly than the rest. It was at that momentcoming down the street, but proceeding in a somewhat slantingdirection towards the corner of another small street, not fifty yardsfrom the spot where he then was. There were two figures in it, inregard to which he could not be deceived: the one nearest him was theAbb de Boisguerin, the second was his own brother, Gaspar deMontsoreau; and he could not help imagining that another whom he sawleading the way was that personage who had first called upon him onhis arrival in Paris, named Nicolas Poulain.Before he could recollect himself, an exclamation of surprise hadcalled the attention of Brissac; but remembering how much his brotherhad excited the indignation of the Duke of Guise, and that his verylife might be in danger if taken in the streets of Paris at that time,Charles of Montsoreau only answered in reply to Brissac's questions,that he had fancied he saw somebody whom he knew."There goes worthy Master Nicolas Poulain," said Brissac, "and thegood Cur of St. Genevieve, as zealous in our cause as any one; but wecan't stop to speak with them just now." And he was hurrying on, butCharles of Montsoreau stopped him, saying,"For my part, Monsieur de Brissac, I shall return to the Htel deGuise. The Duke, I dare say, has concluded his interview with theQueen by this time, and I much wish to speak with him.""Well, you cannot miss your way," cried Brissac. "Take that firstturning to the left, and then the third to the right, and it will leadyou straight to the Porte Cochre."Charles of Montsoreau nodded his head, and hurried on, with manifoldanxieties and apprehensions in his bosom, which twenty times hepronounced to be absurd, but which, nevertheless, he could not banishby any effort of reason.CHAP. II.We must now return to mark what was passing at another point in thecapital, an hour or two earlier than the events narrated in the end ofthe last chapter. The Duke of Guise sat in a cabinet in his hotel,with his sword laid upon the table before him, which also bore a pen,and ink, and paper, and some open letters. His foot was resting on afootstool, his dress plain but costly, and not one sign of any thinglike preparation for the stirring events, which were to take placethat day, apparent in either his looks, his apparel, or his demeanour.Beside him booted, and in some degree armed, stood the Count of St.Paul; while Bois-dauphin, who had just had his audience, was leavingthe cabinet by a low door, and the Duke, bending his head, appearedlistening with the utmost tranquillity to what his friend was tellinghim."Then the matter is done," he said, as soon as St. Paul had concluded."The Place Manbert is in the hands of the people, and may be made aPlace d'Armes. Bois-dauphin tells me that the soldiers underTinteville, at the Petit Pont, are barricaded on all sides and cannotmove. You give me the same account of the March Neuf, the same is thecase with the Grve, the French guard under the Chatelet are hemmed inall round, the Cemetery of the Innocents is invested on all sides, andMalivaut, I understand, has been driven from his post in greatdisorder. This being done, St. Paul, you see these troops of theKing's are not exactly in fortresses, but in prisons; and how Biron,or Crillon, or the King himself, could have committed theextraordinary error--all of them being men of experience--how theycould have committed the extraordinary error, I say, of dividing theirsoldiery in the narrow streets and squares of such a city as Paris,sending them far from the palace, and leaving them withoutcommunication with each other, I cannot conceive. However, they areall in our hands, and what we must think of is, to make a moderate useof our success. Try to keep the people from any active aggression, St.Paul; let them stand upon the defensive only, spread amongst themdifferent parties of those whom we have collected, who may give themdirection and assistance if needful. But keep the principal part ofour own people in this neighbourhood, that we may direct them on anypoint where their presence may be necessary.""Might it not be as well, your Highness," said the Count, "to take onemeasure more? We have far more people than enough to guard all thebarricades. I can undertake to draw ten or even twelve thousand fromdifferent spots, and march them out of the Porte Neuve.""To lead them where?" demanded the Duke of Guise, lifting his eyes tothe countenance of St. Paul with a meaning expression."To the Tuilleries and to the Louvre," replied the Count. "Every pointof importance," he added in a low and meaning voice, "will then beinvested."The Duke of Guise waved his hand. "No, St. Paul, no!" he said, "thatstep would instantly require another. No; if the enemy misjudge ourforbearance, and attempt aught towards shedding the blood of thecitizens of Paris, we must then act as God shall direct us. In themean time I say not, that the barricades may not be carried up to thevery gates of the Louvre, for that is for our own defence; but atpresent, St. Paul, at present, it must be on the defensive that westand. I beseech you, however, to see that no ground is lost in anypart of the city, for you know how soon an advantage is gained. Shouldit be needful send for me, but not till the last extremity."The Count of St. Paul turned to obey, but paused for a moment beforehe had reached the door. The Duke of Guise by this time was gazingfixedly upon the hilt of his sword, as it lay on the table before him,and seemed perfectly unconscious that the Count had not quitted theroom. A slight smile curled that gentleman's lip, as he saw thedirection that the Duke's eyes had taken, and he opened the door andpassed out.For several minutes the Duke of Guise continued to gaze in deepthought; and his bosom at that moment was certainly full of thosesensations which never, perhaps, occur to any man but once in hislifetime--even if Fate have cast him one of those rare and memorablelots, which bear down the winner thereof, upon the stream of fame andmemory, through a thousand ages after his own day is done. The fate ofhis country was in his hands; he had but to stretch out his arm andgrasp the crown of France: and what temptations were there to do so toa mind like his!It must not be forgotten that the Duke of Guise, by every hereditaryfeeling, by every prejudice of education, as well as by many strongand peculiar points in his own character, was in truth and reality astrenuous and zealous supporter of the Roman Catholic Church. Hisveneration for that great and extraordinary institution had descendedto him from his father, and had formed the great principle of actionin his own life. Even had he merely assumed that devotion for thechurch during so many years, the very habit must have moulded hisfeelings into the same form; and he must have been by this time, moreor less a zealous advocate of the Catholic cause, even if he had setout with caring nothing in reality about it. But such was not thecase: his father had educated him in principles of strict and sterndevotion to the faith in which they were born; and though in thegaieties and the frivolities of youth, or the eager struggles ofmanhood, he might have appeared in the ordinary affairs of life anything on earth but the zealot, yet still his zeal would have been farmore than a pretence, had it only been the effect of early educationand constant habit.There was something still more, however, to be said. The spirit of theCatholic Church was consonant to, and harmonious with, the whole toneof his own feelings, at once deep, powerful, imaginative,enthusiastic, politic, and commanding. Chivalry, feudalism, and theChurch of Rome, went hand in hand: all three were, indeed, in theirdecay; but if ever man belonged to the epoch of chivalry, it was HenryDuke of Guise; and he clung to all the other institutions that wereattached to that past epoch, of which he in spirit was a part.Attached therefore sincerely, deeply, and zealously to the CatholicChurch--far, far more than his brother the Duke of Mayenne ever was orever could be--Guise beheld a weak monarch, whom he despised and hatedfrom the very bottom of his heart, wasting the whole energies of theCatholic party in France in a mere pretence of opposing the Huguenots,and, in fact, caring for nothing but so to balance the two religiousfactions as to be permitted to remain in luxurious indolence,swallowed up with the most foul, degrading, and abhorrent vices;setting an example of low and filthy effeminacy to his whole court;and only chequering a life of soft and unmanly voluptuousness bybursts of frantic debauchery, or moments of apparent penitence anddevotion, so wild and extravagant as to betray their own affectation,by the absurdities which they displayed.The church to which Guise was attached was thus betrayed; his ownespecial friends and relations were neglected, insulted, ormaltreated; all that were great or good in the nobility of France wereshut out from the high offices of state, trampled upon by the minionsof the King, and plundered by insolent and fraudulent financiers; thecourse of public justice was totally perverted; every thing in thegovernment was venal and corrupt; the exertions of commerce andindustry totally put to a stop; assassination, poison, and the knife,of daily occurrence; and bands of audacious plunderers tearing theunhappy land from north to south.The Duke of Guise might well think, as he sat there gazing upon thehilt of that renowned sword which had never been drawn in vain, that,were he to say the few short words which were all that was necessaryto bring the crown to his head and the sceptre to his hand--he mightwell think that he could obtain for France thereby those greatobjects which he conceived were, beyond all others, necessary to herwell-being. He might well conceive too that the cost of so doing wouldbut be little: civil war already raged in the land; the whole south ofFrance was one scene of contention; it already existed in the capital;and would, in all probability, be shortened rather than prolonged byhis striking the one great and decisive blow.The King, who was absolutely at his mercy, and whom he could cast downfrom his throne at a single word, was no obstacle in his way; theEpernons, the d'Aumonts, the Villequiers, he looked upon,notwithstanding all their favour, and the semblance of power which hadbeen cast into their hands, as a mere herd of deer, to be drivenbackwards and forwards, like beasts of the chase, between himself andHenry of Navarre. And then again, when he looked to the great andchivalrous Huguenot monarch, what were the feelings with which heregarded the struggle that might take place between them? His breastheaved, his chest expanded, his head was raised, his eye flashed withthe thought of encountering an adversary worthy of the strife, a rivalof powers equal or nearly equal to his own. When he thought of army toarmy, and lance to lance, against Henry of Navarre, with the crown ofFrance between them as the golden prize of their mighty strife, hisspirit seemed on fire within him, and he had well nigh forgotten allhis resolutions, in order to do the daring act which might bring aboutthat glorious result; and then, when fancy pictured him returningtriumphant over his rival, with peace restored, and civil war putdown, and commerce flourishing, and the rights of France maintained onevery frontier, an uniform religion, a happy people, and the strongtruncheon of command in a hand that could wield it lightly, theprospect was too bright, too beautiful, too tempting; and he pressedhis hand tight upon his eyes, as if he could so shut it out from hismental vision.What was it that deterred him? There was much reason on his side;there was little if any risk; there was the object of the church'ssafety; there was the gratification of vengeance upon those who hadinsulted and injured him; there were the exhortations of the King ofSpain; there was almost the universal voice of the people in the northof France; there was his own ambition; there was the certainty thatall he did would be absolved, sanctioned, confirmed by the head of theCatholic Church; there was already in his favour the solemn anddecided declaration of the highest theological authority in France;and there was many a specious argument, which no one could expect thathe should sift and refute against himself.What was it deterred him? Was it that there is a majesty which hedgesin a King, sufficiently strong to overawe even the Duke of Guisehimself? Was it that the habitual reverence, which he had beenaccustomed to show towards the kingly office, veiled or shielded fromhis eyes the real weakness of him who exercised it? Was it that hefeared himself?--Or was it that he felt the act of usurpation must beconfirmed by murder?It cannot be told! Certain it is that he dreamt grand visions; that hesaw mighty prospects of fair paths leading to honour, and glory, andhigh renown, and his country's good, and his church's safety; and thathe banished the visions and would not take the only step which wouldhave over-passed every barrier to his forward way.The words of Catherine de Medici rung in his ears--the words which hadwarned him against the growth of ambition in his own heart; he heardthe shouts of the people without, and her warning voice again cameback in tones that seemed well nigh prophetic. Almost, it wouldappear, without a cause, the vanity of all things seemed to press uponhis mind at that moment with stronger effect than he had everexperienced before. There was a leaden weight upon his spirits he knewnot why. He seemed to feel the hand of Fate, the tangible pressure ofa directing arm, selecting for him the path he was to pursue, andforcing him thereon at the very moment when supreme command appearedgiven to him without a check.The sun seemed to dazzle his eyes as he gazed from the window, vaguefigures passed before him, and crossed the dancing motes, picturing,like shadows, the persons of whom he had been thinking. He saw Henrythe Third distinctly before him, and fierce faces and bloody knives,and figures weltering in their blood upon the ground. He felt that hehad indulged fancy too far, that he had given way to thought at themoment of action, that his course must be shaped as he hadpredetermined it in calmer hours; and waving his hand, as if to dispelthe visions that still haunted his sight, he rose from his chair,leaning heavily on the table, pushed the sword away from him, andmurmured to himself, "No, no! I will never be an usurper! Ho, withoutthere!" he continued. "Who waits? What is that sound of musketry?""Erlan has just arrived, my Lord," replied the attendant, "to bearyour Highness word, that the citizens have driven Malivaut down intothe market, and that is the firing we hear.""Tell Erlan to speed back as fast as possible," replied the Duke, "andbid them cease directly. Let them content themselves with hemming inthe enemy without attacking them. But I hear more firing still; Ishall be obliged to go forth myself.""Monsieur de Brissac has just gone out on one side, your Highness,"replied the attendant, "and Monsieur de St. Paul on the other; bothwith the purpose of stopping the bloodshed. But they have not had timeto get to the spot yet.""It has ceased now," said the Duke listening. "It has ceased nowtowards the Chatelet: but on the other side it is fierce. Go down andsee what are those shouts, and let me know! Surely Henry," he added,"would not venture into such a scene as this. Alas, no! He wouldventure nothing--dare nothing, either for his own sake or hiscountry's."A moment after the attendant returned saying, "It is the Queen, myLord; her Majesty Queen Catherine. The crowd of people prevents thechair from coming up to the gates; but she has descended and is comingon foot."The Duke instantly started up and approached the head of the staircasefor the purpose of hurrying down to receive his royal visitor; butCatherine was by this time upon the stairs, with Madame de Montpensierand a number of other ladies, who had passed the morning at the Htelde Guise, surrounding her on all sides. The Duke advanced and gave herhis hand to aid her in ascending the stairs; and perhaps the aspect ofCatherine at that moment taught him more fully than any thing else,how tremendous was the scene without, and how completely the capitalof France was at his disposal.Habituated for more than twenty years to control all her feelings, andto repress every appearance of fear or agitation, Catherine de Mediciwas nevertheless on the present occasion completely overcome. Her lipquivered, her head shook, and there was a degree of wild apprehensionin her eyes, which it was some moments ere her strongest efforts couldconquer."Cousin of Guise," she said, as soon as she had drawn her breath, "Imust speak with you for a few moments alone; I must beseech you togive me audience, even if it be but for half an hour.""Your Majesty has nothing to do but command," replied the Duke. "Mytime is at your disposal."The Queen smiled slightly at feeling how easily the empty words ofcourts may be retorted upon those that use them. It has been said thatit costs nothing to use civil language and say courtly things, evenwhen insincere: but it costs much; for, sooner or later, we are sureto be paid in the same coin to which we have given currency, perhapseven more depreciating than when we sent it forth. She answered onlyby that smile however; and the Duke led her forward to his cabinet,all the rest of those who crowded the staircase remaining behind.With every sign of ceremonious reverence the Duke of Guise led hisroyal guest to a seat, and stood before her; but she paused for amoment, and hesitated ere she spoke. "My Lord," she said at length,"this is a terrible state of things.""Your Majesty knows more of it than I do," replied the Duke calmly,"for I have not gone forth from the house to-day; but I hear there issome tumult in Paris.""Henry of Guise!" replied the Queen, fixing her eyes upon him. "Henryof Guise, be sincere!""Madam," replied the Duke, "one must adapt one's tone tocircumstances. With those who are sincere with us we may be as candidas the day; but when we are sadly taught the fallacy of words, and thefragility of promises, we must, of course, shelter ourselves undersome reserve.""Your Highness's words imply an accusation," said Catherine somewhatsharply. "In what have I dealt insincerely with you?""Your Majesty promised me," replied the Duke of Guise, "that my noblefriend, the young Count of Logres, should be set at liberty not laterthan yesterday morning; and that my ward, Mademoiselle de Clairvaut,should be immediately replaced under my protection.""You have done me wrong, your Highness," replied the Queen; "andattributed to want of will what only arose from want of power.Villequier has formally claimed the guardianship of Mademoiselle deClairvaut; his application is before the parliament at this hour; andorders have been given on all hands for the young Lady to remain underthe protection of the King till the question is decided.""I will cut his cause very short," replied the Duke of Guise frowning,"if she be not within my gates ere six hours be over.""She is within your gates even now, my Lord," replied the Queen. "YourHighness is too quick. I sent an order myself for the liberation ofthe Count de Logres, for that only depended upon the King my son.Some one, however, diverted it from its right course, and he was onlyset free this morning. He ought to have been here before me, for Isent him on; but I suppose he has not been able to pass the mass ofpeople round your doors. As to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, I haverisked every thing to restore her to you; and notifying to Villequierand Epernon that I would no longer countenance her being detained, Iliberated her on my own authority and brought her here in my ownchair. She would have been freed two nights ago, for I wished toeffect the matter by a little stratagem, and have her carried from theconvent and brought hither without any one knowing how or by whom itwas done; but the meddling burgher guard came up and drove the peoplethat I sent away. But let us, oh let us, my Lord, discuss more seriousthings. Have I now been sincere with you?""You have, madam," replied the Duke, "and I thank your Majesty evenfor doing an act of justice, so rare are they in these days. But may Iknow what are now your Majesty's commands?""You cannot affect to doubt, cousin," replied the Queen, "that Paris,the capital of my son's kingdom, is in revolt from end to end. Can youdeny that you are the cause of it?""Though no man is bound to accuse himself, madam," replied the Duke,returning the Queen's searching glance with a calm, steady gaze, "yetI will answer your question, and sincerely. I have in no degreeinstigated this rising. His Majesty is the cause and not I. We see,without any reason or motion whatsoever, or any expression of theKing's displeasure, large bodies of troops introduced into the city,during the night, without drums beating or colours flying, andaltogether in a clandestine manner. We see them take possessionof various strong points, and we hear them using menacinglanguage--Monsieur de Crillon himself passing through the streets,breathing nothing but menaces and violence; and if your Majesty canwonder that in these circumstances the citizens of Paris fly to armsfor the defence of their property, of their lives, and of the honourof their women, it is more than I can do. In truth, I know not whatthe King expected to produce, but the very result which is before us.I assure your Majesty, however, that it is not at my instigation thatthis was done; though, even if I had done this, and far more, I shouldhave held myself completely justified.""Justified," said the Queen, shaking her head mournfully. "What thenbecomes of all your Highness said upon ambition but three days ago?""Ambition, madam, would have nothing to do with it," replied the Duke."It would have been merely self-defence. Who had so much cause to fearthat the rash and despotic proceedings which have taken place wereaimed at him as I have had? Who had so much cause to know that theobject of all this military parade, was not the hanging of some halfdozen miserable burghers in the Place de Grve, but the arrest, andperhaps massacre, of Henry of Guise and all his kind and zealousfriends? Can you deny, madam, that such was the cause for which thesesoldiers were brought hither? Can you deny, madam, that onlyyesterday, when the King assuming friendship towards me, invited me toride forth with him--can you deny that it was debated in his council,whether he should or should not order his guards to murder me as wewent? Confident in my own conscience, madam, and believing that theKing, though misinformed, entertained no personal ill-will against onewho had served him well, I came to Paris, walked through the royalguards, and presented myself at Court, in the midst of my enemies,with only eight attendants; and ever since that day, there has notbeen an hour in which my life and liberty have not been in danger,in which schemes for my destruction have not been agitated in theCabinet of the King; and I say that, under these circumstances, Ishould have been perfectly justified in raising the people for my owndefence. But, madam, I did not do so; and I am not the cause of thisrising.--What is it, Monsieur de Bois-dauphin?" he added, turning toa gentleman who had just entered, and who now answered a few words ina low tone. The Duke retired with him into the window, and afterspeaking for a moment or two in whispers, Guise dismissed him andreturned, making apologies to the Queen for the interruption.It may be said, without noticing it again, that the same sort ofoccurrence took place more than once--different officers andattendants coming in, from time to time, speaking for a moment withthe Duke in private, and hurrying out again. Though Catherine deMedici felt this to be somewhat unceremonious treatment, and though itevidently showed her, that whatever share the Duke had had in raisingthe tumult at first, he assuredly now guided all its proceedings, andruled the excited multitudes from his own cabinet; yet, in otherrespects, she was not sorry for time to pause and think ere shereplied, knowing that she had to deal with one whose mind was far tooacute to be satisfied with vague or unsatisfactory answers."My Lord," she said, as soon as the conversation was resumed, "I didnot mean exactly to say that you are the active cause of theseproceedings, or that you have excited the people. What I meant was,that your presence in Paris is the occasion of this emotion. Youcannot doubt that it is so; and therefore, being in this respect thecause, it is only yourself who can provide the remedy.""Pardon me, madam," replied the Duke of Guise; "I do not see how thatcan be. In the first place, I have all along denied that I am thecause, either inert or active. The people have risen for their owndefence, though, certainly, my defence and my welfare is wrapped up inthat of the people. In the next place, I know not what remedy can beprovided in the present state of affairs. What have you to propose,madam?""What I came to propose, my fair cousin," replied the Queen, "andwhat, I am sure, is the only way of quieting the tumult that nowexists, is, that you should quit Paris immediately.--Nay! nay! hear meout. If I propose this thing to you, it is not without being preparedand ready to offer you such inducements and recompences, both foryourself and all your friends, as may show you how highly the King, myson, esteems you, and at what a price he regards the service you willrender him. Look at this paper, good cousin of Guise, signed with hisown name, and see what perfect security and contentment it ought togive you."The Duke of Guise, however, put the paper gently and respectfully fromhim, replying, "Madam, what you propose is impossible. Either thepeople of Paris have risen in their own defence, in which case myleaving the city would have no effect upon the tumult, or else theyhave risen in mine, when it would be base to abandon them. I believethe first of these cases is the true one, and that, therefore, bystaying in Paris, I may serve the King far more effectually than Icould by quitting the city."Catherine de Medici had nothing directly to reply to the reasoning ofthe Duke; but she answered somewhat warmly, "By my faith, yourHighness, I think some day you will logically prove that the best wayto serve the King is to take the crown off his head.""Madam," replied the Duke drily, "Messieurs d'Epernon, Villequier,Joyeuse, D'O., and others, have long been trying to prove theproposition which your Majesty puts forth; but they have not yetconvinced me of the fact,--nor ever will. They, madam, are or havebeen those who have put the King's crown in danger; and, as far asregards myself, I have but to remind you that if I had any designsupon the King's person, five hundred men sent out this morning by thePorte de Nesle, and five hundred more by the Porte Neuve, would bequite sufficient for all the purposes your Majesty attributes to me."Catherine de Medici turned deadly pale, seeing how easily the palaceitself might be invested. At that instant one of the Duke's officersagain entered, and spoke to him for a moment or two apart. The Queenquietly took up a pen from the table, wrote a few words on a slip ofpaper, and opening the door of the cabinet demanded in a low voice,"Is Pinart there?"A gentleman instantly started forward, and putting the paper in hishands, she spoke to him for a moment in a whisper, ending with thewords, "Use all speed!" Then re-entering the cabinet, she took herseat while the Duke was yet speaking with his friend."Cousin of Guise," she said, as soon as he had done, and the strangerhad departed, "you have certainly given me strong proof that you haveno evil intentions; but such power is, alas! very dangerous to trustone's self with. Read that paper, I beseech you, and tell me if therebe any other thing you can demand--any other condition which willinduce you to quit Paris even for a few days?""It were useless for me to read it, madam," replied the Duke. "Nothingon earth that could be offered me would induce me to quit Paris atthis moment. But believe me, madam, my being here has nothing to dowith the continuance of the tumult. I have sent out all my friends andofficers and relations already to calm the disturbance. But it is theKing who is the cause of it, or, rather, the King's evil advisers. Ashe has occasioned it, he must put a stop to it.""What would you have him do?" demanded Catherine de Medici quickly."How would you have him act?""In the first place," replied the Duke, "let him recall his troops;let them be withdrawn from every post they occupy! Their presence wasthe cause of the people's rising, and as soon as they are gone, theemotion will gradually subside.""He has sent the order of recall already," replied Catherine; "but itis impossible to execute it. Hemmed in by barricades on every side,how can they retire, or take one step without danger?""That I trust," replied the Duke, "can soon----"But he was interrupted in the midst of what he was saying by thesudden entrance of Charles of Montsoreau."I beg your Highness to pardon me," he said. "Your Majesty will, I amsure, forgive me, when I ask if you know what has become ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut?"There was anxiety and apprehension in every line of Charles ofMontsoreau's countenance, and the Queen's brow instantly gatheredtogether with a look of mingled surprise and apprehension."She followed me into the hotel; did she not?" exclaimed the Queen. "Igot out of the chair first, and she came immediately after. Surely Isaw her upon the stairs!""The porter, madam, declares, that there was no lady entered with yourMajesty; that two or three gentlemen came in; and that it was sometime before your chair, and the rest of your male attendants couldcome up, on account of the crowd. I have ventured to ask Madame deMontpensier and the rest of the ladies in the house, before I intrudedhere: but no one has seen Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, and she iscertainly not in the house.""Is this the way I am treated?" exclaimed the Duke of Guise, his browgathering into a tremendous frown. "Is this the way that I am sportedwith at the very moment----""Nay! nay! nay! Cousin of Guise," exclaimed Catherine de Medici,rising from her seat and clasping her hands. "So help me, Heaven, as Ihave had no share in this! I descended from my chair in the midst ofthe crowd--knowing terror and agitation, such as, indeed, I never knewbefore--and I thought that this poor girl had followed. I was too muchengrossed with the thought of my son's throne tottering to itsfoundation to pay much attention to any thing else; but Monsieur deLogres himself can tell you, that I treated her with all kindness,and that mine was the order for her liberation.""Indeed it was, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "Her Majestydisplayed every sort of kindness, and Mademoiselle de Clairvaut was inthe same chair with her when I left her, scarce a hundred yards fromthese gates. I fear, my Lord, however, that there are machinationstaking place, which I must explain to you. And in a low voice he toldthe Duke what he had seen while returning from the March Neuf."This Nicolas Poulain is a villain," exclaimed the Duke after he hadlistened. "I have received the proofs thereof this very morning. Ho!without there!--Madam, by your leave," he continued, turning to theQueen, "I would fain speak with these attendants of yours, but darenot presume to command them hither in your presence."The Queen immediately directed all those who had followed her chair,or had borne it, to be called in, and the Duke questioned themsharply, in a stern and lofty tone, regarding what they had seen ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut after the Queen had passed on.The answer of each was the same however, namely, that none of them hadseen any thing of her. Some had accompanied the Queen and kept the wayclear, and two others who, had remained with the chair, as well as thebearers themselves, declared that the young Lady, after havingdescended from the Queen's chair had gone on; that there was animmediate rush of the people, which separated them from the rest ofthe royal train; and that what between the pressure and confusion thatimmediately took place, and the kicking of one of the chargers, whichmade the people run back with cries and affright, they had seennothing more of the party to which they had belonged, till they hadmade their way up to the Htel de Guise and obtained admission.The Duke paused with a gloomy and anxious brow. "Go, some one," hesaid at length, "go up to Philibert of Nancy, who was placed above, towatch what was taking place from the top of the house. Ask him what hesaw after the Queen's arrival, and bring me down word.""May I go, my Lord?" demanded Charles of Montsoreau.The Duke nodded his head, and the young nobleman sprang up the stairs,and guided by one of the servants found the watchman, who had beenplaced at the top of the house to report from time to time whateveroccurrences of importance he might perceive in the neighbouringstreets. All the information the man could give, however, was, that hehad seen a party separate from the rest of the people, almostimmediately after the Queen's entrance; that they seemed to be takinggreat care of some person in the midst of them, who, he fancied, hadbeen hurt by the kicking and plunging of a horse which he had remarkedhard by. The party had turned the corner of the street withoutattracting his attention farther; but, he added, that a moment or twoafterwards he thought he had heard a shrill cry coming from thedirection which they had taken.With such tidings only, and with his heart more agonised than ever,Charles of Montsoreau returned to the Duke, who was still standinggloomily by the Queen, who, on her part looked up at his dark andfrowning countenance with a degree of calmness which did not seemquite so natural as she could have wished."Whatever has happened, my Lord Duke," she said, after listening tothe young nobleman's report, "whatever has happened, on my honour, onmy salvation, I have had no share in it; and I promise you mostsolemnly, not to rest a moment till I have discovered what has becomeof your ward, and have made you acquainted therewith. If she be in theCourt of my son, I make bold to say, that she shall be instantlyrestored to you: but I cannot believe that it is so, as it isimpossible for Villequier to have passed those barriers without beingtorn to pieces by the people."Still the Duke remained thinking gloomily without making any answer."Logres," he said at length, "I must trust you with this business,for I have more matters to deal with than I can well compass. Fromwhat you said just now, and from what the boy Ignati told me, I knowhow you stand with our poor Marie. You know what I said, and what Ipromised long ago. Seek her, find her, and wed her! Monsieur de St.Paul will tell you where your own men are; take her, wherever you findher: by force, if it be necessary; and if any man, calling himself agentleman, oppose you, cleave him to the jaws. I will bear you out inwhatever you do: there is my signet: but stay; you had better seeMarteau Chapelle and Bussi about it. They know every house in Paris,and I can spare them now from other affairs: bid them go with you andaid you; and tell Chapelle---- What is it now, Brissac? You lookconfounded and alarmed.""The news I have will confound your Highness also, I am sure," repliedBrissac; "to alarm you is not possible, I fancy. I have just receivedintelligence from the Porte de Nesle, my Lord, that the King hasquitted Paris, and taken the road to Chartres!"The Duke of Guise turned towards Catherine de Medici, and gazed uponher sternly, saying, "You have done this, madam! You amuse me, whileyou destroy me!"[1]---------------------[Footnote 1: I have given the Duke's own words without variation.]---------------------"I have done this, cousin of Guise," replied the Queen, "and I havedone wisely for all parties. I have removed from you a greattemptation to do an evil action--a temptation which I saw that youyourself feared; and while I have removed that danger from you, myadvice has put my son in safety.""Madam," replied the Duke, "I felt no temptation: my resolution wasfirm, positive, and unshaken; and had I chosen to compromise theKing's safety, or do wrong to his legitimate authority, the Louvrewould have been invested six hours ago, for the people were already ontheir march, if I had not stopped them. I wonder that he escaped insafety, however, for they are very much infuriated at the sight ofthese soldiers.""He walked from the Louvre," replied Brissac, "on foot to theTuilleries, I hear, followed by some half dozen gentlemen; he thenmounted his horses in the stables, and rode out suddenly; but it issaid that they fired at him from the Porte de Nesle. The people,however, as they hear it, are becoming quite furious, and I fear thatwe shall not be able to keep them from massacring the soldiery.""You see, madam," replied the Duke of Guise, still thinking alone ofthe King's escape, "you see, madam, to what danger the King hasexposed himself. Had he remained in Paris no evil could have befallenhim. He was safe, on my life, and on my honour."I believe you, cousin of Guise; I believe you;" replied the Queen,who thought she saw that the tone of the Duke of Guise was not quiteso peremptory as it had been, while the King had seemed entirely inhis power. "But now, in order to prove your good will entirely, let mebeseech you to exert yourself to save the unhappy men who have beenplaced in such a situation of danger.""That shall soon be done, madam," replied the Duke; "and as soon asthis is done, I too must take means for finding my ward. In themeantime, madam, I will beseech you to use such measures at the Court,as may insure that the people of Paris, and of the realm in general,shall not be driven again to such acts as these, remembering, that asyou warned me not long ago, popularity is the most transient of allthings, and that mine may not last long enough to save the state asecond time from the dangers that menace it.""I understand you, cousin of Guise; I understand you;" replied theQueen. "It may not last long enough, or it may not be willinglyexerted: but I give you my promise, that every thing shall be done tocontent you; and with that view I have already demanded that theinsolent, greedy, and ambitious Epernon shall be banished from theCourt, and stripped of his plundered authority.--But hark!" shecontinued, "I hear the firing recommence. Wait not for further words,or for any ceremonies; I will find my way back to the Louvre withoutdifficulty. Go, my Lord, go at once, and save the poor Swiss from thefury of the people!"The Duke bowed low, took up his hat and sword, and without other armswalked out into the streets.CHAP. III.Passing out by the rooms belonging to the porter, instead of by thePorte Cochre, the Duke of Guise, followed by a number of hisofficers, presented himself to the people on the steps which we havealready noticed. The moment he appeared, the whole street rang withacclamations, a path was instantly opened for him through the midst ofthe people, and mounting his horse he rode on, the barricades openingbefore him, as if by magic, wherever he came, and the people rendingthe air with acclamations of his name.From time to time he stopped as he went, either bending down his proudhead to speak to some of those whom he knew, or addressing the generalpopulace in the neighbourhood of the different barriers, exhortingthem to tranquillity, and beseeching, commanding, and entreating themto desist from all attacks upon the soldiery. His words spread likelightning from mouth to mouth; and though he went in person to severalof the different points where the unequal contest was actively goingon, the assault upon the troops was stopped in other quarters also, bythe mere report of his wishes.Thus, as it were in triumph, totally unarmed amidst the armedmultitude, he went ruling their furious passions, as if by someall-powerful charm. The most violent, the most exasperated, the mostsullen, uttered not one word in opposition to his will, and showednothing but promptness and zeal in executing his commands. Before hereached the Place de Grve even, towards which his course wasdirected, the screams, the cries, the shouts, the firing, had ceasedin every part of Paris, and nothing was heard throughout that widecapital but the rending shouts of joy, with which the multitudeaccompanied him on his way.On entering the Place de Grve the Duke looked sternly up at thewindows of the Htel de Ville, but did not enter the building. Hesaid, however, speaking to those immediately surrounding him, "A weekshall not have elapsed before we have cleared that house of the verminthat infest it; and the people shall be freed from those who havebetrayed them."Then dismounting from his horse, and ascending the steps leading tothe elevated space, called the Perron of the Htel de Ville, he liftedhis hat from his head for a moment, as a sign that he wished toaddress the people. All was silent in an instant; and then were heardthe full rich deep tones of that eloquent voice, pouring over theheads of the multitude, and reaching the very farthest parts of thesquare."My friends and fellow-citizens," he said. "You have this day acquireda great and glorious victory. You have triumphed over the efforts ofdespotic power, exerted, I am sure, not by the King's own will andconsent, but by the evil counsels, and altogether by the evil efforts,of minions, peculators, and traitors. The real merit of those who wingreat victories and achieve great deeds, is ascertained more by theway in which they use their advantages, than by the way in which thoseadvantages have been gained. Were you a mean, degraded, unthinkingrace of men, who had been stirred up by oppression into objectlessrevolt, you would now content yourselves with wreaking your vengeanceon a few pitiable and unhappy soldiers, who in obedience to thecommands which they have received, have been cast into the midst ofyou, like criminals of old, given up naked to a hungry lion. But youare not such people; you have great objects before you; you know andappreciate the mighty purposes for which you have fought andconquered; and though driven by self-defence to resist the will of theKing, you are still men to venerate and respect the royal authority;and even while you determine, for his sake as well as for your own,never to rest satisfied till the Catholic Church is established beyondthe power of heretics to shake; till the Court is freed from theminions and evil counsellors that infect it; till the finances of thestate are collected, and administered by a just and a frugal hand; andtill the whole honours, rewards, and emoluments of the country are nolonger piled upon one man--though you are determined to seek for andobtain all this, nevertheless, I know, you are not men to trench inthe least upon the royal authority, farther than your own securityrequires, or to injure the royal troops whom you have conquered, whenthey are no longer in a situation to do you wrong. You will remember,I am sure, that they are our fellow-christians and our fellow-men, andyou will treat them accordingly. I have therefore," he said,"requested my friends and fellow-labourers in your cause, Monsieur deBrissac and Monsieur de St. Paul, to conduct hither in safety theFrench and Swiss troops from the different quarters in which they havebeen dispersed. Their arms will be brought hither by our own friends,and in the manner which we shall deal with these two bodies ofsoldiery, I trust that we shall meet still with the approbation of ourbrethren."While thus speaking, the Duke of Guise had been interrupted more thanonce by the applauses of the people, and in the end loud andreiterated acclamations left no doubt that all he chose to do wouldreceive full support from those who heard him.While he was yet speaking--according to the orders which he had givenas he came along--the arms of the Swiss and French guards were broughtin large quantities, by different bodies of the citizens: somecarrying them in hand-barrows, some bearing them upon their shoulders;and it was a curious sight to see men and boys, and even women, loadedwith morions, and pikes, and swords, and arquebuses, bringing themforward through the crowd, and piling them up before the princely manwho stood at the top of the steps, surrounded by many of the noblestand most distinguished gentlemen in France.This sight occupied the people for some minutes, and then a cry ranthrough the square of "The Swiss! the Swiss!" The announcement causedsome agitation amongst the populace, and some forgetting that thesoldiery were disarmed, unslung their carbines, or half drew theirswords, as if to resist a new attack. The discomfited soldiers,however, came on in a long line, two abreast, now totally disarmed,and seeming by their countenances yet uncertain of the fate thatawaited them. With some difficulty a space was made for them in thePlace de Grve, and being drawn up in two lines, the Duke commandedthem to take their arms, but not their ammunition. Two by two theyadvanced to the pile; and each man, as far as possible, selected hisown, when it appeared, to use the words of the Duke of Guise himself,when recounting the events of that day to Bassompiere, that therenever had been such complete obedience amongst so agitated amultitude; for not one sword, morion, pike, or arquebuse, of all theSwiss and French there present, was found to be wanting.[2]---------------------[Footnote 2: This extraordinary fact reminds us of days not longpassed.]---------------------When all was complete, the Duke of Guise turned to the soldiery,saying in a loud and somewhat stern tone, "The people of Parisconsidering that you have acted under the commands of those you havesworn to obey, permit you for this once to retire in safety from theperilous situation in which you have been placed; but as there arepoints which make a considerable difference between the Swiss troopsin the pay of France and the French troops themselves, there must be adifference also in their treatment. The Swiss, as foreigners, couldhave no motive or excuse for refusing to obey the commands imposedupon them; the French had to remember their duty to their country andto their religion. The Swiss, therefore, we permit to march out withcolours flying and arms raised; the French will follow them, withtheir arms reversed and their colours furled."A loud shout from the people answered this announcement; forthroughout the course of that eventful day, the Swiss had acted withmoderation and discipline, whereas the licentious French soldiery hadduring the early morning, while they thought themselves in possessionof the capital, displayed all the brutal insolence of triumphantsoldiery.The Duke of Guise spoke a few words to Brissac and to St. Paul, andthose two officers put themselves at the head, Brissac of the Swiss,and St. Paul of the French guards. Each held a small cane in his hand,and with no other arms they led the two bands from barrier to barrierthrough the city, till they were safe within the precincts of theLouvre.Scarcely had these two parties quitted the Place de Grve, however,drawing a number of people from that spot, when information wasbrought to the Duke, that there were still two bands of soldiers inthe city, one in the Cemetery of the Innocents, and one under theChatelet, but both threatened by the people with instant destruction."We must make our way thither quickly," said the Duke; "for, if Iremember right, it is the band of Du Gas which is at the Chatelet, andthe people are furious against him."He accordingly lost not a moment on the way; but turning toBois-dauphin, who accompanied him, he said in a low tone, as theywent, "I would have given my left hand to stay and examine theinterior of the Htel de Ville, in order to punish some of thetraitors who, I know, are lurking there. Perhaps it is better,however, to let them escape than that any mischief should be done; andin these popular movements, if we once begin to shed blood, there isno knowing where it will end.""I fear there is bloodshed going on at present," said Bois-dauphin,hearing a shot or two fired at no great distance. "They are at itunder the Chatelet now.""Hurry on! hurry on!" said the Duke, speaking to some of those behind."Run on fast before, and announce that I am coming. Command them, inmy name, to stop."Two or three of his followers ran forward, and no more shots wereheard; but scarcely two minutes after, just as the Duke had passed oneof the barricades, he saw two or three men hurrying up to him, led byChapelle Marteau, who approached him with no slight expression ofgrief and apprehension in his countenance."I fear I have bad news for you, my Lord," he said."What is it?" demanded the Duke calmly. "Such a day as this couldhardly pass over without some alloy.""I fear," replied the Leaguer, "that your Highness' friend. Monsieurde Logres, is mortally wounded. He brought me your signet and orders,which I immediately obeyed. We gained information which led us tosuppose that the persons we sought for, were concealed in a house inthe Rue de la Ferronire here hard by. We proceeded thither instantlyand demanded admission; but they, affecting to take us for a party ofsoldiery, fired upon us from the window, when two shots struck theCount, one lodging in his shoulder, and the other passing through hisbody. He is yet living, and I have ordered him to be conveyed to theHtel de Guise at once, where a surgeon can attend upon him. Ourpeople were breaking into the house to take the murderers prisoners,when, hearing of your approach, I came away to tell you the facts."The Duke of Guise paused, and gazed sadly down upon the ground,repeating the words, "Poor youth! poor youth! so are his bright hopescut short! He shall be avenged at least! Show me the house, Chapelle."And he followed rapidly upon the steps of the Leaguer, who led him toa small house, with the entrance, which was through a Gothic arch,sunk somewhat back from the other houses. There were two windows abovethe arch, and a window which flanked it on either side; but thefollowers of the young Count of Logres and of Chapelle Marteau had bythis time broken open the doors, and rushed into the building."This is part of the old priory of the Augustins," said the Duke ofGuise as they came up. "They exchanged it some fifty years ago fortheir house further down. But there are two or three back ways out, Iknow; and if you have not put a guard there, they have escaped you."It proved as the Duke anticipated. The house was found completelyvacant, and though strict orders were sent to all the different gatesto suffer no one to pass out without close examination, either theorder came too late, or those against whom it was levelled proved toopolitic for the guards; for none of those whom the Duke of Guisewished to secure, except Pereuse, the Prevt des Marchands, were takenin the attempt to escape.The shots, the sound of which, Guise had heard, proved to be thosewhich had struck the unfortunate Count de Logres, and no difficultywas found in inducing the people who surrounded the soldiery near theChatelet, to suffer them to depart, as their companions had done.On entering the Cemetery of the Innocents, however, the Duke instantlysaw that the danger of the troops was greater; for, shut up within,those walls, together with the Swiss, he found the famous Baron deBiron and Pomponne de Bellievre, while the people without were loudlyclamouring for their blood. They both advanced towards him as soon ashe appeared; and the Duke, gazing around him, said with a sigh, "Alas,Monsieur de Biron! those who stirred up this fire should have beenable to extinguish it.""I say so, too, my Lord," replied Biron sadly. "Evil be to those whogave the counsel that has been followed. God knows I opposed it to theutmost of my power, and only obeyed the King's absolute commands inbringing these poor fellows hither, who, I fear, will never besuffered to pass out as they came.""For the soldiery I have no fear," replied the Duke, "and as for you,gentlemen, I must do the best that I can. But the people look upon youas partially authors of the evil, and they will not be easilysatisfied."The Duke of Guise, however, succeeded, though not without difficulty,in his purpose of saving all. The people yielded to him, but for thefirst time showed some degree of resistance; and he returned to theHtel de Guise feeling more sensibly, from that little incident, thetruth of the warning which Catherine de Medici had given him,regarding the instability of popularity, than from all the argumentsor examples that reason or history could produce.We may easily imagine the reception of the Duke in his own dwelling:the joy, the congratulations, the inquiries; and we may imagine, also,the passing of that busy night, while messengers were coming to andfro at every instant, and couriers were dispatched from the Htel deGuise to almost every part of France.Henry of Guise was well aware, that whatever deference and humility hemight assume in his words towards the King, or whatever testimonies offorgiveness and affection Henry might offer to him, his own safetynow, for the rest of his life, depended on his power, and that hisarmour must be the apprehensions of the King, rather than his regard.Up to a very late hour, notwithstanding all the fatigues andagitations of the day, he sat with his secretary Pericard, writingletters to all his different friends in various parts of the country,demanding their immediate assistance and support, even while heexpressed the most devoted attachment to the King; and thus, in theletter we have already cited to Bassompiere, he makes use of suchexpressions as the following:--"Thus it is necessary that you should make a journey here to see yourfriends, whom you will not find, thank God! either wanting in means orresolution. We must have good intelligence from Germany, however, thatwe be not taken by surprise. We are not without forces, courage,friends, nor means; but still less without honour, or respect andfidelity to the King, which we will preserve inviolably, doing ourduty, as people of worth, of honour, and as good Catholics."It was about twelve o'clock at night, when Reignaut, the surgeon,entered the cabinet of the Duke, and bowing low said, "I come,according to your Highness's order, to tell you the state of the youngCount of Logres. Soon after I saw you about six to-day, we extractedboth balls. He bore the operation well, and has slept since forseveral hours.""Is he sleeping still?" demanded the Duke."No," replied the surgeon. "He awoke about a quarter of an hour ago,and seems anxious to see your Highness. He questioned me closely as tohis state, when I told him the truth.""You did right, you did right," replied the Duke. "He is one that canbear it. What is your real opinion, Reignaut, in regard to theresult?""I can hardly tell your Highness," replied the surgeon. "Two or threedays more are necessary, before we can judge. The wound in theshoulder is not dangerous, though the most painful. The shot whichpassed through his body, and lodged in the back, is one which wegenerally consider mortal; but then, in ordinary cases, death eithertakes place almost immediately, or indications of such a result areseen in an hour or two, as to leave no further doubt on the subject.No such indications have appeared here, and it may have happened thatthe ball has passed through without touching any vital part. We mustremember, also," he continued, "that the wound was received when themoon was in her first quarter, which is, of course, very favourable;and we shall also, if there be any chance of life being saved, havemade some progress towards recovery before any crisis is brought on bythe moon reaching the full."The Duke listened attentively, for though such things may appear tous, in the present day, mere foolishness, that was not the case twocenturies and a half ago, and the power of the moon, in affecting thewounded or sick, was never questioned. "Stay, Reignaut," said theDuke, "I will go with you, and see this good youth. I love him much;there is a frankness in his nature that wins upon the heart. Besides,he has saved my life, and has come to my aid on all occasions, as ifthere were a fate in it; and I believe, moreover, that he loves mepersonally as much--nay, perhaps more, than any of my own family andrelations."Thus saying the Duke rose, and, followed by Reignaut, passed throughthe door of his cabinet into the anteroom. His pages instantlypresented themselves to light him on his way, and traversing some ofthe long corridors of the vast building be inhabited, he reached thechamber where his unhappy friend lay stretched upon the bed of painand sickness. The boy Ignati sat beside him, tending him with care andaffection; and at the foot of the bed, with his arms crossed upon hischest, stood his faithful servant Gondrin, with tears in his eyes.The Duke seated himself by the young Count, and remained with him fornearly an hour; and knowing well what effect the mind has upon thebody, spoke to him cheerfully and hopefully of the time to come,talked of his recovered health as a thing certain, and mentioned hisunion with Marie de Clairvaut as beyond all doubt."It is upon that subject, my Lord," said the young gentleman, "that Iwished particularly to speak with your Highness. I have not had eithertime or opportunity of telling you all that has occurred since I leftyou at Soissons. But from all I have heard, I now judge better inregard to the situation of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut than even youcan. Nay, Monsieur Reignaut, I must speak a few words, but I will beas brief and as prudent as possible. In this business, my Lord,suspect not the Queen. It is not in her hands that Mademoiselle deClairvaut will be found. Neither is she with Villequier, depend uponit; nor in the power of the King. I grieve to say it, but I feel suremy own brother has something to do with the events of this day as faras they affect her so dear to me.""But you surely do not think," exclaimed the Duke, "that it is yourbrother's hand which inflicted these wounds upon you!""The ball would be poisoned, indeed, my Lord," replied Charles ofMontsoreau, "if I did believe such to be the case. But I trust it isnot so; most sincerely do I trust--ay, and believe--it is not so.There is another hand, my Lord Duke; and not long ago I could as wellhave believed that my own father's would have been raised against meas the one of which I speak. But still there is another hand, my Lord,which--actuated by motives dark and evil--I believe to have beenraised against my life. That hand is in general unerring in its aim;and the moment before the shot was fired, I saw the calm cold featureswhich I know so well, at the window just above me.""But whose is the hand?" exclaimed the Duke. "Whose are the featuresthat you mean?""I mean those of the Abb de Boisguerin, my Lord," replied the Count;"and to him, to him, I think, your Highness must look even rather thanto my brother. I believe Gaspar but to be a tool in his hands, andthat he uses him for his own dark and criminal designs.""Have I not heard you say he was your tutor?" demanded the Duke. "Whatthen are his motives? what can be his inducements?""Love, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "I have the word ofthat sweet girl for his having dared to use words towards her, forwhich he deserves and must meet with punishment. Him I would point outto your Highness as the person to be watched, and sought for, and madeto account for all his actions; for, depend upon it, his are themachinations which are ruling these events.""He shall not be forgotten!" replied the Duke. "He shall not beforgotten! But now, Logres, speak no more, except indeed only toanswer me one question. I have heard that the county of Morly haslately fallen to you by the death of the old Count. These, with theestates of Logres, if properly conducted, may afford me greatassistance. You are incapable for the time of directing them at all.Do you authorise me to fill your post, and give orders in your nametill you are better?""Most willingly, my Lord," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "I hadalready thought of it. But your Highness talks of my becoming better:I have thought of that matter too, but in a different light; andconsidering what may take place in case of my own death, I haverequested Monsieur Reignaut here to cause a will to be drawn up,leaving the whole that I possess to the person whom I love best onearth, with your Highness for her guardian. There are a few giftsbestowed on those that love me, and a provision for all old servants:but----""But it will not be wanted, Logres," said the Duke, pressing hishand. "I see it in your eye; I hear it in the tone of your voice. Youwill recover and strike by my side yet--perhaps, in many a well-foughtfield. Silence and perfect quiet, I know, are Monsieur Reignaut's bestmedicines; but I shall come to you, from time to time, when I have gotany pleasant tidings to bear."CHAP. IV.We must now pass over a considerable lapse of time without taking anynote of the political intrigues with which it was occupied, and leadthe reader at once from the month of May to the end of summer, andfrom the city of Paris to the distant town of Augoulme.Under the high hill on which that city stands, at the distance ofabout a league from the base, was in those days a beautiful park witha pavilion of four towers; and in one of these towers, on a finesummer day towards the end of July, sat the young Marquis ofMontsoreau together with the Abb de Boisguerin: not exactly inconversation, for the Marquis had not spoken a word for nearly anhour; but in dull companionship.The young nobleman's back was turned towards the light, his eyes werebent down upon the ground, his head drooped forward in a despondingattitude, the nostril was painfully expanded, as if he drew his breathwith difficulty, and the teeth were tight shut, as it were to keepdown some struggling emotions that swelled for utterance. An openletter lay upon the table, and another much more closely written, andwritten in cypher, was in the hand of the Abb de Boisguerin. TheAbb's brow too was a good deal contracted, and his lip was somewhatpale, though it quivered not; but from time to time he addressed theyoung nobleman with words of consolation, regarding some afflictingtidings just received.Those words, however, though well chosen, appropriate and elegant,were not of the words that console, for they were not of the heart. Hereasoned logically on the inutility of human grief, and still more onthe vanity of regretting that which could not be recalled. He spokelightly of all deep feelings for any earthly thing, and he talked ofevery deed upon the face of the earth being justified by theimportance of the objects to be obtained.When he had talked thus for some time without obtaining any answer, hewas going on to justify the past; but Gaspar de Montsoreau suddenlystarted up, and interrupted him with a vehemence which he had neverdisplayed before."Abb de Boisguerin," he said, "talk not to me of consolation and ofcomfort. Is not my brother dead? Is not my brother dead, killed by myown hand? Can you tear that from the book of fate? Can you blot it outfrom memory? Can you rase it for ever from the records of crimes done?Can you find me a pillow on all the earth, where I can lay my head inpeace?""Your brother, indeed, is dead," said the Abb de Boisguerin, withoutin the least degree trying to relieve the mind of his young companionfrom the crime with which conscience charged him. "Your brother,indeed, is dead; and it is not to be denied that your hand, my dearGaspar, took his life; but yet you were in a city where war wasactually going on between two parties, one of which you served, andthe other your brother. These things have happened every day in civilwars, and always will happen. They are to be grieved at, but who canhelp them?""But I was engaged in no civil wars," exclaimed the young Marquis. "Mymen were at the Louvre. I was not fighting on the part of the King: Iwas not engaged in trampling down the people. But what was I busiedwith, Abb de Boisguerin? I was engaged in a scheme for carryingoff--from him she loved, and from those who had a right to protecther--one whom I had no title to control, whom I was bound by honour toguard and to defend. I was injuring her; I was preparing to injureher. If I had not lied to her myself, I had caused her to be deceivedand lied to; and all that I had previously done made the act itselfwhich I had committed, but the more hateful. Speak not to me ofconsolation, Abb; speak not to me of hope or comfort. You of all men,do not venture to mention to me a word like happiness or confidence.""And why not, my Lord?" demanded the Abb somewhat sternly. "What haveI done to merit reproach in the matter?""Has it not been you that have prompted me throughout?" demanded theMarquis. "Was it not you who devised the scheme, prepared the means,got possession of the Queen's letter by corrupting her servants. Wasit not your tool, that, upon pretence of assisting her to the othergates of the hotel, got her into our power; and was it not you, whenher prayers and entreaties and agitation would have made me yield--wasit not you that resisted, and remorselessly bade the men carry her on?Did you not yourself stand by me when the shot was fired; and was itnot your warning, that disgrace and death must follow hesitation,which winged the ball that took my brother's life?""It is all true, Gaspar," replied the Abb de Boisguerin in a sad butno longer a harsh tone. "It is all true; and from you I meet thereward, which all men will meet and well deserve who love othersbetter than themselves, and who do for them things that they would notdo for themselves. Nevertheless, I still think that there was not thatevil on our side with which you seem to reproach yourself. Shocked andmourning for your brother's death, you see all things in dark andgloomy colours. Those things which you regarded before as light, havenow become to you heavy and sombre as night. But all this is but mood,and let me call to your remembrance what sense and reason say. You andyour brother loved the same person,--you vehemently, warmly,devotedly; he coldly, and by halves. You, as the elder brother and aslord of the dwelling in which she was received, had, if any thing, thefirst claim upon her; and he himself rendered that claim still greaterby leaving her entirely to you, and absenting himself from her. Youhad every right, therefore, to seek her hand by all means; and whenyou found that, though he affected generous forbearance, he had gonecovertly to forestall your demand, and gain the promise of her handfrom her guardian, surely you were bound to keep no measures with him.All I did subsequently was to serve you in a cause that I thought wasright, and it is but a few days ago that you were grateful to me forso doing. I said at the time, and I say again, that if at the momentwhen your brother commenced his attack upon the house in the Rue de laFerronire, either you or I had been taken, death and eternal disgracewould have been the consequence. We acted but in our own defence, andthose who assailed us cannot accuse us for so acting."Gaspar de Montsoreau heard him in sullen silence, his dark eyesrolling from side to side beneath his heavy eyebrows. In his dealingswith the Abb de Boisguerin he had by this time learned fully howartful and politic was the man who led him. He saw it, and he couldnot doubt it, even while he shared in the things at which his betterspirit revolted. But that very knowledge taught him to doubt, whetherthe art and the policy were used for his service, and out of affectionto him, or whether they were all directed in some secret way to thebenefit of him who wielded them so dexterously. The suspicions whichVillequier had instilled rose fresh in his mind at this very time; andas his only answer to the Abb's reasonings, he demanded with a keenglance and a sharp tone, "Tell me. Abb, was it, or was it not, youwho brought the reiters upon us, and who gave the King's forces noticeof our passage?""I did the one, but not the other," replied the Abb calmly. "I dealtnot with the reiters, Gaspar de Montsoreau, for that would have beendangerous to me, to her, and to you. But I did inform the troops ofthe King, because I already had learned how deeply the Duke of Guisewas pledged to your brother; because I knew that no reasoning wouldprevent either you or this fair girl from going on to Soissons; andbecause I saw that there was no earthly chance of your obtaining herhand, but by placing her under the charge of her father's nearest malerelation, from whom the Duke of Guise unjustly withholds theguardianship. I own it, I acknowledge it, I am proud of it."The way in which the Abb replied was not such as Gaspar de Montsoreauhad expected; but dissatisfied with himself, and of course with everything else, Gaspar de Montsoreau still gazed sullenly on the floor,and then raised his eyes to the open window of the pavilion, where thewarm sun was seen streaming through the green vines, with the birdsstill singing sweetly in the woods without. But it was all to him asthe face of Eden to our first parents after the fall; a shade seemedto come over his eyes when he looked upon the loveliness of nature;the very sunshine seemed to him darkness; and the fair world a desert."Can you give me back my delight in that sunshine?" he said, after apause. "Can you make the notes of those birds again sound sweet to myear? Can you remove the heavy, heavy burden of remorse from thisheart? Can you ever, ever prove to me, that for this unrequited love Ihave not made myself a guilty wretch, bearing the sign of Cain uponhis brow, the curse of Cain within his bosom?""If such be your feelings," replied the Abb, "if such--contrary toall justice and reason--is the state in which your mind is to remain,there is one way that will alleviate and soothe you, that may seem inyour eyes some atonement, and put your conscience more at rest. Castoff this love which you believe has led you into evil, yield thepursuit of this fair girl, renounce the object for which you did thatwhereof your heart reproaches you, and by that voluntary punishmentand self-command, do penance for aught in which you may have failed.Doubtless, that penance will be severe and terrible to endure; but themore it is so, the greater is the atonement."The Marquis gazed him in the face thoughtfully while the Abb spoke,and then fell into a long reverie. His brow was raised and depressed,his teeth gnawed his nether lip, his hand clenched and opened with thestruggle that was going on within, and at length, stamping his heelupon the ground, he exclaimed, "No, no, no! I have paid a mightyprice, and I will save the jewel that I have bought with my soul'ssalvation! That fiery love is the only thing now left me uponearth.--She shall be mine, or I will die! What is there that shallstop me now? What is there that shall hinder me? Have I not wealth,and power, and courage, and strength, and daring, and determination?The fear of crime! the fear of crime! that weak barrier is cast downand trampled under my feet. Have I not broken the nearest and thedearest ties of kindred and affection, murdered the brother thathung on the same breast, dimmed the eyes that looked upon me ininfancy, frozen the warm heart that was cradled in the same womb withmine?--Out upon it! What is there should stop me now? The lessercrimes of earth, the smaller violences, seem ground into unseen dustby this greater crime. Abb, I will buy her of Villequier!--I know howto win him!--I will force her to love me, or she shall hate herhusband! What is there shall stop me now? I will buy the priest aswell as the ring, or the wedding garment; and she shall be mine,whether her heart be mine or not!".While he spoke the Abb de Boisguerin gazed upon him with one of hiscalm dark smiles; but upon the present occasion that smile upon thelip was at variance with a slight frown upon his brow. He repliedlittle, however, saying merely, "It is so, Gaspar! It is so, that menseek to enjoy the fruit, and yet regret the means. They will neverfind happiness thus, however.""Happiness!" exclaimed the Marquis, with a look of agony upon hisface. "Is there such a thing as happiness? Oh yes, there is, and Ionce knew it, when together with that brother who is now no more, andyou also, my friend, undisturbed by stormy passions, content with thatI had, blessed with the only friendship and affection that was needfulto content, I passed the sunny hours in sport and joy, and scarcelyknew the common pains incident to man's general nature. And you haveaided to destroy this state, and you have helped to drive me forthfrom happiness, to blot it out so entirely, that I could almost forgetit ever existed.""No, no, Gaspar of Montsoreau!" exclaimed the Abb quickly, "I havenot done any of these things you talk of. I have not aided in any onedegree to take from you the happiness you formerly had. There is butone secret for the preservation of happiness, Gaspar. It matters notwhat is the object of desire, for any thing that we thirst for reallymay give us happiness in nearly the same portion as another. Happinessis gained by the right estimation of the means. If a man ever usesmeans that he regrets, to obtain any object that he desires, he losesthe double happiness which may be obtained in life, the happiness ofpursuit and the happiness of enjoyment. Every means must, of course,be proportioned to its end; where much is to be won, much must berisked or paid: but the firm strong mind, the powerful understanding,weighs the object against the price; and, if it be worthy, whateverthat price may be, after it is once paid and the object attained,regrets not the payment. It is like an idle child who covets a gilttoy, spoils it in half an hour, and then regrets the money it hascost, ever to sorrow over means we have used, when those means haveproved successful. Say not, Gaspar, that I disturbed your happiness!While you were in your own lands, enjoying the calm pleasures of aprovincial life, knowing no joys, seeking no pleasures but thosewhich, like light winds that ruffle the surface and plough not up thebosom of the water, amuse the mind but never agitate the heart, Ilived contented and happy amongst you, believing that, but once ortwice at most in the life of man, a joy is set before him, which isworthy of being bartered against amusement. I joined in all yoursports, I furnished you with new sources of the same calm pleasures;and as long as I saw the passions were shut out, I sought no changefor myself or for you either. But when the moment came, that strongand deep passions were to be introduced; when I saw that your heart,and that of your brother, like the moulded figure by the demigod, hadbeen touched with the ethereal fire, and woke from slumber never tosleep again, then it was but befitting that I should aid him whoconfided in me, in the pursuit that he was now destined to follow. Ifthe object was a great and worthy one, the means to obtain it werenecessarily powerful and hazardous. No man ought to yield his reposefor any thing that is not worth all risks; but having once begun thecourse, he must go on; and weak and idle is he who cannot overleap thebarriers that he meets with, or, when the race is won, turns to regretthis flower or that which he may have trampled down in his course.""You are harsh, Abb," replied the Marquis thoughtfully, somewhatshaken by his words--for though the wounds of remorse admit no balm,they are sometimes forgotten in strong excitement. "You are harsh, butyet it is a terrible thing to have slain one's brother.""It is," replied the Abb; "but circumstances give the value of everyfact. It is a terrible thing to slay any human being; to take the lifeof a creature, full of the same high intelligences as ourselves: butif I slay that man in a room, and for no purpose, it is called murder;if I slay him in a battle-field, in order to obtain a crown, it is aglorious act, and worthy of immortal renown."The Marquis listened to his sophistry, eager to take any theme ofconsolation to his heart. But any one who heard him, would havesupposed that the Abb de Boisguerin thought his companion too easilyconsoled. Perhaps it might be that the Abb himself sought to defendhis share in the transaction, rather than to give any comfort to hisunhappy cousin. At all events, after a brief pause, during which bothfell into thought, he added, "What I grieve the most for is, thatCharles was kind-hearted and generous, frank and true, and I believesincerely that, but for this unhappy business, he loved us both.""Ay, there is the horror! there is the horror!" exclaimed the Marquis,casting himself down into a chair, and covering his eyes with hishands. "He did love me, I know he did; and I believe he sought to actgenerously by me."The Abb suffered him to indulge in his grief for a moment or two, andthen replied, "But the misfortune is, that, with all this, your objectis not yet secured; that though you have once more snatched her fromthe power of the Guises, you have not contrived to keep her in yourown."The Marquis waved his hand impatiently, saying, "I cannot--I will nottalk of such things now. Leave me, Abb, leave me! I can but grieve;there is no way that I can turn without encountering sorrow."The Abb turned and left him; and descending the steps into thegardens, he walked on in the calm sunshine, as tranquilly as if purityand holiness had dwelt within his breast. "I must bear this yet awhile longer," he said to himself. "But now, if I could find someenthusiastic priest, full of wild eloquence, such as we have in Italy,to seize this deep moment of remorse, we might do much with him tomake him abjure this pursuit; perhaps abjure the world! The foolishboy thinks that it was his hand that did it, and does not know that Ifired at all, when his hand shook so that he could not well havestruck him. Perhaps there may be such a priest as I need up there," hecontinued, looking towards Augoulme, "perhaps there may be such apriest up there, of the kind I want. Epernon has his fits of devotiontoo, I believe. At all events, I will go up and see. The madder thebetter for my purpose."Thus saying he called some servants, ordered his horse, and, as soonas it was brought, rode away towards Augoulme.CHAP. V.Gaspar de Montsoreau remained in the same position in which the Abbhad left him for nearly an hour, and the struggle of the variouspassions which agitated his heart, were perhaps as terrible as anythat had ever been known to human being. His situation, indeed, wasone which exposed him more than most men are ever exposed, to thecontention of the most opposite feelings. He had not been ledgradually on, as many are, step by step, to evil; but he had beentaken from the midst of warm and kindly feelings, from the practice ofright, and an habitual course of calm and tranquil enjoyment, and bythe mastery of one strong and violent passion had been plunged intothe midst of crimes which had left anguish and remorse behind them.Still, however, the passion which had at first led him astray, existedin all its fierceness and all its intensity; and, like some quietfield--from which the husbandman has been accustomed to gather yearly,in the calm sunshine, a rich and kindly harvest--when suddenly madethe place of strife by contending armies, his heart, so tranquil andso happy not a year before, had now become the battle-place of remorseand love.Sometimes the words of the Abb came back upon his ear, urging him toabandon for ever, as a penance for his crime, the pursuit which hadalready led him to such awful deeds; but then again the thought ofMarie de Clairvaut, of never beholding that beautiful being again, ofyielding her for ever, perhaps, to the arms of others, came across hisbrain, and almost drove him mad.Then would rush remorse again upon his heart, the features of hisbrother rose up before him, his graceful form seemed to move withinhis sight; the frank warm-hearted, kindly smile, that had ever greetedhim when they met, was now painted by memory to his eye; and many atrait of generous kindness, many a noble, many an endearing act, thewords and jests of boyhood and infancy, the long remembered sports ofearly years, the accidents, the adventures, the tender and twiningassociations of youth and happiness, forgotten in the strife ofpassion and the contention of rivalry, now came back, as vividly asthe things of yesterday--came back, alas! now that death had ended thestruggle, rendered the deeds of the past irreparable, thrown the pallof remorse over the last few months, and left memory alone to deck thetomb of the dead with bright flowers gathered from their spring oflife.It was too much to bear: he turned back again to the words, not ofconsolation but of incitement, which the Abb had spoken to him. Hetried to think it was folly to regret what had been done; he tried torecollect that it was in a scene of contention, and in moments ofstrife, that his brother had fallen; he strove to persuade himselfthat Marie de Clairvaut had been under his care and guidance anddirection, and that his brother Charles had had no right even toattempt to take her out of his hands. He laboured, in short, to steelhis heart; to render it as hard iron, in order to resist the thingsthat it had to endure. He sought anxiously to rouse it into activity;and he tried to fix his mind still upon the thoughts of winning Mariede Clairvaut. He resolved, at whatever price, by whatever sacrifice,to gain her, to possess her, to make her his own beyond recall: withthe eagerness of passion and the recklessness of remorse, hedetermined to pursue his course, trusting, as many have idly trusted,that he should induce the woman, whose affections and feelings heforced, to love the man to whose passions she was made a sacrifice.The struggle was still going on, the voice of conscience was raisingitself loudly from time to time, memory was doing her work, andpassion was opposing all, when, without hearing any step, or knowingthat any one had arrived at the house, he felt a hand quietly laidupon his arm, and starting up with a feeling almost of terror, whichwas unusual to him, he beheld the dark and sinister, though handsome,countenance of Villequier.The courtier grasped his hand with enthusiastic warmth, and gazed inhis face with a look of deep interest. "You are sad, Monsieur deMontsoreau," he said; "I grieve to see you so sad. I fear that thenews which I came to break to you has been told you, perhaps, in arash and inconsiderate manner. You are aware then that your brother isno more. I hoped to have been in time, for I only heard it the daybefore yesterday, in the evening, from the Duke of Guise, who is nowwith the King, and, as you know, all powerful."Gaspar de Montsoreau heard him to an end, and then merely bowed hishead, saying, "I have heard all, Monsieur de Villequier." But althoughhe saw that his companion--who had more than once witnessed thefierceness of his feelings towards his brother regarding Mademoisellede Clairvaut--was surprised at the deep grief he now betrayed, hedared not let him know how much that grief was aggravated by remorse,from the belief that his own hand had cut the thread of his brother'slife."I am sorry. Monsieur de Montsoreau," added Villequier, "to see you sodeeply affected by this matter. Pray remember, that though Monsieur deLogres was your brother, he was struggling with you for the hand ofthe person you love, and that his being now removed, renders your hopeof obtaining the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut no longer doubtfuland remote, but certain and almost immediate.""I see not the matter in the same cheering light that you do, Monsieurde Villequier," replied Gaspar de Montsoreau thoughtfully. "You say,and I hear also that it is so, that the Duke of Guise is now allpowerful with the King; if such be the case, what results have we toanticipate? Do you think that the Duke of Guise will ever consent tothe union of his ward with me? Do you think that, prejudging thequestion as he has already done, he will give me the bride that hepromised to my brother? Have I not heard from those who were present,that he has sworn by all he holds sacred, that never, under anycircumstances, should she be mine?""The Duke of Guise is not immortal," replied Villequier drily; "andhis death leaves her wholly in my power. Should such an event not takeplace, however, and the period of her attaining free agency approach,we must risk a little should need be, and employ a certain degree ofgentle compulsion to drive or lead her to that which we desire.""When will it be?" demanded Gaspar of Montsoreau. "Why should wepause? why should we risk any thing by delay?""She becomes a free agent by the law," replied Villequier, "on themorrow of next Christmas. If that day passes, it is true, prayers andsupplications will be all that can be used, for the Parliament willextend its protection to her, and not the King himself can force herto wed any one she does not choose. Before that period her guardiancan, for such is the feudal law of this realm, that she can be forcedeither to resign her lands or produce some one in her stead to leadher retainers in the King's service. The law has been somewhatstretched, it is true; but on more than one occasion, with the consentof the King, the guardian of a young lady difficult to please, hascompelled her to make a choice, and the Parliament has sanctioned theact.""Are you not her lawful guardian, then?" demanded the young Marquis,"that you should hesitate, in hopes of the Duke of Guise's death.""I maintain that I am her guardian," replied Villequier, "and my suitis before the Parliament; but I should be much more certainly herguardian, if the Duke of Guise were dead.""The Duke of Guise dead!" said Gaspar de Montsoreau sullenly. "A thingimprobable, unlikely, not to be counted upon. If that be all my holdupon you, Monsieur de Villequier, the hopes that you have held out tome are but slight in fabric and foundation.""Hear me, my good young friend," replied Villequier. "They are not soslight as you imagine. In the first place, we have for some time heldin France that rash and troublesome persons who oppose our progress,or thwart our desires, are to be encountered for a certain time by thearts of policy and by every soft and quiet inducement we may hold outto them. When we have been patient as long as possible, and find thatthey are not to be frustrated by any ordinary means, it becomesnecessary to put a stop to their opposition, and to remove them fromthe way in which we are proceeding. Now, the Duke of Guise has beenvery busily teaching a number of persons, both high and low, that hisprolonged life would be extremely inconvenient to them. Biron does notlove him, D'Aumont abominates him, D'O. has good cause to wish him astep beyond Jerusalem; Henry of Navarre has in him a bitter enemy; therash, vain, Count of Soissons an obstacle and a stumbling-block; andthough I am his humble servant, and the King his very good friend, yetboth Henry and myself could do quite as well without him. Besidesthese, there are at least ten thousand more in France who would walkwith their beavers far more gallantly, if there were a Guise the lessin the world; so that I say, on very probable reasoning, that I wouldfully as soon reckon upon the life of a man of eighty, as I would uponthe robust, powerful existence of Henry of Guise even for an hour. Butputting all that aside. Monsieur de Montsoreau, taking it for grantedthat he lives, what can I do but what I propose? You have the King'spromise and mine in writing; we can do no more. The cause is beforethe Parliament, and Henry, restrained in his own court, at war withhis own subjects, and driven from his own capital, depend upon it,will never sign your contract of marriage with Mademoiselle deClairvaut till every other hope has failed; ay, and what is more, tillhe sees before him a very very great object to be gained by so doing.""A fresh object you mean, Monsieur de Villequier," replied Gaspar deMontsoreau. "I know that this is the way in which kings and statesmendeal with men less wise than themselves. There must be always oneobject secured to obtain the promise, and another to obtain theperformance. Pray, what is the new object, Monsieur de Villequier? andis it sure, that if an object be held out of sufficient worth andimportance, the King will not find some specious reason for drawingback, or that some new irresistible obstacle does not present itself?""Consider the King's situation. Monsieur de Montsoreau," repliedVillequier, "with the Duke of Guise constantly at his side, dictatingto him all his movements, with the question, of guardianship even nowlying before the Parliament, he would run the very greatest risk atthis moment if he were to do as we both wish, and forcibly hurry onthis business to a conclusion. But the aspect of affairs is changingevery day,--the Count of Soissons has come to join him; Henry ofNavarre himself has sent him offers of assistance and support;Epernon, roused into activity, is levying forces in all parts of thecountry; every day the King may expect to make some way against theparty of his adversaries; and therefore every day is something gained.But even were it not so very hazardous to attempt any thing of thekind at present, you could not expect the King to risk much, andembarrass his policy for your sake, without some individual motive.That this business should take place, is your strong and intensedesire. It is very natural that it should be so; but neither the Kingnor myself have any such feelings, passions, or wishes. Let us eachhave our advantage, or our gratification, in that which is to ensue,and I will undertake, and pledge myself in the most solemn manner,that Mademoiselle de Clairvaut shall be your wife before nextChristmas-day."Gaspar de Montsoreau paused, and thought carefully over all that hadbeen said. "I thank you. Monsieur de Villequier," he said, "forspeaking freely in this matter. Let us cast away all idle delicacy.Things have happened to me lately which have taught me to hold allsuch empty verbiage at naught. Let us look upon this business as amatter of dealing, a matter of merchandise.""Exactly!" replied Villequier raising his eyes slightly, but notseeming in the least degree offended. "Let us consider it in such alight. Every matter of policy is but trade upon a large scale.""Well then," continued Gaspar de Montsoreau in the same bold tone, "Iwill look upon you and the King, Monsieur de Villequier, as twopartners in a mercantile house. Now, what sort of merchandise is itthat you would prefer to have in barter for your signature to mymarriage contract with this young Lady. Shall it be money?""Money!" exclaimed Villequier, with a slight ironical smile playingabout the corners of his mouth. "Have you any money? It is indeed asurprising thing to hear any one talk of money except the Duke ofGuise, or the Duke of Epernon. Why, Bellievre assures me, upon hishonour, that the very dispatch which he was ordered to send toSoissons, to forbid positively the Duke of Guise coming to Paris, wasstopped, for what reason think you? Because, when he took it down tothe treasury, there was not found fifty livres to pay the courier'sexpenses. The courier would not go without the money, Bellievre hadnone to give him, so between them both they carried the King'sdispatch to the post, and put it in with the common letters. Theletters went to Rheims before they were sent to Soissons, and the Dukeof Guise was in Paris, while the order to forbid him was on theroad.[3] Money? Oh certainly, money above all things! But pray do notlet it be a large sum, lest, like an apoplectic epicure, the King'streasury and my purse die of sudden repletion."---------------------[Footnote 3: This is historically true in regard to one of thedispatches to the Duke of Guise; and in representing Henry and hiscourtiers as occasionally acting the part of low and mercenaryswindlers, first fleecing and then laughing at a dupe, I am also borneout by facts.]---------------------"Well then, Monsieur de Villequier," said the Marquis, after takingone or two turns up and down the room, "I will tell you what I willdo, to show you how dearly I hold the gift that is promised me. On theday of my marriage with Marie de Clairvaut, when it is all completed,the benediction said, the contract signed, your name as guardian, andthe King's in confirmation attached, I will place in your hands thesum of one hundred thousand crowns of the sun.""Heavens and earth!" exclaimed Villequier in the same tone in which hehad spoken before, "I did not know that there was such a sum inFrance. If I were to tell it to Monsieur d'O. he would not believeme.""But remember, Monsieur de Villequier," replied Gaspar of Montsoreau,not quite liking the levity of his companion's speech, "this is nojesting matter with me, whatever it may be with you; and I must havesuch sure and perfect warranty that you will not betray my hopesagain, or ask for even the slightest further delay, that there cannotbe a doubt rest upon my mind; otherwise----""Otherwise what, Monsieur de Montsoreau?" demanded Villequier. "If wedo not keep our words, you know we shall lose the great advantage thatwe hope to gain from you. That is the surest bond! Let the matterstand thus, sir: if this marriage do take place, as I have promisedyou it shall, the hundred thousand crowns of gold are paid; if not, weare the losers. I see no alternative beyond this.""By Heavens! but there is, and there shall be one," answered Gaspar deMontsoreau impetuously. "I see that Monsieur de Villequier, who issupposed to count upon every chance and circumstance collateral anddirect, has forgotten one or two points, although he has not forgottenthat I am heir of my brother's lands, both of Logres and Morly. But Iwill only put him in mind of what might take place on either side. TheKing and Monsieur de Villequier might find obstacles of great importrise up against my wishes, or they might find greater advantages insome other quarter; they might think it worth while to keep metrifling in inactivity, or employ me in their service against theenemy. They might do all this, and then forego the sum named for agreater. I, on the other hand. Monsieur de Villequier, might seewavering and hesitation; I might grow tired of waiting and dependence;I might say to-morrow I have no certainty in this business, and Imight give my banner to the wind, broider the cross of the League uponmy breast, or assume the double cross of Lorraine, and either rangethe spears of Montsoreau and Logres in the ranks of the army ofMayenne, or marching to Chartres, Tours, or Blois, might bow me lowlyto my Lord of Guise, and begging him to forget the past, swear myselfhis faithful servant."Villequier gazed on him for a moment with certainly not the mostfriendly expression of countenance, and was about to speak; but theyoung Marquis, conscious of his own importance, waved his hand,saying, "Nay, nay, Monsieur de Villequier! on all and on every accountthe plan I am about to propose is the only one that can be followed.Of course, in dealing with his Majesty, I cannot treat as crown tocrown;" and he smiled somewhat bitterly. "But I must treat with you asgentleman to gentleman, and leave you to entreat his Majesty--urgentlyand zealously, as I doubt not you will do it, to accede graciously toour views. Thus then shall it be, that you and the King shall enterinto a bond with me, by which you shall engage that Mademoiselle deClairvaut shall, with the full consent of both parties expressed bytheir signature to our marriage-contract, become my wife on or beforenext Christmas-day, and in default shall be subject to amercement inwhatsoever amount the Parliament of Paris may judge that I am damagedby the want of performance. This is merely to secure that the matterbe explicit; and in the same bond may be placed my engagement to paythe sum named, upon the fulfilment of the contract. This is fair, andonly fair; and you know my last resolve.""In truth, Monsieur de Montsoreau," replied Villequier, "if you knewbut the state of our finances, you would see that we are far morelikely to be so eager in concluding this business as even to riskdangerous consequences, than to trifle with you in any degree."He remembered the curious engagement that he had entered into with theAbb de Boisguerin, and he paused a moment, in hopes that Gaspar deMontsoreau might show even the slightest sign of hesitation: but, sofar from it, the frown deepened on the young nobleman's brow, and hereplied sharply, "I will trust to no contingencies. Monsieur deVillequier. These are changing times, as you well know. The crossFleurdelise in your arms[4] may well be changed, by the goldenbillets dropped around it, into the cross of Lorraine. If what I haveoffered be as good as you say, there is no earthly reason why hisMajesty of France or yourself, Monsieur de Villequier, should objectto enter into the engagement with me that I propose."---------------------[Footnote 4: Such were the arms of the Villequier family.]---------------------"Well," answered Villequier; "well, I must do my best with the King;but I dare say, Monsieur de Montsoreau," he said in a lower voice, "Idare say you are well aware that a little compulsion, perhaps, must beused in this instance."He thought he saw hesitation, and he went on the more eagerly, for hewished to avoid the written engagement. "I must be permitted to usewhat means I think fit to wring consent from the young Lady herself.Nor must I have one word of objection on your part, whatever you seeor hear--no asking for delay!--no yielding to her tears. One word ofsuch a kind, remember, vitiates the engagement upon our part, butleaves you as strictly bound as ever."Gaspar de Montsoreau gazed down upon the ground sternly for severalmoments, with his brows contracting, till his eyes were nearly hidbeneath them. His fingers were seen to clasp into the palms of hishands, as if the nails would have buried themselves there. But after ashort and terrible struggle, the evil spirit maintained itsascendancy, and he exclaimed, "Be it so! Be it so! But in themeantime, sir," he continued abruptly, "there is one thing I have todemand. How have I been led with hopes, and meeting nothing butdisappointments, for the last two months. I who dared all, andunderwent all, to snatch her once more from the power of the Guises.When forced to fly, it was under your power and in your charge I lefther; and yet, though this is the fourth or fifth time that you and Ihave met, I have never been able to see her, or to learn distinctlywhere she is. This must be no longer, Monsieur de Villequier. I needconsolation; I need comfort; the only comfort or consolation I canfind is in her presence and in her society. Where is she?--I demand toknow where she is. I was brought to Augoulme by information that shewas in the neighbourhood; but I cannot discover her, and I will betrifled with no longer.""By all I hold sacred," exclaimed Villequier, not a little surprisedby the bold and daring tone and decided manner, which the youngnobleman had so suddenly put on, "By all I hold sacred----""What is that, sir?" demanded Gaspar de Montsoreau.Villequier smiled. "Oh many things, Monsieur de Montsoreau," heanswered; "I hold many things sacred. But with any oath or abjurationthat you think most convenient, I assure you that Mademoiselle deClairvaut is not under my charge, or in my power at this moment.""But was so how long ago?" demanded the Marquis."About a fortnight," replied Villequier coolly. "The fact is, Monsieurde Montsoreau, that his high and mighty Highness, the Duke of Guise,having come to pay a humble visit to his Majesty--to congratulate him,I suppose, on being driven out of Paris,--gave significant notice tothe King, on their first interview at Chartres, that he believedMademoiselle de Clairvaut to be in my hands, and that he would haveher instantly delivered up. I was not present, you know, but everything passed as the Guises wished. I dare say you have heard all therest; Epernon was banished, and fled to Augoulme here, stripped ofhis high posts and manifold emoluments; Guise was createdgeneralissimo of the King's armies; in fact, Guise dictated the law tothe King, and Henry was fain to forget all the past, or to cover thebitter memory with a jest.""But to the point; to the point, Monsieur de Villequier," said theMarquis de Montsoreau. "What of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut?""Why, the King told me," replied Villequier, "that the Duke demandedher at all events till the Parliament of Paris had decided our cause.The next day the Duke and I had an interview on the subject; but erethat, I had placed her in the hands of a friend, and begged him toremove her for a time from the house where she then was. The Duke wasas imperious and unceremonious as an executioner. He vowed that Ishould give her up to him at once; and though we did our best todeceive him, exactly as we had done with your wild thoughtlessbrother, the Duke did not so easily believe us; and both I and theKing were obliged to swear upon the mass that she was not in ourpower, and that we knew not where she was. That was easily done; butHenry's low laugh had nearly betrayed the whole; and the Duke sworeloudly, and menaced high, that if he were deceived, he would havevengeance.""And now, Monsieur de Villequier," said the Marquis, "where is shenow? And who is the friend in whose hands you have placed her?"Villequier paused for a single moment, as if to consider whether heshould tell him or not. But a moment after he answered with a smile,"The friend in whose hands she is placed, Monsieur de Montsoreau, isone in whom at that time you yourself placed great confidence. I trustthe same feelings exist still towards him. I mean the Abb deBoisguerin."Gaspar de Montsoreau started at the intelligence with feelings ofangry dissatisfaction, which he could hardly account for to himself,but which he instantly strove to conceal from the keen eyes of theartful man with whom he was dealing. The exclamation of "Indeed!"however, which broke from his lips, was uttered in a tone whichinstantly showed Villequier that the tidings were by no meanspleasing; and while he suffered the young Marquis to digest them atleisure he laid out in his own mind a plan for keeping the Abb andhis former pupil at variance, not with any clear and definite object,indeed, but for the purpose of having a check upon the young Marquisat any future moment, in case of necessity. Villequier felt, too, thatthe clear, artful, and unscrupulous mind of the Abb de Boisguerin wasfar better fitted to deal with, and frustrate him in any purpose thathe might entertain, than that of the young Marquis, which, though notdeficient either in acuteness or policy, was constantly misled byinexperience, or by the impetuosity of strong passions. He felt thatthe counsels of the Abb might under many circumstances, if givensincerely, be a safeguard to Gaspar de Montsoreau against his arts;and he therefore saw no slight advantage in encouraging feelings ofdoubt and dissatisfaction in the mind of his young companion."It is surprising," said the Marquis, "that the Abb did notcommunicate to me the facts which you have mentioned, Monsieur deVillequier; but I suppose that you bound him down to secrecy.""To general secrecy," replied Villequier, "as was absolutelynecessary. But you, of course, as my friend, and as the person mostinterested--you, of course, were excepted. No, Monsieur de Montsoreau,no! In this business the Abb has acted upon his own judgment. He wasthen at Blois, you know. I was in great haste, knew no other person towhom I could apply, and therefore entrusted him with the task,thinking him also, at that time, you must remember, sincerely, truly,and devotedly your friend.""And have you any cause. Monsieur de Villequier," demanded theMarquis, "have you any cause to suppose now that he is not my friend?""Nay, Monsieur de Montsoreau!" replied Villequier. "If you aresatisfied, I have nothing to say. I only thought you seemeddissatisfied, and----""And what, Monsieur de Villequier?" demanded the Marquis, seeing thathe paused."I was going to say," replied Villequier, "that it might be as wellfor you to be upon your guard. We are living in troublous times,Monsieur de Montsoreau. We are both of us placed in a delicatesituation; every word and action ought to be guided by policy andforethought; and though I do not wish to wound the delicacy of yourfriendship towards your relation and friend, Monsieur de Boisguerin,yet we all know that he is a skilful politician, and that when, someyears ago, even as a young man he appeared at the Court of France, herMajesty the Queen-mother was heard to say, she was glad when he wasgone, for she was confident that he would outwit Satan himself, andtherefore might go far to outwit her.""I should not mind his policy," replied the Marquis. "I should notmind his policy, if you had not insinuated doubts as to whether he wasat heart my friend."Villequier answered nothing, but gazed down upon the ground with hisbrow somewhat contracted, and then stirred the rushes on the floorwith the point of his sword, as if determined not to make any reply."You are silent, Monsieur de Villequier," said Gaspar of Montsoreau;"and yet there is hanging a cloud of much thought upon your brow, asif there were intelligence in your breast which you could give, butwould not. I beseech you, if you are really friendly to me--or tospeak more plainly--if our interests in this business are in somedegree linked together, I beseech you to let me know fully and fairlywhat you think, and what you know, of the Abb de Boisguerin.""Thus adjured, Monsieur de Montsoreau," replied Villequier, "I can butanswer you, that I do not think Monsieur de Boisguerin is as friendlyto you as you suppose. Depend upon it, he has his own purposes toanswer first, and you are but a secondary consideration, if not,perhaps, a tool.""These are grave charges, sir," said Gaspar de Montsoreau, somewhatangry at the term tool. "I should like to have some proofs to sustainthem.""See! you are angry already," cried Villequier. "However, at thepresent moment I have no proofs to give. At some future time--ay,before the period of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, Imay give you such proof of what is the Abb's real character and realfeelings towards you, that you will say I am well justified. In themeantime I have warned you sufficiently to put you on your guard. Thatis enough for the present moment: you must act as you think fit; butstill you will be prepared. Farther, I have only to say, that it isnot I that keep you from seeing Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. You have myfull will and consent to see her whom you will. I would not, indeed,have you visit her too often, lest discovery should ensue, and Guiseobtain possession of her at once. But your own discretion must be yourguide. I will now leave you, Monsieur de Montsoreau; and, depend uponit, you will not find that I will fail you in any of the promises Ihave made, and will very soon return to you with the business arrangedby the King, in the manner that you desire. We must then wait untilfurther delay be judged dangerous: then if nothing occurs to relieveus from the other obstacles, we must in the end step over them; and,forgetting a little law, conclude your marriage, whether theParliament awards me the guardianship or not. When once she is madeyour wife, they cannot easily unwife her."Gaspar de Montsoreau, full of thoughts rather than words, did notpursue the conversation further. "I have but shown you scantycourtesy, Monsieur de Villequier," he said, "in not asking you to makeyour home of my poor house. It is not, indeed, such as I could wish tooffer you, having been taken from its bankrupt lord in some slighthaste. But still----""I thank you most humbly, Marquis," replied Villequier. "But I ambound farther to the city on the hill there. I must lodge with Epernonto-night, for I have messages to him from the King."Thus saying, after various more such ceremonious speeches as the agerequired, Villequier took his departure, and mounting his horse, whichhe had ordered to be kept still saddled in the court-yard, he rode ontowards Augoulme, followed by his train. As he did so, he once morethought over the alliance between Gaspar de Montsoreau and Marie deClairvaut. "If I can bring it about," he thought, "I not only gainthis sum he promises, but bind him to me for ever. I am her nearestmale relation, and I could not well find such an alliance in France.Montsoreau, Morly, Logres; it is a wonderful combination! But even,were it not for that--were it half as good, where should I get the manin France who would give a hundred thousand golden crowns for thepossession of such a cold piece of pretty marble as that."CHAP. VI.While the conversation just narrated was taking place, and thecharacter and views of the Abb de Boisguerin were being commentedupon in a manner which he could but little have wished, he himself waspursuing his way towards the town of Augoulme, with feelings andpurposes varying at every step; though in his case it was not theslightest sting of remorse or regret which occasioned this vacillationof purpose.Probably there never was a man on earth who wholly and entirelystilled the voice of conscience, and there might be moments when theAbb's own heart reproached him for things which he had done. But thehabit of his thoughts was different. He had been brought up in aschool where right and wrong were so frequently confounded for thepurpose of maintaining the temporal dominion of the church that, at avery early period of his life, he had arrived at that conclusion,which the sceptical followers of Pyrrho arrive at by a more lengthenedprocess, namely, that on earth there is no absolute and invariableright and wrong.The Jesuits had taught him, that what was wrong under somecircumstances, and marked by the reprobation both of God and man, wasright under other circumstances, and even praiseworthy; and forgettingthe cautious restrictions under which the wiser and the better membersof the order attempted, though vainly, to guard the doctrine, his keenand clear mind at once determined, that if fraud could ever be pious,virtue of any kind could be but a name. If there were no invariableand universal standard: if his thoughts and his actions were to begoverned by the opinions, and directed to the purposes of men, theonly rule of virtue, he saw, must be the approbation of others likehimself; and as every course of action must have an end and object tosecure energy in pursuing it, he readily fell into the belief thatgratification was the great object, and men's good opinion but to besought as a means to that end.It may be easily conceived how far he went on upon such a course ofreasoning. It naturally ended in the disbelief of every thing thatother men hold sacred: yet he put on all the semblances of religion;for as he believed in no hereafter, to do so, did not seem to him animpious mockery, but merely an unmeaning ceremony required by society.Every thing had become with him a matter of calculation; any thingthat was to be obtained, was to be obtained by a certain price; and,as he himself declared, he never regretted giving any price, providedthe object was attained, and was of equal value.It was his passions alone that led him wrong, and made him calculatefalsely. They had done so more than once in life, but yet notfrequently; not indeed that he sought to subdue them, but that theywere not naturally easily roused.It was no remorse then, or regret, that moved him in the varying stateof his thoughts as he rode on. It was doubt as to the means that hewas employing; It was doubt as to whether the strong passion, which hefelt within his breast, was not blinding his eyes, and misleading hisjudgment, as to the choice of paths and instruments. He felt that onthe present occasion he calculated not so coolly as he was accustomedto do; he felt that the object he had proposed to himself--or ratherwhich passion, and rash passion had suggested--was one so great and solittle likely to be obtained, that the means employed must be greatand extraordinary also; and that no single false step could be takenwithout the loss of every hope. His sensations were all strangelycomplicated, however. He felt and reproached himself for feeling thatthe passion in his heart had grown up so powerful, so overwhelming,that when he thought of staking life itself upon the issue, not ahesitation crossed his mind, and that he was ready to say, like alove-sick boy, "Let me die, if she be not mine!" But with thatpassion, he had mingled ambition, both as a means and as an end;prospects had opened before his eyes which had roused in his heartaspirations, which he thought he had put down; and not only to succeedin his love, but to gild that love with pageantry and state and power,had now become his object.Still, however, he remembered that in grasping at these high things,he might overlook matters which would prevent him reaching them; andafter riding on quickly for some time, he drew in his rein, to thinkmore calmly, to review his situation, and to calculate exactly all theimportant, the critical steps which were now to be taken."What am I next going to do?" he thought. "To seek for a priest, whomay work upon that impetuous, weak-minded boy, to yield the object ofhis passion, because, in the pursuit thereof, he has shed hisbrother's blood. And yet, is it likely that he will yield it? No! Ifear not! and yet stronger minds than his have been bowed down bysuperstition to greater sacrifices. He may, it is true; and it may beas well to secure that chance: but then, even then, only one smallstep is gained. If one could get him to yield all his greatpossessions at the same time, that were something! But he will not dothat! Two centuries ago we would have sent him to the holy land: butthose good times are past. What then is to be done?--To hurry him oninto some rash enterprise, and sharing his danger, take the equalchance of which shall live and which shall die?--That were agamester's policy indeed.--No! we must find more easy means thanthat.""However," continued the Abb, after a pause "in the meantime, I muststrike for myself alone. She hates and abhors him evidently. I myselfhave been too rash and rough with her. My passion has been tooimpetuous--too fiery. I know that those women who seem so cold andcircumspect are often like tna, icy above but with fire at the heart.But I have been rash. She will easily forgive that offence, however,and forget it too, when I can woo her as one unbound by the clericalvows, and companion of the high and great. I must lose no time,however, for events are drawing clearly to a mighty issue. Here is theparty of Henry, and the party of the League. I must choose between thetwo without delay. And yet the choice is soon made. In the firstplace, it would be long ere Guise would trust me: in the next, hewould never love me: in the next, he himself is not long lived. As Ihave seen a bird, when hit by a skilful fowler, tower high into theair before it falls, so Guise is soaring up with mighty effort, whichwill end but in his own destruction. I will away to Epernon at once.He is the man whose fortunes will yet rise; his unconquerable spirit,his courage, determination, and activity, his gross selfishness, hisinsolence, his very weakness, will all contribute to support himstill. This is a world in which such things thrive! Epernon must bethe man; and if I show him such cause as I can show him, he may wellbe glad to attach me to himself, as increasing his power and enhancinghis importance with the King. It is to him I will go! Doubtless hisreverses have humbled him somewhat, otherwise it were no light task todeal on such subjects with Epernon."In judging of Epernon the Abb judged by mankind in general, for inalmost every breast pride is a cowardly quality, and once depressedsinks into grovelling submission. Epernon, however, was the exceptionto the general rule, and seemed rather to rise in haughtiness underadversity.With thoughts like those which we have just detailed, the Abb spurredon towards Angoulme; but as he began to climb the steep ascent, hesaw several indications of popular emotion, which made him hesitatefor a moment, as to whether he should proceed or not. There were twoor three groups of citizens all speaking eagerly together, and in lowtones; and at the gates of the city he remarked a man whom he had seenbefore, and knew to be the mayor of the place, conversing in a lowtone, but in what seemed an anxious manner, with the soldiers of theCorps de Garde. The Abb contrived to make his horse pass as near themas possible, but at the same time affected to be deeply busied withhis own thoughts while really listening attentively to theirconversation. He could only catch, however, the end of one sentenceand the beginning of a reply:--"This Duke--a proud insufferable tyrant," said the voice of the mayor."Get along; if you were not what you are, I would put my pike intoyou," replied the soldier; and went on with some observations upon hiscompanion's conduct, not very complimentary, the whole of which theAbb de Boisguerin did not hear.As he advanced into the town, however, his keen eye remarked many moresigns and symptoms of the same kind, from all of which he drew his owndeductions; and on entering the castle, which was then inhabited bythe Duke of Epernon, he dismounted in the court of the guardhouse, asit was called, where there were a considerable number of the Duke'ssoldiery loitering about. Though it was not the usual place forvisitors to dismount, they suffered him to attach his horse to one ofthe large iron hooks in the wall, and in a few minutes after he was inthe presence of the Duke of Epernon. Not a trace of humiliation orabasement was to be seen in the Duke's countenance or demeanour. Hewas as proud, as fierce, as fiery as ever; and although he receivedthe Abb, having seen him more than once in Paris during the lateevents, and entertaining that degree of consideration for him which akeen and powerful mind almost always commands, he nevertheless seemedto doubt whether he should ask him even to sit down, and did it atlength with an air of condescension."Well, Monsieur de Boisguerin," he said at length, "to what do I owethis visit?""I come, my Lord," replied the Abb without a moment's hesitation, "tooffer your Lordship my poor services."The Duke smiled. "They are of course," he said, "welcome. Monsieur deBoisguerin. But the time of offering them is somewhat singular, whenall men think my fortunes on the decline, or, perhaps, I should say,utterly down.""Such it may seem to them, my Lord," replied the Abb; "but such itseems not to me. There are sciences, my Lord, which teach us what thefuture is destined to produce; and I own that I am quite selfish in mypresent act, seeking to attach myself to one who is yet destined touphold the throne of France, to affect the fortunes of the times, totriumph over all his enemies, and to outlive most of them now living.""Indeed!" said the Duke thoughtfully; "and am I to believe thisprophecy seriously?""Most seriously, my Lord," replied the Abb. "I myself believe it andknow it, as I believe and know the great fortunes that are likely toattend myself--otherwise, perhaps, you might not have seen me hereto-day.""That is candid, at all events," said the Duke; "and to say truth, Ithink that your prophecy, in some things, may be right; for I feelwithin my breast that undiminished power, that sense of my ownstrength, that confidence in my own destiny, which surely never can begiven to a falling man. But you spoke of your own future highfortunes, sir. What may they be?"The Abb paused and looked down for a moment, but then replied, "Itell not the prophecy to every one, my Lord; but to you, to whoseservices I hope to dedicate those high fortunes, I fear not to relateit. It was pronounced long ago, in the city of Rome, when I was therestudying, and as a rash young man had entangled myself in an affairwith a fair girl of the city, who suffered our intercourse to bediscovered, and consequently well nigh ruined all my prospects. Ithought indeed it was so, and was turning my back upon Rome for ever,when I met with an old monk, who from certain facts I told him drew myhoroscope, and assured me that I should find my fate in France; thatmy fortune would be brought about by the death of two relations faryounger than myself; and that I should suddenly take a share in greatevents, and rule the destiny of others when I least expected it. Suchwas the old man's prophecy now many years ago; and I have seen no signof its accomplishment till the present time.""And what signs have you seen now?" demanded Epernon."That I have been suddenly led, my Lord," replied the Abb, "from thecalm and tranquil quiet of a provincial life, without my own will oragency, into scenes of activity and strife; and that one, out of thetwo lives which lay between me and the great possessions ofMontsoreau, Logres, and Morly--lives, which in their youth andhealthfulness seemed to cut me off from all hope--has already lapsed,and left but one.""How is that?" exclaimed the Duke. "What life has lapsed?""That of the young Count of Logres," replied the Abb."Indeed!" exclaimed the Duke of Epernon in a tone somewhat sorrowful."I had not heard that. He was a bold, rash youth; but yet there was inhim the seeds of great things. He was fearless, and proud, and firm:virtues, the parents of all dignity and greatness.--You say then thatthere is but one life between you and all these lordships.""But one," replied the Abb; "that of Gaspar of Montsoreau, in regardto whom you took some slight interest, at the time his marriage withMademoiselle de Clairvaut was talked of.""Was talked of?" said the Duke. "Is it not talked of still?""Why, my Lord," replied the Abb, "the Lady's evident detestation ofthe young Marquis has rendered the matter hopeless. You yourselfremarked it, when you spoke with her at Vincennes; and he is nowconvinced of it himself. The grief and depression thus produced haveimpaired his health; and, indeed, it would seem as if ten years hadgone over him, instead of a few months, since all this affair began.""I hope, Monsieur de Boisguerin," said the Duke of Epernon with abitter smile, "I hope that you have not been taking too deep lessonsof our friend Villequier. I would rather be a prisoner on a charge ofhigh treason, and with Guise for my enemy, than I would be next akinto Villequier, and between him and lands and lordships."The Abb's brow grew as dark as night. "My Lord," he said, "I will notaffect to misunderstand you; but I am sure that fate will work out itsown will without any aid of mine; and had I been disposed to clear theway for myself, who should have stopped me, or who could havediscovered any thing I did, when these two youths have been under mycare and guardianship ever since their father's death?""I did but jest, Abb," replied the Duke. "But supposing that theevents which you anticipate were really to occur, what would be yourconduct then?""So sure am I, my Lord," replied the Abb, "that they will occur, thatmy conduct has been put beyond doubt. I have already demanded of theCourt of Rome to be freed from this black dress; and my last lettersfrom the eternal city announce to me, that the dispensation is alreadygranted, and, drawn up in full form, is now upon the road.""Ha!" exclaimed the Duke of Epernon. "Is it so, indeed? You must havepowerful protectors in the conclave.""I have," replied the Abb; "and though his Holiness is not fond ofrelaxing the vows of any one without some puissant motive; yet, whenthere is a strong one, he does not let the opportunity of unbindingslip, lest his key should grow rusty. But however, my Lord, supposingthese things done away, and I Marquis of Montsoreau and Lord ofLogres, my first aim and object would be to raise what power andforces I could, and with my sword, my wealth, and my life, were itnecessary, serve his Majesty the King, under him whom I hope soon tosee directing the state, namely, the Duke of Epernon, if----""Ay, there is still an if," replied the Duke. "Well, sir, what isthe condition?""It is, my Lord," said the Abb after a pause, in which it was evidentthat he considered the way he was to put his demand, "It is, that theDuke of Epernon will pledge me his princely word, that as far as hispower and influence go, he will support my claim to the hand ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut."The Duke actually started back with surprise; and, forgettingaltogether the splendid future with which the Abb had beenendeavouring to invest his pretensions, he exclaimed, in a tone ofanger and contempt that chafed and galled the spirit of the ambitiousman with whom he spoke, "Yours,--yours? Abb de Boisguerin? you, apoor preceptor in your cousin's house, an insignificant churchman,unbeneficed and unknown--you, to lay claim to the heiress ofClairvaut, a niece of the Guise, a lady nor far removed from asovereign house? On my soul and honour, I mind me to write toVillequier at once, and bid him marry his cousin to this young Marquisout of hand, in order to save your brains from being crackedaltogether!""Villequier can marry his cousin to no one," answered the Abb,"without my full consent. No, nor can the King either!""Mort-bleu!" exclaimed Epernon with a scornful laugh. "Vanity andambition have driven the poor man mad. Get you gone, Monsieur deBoisguerin; get you gone! I shall not trust with any mighty faith toyour fine prophecies."Though the Abb de Boisguerin felt no slight inclination to put hishand into his bosom, and taking forth the dagger that lay calmlythere, to plunge it up to the hilt in the heart of Epernon, he showednot in the slightest degree the wrath which internally moved him. Nay,the great object that he had in view made him in some degree conquerthat wrath, and he replied, "Well, my good Lord, I will get me gone.But, before I go, you shall hear another warning, which may enable youto judge whether my divinations are false or not. It is destined that,in the course of today or to-morrow, you should encounter a greatperil. Remember my words! be upon your guard! and take measures toensure yourself against danger! Go not out into the streets scantilyattended----""Oh no!" replied the Duke with a sneer. "I do not trust myself alonein the streets and high roads without a footboy to hold my horse, likethe noble aspirant to the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. I am notso bold a man, nor so loved of the people; and as to chance perils, Ifear them not.""Your acts on your own head, my Lord Duke!" replied his companion. "Igive you good day." And turning away abruptly, he passed out of theroom through the long corridor, and part of the way down the stairswhich led to the court of the guard.He was scarcely half way down, however, when some sounds which heheard coming from the other side of the building made him suddenlystop, listen, and then turn round; and, with a step of light, heretrod his way to the chamber where he had left the Duke.Epernon was busy writing, and looking up fiercely, demanded "Whatnow?""Fly, my Lord, fly quick!" exclaimed the Abb. "I come to give youtime to save yourself, for the mayor and his faction are upon you.They have come in by the great court, and I think have killed theSwiss at your gate. Believe me, my Lord, for what I say is true! Flyquickly, while I run down to send the guard to your assistance."His words received instant confirmation, even as the Duke gazeddoubtfully in his face; for a door on the opposite side of the roomburst open, and a terrified attendant rushed in, while eight or ninefierce faces were seen pursuing him quickly.The Duke darted to a staircase, which led to a little turret, and thefirst steps of which entered the room, without any door, just behindhis chair. He sprang up eagerly towards the small dressing-room above,and the mayor and his armed companions pursued as fiercely, leavingthe Abb to make his escape towards the court of the guard, withoutgiving any heed to his proceedings. Before the Abb had passed thedoor, however, he heard a loud crash, and turned his head to see bywhat it was occasioned, when, at a single glance he perceived that thevery eagerness of his pursuers had saved the Duke of Epernon. Ten ortwelve heavily armed men had all rushed at once upon the old and crazystaircase which led to the Duke's dressing-room. The wood work hadgiven way beneath them, precipitating one or two into the story below,and the greater part back into the room itself, but leaving a chasmbetween them and the Duke, which it was impossible for them topass.[5]---------------------[Footnote 5: Such is the account given by the most crediblehistorians. The author of the life of the Duke, M. Girard, who wasnearly contemporary, gives a different version: acknowledges that theDuke fled into his cabinet, but adds that he there defended himselflike a lion.]---------------------Without pausing to make any farther remark, the Abb ran down hastilyand alarmed the guard; and while the soldiers rushed tumultuously upto defend a commander whom they all enthusiastically loved, the Abbde Boisguerin mounted his horse and rode quietly out of the town. Hedoubted not, as indeed it happened, that the soldiery would arrive intime to save their Lord, and to compel the mayor and his comrades tomake a hasty retreat.It was not, however, towards the Chteau of Islay, where he had leftGaspar de Montsoreau, that the solitary horseman took his way; but, onthe contrary, crossing the Charente, he rode rapidly onward by thebanks of the river, in the direction of that field of Jarnac, where,in his early days, Henry III. had given such striking promises ofheroism and conduct which his after life so signally failed to fulfil.As he rode along, he thought with somewhat of a smile upon hiscountenance, that his last prophecy to the Duke of Epernon had metwith a speedy fulfilment; and he pondered with some bitterness overthe parting words which that nobleman had spoken to him."The aspirant to the hand of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut," he said tohimself, "without a single footboy to hold his horse! That may be inthe present instance policy rather than any thing else, my good LordDuke. But still we may learn wisdom, even, from such bitter words asthose. I had forgotten how much all men value the gilded exterior. Butit shall be so no longer. This that I aim at must be soon lost or won.I have staked life upon the pursuit, and all that makes life valuable.And why should I not stake fortune also? 'Fortune buys fortune,' saysthe old adage; and as the stake is great, so shall my game be bold."His resolution was instantly taken. He possessed, as we have saidbefore, sufficient wealth to give him competence, and to enable him tomingle with decent splendour in the society in which he was born. Buthe calculated that the same fortune which put him at ease for life,might afford him the means of magnificence and display, if he resolvedto expend the whole within a few years. He did so resolve, saying tohimself, "I shall either be at the height of fortune and enjoyment eretwo years be over, or I shall be no more. It suits me not to go onplaying stake after stake, as many men do, beaten, like a tennis-ball,from prosperity to ruin, and from ruin to prosperity. I have bentmyself to one great purpose, and I will attain it or die. That isalways within one's power, to shake off life when it is no longer asource of happiness."As he thus thought, his horse slowly descended a gentle hill by theside of the river, with a meadow down to the Charente on the one side,and a bank crowned with the wall of a vineyard on the other. Built upagainst the wall was a little shrine, with a virgin and child behind anet-work of iron, and the votive offering of a silver lamp burningbelow.Sitting on the little green spot which topped the bank at thatplace--after having apparently said his prayers at the foot of theshrine--was a boy of about thirteen or fourteen years of age; and asthe Abb came slowly near, the youth took a pipe out of his pocket andbegan playing a wild plaintive Italian air, full of rich melody anddeep feeling. The music was not new to the Abb; he had heard itbefore in other lands, when the few pure feelings of the heart whichhe had ever possessed had not been crushed, like accidental flowersblossoming on a footpath, by the passing to and fro of other coarserthings.He drew in his horse and paused to listen, and then gazed at the boy,and thought he had seen him somewhere before. The eyes, the features,the expression of the countenance, seemed to be all connected withsome old remembrances; and the air which he played too, brought hismemory suddenly back to early scenes, and a land that he had loved. Ashe gazed at the boy, who went on with the air, the recollection of hisperson again connected itself with different events; and, though nowhe was clothed in simple grey, he fancied he recognised in him theyouth who had been seen with Charles of Montsoreau when he attackedand defeated the small body of reiters near La Fert, and whom he hadalso beheld more than once in Paris, when he was watching theproceedings of the young Count in the capital.This conviction became so strong, that he went up and spoke to him,and found that it was as he suspected. After conversing with him for afew moments, he told him that if he would pursue that road for nearlya league, he would meet with some buildings belonging to a farm; andthen, turning again down a road to the left, he would find him at achteau upon the banks of the river. The boy promised to come, and theAbb rode on, while Ignati putting up his pipe followed as fast aspossible, and soon arrived at the gates of the dwelling to which hehad been directed.He was brought into the presence of the Abb by an attendant wearingthe colours of no noble house in France, and found him with some fruitand wine before him. But in regard to the subject on which the boyexpected to be questioned most closely, namely, the death of Charlesof Montsoreau, the Abb spoke not one word. Notwithstanding all hisfirmness of purpose, notwithstanding the remorseless character of hismind and of his habitual thoughts, he loved not to touch upon thesubject of his young cousin's death, unless forced on to do so bycircumstances. He spoke of Paris and of the Duke of Guise; and wherehe had first met with the young Count of Logres, and of all theaccidents that had befallen him while in company with Charles ofMontsoreau. But he spoke not one word in regard to the day of thebarricades, or the young nobleman's death.From time to time, while he talked with the boy, Ignati saw that theAbb's eyes fixed upon his countenance, and at length he asked him,"You are an Italian by birth, are you not?""I am," replied the boy; "that is, I am a Roman." And he said it withthat pride which every person born within the precincts of the ancientqueen of empires feels, although glory has long departed from herwalls, and the memory of past greatness is rather a reproach than anhonour."And what is your name?" demanded the Abb sharply."My name is Ignati," answered the youth."Ignati!" said the Abb, "Ignati!" But you have some other name. Whatwas your father's?""I do not know," answered the boy, with his cheeks and his browglowing. "Why do you ask?""Your mother's then?" said the Abb, without replying to his question."Your mother's? what was your mother's name?""Her name was Laura Pandolfini," replied the boy, gazing upon the Abbwith a degree of sternness in his look. "Did you know her?"The face of the Abb changed from deadly pale to glowing red in amoment; and after a pause he replied angrily and abruptly, "I knowher?--I know her? I know a common strumpet?"The boy's eyes flashed fire; and his hand was in his bosom in a momentseeking the knife that lay there. But he had put the pipe in thebreast of his doublet also, and ere he could reach a weapon, which, aswe have seen, he was able to use with fatal effect, the form of a ladypassing across the two open doors on the other side of the room madehim suddenly pause; and after a moment's thought, he drew back hishand and said, "What you say is false! She deserved not the name youhave given her!"He was turning towards the door, when the Abb cried "Stay!"and as the boy turned, he put his hand to his head and musedthoughtfully. Then starting suddenly he added, "No, no! It would bediscovered!--Come hither, boy!" he added; and taking out his purse hecounted out some pieces of gold, to no light amount; and giving themto the boy, he said, "There, you have lost your master and seem to bepoorly off. Take those, and get thee into some reputable employment."But the boy gave one fierce glance at his countenance, dashed down thegold upon the pavement, and exclaiming, "I will have no liar's money!"quitted the chamber and the house.The Abb gazed after him for a moment or two, fell into deep thought,and ended by pressing his hands over his eyes and exclaiming, "I am afool!"After pausing for a few moments more, he said to himself, "Well, Imust wait no longer here. This girl seems pleased with my newdemeanour towards her. Of my past language which frightened her, itseems that very soon no other impression will remain but the memory ofthe deep and passionate love I testified. That is never displeasing toany woman; and if I can lead her gently on, the matter will be soonaccomplished, now that this her first fancy is at an end, and thegrave has taken the great obstacle out of the way. Love him, she didnot, with true, womanly, passionate, love; but fond of him she was,with the sickly fancy of an idle girl; and her grief will besufficient to soften her proud heart. It is a wonderful softener,grief; and she will cling to whosoever is near her, that has skill andpower to soothe and support her. I will teach her to love better thanshe has loved!--But I must write down these tidings. I must not tellthem to her with my own voice, and with her eyes upon me, lest shelearn to hate me as the bearer of evil tidings."And seeking for pen and ink he wrote a note, such as few others buthimself could have composed. It was tender, yet respectful,--notlover-like, yet through every word of it love's light wasshining--sad, but not gloomy--melancholy, yet with words of hope. Whenhe had done he folded and sealed it, and then listening to the distantvillage clock, he said--"If I am absent much longer, Gaspar may suspect; and I am ratherinclined to believe that some one has roused suspicions in his mindalready. Well, we shall soon see; it is no very difficult task to rulea light-brained youth like that."Thus thinking, and leaving the note behind him on the table, the Abbproceeded to the stables, chose a fresh horse, caused it to be saddledand bridled, and rode back to the Chteau of Islay with all speed.Before he proceeded to the saloon to join the young Marquis, hequestioned his own servants as to all that had taken place during hisabsence; heard of the long visit of Villequier; and planned his ownconduct accordingly.Gaspar of Montsoreau, when he joined him, expressed some surprise thathe had not returned before, and added, in as gentle a tone as he couldassume, "I trust, nay good friend, that you have been pursuing theinquiries which have so long frustrated us in regard to the dwellingof that sweet girl, whom we were very wrong to place again in thehands of Villequier, even though it might have cost us our lives hadwe either remained in Paris, or attempted to take her with us."Though the young Marquis spoke quickly, his companion, who knew hischaracter to the very bottom and could instantly see the workings ofhis mind when he used any of the arts he himself had taught him,perceived at once that Villequier had betrayed the secret of Marie deClairvaut's abode; and he replied deliberately, "Yes, Gaspar, I havebeen more successful; and I think now--tamed down as you have been bygrief, and requiring some consolation--I think now, I say, that it isnot only safe but right, to let you know both that this fair girl isin the neighbourhood of the spot where we now stand, and that she isunder my care and guidance.""In the neighbourhood?" exclaimed Gaspar of Montsoreau. "Under yourcare and guidance? How happened I not to hear this before, Abb?""Simply," replied the Abb, "because the state of violence andirritation in which you were when I last returned to you fromBlois--the period when I first became possessed of any knowledge onthe subject--would have led you into acts of impetuosity, which, inthe first place, would have terribly injured your cause with her; and,in the next, would have discovered the place of her abode to every onefrom whom we seek to conceal it. Now, however, I think you can commandyourself, and you will find the benefit of what has been done to serveyou. All I require is, that you would let me know when you visitMademoiselle de Clairvaut; that you would do so with prudence andcaution and forbearance; and though it is not of course necessary thatyou should desist from pleading your own cause with her, yet let it beas gently as may be."The Abb de Boisguerin knew that Gaspar de Montsoreau could not do ashe asked him; that it was not in his nature to plead his own causegently. He felt perfectly confident that the rash impetuosity of theyoung Marquis would alienate more and more the regard of Marie deClairvaut, and thus, perhaps, facilitate even his own views andpurposes. Could he have prevented it, he would not willingly have lethim visit her at all; but it was now impossible to exclude him; and heknew that the secret of Charles of Montsoreau's death gave him thepower of destroying at once all his former pupil's hopes, if he sawthat he even made one step in removing the bad impressions Mariepreviously had received.On his part, though not quite satisfied with being deceived, Gaspar ofMontsoreau believed that the Abb had deceived him for his own good;and the selfish purposes which were most needful for him to discover,were still concealed in spite of the warnings of Villequier.CHAP. VII.In the gardens of the Chteau by the banks of the Charente; which theAbb de Boisguerin had left to return to Gaspar de Montsoreau, and inan arbour which had been constructed, as is still ordinary with thepeople of that country, by a number of vines entwined over a lighttrellis work; with a soft and beautiful scene before her eyes, and theautumn sunshine gilding the glowing waters, Marie de Clairvaut sat andwept, with the note from the Abb which had conveyed to her thebitterest tidings she ever had received on earth open in her hand. Aday had passed since the events just recorded had taken place, and shehad now received the news many hours, but her grief had not in theleast subsided; and to herself it even seemed greater than it had beenat first. Her whole thoughts at first had been bent upon the onepainful fact, that he whom she had loved with all the fervour, and thedepth, and the devotion of a heart that had never loved before, waslost to her for ever; that she should never behold again that frankand candid countenance, beaming with looks of deep and indubitableaffection; that she should never again see those eyes poring into herswith the intense gaze of love, and seeming at once to give and receivefresh light; that she should never hear the tones of that musicalvoice, which had so often assured her of protection and support; thatshe should never cling to that arm, which had so often brought herrescue and deliverance in the moment of danger. Then, she had feltonly that he was lost and gone, cut off in the brightness of his days,in the glory and strength of his youth, in the full blossom of hishopes, and ere he had yet more than lifted to his lips the cup, which,offered to him by honour, virtue, and sincerity, ought to have been asweet one indeed.Now, however, there had grown upon her mind feelings indeed moreselfish, but which were the natural consequences of her situation, andconnected intimately with the loss of him she loved. A feeling ofdesolation had come over her--of utter loneliness in all the world. Itseemed as if she had never loved or esteemed or clung to any buthimself; as if there were no one to protect her, to guide, support,direct, or cheer her upon earth; as if life's youth were over, thefortune of existence spent like a prodigal, the heart's treasuryempty, and nothing left for the immortal spirit on this side the gravebut penury of every rich and noble feeling, lone solitude and pettycares, and all the dull anxieties of a being without an object.Desolate, desolate indeed, did she feel: and well too might she feeldesolate! for though her grief did some wrong to many who loved her asfriends and relations, and would have done much to aid and supporther; yet, oh! what is such love and esteem? what is aid and supportwrung from the midst of hours devoted to other things, and thoughtsand feelings centered upon other objects, when compared with theentire devotion, the pure, single love of an upright, an honourable,and a feeling heart--where the being loved is the great end and objectof every thought and every action--where all the feelings of thespirit are hovering by day round that one object, and guarding it likeangels through the watches of the night? Oh yes, she was lonely, shewas desolate, she was unprotected and unsupported, when she comparedthe present with the past! Well might she think so; well might shegrieve and mourn over her own deprivation, when she wept for him andfor his early end!Some comfort, perhaps, had been indeed afforded her by the changewhich had taken place in the demeanour of the Abb de Boisguerin. Shecould never love him; she could never like him: his society couldnever even become tolerable to her: but yet it was no slightsatisfaction to find that she was no more to hear words which sheconsidered as little less than sacrilegious, or to endure the eagerpassion in his eye, and hear him dare to talk to her of love. Shelooked upon him as her gaoler indeed, though he often denied that hehad power to liberate her; but yet she felt that peace and comfort atleast depended much upon that gaoler's will, and was not a littlepleased to find that during the three or four last visits which he hadpaid, no word which could offend her had been spoken, no tone or evenlook that she could take amiss was to be seen, though a certaintenderness and melancholy seemed to have fallen upon him, which shecould well have wished removed, or not so openly displayed.During the very morning of which we are now speaking, he had comethere again, and his conduct towards her had been all that she couldhave desired. He had not spoken directly of the cause of the deepgrief which he saw his intelligence of the former day had brought uponher, but all his words were chosen so as to harmonise with that grief;and the object of his visit itself, as he expressed it, was only tosee whether he could do any thing to console her, or to alleviate thesorrow under which she laboured. She had thanked him for his courtesyand kindness; but, ere he had left her, he said with a tone of whatseemed real regret, that he was sorry to say his own visit would befollowed by another, which he feared might, in some degree, importuneher."The young Marquis of Montsoreau," he added, "will be restrained nolonger from seeing you; and you know, Madam, it is impossible for meto prevent him, which I would willingly have done, especially as theview he takes of the recent most lamentable event is not likely to doaught but give you pain.""Oh, cannot you stay him?" exclaimed Marie de Clairvaut. "Cannot youstay him at this terrible moment, when the very sight of him will behorrible to me?""I fear not indeed. Lady," replied the Abb. "I would have given myright hand to prevent his coming, but he seemed perfectly determined.However, when I return, I will do my best once more, in the hope thathe may yet be moved." And after a visit very much shorter than usual,he had taken his leave and departed.The fair girl he left had gone out into the gardens, as we have seen,once more to weep alone over the sad and painful situation in whichshe was placed, and over the dark and irreparable loss which she hadsustained; but ere she had gone out, she had taken the only precautionin her power to insure that her solitude would remain inviolate,directing the servants--who acted indeed the part of turnkeys--if theMarquis of Montsoreau applied to see her, to state at once that shewas not well enough to receive him, and wished to pass some days aloneand in tranquillity.She wept long and bitterly; but in about an hour after she had goneout, the sound of horses' feet reached her ear, and voices speaking atthe gateway made themselves heard. She could distinguish even thetones of the young Marquis, and indistinctly the words of the servantin reply. But Gaspar of Montsoreau was hurt and offended by themessage she had left, and a certain inclination to tyranny in hisdisposition broke forth with his usual impetuosity."Inform Mademoiselle de Clairvaut," he said, "who it is that desiresto see her, and let me have an answer quick. Say that I much wish fora few minutes' conversation with her. What, fellow! Would you shut thegates upon me like a horseboy? Get ye gone and return quickly. I willwalk in the gardens till you come back." And striding in he threw thegate violently to, and advanced directly to the water's side, as if hecould have divined that the object of his search was there.Marie de Clairvaut was indignant, and that feeling for a momentenabled her to throw off the overwhelming load of grief. Rising atonce she came forth, and crossed the green slope towards the chteau,passing directly by Gaspar of Montsoreau as she did so, and intendingmerely to bow her head by way of salutation. He placed himself in sucha manner, however, that she could not pass on, although he must haveseen the tears fresh upon her cheeks, and her indignation was moreroused than before."I directed the servant, sir," she said, when forced to pause, "toinform you, if you came, that I was not well enough to see you; andthat I wished for solitude and tranquillity.""Nay, indeed, dear Lady," said the young Marquis, conquering thefeelings of anger with which he had entered, and speaking with a calmand tender tone, "I thought, if you knew that I was here, pity, ifnothing else, would induce you to see, but for a few moments, onewho has languished for weeks and months for a single glance of youreyes--one who so deeply, so tenderly, so devotedly, loves you."Those words sounded harsh, painful, and insulting to the ears of Mariede Clairvaut--words which, from the lips of him she loved, would havebeen all joy and sweetness, but were now abhorrent to her ear; andlooking at him sternly, with her bright eye no longer dimmed, thoughher lip quivered, she said, "Never let me hear such words again,sir!--I beg that you would let me pass!--Marquis of Montsoreau, thisis cruel and ungentlemanly! Learn that I look upon myself as yourbrother's widow, and ever shall so look upon myself till my dyingday." And thus saying she passed him, and entered the house.She listened eagerly for the sound of horses' feet after she hadentered her own apartments, and was very soon satisfied that the youngMarquis had gone back. As soon as she was assured of this, she oncemore went out into the open grounds--for the load of grief ever makesthe air of human dwellings feel oppressive; and again going down tothe bank of the river, she gazed upon its tranquil current as shewalked by the side; and though her sorrow certainly found no relief,yet the sight of the waters flowing beneath her eyes, calm, tranquil,incessant, led, as it were, her thoughts along with them. They becameless agitated, though still as deep and powerful; they seemed toimitate the course of the river, running on incessantly in the samedark stream, but in quiet and in silence. The tears indeed would, fromtime to time, rise into her eyes and roll over her cheeks, but no sobaccompanied them; and though a sigh often broke from her lip, it wasthe sigh of deep, calm despair, not of struggling pain.It is wonderful how, when we are in deep grief, the ordinary soundsand sights of joyous nature strike harsh and inharmonious upon us.Things that would pass by unheard at other times, as amongst thesmaller tones in the great general concert of the day, then becomepainfully acute. The lark that sung up in the sky above her head, madeno pleasant melody for her ear; a country boy crossing the oppositefields, and whistling as he went, pained her so much, and made hergentle heart feel so harsh towards him, that she schooled herself forsuch sensations, saying, "He cannot tell that I am so sorrowful! Hecannot tell that the sounds which I once was fond of, are now the mostdistasteful to me."A minute or two after a few notes upon a pipe were played immediatelybeneath the garden wall--a little sort of prelude, to see that theinstrument was clear; and unable to endure it longer, Marie deClairvaut turned to seek shelter in her prison.Ere she had taken three steps, however, she paused. The air was notone of the country; a finer hand, too, a more exquisite taste thanFrance could produce woke the instrument into sounds most musical, andin a moment after, she recognised the sweet air which she had twicebefore heard, and both times from the lips of Charles of Montsoreau.The memory of the first time that it had met her ear was sweet anddelightful; but the memory of the second time was as the memory ofhope; and, in despite of all, it woke again the feelings it hadawakened before; and an indistinct feeling of glad expectation cameacross her mind, like a golden sunbeam, shining through the mist of anautumnal morning. What was it she hoped? what was it she expected? Sheknew not herself; but still there was an indistinct brightening cameover her heart, and feelings; and when the air was over, instead offlying from the music, she listened eagerly for its renewal.The pipe, however, sounded not again; but in a moment after she heardsome one say, "Hark!" and the sweetest possible voice began to sing:--SONG.Weep not, Lady, weep not,Grief shall pass away;Angels' eyes that sleep notWatch thee on thy way.Heavenly hands are twiningGarlands of glad flowers.Joy and Hope combiningWreath thy future hours.Diff'rent powers are near thee--Bright Hope, dark Despair;Let the Goddess cheer thee--Fly the Fiend of Care.Son of Sin and SorrowDespair by earth was given;Child of the bright to-morrow,Hope was born of Heaven.What could it mean? Marie de Clairvaut asked herself. The words seemeddirectly addressed to her, and applicable to her own situation: yetthe voice, as far as she could judge, she had never heard before. Butstill every note, every word, appeared to counsel hope. "Can I havebeen deceived?" she thought. "Can the Abb de Boisguerin and Gaspar deMontsoreau have combined for their own dark purposes to cheat me, toinduce me to believe that the one I love so well is dead?"But, alas no! The Abb had left, inclosed in his own, the brief notewhich he had received from Paris, announcing the event, and that notebore every appearance of being an ordinary matter of business, passingregularly through the post-office of the capital. Could the song thatshe had heard, she asked herself, again--could it have beenaccidental; could it have been sung at that moment through one ofthose strange combinations, which sometimes arise out of entirelyindifferent circumstances, to give zest to our joy, or poignancy toour sorrow? She determined, if possible, to ascertain; and raising hervoice a little above its ordinary tone, she said, "Who is there? Towhom do you sing?"She did not seem to have made herself heard, however, for a momentafter the same voice demanded, "Is there any one that listens?""Yes, yes!" she exclaimed, eagerly, "I listen; speak on!""Well then, hearken," said the voice, and again a new air and a newsong began.SONG.He goes away to a far distant land,With cross on his shoulder and lance in his hand;And news soon comes how his lightning brandHas scattered the hosts of paninrie.His beautiful Lady sits weeping and lone,And wishes she were where her Knight has gone;But she grieves not his absence with angry moan,For her spirit is full of his chivalry.But what are the tidings come next to her ear?Oh! tidings dark and heavy to hear;How her fearless warrior, her husband dear,Has fallen 'neath the lance of the Moslema.How, gallantly staking his life, to saveFrom infidel hands, the Redeemer's grave,He has fought for the righteous and sleeps with the brave,'Neath the walls of Hierosolima!'Tis true, oh, 'tis true!--yet she will not believe,"Ah, no! e'en in dying he would not deceive;And he promised, if spirit such power could receive,And he fell in his holy chivalry.To visit my side in the watches of night,To comfort my heart, and to gladden my sight,And call me to join him in countries of light,And dwell in his breast through eternity."Years pass; and he comes not. Nor yet she believes!'Tis his absence, but 'tis not his death that she grieves.Hope strong in affection, her heart still deceives,Lo! she watches yon Palmer how eagerly,To ask him some tidings of Syria to say--But what is thy magic, oh, thou Palmer gray?She is clasped in his arms! she has fainted away!And he kisses her fair cheek how tenderly.As the song had gone on, Marie de Clairvaut could no longer doubtthat, though allegorical, those words were applicable to herself.Joy--joy beyond all conception took the place of grief; all that shehad suffered, all that she had endured in the past, she now felt,indeed, to be nothing to what she had lately undergone. But theextatic delight which the last words of that song gave, the suddendissipation of grief was too much for her to endure. It was like thelight that blinds us when we suddenly rush from the darkness into thesunshine; and she who had gone through dangers, and horrors, andperils of many a kind, firm and unshaken, fell fainting under thesudden effect of joy. How long she remained so she knew not; but atall events it was not long enough to attract the attention of thepeople of the house, from the windows, of which she was screened by athick alley of trees. Some one, however, had been near her, for therewere the prints of small feet in the grass, extending from the wall tothe spot where she lay, and immediately under her hand was placed asmall packet addressed to herself.Fearful of discovery, she hid it instantly in her bosom, and, as soonas she could, rose, and with a step far slower than her wishes, spedback again to the house to read the paper she had received, in secret.It was written in a bold, free hand; the date was that very morning;and the first words, "My beloved."Marie de Clairvaut laid the letter down and gasped for breath. It wassufficient, it was altogether sufficient; every doubt, every fear thathad remained was now at an end, and she once more burst into tears;but, oh, how sweet were those tears! how happy! how unlike the past!Soon she took up the letter again, and through the dazzling drops thatstill hung in her eyes read the bright assurance, that he lived forher who loved him."I have feared," the letter said, "I have feared, that a report of mydeath which has been current in this city of Paris should have reachedmy beloved Marie, and the more especially as, by the counsel andearnest entreaty of the Duke of Guise, I have myself contributed tothe spread of the rumour, and have taken every means to suffer it tobe confirmed. The object of this, however, was to deliver you alone bythrowing those who so unjustly detain you off their guard; and somedays ago I came on into this neighbourhood--where my brother, the Abbde Boisguerin, and the Duke of Epernon, all are, and to which we havetraced Villequier several times--in the confident belief that you werenot far distant from Angoulme. It might have been some time ere Idiscovered your abode, but accident has befriended me, and my page,who bears you this, and undertakes positively to deliver it to you,saw you yesterday morning by a most extraordinary but fortunatechance. I dare not venture near you in the early part of the morning,but ere night has closed in, I will find some means to see and speakwith you. As far as possible, dearest Marie, be prepared for any thingthat it may be necessary to undertake. I fear that you have alreadysuffered much; but I will not doubt that even the rash and violent menwho have dared every crime to withdraw you from those that love youbest, have treated you with tenderness and kindness. I too havesuffered much, but far more from knowing that you were at the mercy ofthose who persecute you while I was lying stretched upon the bed ofsickness, than from the very wounds that brought me there. I am nowwell: I am near you; and that is enough to enable me to say that I amhappy, although there may be perils and dangers before us, as we arestill in the midst of our adversaries, and must once more attempt topass through a long track of country with obstacles at every step."The letter ended with every expression of affection and of love; andagain and again Marie de Clairvaut read it and wept, and fell intofits of deep thought, and could scarcely believe that the joyoustidings were true.She next asked herself what she could do to favour her lover'sefforts. The two or three women who had been appointed to wait uponher, as well as the male attendants by whom she was surrounded, wereall strangers to her, and she felt that they were her gaolers. Therewas one of them, however, who had looked upon her during the precedingday with evident compassion, had watched her tears with sorrowfuleyes, and had spoken a few words of consolation. At one time shethought of speaking to that woman, and trying to gain her to herinterests for the purpose of facilitating any thing that Charles ofMontsoreau might do to effect her liberation. She hesitated, however,and judging that if he succeeded in seeing her that evening it wouldbe by passing over the wall at the spot where she had heard the boysinging in the evening; she lingered about during the whole of theevening, listening for the least sound. None was heard, however, andat length the bell at the gates of the enclosure was heard to ring.Agitated and anxious, fearing that every moment might bring Charles ofMontsoreau to the spot, at the very time that other persons were near,she came out from behind the trees, and walked slowly on by the sideof the river. Just at that moment a small boat pushed slowly up thecurrent by a country boy, passed by the spot where she stood; but theboy whistled lightly on his way, as he went, and took no notice ofher; and in a minute after, she heard steps approaching from the otherside, and turned with some anxiety to see who it was that approached.It was the servant girl we have before mentioned, who came towards herquickly, saying, "You have been very sad these two days, lady, and Iwish you would take comfort. Here is a good man, one of the preachingfriars just called at the gate, and I'm sure, if you would but listento him, he would give you consolation.""Oh no," replied Marie de Clairvaut, "he could give me no consolation,my good girl. My own thoughts just now are my best companions."As she spoke, however, to her dismay, she saw the monk coming acrossthe green from the side of the gates, and she determined at once toreject all his proffered advice and consolation, fearing that theprecious minute for seeing him she loved might be lost by thisunwonted intrusion."Do listen to him, dear lady," said the girl. "When I told him how sadyou were, he said he was sure that he could give you comfort."In the mean time the friar approached with a slow step, with his cowldrawn over his head, and his hand supported by his staff. Marie deClairvaut trembled from anxiety and apprehension, and only returnedthe friar's benedicite by an inclination of the head and an assurancethat she did not stand in need of the consolation he offered."Yet listen to me, daughter," he said, without withdrawing the cowlfrom his head. But the first tones of that full rich voice provedsufficient nearly to overpower the fair girl to whom he spoke. "If youwill hear me but for five minutes, my daughter," he said, "I think andI believe, that I can suggest to you consolations that you may take toheart; and if not, the few words I have to speak can do you no harm atleast."Marie de Clairvaut bowed her head, and took a step or two nearer tothe water, while the woman withdrew for a short space, so as to be outof ear shot. But still she remained watching the two, as if she wereeither afraid of having done wrong in admitting the friar at all, orhad suddenly conceived some suspicion of his purpose. The eyes ofMarie de Clairvaut and of Charles of Montsoreau turned that way, andboth saw that they were watched. Could they have followed the dictatesof their own hearts, they would have cast themselves into each other'sarms; but now they were forced to stand, ruling every look and everygesture, and assuming the demeanour of strangers, even while the wordsof love and affection were bursting from their lips. The youngnobleman, however, gave but brief course to his feelings."This night, Marie," he said, after a few words of passionatetenderness, "this very night at twelve, a boat shall be ready for youunderneath that bank, and means prepared for you to descend. It hasalready passed up the river in order that we may descend swiftly withthe stream, for the current is too rapid to permit of our passing upwithout the risk of being stopped at every moment. At Jarnac, however,all is prepared for our escape, and though our journey thence may belonger, it will be more secure. Can you be here at that hour?""I can," she said, "and will, and, oh! may God grant, Charles, thatthis time we may not only come within sight of the haven, as we havetwice done before, but reach it altogether; and never, never againwill I suffer them to separate me from you, as I did on that awful dayin Paris.""Even yet, neither I nor the Duke know how it happened," said Charlesof Montsoreau."As I was following the Queen," replied Marie, rapidly, "some onepulled me by the sleeve, and on turning to see who it was, the crowdclosed in between me and Catherine. The person who had touched me wasdressed in the colours of the house of Guise, and he said, 'The Dukeexpects you Mademoiselle. If you will come round this way, I will leadyou to the other gate where there is no crowd.' I followed willingly,and nothing doubting; and he led me round into one of the streetsbehind, when suddenly I was seized by the arms on either side, andhurried along without the power of resistance. I cried for help asloud as I could, indeed, but they bore me rapidly into the houseopposite, where I saw the Abb de Boisguerin, and could hear yourbrother's voice talking to Monsieur de Villequier. They then put meinto a chair, the blinds of which I could not undraw, and carried merapidly to another house, where I remained for some time, tillVillequier and the rest again appeared. I did all that woman could do,Charles, to make them set me free; but what could I do? what means hadI to use?--entreaties, to which they were deaf; menaces, at which theylaughed. Your brother, indeed, said something that he intended forkindness, and the Abb looked gloomy and sad. But Villequier onlysmiled for all answer; till at length tidings were brought them thatthey were discovered, and that people were coming rapidly in pursuitof them. I was then once more borne away by Villequier, after a fewwords between him and your brother; and I heard your brother say asthey parted, 'I will delay them as long as possible.' Where they tookme I know not well, but I believe it was the Htel de Villequier.--Butsee, the woman is coming near! We must part, dear Charles; I fear wemust once more part."Nothing more could be said, for the girl now approached; and Charlesof Montsoreau, assuming the tone of the friar, bade Marie remember hiswords, and take them to heart; and then, giving her his blessing,departed.Shortly before midnight, wrapt in a cloak of a dark colour, in order,as far as possible, to pass unobserved if any eye should be watching,Marie de Clairvaut passed through one of the lower windows of thechteau, and with a light step, sprang into the little cloister thatran along one side of the building, at no great depth from the window.The moon was shining bright and full, and every object around, exceptwhere the shadow of the cloister fell, was as clear as if the sun hadbeen in the sky.She paused and listened with a beating heart. There was no sound butthe murmur of the quick Charente; and then, putting her ear to theopen window, she listened there to ascertain that all was quiet in thehouse. Nothing stirred; and, knowing how important it was to leave notrace of the manner in which her flight had been effected, she closedthe casement carefully, and prepared to go forth into the moonlight.There was something, however, in the stillness, and the clearness, andthe calmness of every thing that was in itself fearful; and shehesitated for a moment before she went out. At length, however, sheventured across the green and shining turf, and with a quick stepapproached the edge of the water. Looking down upon it from above, shecould see nothing in the deep shadow of the bank; but, suddenly, abright ripple caught some stray rays of moonlight, and chequered thedark bosom of the water with quick lines of silver."Are you there?" said the voice of Charles of Montsoreau from below."Yes," she said. "How shall I descend?"But, even as she spoke, a figure glided out from the shrubs besideher, and, uttering a low cry, Marie de Clairvaut perceived the girlwho had given admittance to the supposed friar on the precedingevening. The sound which she had uttered had instantly caught theattention of Charles of Montsoreau; and, springing up the bank, hefound the girl with her hand clasped round the Lady's wrist, butholding up the other hand as if enjoining silence."You are unkind," said the girl, in a low tone, "when I was kind toyou. I have already been bitterly reproached for letting in the monk;and now, if you fly, what will become of me? They will say that I didit.""Fear not, fear not!" answered Charles of Montsoreau, "and attempt notto detain the Lady, my good girl; for go she must and will; and, asthere is no other boat here, any attempt to pursue us will be vain.All you can do by endeavouring to detain her will be useless, and butinjure yourself. Here is money for you," he continued.The girl put it away with her hand, replying, "I want no money, sir;but if she goes, I will go with her. I will not stay here in the powerof that dark Abb. I will come with her if she will let me.""Willingly, willingly," replied Charles of Montsoreau; "but say not aword, and come quick; and remember, till the Lady is safe under theprotection of the Duke of Guise, we pause for no one, so there must beno pretences of fatigue.""Fear not," replied the girl; "I can bear more than she can. But howcan we get down the bank?""There is a short ladder," said the young Count. "Come quick!" And ina moment after he aided Marie de Clairvaut to descend. It was all donein a moment. The girl followed the Lady, the ladder was taken into theboat, and, with joy and satisfaction beyond all conception, the fairgirl, whose days had lately passed so sorrowfully, felt the littlevessel fluctuating beneath her feet as she seated herself in it; whileCharles of Montsoreau, with a man who had been waiting therein, pushedthe boat away from the bank, and a boy seated at the stern guided itinto the deeper parts of the water. There were but a few words spokenby any one."You are sure, Ignati," said the young Count, "that you marked everyrock and shoal as you came up?""Quite sure," replied the boy; and, leaving the current, which wasrapid and powerful, to bear them on, without disturbing its smoothsurface by the splash of oars, they glided along quickly down thestream: now in moonlight, now in shade, with the high rocky banks andpromontories filled with holes and caverns, which border the valley ofthe Charente, now seen in bright clear light--now rising up againstthe silvery sky wrapped in deep shadows and obscurity.The hand of Marie de Clairvaut lay clasped in that of her lover asthey sat side by side. Their hearts were full, though their lips weresilent; and the eyes of both were raised towards the sky, filled withthankfulness, and hope, and trust. Thus they went on for about twohours, saying but little, and that little in low and murmured tones;but as they went, Charles of Montsoreau found occasion to tell herthat he had luckily effected a new arrangement, and that he hadprocured means of landing and proceeding on their journey before theyreached Jarnac.At length, after a voyage of about two hours and a half, as the moonwas beginning to decline, a rushing sound was heard over the bow ofthe boat, and the waters of the river were seen fretting against adyke, which had been built to confine it in its proper course. Acouple of houses, sheltered by two sloping hills which swept down tothe very bank of the river, appeared upon the left hand, with whatseemed a number of living objects gathered about them.Marie de Clairvaut turned her eyes to Charles of Montsoreau with someapprehension, but he pressed her hand tenderly, saying, "Fear not,fear not. They are my own people, waiting for our arrival."The boy guided the boat safely up to the landing place, and thequestion, "Who comes here?" was demanded, as if at a regular warlikepost."A friend," replied Charles of Montsoreau, and gave the word ChteauThierry. The man grounded his arms, and Charles of Montsoreau,springing to the shore, led Marie de Clairvaut and the girl who hadfollowed her, to one of the houses, where every thing seemed preparedfor their reception.He paused for a moment to gaze upon the face of the girl who hadaccompanied them, and to ask her name, which he found to be Louise.The countenance was good, and frank, and gentle, and the naturalspirit of physiognomy, which is in every one's brain, gave a pleasantreading of that face."Listen to me," he said, speaking to her. "As you have preferred theservice of this lady to remaining behind where I found you, dependupon it every attention and devotion that you show to her by the waywill be taken note of and well rewarded; and do not forget, that, ifpossible, you are never to leave her, but to do every thing in yourpower, under all circumstances, to enable her to reach the Duke ofGuise, who is her near relation, and whom we expect to find at Bloisor Chartres.""Is she so great a lady?" said the girl."She is the niece and ward of the great Duke of Guise," repliedCharles of Montsoreau; "and the time is rapidly coming when those whohave injured and offended her will be severely punished, and those whohave assisted and befriended her rewarded far beyond theirexpectations."Having said this, he left them to see that all was properly prepared;and in a few minutes more Marie de Clairvaut, with the girl whoaccompanied her, were placed in one of the rude but roomy chaises ofthe country, and with six horses to drag it through the heavy roads,was rolling away in the direction of Limoges, followed by Charles ofMontsoreau, and a party of five or six servants on horseback.CHAP. VIII.The autumn was far spent, an early winter had set intensely in, frostonce more covered the ground, the last leaves had fallen from thetrees, and looking round upon the thick tapestry that covered thewalls, and the immense logs of wood which blazed in the deep archedfire-place, the tenant of a splendid room in the old chteau of Bloissmiled when he thought of where he had last passed a similar frostyday: in arms in the open field against the enemies of the land.Now, however, the appearance of Henry Duke of Guise was in some degreedifferent from that which it had ever been before. Loaded with honoursby the King, adored by the people, gratified in every demand, rulingalmost despotically the state, the height to which he had risen hadimpressed itself upon his countenance, and added to that expression ofconscious power, which his face had ever borne, the expression also ofconscious success. His dress, too, was more splendid than it had everbeen--not that he had adopted the silken refinements of Epernon orJoyeuse; not that his person was loaded with jewels, or that his earhung with rubies: but every thing that he wore was of the richest andmost costly kind; and as he now stood ready dressed to go down to holdthe table of grand master of the King's household and generalissimo ofthe armies of France, at which Henry himself, and all the great noblesof the Court were that day to be present, it would have beendifficult, throughout all Europe--nay, it would have been impossible,to match his princely look, or to excel in taste his rich apparel. Onesingle star gleamed upon his bosom, the collars of manifold ordershung around his neck, the hilt of his sword was of massy gold, andthin lines of gold embroidery marked the slashings of his green velvetdoublet, where, slightly opening as he moved with easy dignity, thepure white lining below appeared from time to time. There were nojewels on his hands, but one large signet ring. He wore no hat, andthe brown hair curling round his forehead was the only ornament thatdecked his head. There  was a jewel in his belt, indeed, a singlejewel of high price, and the pommel of the dagger, which lay acrosshis loins, was a single emerald.From time to time, while he had been dressing;--indeed we might sayalmost every minute, some messenger, or page, or courier appeared,bearing him news or letters from the various provinces of the realm.His secretary stood beside him, but every line was read first by theDuke's own eye; and then he handed them to Pericard, either with somebrief comment or some direction in regard to the answer to bereturned."Ha!" he said, smiling, after reading one epistle. "There is a curiousletter from good Hubert de Vins. Hubert loves me as his own brother,and yet to read that letter one would think he respected me butlittle. There is no bad name he does not give me down to Maheutre andHuguenot, because I trust in King Henry, who, he says, is astreacherous as a Picardy cat.""I think with Monsieur de Vins, your Highness," said Pericard, who hadbeen reading the letter while the Duke spoke, "'that trusting in thesemblances of the King's love, you expose your life every hour as ifit were neither a value to yourself or your friends or your country.'""You mistake, Pericard," replied the Duke; "I trust not in Henry'slove at all. Whether it be feigned or whether it be real for the time,matters not a straw. If it be feigned, it does me no harm, but, on thecontrary, daily gives me greater power; if it be true, I receive thebenefits thereof for the time, well knowing that to-morrow or the nextday it will change completely into hate. I'll tell you what it is Itrust to, Pericard: not to the King's love, but to his good sense; forwere I dead to-morrow he could be ten times worse than he is to day. Iam he who stands between him and destruction!--Ah! who have we hear?"he continued, as the door again opened. "From Provence;"--and takingthe letter from the hand of a dusty courier, he read it overattentively and threw it to Pericard, saying, "That is good newssurely, Pericard! In the room of the two deputies who were sodifficult to manage that we were obliged to stuff them with carp andtruffles till they both fell sick and fled, we have got two steadyLeaguers not to be shaken by threats or moved by choice meats. If wecould dislodge that viper, Epernon, from Angoumois, all would be clearbefore us till we reached the confines of Henry of Navarre. ButEpernon is raising troops, I hear----" he added, although he saw thatsome one had entered the room and was approaching him."Which he will soon disband. Monsieur de Guise," said the stranger,"as I am charged by the King to set out to-morrow morning to give theDuke his commands to that effect.""By my life, Monsieur Miron," said the Duke, "you will have soon tolay aside altogether the exercise of your esculapean powers, at leastupon his Majesty's person. You show yourself so skilful in healing thewounds of the state, and curing the sickness of the body politic.""Your Highness is good unto me," replied the King's physician, lookinghumble; "but I came to pay my respects to your Highness now, nothaving seen you since the exile of Villeroy, Pinar and the rest. Ihope your Highness does not think that their disgrace is likely toaffect your interests at court.""Not in the least, Monsieur Miron," replied the Duke: "far from it. Iseek to exercise no influence amongst the King's ministers. Those whoare good for the state are good to me. On the King's good feeling andgood sense I firmly rely.""Some body," said the physician, "informed his Majesty that you weregrieved at the dismissal of Villeroy. I may tell him, then, that suchis not the case, for he was pained to hear it.""Tell him so, I beseech you," replied the Duke. "I know the King wouldnot wish without some good reason to dismiss any one that I especiallyesteemed.""Most assuredly," replied Miron; "but might I give your Highness oneslight warning as a friend, and a most sincere one?""Most gratefully will it be received," replied the Duke. "Speakfreely, my learned sir," he continued, seeing that the physician hadfixed his eyes upon Pericard. "Our good Pericard is as silent as yourfriend death, Monsieur Miron, who tells no tales you know to those onthis side the grave, whatever he may do to those on the other. What isit you have to say?""It is this, my Lord," replied Miron. "I should tell you first, that Ido believe the King sincerely loves you, and that if you deal butpoliticly with his humours, there is none in whom he will place suchconfidence. But my good lord the King's temperament is a strangeone.--I speak as a physician. It is indeed injured by some excesses,but though by nature full of the mercurial character, there was alwaysmuch of the saturnine in it. The balance between these has beenoverthrown by many circumstances, and in certain conjunctions of theplanets he is strangely and variably affected. Such also is the casein the time of these hard frosts. In soft and genial weather he may beeasily dealt with: you will then find him but as a thing of wax inyour hands. But I beseech you, my Lord, remember that, when the poresof the earth are shut up and filled with this black and acrid frost,'tis then that all the humours of the body are likewise congealed, andHenry is at that time filled with black and terrible vapours, whichare dangerous not alone to himself, but to every one who approacheshim unprepared. I say it advisedly, my good Lord. Any one who urgesthe King far, at such moments, is in peril of his life.[6] But I mustsay no more, for here comes a messenger."---------------------[Footnote 6: Such, and in such terms, strange and fantastic as theymay seem, was undoubtedly the warning given by the physician Miron tothe Duke of Guise not many days before the catastrophe of Blois.]---------------------"I thank you most sincerely," replied the Duke. "Who is this packetfrom? I must speedily descend to supper.""From his Highness of Mayenne," replied the messenger. "He said it wasmatter of life and death, and commanded me to ride post haste.""Ha!" said Guise, as he opened the packets and saw the contents. "Ourcousin of Savoy in arms in France. This shows the need of unanimityamongst ourselves. He shall find himself mistaken, however, if hethinks Guise will forget his duty to his country. Write Charles ofMayenne word, Pericard, to bring his troops into such a position thatthey can act against Savoy at a moment's notice, and tell him that heshall have orders to do so ere three days be over. Send, too, toRouen, thanking them for their attachment; and see that our agent atthe court of Rome have full instructions regarding the Count deSoissons. Ha! here comes our brother of the church. My good LordCardinal, we will descend together. We shall scarcely reach the hallbefore the King arrives."The person who entered bore a strong family likeness to the Duke, butwas neither so tall nor so powerful in person. He was dressed in thecrimson robes of a prince of the church of Rome; and his countenance,which had much shrewdness and some dignity, accorded well with hisstation, Miron had retired quietly while the Duke spoke; a sign haddismissed the messenger from the Duke of Mayenne, and none butPericard remained in the room. But yet the Cardinal spoke in a whisperto his brother, who merely smiled, replying, "Come, come; we have notime now to jest." And thus saying, he led the way down to a hall,where supper was prepared at the table of the Grand Master for all themost distinguished guests then resident at Blois.The table was covered, as was then much the custom, with jewelledplate of many kinds, and various fanciful devices. The room was in ablaze of light, and all the guests, but the King and his particulartrain, had already arrived. They were standing back from the table,and gathered together in the magnificent dresses of that period,formed splendid groups in different parts of the chamber, while sewersand other attendants, hurrying backwards and forwards, brought in thevarious dishes, and set them in their regular order.The appearance of the Duke and his brother, the Cardinal de Guise,occasioned an instant movement amongst the guests, and the proudestthere bowed lowly to the gallant Prince, whose fortunes hitherto hadgone on from height to height. Nobles and generals of the highestdistinction eagerly sought a word with him, and bishops and prelatesof many a various character crowded forward, but to touch the hand ofone who had stood forth so prominently in defence of the church.In a few minutes the table was covered with the various dishes, andintimation that supper was served was immediately given to the King,who appeared the moment after, while the Duke of Guise advanced to thedoor to receive him, and with every testimony of lowly respect led himto the raised seat appointed for him. The King was followed by sixgentlemen, for whom places had been reserved, and amongst them the eyeof Guise rested upon Villequier. That eye flashed for a single momentas it saw him; but the next instant all was calm, and the Duke noticedhim especially by an inclination of the head.As soon as the King had taken his seat, saying, "Sit, my Lord Duke, Ipray you; stand upon no further ceremonies," Guise and the rest seatedthemselves at the table, and the monarch and his princely officer bentforward to say some complimentary nothing to each other, each at thesame time unfolding the napkin that lay before them. As they did so,from the napkin of the Duke of Guise fell out upon his plate a foldedletter; and Henry, who was all gaiety and condescension at thatmoment, exclaimed aloud with a light laugh, "Some letter from hislady-love, upon my honour. Read, read, my Lord Duke! Read, read!Carvers, touch not a dish till the Duke has read."The Duke opened the letter smiling, while the King bent a littletowards that side, as if jestingly, to see the contents. All eyesround the table were fixed upon those two; and it was seen that thecolour mounted into the cheek of the Duke of Guise, that his browgathered into a frown, and his lip curled with a scornful smile. Asfar as the paint on the King's countenance would admit, he appeared toturn pale at the same moment. But Guise, crushing the letter togetherin his hand, threw it contemptuously under the table, saving aloud,"They dare not!"[7]---------------------[Footnote 7: Some of the Duke's historians say, that he did not speakthe words aloud, but merely wrote at the bottom of the note, "Onn'oseroit," and then threw it under the table.]---------------------None but the King around the table knew to what those words alluded:but Henry had seen the words, "Beware, Duke of Guise, your life is indanger every day. There are those round you from morning to night, whoare ready to spill your blood."The Duke seemed to forget the matter in a moment, and by the graces ofhis demeanour soon caused it to be forgotten also by all those around.Henry resumed his gaiety and tranquillity; wine and feasting did theirpart; and some short time after the King, with his glass filled withthe most exquisite wine of France, exclaimed, "Let us drink to someone, my Lord Duke. To whom shall it be?""It is for your Majesty to command," replied the Duke gaily. "Let usdrink to our good friends the Huguenots!""Willingly, willingly," cried Henry laughing. "To the Huguenots,cousin of Guise: ay, and to our good barricaders, too; let us notforget them."The King smiled, and many around smiled also, at what they thoughtwould be a mortification to the Duke. But Guise answered immediately,after drinking the toast, "It is well bethought of your Majesty, whileyou give us the health of your bitter enemies, to give us that of yourmost faithful servants, who will never cease to defend you againstthem."He spoke with such an air of good humour, that none could see he hadtaken any offence, and this matter was also forgotten in a fewmoments. Shortly before the dessert was placed upon the table, a pageslipped a small scrap of paper with a few words written upon it intothe hands of the Duke, who gathered the meaning at a single glance,while his whole countenance brightened with satisfaction. "Come,Monsieur de Villequier," he said, "honour me by drinking with me to amutual relation of ours. Here is to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, assweet, as good, as fair a lady as any in France. Let us drink herhealth, and a gallant husband to her soon.""Willingly, willingly, my Lord," replied Villequier; "and I wish yourLordship would let me name that husband. But here is to her health."And he drank the wine."Nay," answered Guise, "that cannot be, Monsieur de Villequier, for Ihave named him myself already.""Indeed!" exclaimed Villequier, with no slight surprise in his look.But he instantly overcame the first emotion, adding, "I suppose, then,that the young Lady is under your protection at the present moment?""At which you can neither be displeased nor surprised. Monsieur deVillequier," replied the Duke, still bearing a courteous and affablelook. "As you know you swore upon the mass some weeks ago that she wasnot under your protection, and that you knew not where she was, itmust be a relief to your mind to find that she is well cared for.""Oh, my good Lord of Guise," replied Villequier in the same courteoustone, "no one ever doubts that his Highness of Guise cares for everyone that comes within his influence. Have we not an instance of ithere, when no sooner is one of the good Duke's friends, and theallotted husband of his fair niece, dead, than another of his friendsis raised to the same happy prospect. But, pray, may I ask if theyoung Lady herself is well pleased with this rapid substitution oflovers?""Delighted, I believe," replied the Duke with a smile full of meaning."Though I have had no particular communication with her yet, inasmuchas, it having been discovered that she had escaped from the hands ofsome base persons who unjustly detained her, the worthy andrespectable governor of Angoumois took pains to guard the country allround, in order to stop her on her journey to Blois. This has muchdelayed her coming, and would most likely have delayed it stilllonger, had she not taken refuge with Monsieur and Madame Montmorin,till I sent a force sufficient to open the way for her through all theLa Valettes in France. It is thus only this night--nay, this verymoment, that I hear of her arrival in Blois.""Well, my Lord," answered Villequier with a laugh, "it is evident thathe who attempts to strive with the Duke of Guise, either in stratagemor in force, must be a bold man, and should be a clever one. As I toldyour Highness, Mademoiselle de Clairvaut was not in my hands, but howshe was set free from the hands in which she was placed must remain amystery rather difficult to solve. A servant girl, it seems, becamethe immediate instrument; but the skill with which every trace of herpath was concealed, and even the manner in which her flight itself waseffected, bespeaks a better brain than that of a peasant of Angoumois.Is it permitted, my Lord, to ask the name of the favoured gentlemanyou destine for her husband?""His Majesty receives his Court to-night, I think," replied the Duke,"and then, Monsieur de Villequier, I shall have much pleasure inpresenting that gentleman to you. But, Monsieur de Villequier, if, asyour words imply, you have suffered yourself to be out-man[oe]uveredin this business, I will mortify your pride in your own skill bytelling you that you have been foiled and frustrated by no efforts ofmine, but by the wit of a girl and the courage and stratagem of a mereyouth. My Lord the King, may I humbly beseech your Majesty to let usdrink better policy to Monsieur de Villequier."Henry laughed lightly and drank the wine; and the rest of the supperpassed off gaily, though Villequier from time to time fell into amomentary fit of thought, from which he was twice roused to find theeye of the Duke of Guise upon him. At length, as the hour for thereception of the Court in the King's own apartments approached, Henryrose and retired, followed by Villequier and the rest of the gentlemenwho had accompanied him.The Duke of Guise paused for a moment after, speaking rapidly toseveral of those around him; and then, calling a page, he whisperedto him, "Go with speed to Monsieur Chapelle Marteau. Tell him to letme see him at midnight. I should also like to see Monsieur de Magnac,one of the Presidents of the Nobles. You will very likely find himin his cabinet at the Palais de Justice. I would fain see themboth.--Gentlemen, the King will soon be in the hall, where you hadbetter meet his Majesty. I must be absent for a few moments, and youwill therefore pardon me."Thus saying the Duke left them, and followed by one or two attendants,proceeded to the apartments assigned especially to himself.In the mean while the rest of the nobles hurried from the chteau tovarious parts of the town, in order to accompany their wives anddaughters to a great assembly of the Court, which was to be held thatnight in the grand hall of the castle. In the same hall the meetingsof the States-General of the kingdom usually took place, when thethree orders assembled together; but, as it was considered probablethat they would deliberate separately for some days to come, the hallhad been arranged that night, as we have said, for the reception ofthe Court; and in it soon appeared almost all the splendid nobility ofFrance brought into Blois by the meeting of the States. The Duke ofGuise, however, had not yet arrived when the King appeared, and muchwas the surprise and wonder of all that he did not show himself. Inabout ten minutes after, however, there was a whisper near the greatdoors of "The Duke! the Duke is coming! He is in the corridor speakingto Brissac:" and after the pause of an instant, the two wings of thedoor were thrown open, and Guise, followed by a long and brillianttrain, and himself decorated with the collars and jewels of all thefirst orders in Europe, entered the great hall and advanced towardsthe King. With him appeared the lovely form of Marie de Clairvaut,leaning on his left arm, while, dressed with all that splendour towhich the fashion of the day lent itself, appeared upon his right theyoung Count of Logres, somewhat thinner and somewhat paler than hehad been when he before presented himself at the Court of France, butwith his head high, and proud with the best kind of pride, theconsciousness of rectitude, and his eye bright with the excitement ofthe moment and the scene. The eyes of Marie de Clairvaut were bentdown, and there was a slight but not ungraceful embarrassment in hermanner, from the consciousness that many late events which hadbefallen her would attract more than usual attention to herself.Advancing straight towards the King and Queen, the Duke of Guise tookMarie's hand in his, saying, "Allow me to present to your Majesties mydear niece and ward. Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, and permit me also topresent to you my friend----;" and he laid particular emphasis on theword, "the Count of Logres, whom, with your Majesty's permission, andthis fair Lady's consent, I destine to be her husband. Were itpossible to give him a higher treasure than herself, I should be boundto do it, as if it had not been for him, and for his skill, courage,and determination on two occasions, my head would have been now in thedust, and I should not now have had the hope of serving your Majestywell, faithfully, and successfully, as I trust to do."From his first entrance, and while he spoke, a low murmur had runthrough the whole Court, some inquiring who the gentleman was thataccompanied him, the few who knew Charles of Montsoreau whispering hisname, and all, as it passed round, expressing their surprise at there-appearance of one supposed to be dead. The Duke of Guise in themean time turned to Villequier, who had at first become pale at thesight of Charles of Montsoreau."Monsieur de Villequier," said the Duke, "you were desirous of knowingthe name of the friend for whom I destine my niece. Allow me topresent him to you in the person of the Count of Logres, whom I trustyou will soon congratulate upon their marriage." And while he spoke heran the finger of his right hand gently down his baldric towards thehilt of his sword, with a gesture significant enough, but which couldonly be seen by Villequier.Having said this, the Duke and his party retired to a space left forthem on the King's right hand, and the various entertainments of theevening commenced, the King, who had been rather amused than otherwiseat the reappearance of Charles of Montsoreau, giving himself up to oneof those bursts of gaiety, which occasionally ran into somewhatfrantic excesses.We cannot pause here to describe the scene. All was splendour andamusement; and in the light Court of France the circumstances inwhich Marie de Clairvaut was placed were sufficient to draw around herall the gay, and the gallant, and the idle. Unaccustomed to suchscenes--less accustomed, indeed, than even she was--the eye of Charlesof Montsoreau turned towards her from time to time, with perhaps someanxiety, to see how she would bear the homage that was paid to her;whether, in short, it would be the same Marie de Clairvaut in themidst of flattery and adulation and that bright and glittering scene,that it had been with him in the calm quiet of country life, in morethan one solitary journey, and in many a scene of peril, danger, anddistress. Whenever he looked that way, however, he saw the same sweet,calm, retiring demeanour; and more than once he found her eyes seekinghim out in some distant part of the hall, and her lips light up with abright smile as soon as their glances met. He felt, and he feltproudly, that there was none there present who could doubt that herguardian's choice was her own also.With the irregularity which marked all Henry's conduct at that period,after remaining for half an hour with the appearance of the utmostenjoyment, the King suddenly became sombre and gloomy; and, afterbiting his lip and knitting his brow for a few minutes, turned andquitted the hall. All was immediately the confusion of departure, andCharles of Montsoreau made his way across to where the Duke of Guisewas seen standing, towering above all the rest. The young Count hadremarked, that in the course of the evening the Duke had been speakinglong and eagerly with a lady of extraordinary beauty, who stood atsome distance from the royal party; and he had heard her named as theMarchioness of Noirmontier, with a light jest from more than onetongue at her intimacy with the Duke. When he now reached the side ofthat Prince she had passed on, and was bending over Mademoiselle deClairvaut, and speaking to her with a look of tenderness andadmiration."Come on Count, come on," said the Duke, in a low but somewhat sharptone, as soon as his young friend joined him. And they advanced to theside of the two ladies at the moment that Madame de Noirmontier wasurging Marie to spend a few days with her at her beautiful chteausome way down the Loire. The Duke, however, did not suffer his ward toreply."I fear, dear Madam," he said in a decided and somewhat stern tone,"that it cannot be."The colour rushed violently up into the cheeks of Madame deNoirmontier, and the tears seemed ready to spring into her eyes. Butthe Duke added, "Logres, escort Marie back to my apartments. If youwill permit me, Madam, I will be your attendant to your carriage, andexplain why my young ward cannot have the extreme pleasure and honouryou intended for her.""It needs no explanation, your Highness," replied the Marchioness,raising her head proudly. "I intended to have staid some days longer inthis neighbourhood; but as she cannot come to me, I shall return atonce to Paris."The Duke looked mortified, but still offered her his hand; and when herejoined his own party in the apartments assigned to him, he wassomewhat gloomy and abstracted.CHAP. IX."His Highness, Sire," said one of the attendants to Henry III. on thefollowing day, "His Highness of Guise is not to be found this morning.His servants say that he has gone forth on horseback, followed only bytwo grooms: but whither he has turned his steps, no one seems rightlyto know.""Seek him with Madame de Noirmontier," said Villequier, who stoodbeside the King.But Henry, however, who was in no mood for jesting at that moment,replied sharply, "He is playing with me! He is playing with me! Hemocks me! He will repent it some day! And I think you mock me too,Villequier, to talk of Madame de Noirmontier at this moment. Have younot heard this business of Savoy? He knew it last night, and saidnothing of it; and I'll tell you what more he has done, Villequier,which you may like as little as I like the other. He has fixed the dayfor the marriage of his niece with that bold young Logres. But thisbusiness of Savoy is terrible, and these mutinous States will be theruin of the realm.""Sire," replied Villequier, "your Majesty must remember that I amsomewhat in darkness, in twilight at least. I have heard a rumour thatthe Savoyard is in arms in France. But what of the States?""Why, they are even now discussing," exclaimed the King, "whetherthere shall be war or not, even to defend our invaded territory. Thereare the Clergy now arguing it at the Jacobins, the Nobles in thePalais de Justice, and the Third Estate in the Htel de Ville,--all,all showing a disposition to hesitate at such a moment; and Guise, theGeneralissimo of my armies, and Grand Master of my household absent.Heaven knows where!""The devil knows best, most likely," replied Villequier with a calmsmile. "But, perhaps, the secret may be, that the Duke of Savoy isson-in-law of the King of Spain. Now, the King of Spain has been agood friend to the Duke of Guise, and the good Pope used always to saythat a Guise never jumped higher than the King of Spain liked.""By my faith!" replied the King, "I sometimes think that this samegloomy Philip is more sovereign in France than the King thereof. Buthere come tidings from the Tiers Etats. Come, Monsieur Artau, how havegone the deliberations of the States? What say our good Commons to warwith Savoy?""They go against it altogether, Sire," replied the officer who nowentered. "Chapelle Marteau spoke against it vehemently, declared thatit was but a plundering excursion of some light troops, who hadcarried off a few thousand crowns, while it would cost many millionsto carry on a war with Savoy: and then, up got another, and talked ofimposts and taxes and the poverty of the state, and said that millionsand hundreds of millions had been lost in peculation and extravagance.If your Majesty indeed, he said, would bear two-thirds of the expenseout of your domain, and would cut down your tall trees, or mortgage apart of the royal forests, the Commons would see what could be done.""By Heaven!" exclaimed Henry stamping his foot, "when they keep mehere, a throned beggar, without a crown in my pocket, to give a jewelto a mistress or a friend, they expect me to carry on the defence ofthe country at my own expense! On my soul! I have a great mind to castaway the sceptre, to go down into the ranks of a private gentleman,and name my rule-loving mother to govern in my stead: or faith, I carenot if it were Guise himself. He would teach these surly citizens whatit is to have an iron rod over their heads. By the Lord! he would notspare the backs of the porkers. Hie thee, good Artau to the Clergy atthe Jacobins; see what they say to the matter. And what say you,Villequier, to my scheme of abdicating?""Why, Sire," replied Villequier calmly, "I think it is an excellentgood one. But I hope, in the first place, that you will give a fewthoughts to what I told you concerning the young Marquis de Montsoreauand the hundred thousand crowns he promised on the day of his marriagewith Mademoiselle de Clairvaut. You know your Majesty has claimed thelion's share; and seventy-five thousand crowns at the present moment,or any time between this and Christmas, might serve to give yourMajesty a new lace to your doublet, or a new doublet to your lace, forto my mind both are plaguy rusty. Now, though the re-appearance ofthis young Count of Logres will cut down the amount of his brother'sestates most terribly, yet that affects me more than you, Sire; and byhaving made inquiries I find, to a certainty, that he is quite capableof paying the money the moment the marriage is concluded.""Seventy-five thousand crowns!" repeated the King thoughtfully."Seventy-five thousand crowns! Why, my friend, I think that neitheryou or I have heard of such a thing since we had beards. But how doesall this square with my giving the crown to Guise, which you approvedso highly?""Oh, extremely well, Sire," replied Villequier. "The crown I wouldhave you give him is neither the crown of France nor of Poland: Iwould give him an immortal crown, Sire. You will fit him better,depend upon it, that way than with a terrestrial one. His aspiringspirit seeks the skies, and, could I deal with him, should very soonfind them. However, you will remember that your royal word, as well asmine, is pledged to the young Marquis de Montsoreau."A dark smile came over the King's face. "We will see, Villequier; wewill see," he said. "My word must be kept and shall not be broken. Themorning of Christmas-day the Duke has fixed for the marriage. Whoknows what may happen between this and then, Villequier. She is thenabsolutely your ward failing the Duke of Guise, and we will have nohesitation or delay, when we have the power to compel obedience. Butwe must be very cautious, Villequier; we must be very cautious. Wemust neither seem pleased with this business of the marriage, for thenhe would suspect us of some concealed design; nor must we oppose himstrongly, because that would put him on his guard; and I fear me, thatall the crowns in France could not do me so much good as the Duke ofGuise could do me harm if he were offended.""Without being slain," replied Villequier in a low tone. "Oh no, myLord, I know well, a wounded boar is always the most dangerous."The King smiled again in the same dark and sinister manner, but hemade no reply to Villequier's insinuation--perhaps still doubtful ofhis own purposes, perhaps prevented from speaking openly by the returnof Monsieur D'Artau."What! so soon come back?" exclaimed Henry. "You cannot judge of thetone of the assembly, D'Artau. You should have heard more of theirdeliberations.""There was no more to hear, Sire," replied D'Artau. "The Clergy wereall agreed; every body had become wonderfully pacific in a moment.There had not been one voice raised for war, and fifty or sixty wereraised against it; so their deliberations, as I have said, were almostconcluded at the time I entered. They went to no vote, indeed, uponthe subject, but agreed to pass on to another question.""The villains! the crows!" exclaimed the King. "What did they give usas reasons, did you hear?""Why, they said, Sire," replied the officer, "that they had taxedthemselves, time after time, for the purpose of carrying on the warwith the Huguenots; that they had now again taxed themselves to theutmost of their means, and would not consent that any part of the sumthus raised should be diverted to make war upon their fellowCatholics, while nothing had yet been done against the enemies oftheir faith.""The specious hypocrites!" exclaimed Henry. "But what said they all tothe absence of the Duke of Guise?""It was said, Sire, as I heard, by several people, that he hadevidently absented himself from policy, not wishing to oppose yourMajesty, and yet unwilling to go to war with Savoy. Some said, indeed,Sire," he continued, "that Chapelle Marteau had acknowledged that thiswas the case. But that could not be so either, for the Duke sent forthe President of the Tiers Etats last night, without being able tofind him. That I know from the servants, so that what Chapelle saidmust have been out of his own head; while, on the contrary, I hearthat Monsieur Magnac and the Count de Brissac, who were with the Dukefor more than an hour last night, spoke vehemently against the Duke ofSavoy amongst the Nobles at the Palais de Justice. Thus the Nobleswere as unanimous for the war, as the other two States were againstit.""That should be the foot-fall of a Guise in the antechamber," said theKing. "Who is without there?""The Duke of Guise, your Majesty," said a page entering almost as theKing spoke, "craves audience for a moment.""Admit him," said the King; "admit him:" and the next instant the Dukeof Guise entered hastily in a riding dress."Your Majesty's gracious pardon," he said, "for presenting myselfbefore you thus: but I heard tidings, as I came along, which Ibelieved might give you great and exceeding pain.""Well may it give me pain, cousin of Guise," replied the King. "Wellmay it give me pain, to find that my subjects are so insensible totheir own honour or to mine, as to suffer a foreign enemy to encampupon our native soil, without doing what best we may to drive himforth.""It may, indeed, Sire," replied the Duke of Guise. "But the matter hasnot been properly explained; and neither the Tiers Etats nor theClergy have seen it in its true light.""But where was the Duke of Guise to explain it?" demanded Henry."Where was the Generalissimo of my armies, the Lieutenant-general ofmy kingdom, the Grand Master of my household, the man whose voice isonly second to my own in France--ay, and by Heavens! whose voice issometimes first likewise? Where was he, I say; and how came he not tobe present?""From the simplest of all possible causes, Sire," replied the Duke."The business regularly appointed for this morning's discussion by theStates was a mere trifling matter of some petty impost. I had not toldyour Majesty last night of this affair of Savoy, because I thought itwould spoil the pleasure of your evening, and perhaps disturb yourrest. I myself, however, neglected nothing. I instantly dispatchedorders, in your Majesty's name, to my brother of Mayenne, to advancetowards Piedmont with troops from Lyons. Before I rested, I sent forthe Presidents of the Nobles and of the Tiers Etats. The latter,however, was not to be found; but I told Brissac and Magnac what hadoccurred, and begged them to prepare all minds for vigorous measuresagainst Savoy, without disclosing the actual fact of aggression, thatfact having only reached me by the excessive speed of my brother'scourier. I felt perfectly certain that the news could not be knowntill to-night or to-morrow morning; and how it happened that yourMajesty was informed of it so early, as to send down a message thereonto each of the three Estates, I really do not know.""Very simply, my good cousin of Guise," replied the King, whose facehad now relaxed from the harsh and acrid aspect it had bornethroughout the morning; "it was Miron told me.""I had forgotten, I had forgotten," replied the Duke. "He was in theroom when the packet arrived, and I must have given vent to mythoughts aloud.""Well, under such circumstances," replied the King, "I suppose I mustpardon, cousin of Guise, your having gone to pay your homage somewhereelse, as Monsieur de Villequier insinuates, when the King much wantedyour presence.""Monsieur de Villequier is, as usual, wrong," replied the Duke ofGuise frowning upon him. "Where he seeks for or finds such abundanceof evil motives to attribute to other men, I do not know. May it notbe in his own bosom? I went, for your Majesty's service, to inspect abody of three thousand men, about to march early this morning fromLaucome to join the army of the Duke of Nevers, and it was only as Ireturned that I heard of this unfortunate business.""Perhaps his Highness thinks," said Villequier, not unwilling toincrease any feeling of ill-will between the King and the Duke,"perhaps his Highness thinks that your Majesty would have done morewisely to have waited till his return, and not to have communicatedthe news from Savoy at all to the States, till you had consulted himupon it."Villequier had almost said, "till you had asked his permission;" buthe feared that a part of the King's anger might fall back uponhimself. The Duke of Guise, however, saw through all his purposes in amoment, and replied, "Far from it, Monsieur de Villequier! I think, onthe contrary, that I should have done more wisely if, instead ofinspecting the troops at all--although Nevers, who is my enemy, mighthave reproached me for neglect--I had waited till the King had risen,to convey the expression of his will in person to the States-General,Sire, I humbly crave your Majesty's pardon for this one instance ofneglect; and, to prove how sorry I am that it has occurred, I willundertake to show the Clergy and the Commons such good motives forchanging their decision, that your Majesty's name and honour shall notsuffer by the invasion of your territories unresisted.""They will refuse you, Guise; they will refuse you," replied the King."I know them well. You think to rule them, Guise; but the first timeyou speak of money to Commons or to Clergy, you will find thatcabalistic word, money, acts on them as the sign of the cross upon thefiends we read of, and makes the seeming angels resume their shapes ofdevils in a moment.""Well, Sire, well," exclaimed the Duke of Guise, tossing his loftyhead with a proud smile, "if they refuse us, we will shame them. Youand I together will put our lances in the rest, as in days of old: wewill call the nobility of France about us; and I will promise, at myown expense, without craving these penurious Commons for a sol, withmy own men and your Majesty's good help, in three weeks' time to drivethe Savoyard back to his mountain den. But no, Sire, no! They will notrefuse me; and I pledge myself before this hour to-morrow to bring yousuch tidings from both clergy and commons as you could wish to hear.""If you do, cousin," cried the King eagerly, "if you do, you are mybest of friends and counsellors for ever.""Fear not. Sire; fear not," replied the Duke of Guise; "I will be boldto undertake it. But I must see the presidents and some of thedeputies speedily, to know what are the vain and idle notions on whichthey have hesitated in regard to a step imperatively necessary. I willtherefore humbly take my leave, beseeching you to think well of meduring my absence, even though my good Lord of Villequier be at yourMajesty's right elbow."Thus saying the Duke retired, and the King, turning to Villequier,asked with some anxiety "Think you, Villequier, that he will succeed?""I know not, Sire," replied Villequier; "but I should judge not. Theyhave too far committed themselves to retract, let the question be whatit would, but are not at all likely to retract where money isconcerned.""Well, well," said the King; "I will hope the best. And now,Villequier, we must think of what can be done, in order not to losethe seventy-five thousand crowns. Mort Dieu! What a sum! In the veryfirst place, we must call hither your young friend, wherever he maybe, without loss of an hour. We must not have him appear at the Court,however. He must lie concealed, but be ready at a moment's notice. Lethim bring what men he can with him. But above all, do not let himforget the crowns, Villequier. Let them be prepared.--Nay, smile not,I have a scheme for the purpose, which will mature itself in time. Butno good plan should ever be hurried, and it should always be formed ofelements as ductile as warm wax, that it may fit itself into the mouldof circumstances. It will mature itself in time, Villequier; it willmature itself in time. But now to this other terrible business.""Pray, Sire, what is that?" demanded Villequier with some alarm, forsince his arrival at Blois Henry had shown so much more activity andapplication to serious matters, that even his favourite had forgottenhis character. "Pray, what terrible business does your Majesty speakof?""Have you not heard," exclaimed the King, "have you not heard, thatthe boat was upset in coming down the Loire--the boat with the parrotsand monkeys; and my great beautiful black ape, Ridolin-din-din, wasnearly drowned, and has caught such a cold, that it is feared he willdie!--Sweet creature, he is a beauty, and in his woollen nightcap andlong gown is not at all unlike my mother. Poor fellow, have you notheard him coughing in the room beyond? I must go and give him someconfection of quinces."During a considerable portion of the day Henry devoted himself to hisape, but towards evening his anxiety in regard to the States and tothe eruption of the Duke of Savoy seized upon him again. This wasterribly increased by the arrival of a new courier, bearing more ampleparticulars than the former. The king slept ill at night, and roseearly the next morning; but still all the reports brought him of thedisposition of the States made him imagine that no means would betaken to curb the enemy, and that he himself would be left by hissubjects the mockery and by-word of Europe, unable to repel theoutrages of even the pettiest of all the neighbouring princes. Thesneers of many of his favourites and courtiers at the Duke of Guise,too--their ironical smiles at the very idea of his being able tochange the announced determination of two great bodies in the State,tended to irritate the King still more, and to drive him almost tomadness.In this state of mind he was walking up and down his chamber betweeneleven and twelve o'clock on the succeeding day, when suddenly hearingthe bustle of many feet without, he himself threw open the door andbeheld the Duke of Guise approaching with his usual train and severalother persons.There was in the noble countenance of the Duke the glad consciousnessof success; but Henry, eager for confirmation, exclaimed, "What is it,cousin of Guise? What is it? Uncertainty drives me wild.""Health to your Majesty," replied the Duke. "These gentlemen whofollow me. Messieurs Brissac and Magnac, the Presidents of theNobility, the Archbishop of Lyons representing the Clergy, and my goodfriend, Chapelle Marteau, President of the Third Estate, humblyapproach your Majesty with a petition, that as the Duke of Savoy hascommitted a wanton infringement upon the territories of France, youwould be graciously pleased to pronounce a declaration of war againstthat Prince, in which your dutiful subjects will aid and support yourMajesty to the best of their ability."The King's joy knew no bounds, and throwing his arms around the Dukeof Guise, he kissed him on both cheeks. Recovering himself, however,in a few minutes, he received the deputies from the States with somedegree of dignity. His joy, however, was still exuberant; and, indismissing the petitioners, he said that the declaration should beimmediately issued, and that he would trust to his best friend andwisest counsellor, pointing to the Duke of Guise, to repel speedily,with that unconquerable hand which had won so many victories, this newaggression upon the territory of France.As soon as the deputies were gone, he burst forth again in the samestrain, vowing to the Duke that he loved him beyond every thing onearth, that his attachment should be unalterable and inviolate, andthat whatever might be said or urged against the Duke, he would neverbelieve it."Cousin of Guise," he exclaimed, "there are people who would fainpersuade me that you aim at my crown, and perhaps there are others whomay try to persuade you that I aim at your liberty or life, I knowthere are.""Sire, we neither of us believe them," replied the Duke."Let us never believe them," answered the King; "let us never believethem. Let us swear, Guise, let us swear to hold good faith andundoubting sincerity and true friendship to each other for ever! Letus swear it upon the altar even now! Let us swear it by the HolyCommunion, by which we dare not swear falsely, and then theinsinuations of our enemies will be as empty air!""Most willingly, Sire," replied the Duke; "I am ready this moment. Itis near the hour of mass, and having nothing in my heart but goodtowards your Majesty, I am ready this very moment.""Come then, come to the chapel," cried the King. And taking the Dukeof Guise by the hand he led the way, followed by only the twoattendants who were in the anteroom. In ten minutes more the King andthe Duke might be seen kneeling before the same altar, calling downthe wrath of God upon their heads if they ever did one act of enmitytowards each other, drinking of the same consecrated cup, and dividingthe host between them.[8]---------------------[Footnote 8: This awful fact is but too certain.]---------------------CHAP. X.It was a bright clear frost, all the ancient houses and streets ofthat most curious and interesting old town, called Blois, were seenclear and defined, without the slightest thin particle of smoke orhaze, and from the high windows of the chamber of Catherine de Medicithe servant, who sat and gazed out, might see the slightest objectthat passed along the road below.As she thus sat and gazed, her eyes fell upon a glittering troop ofcavaliers who issued forth from the castle gates, and took their waythrough the town, and she could see the princely form of the Duke ofGuise, and the strong frame of Brissac, and the graceful person ofCharles of Montsoreau, riding nearly abreast at the head of the troop."The Duke has gone forth, may it please your Majesty," said the woman,turning to the bed on which lay Catherine de Medici, sick in body anduneasy in mind. "The Duke has gone forth, and a large train with him.""Then the King will soon be here," replied the Queen-mother. "Go intothe further chamber, good Bridget, and wait there till he leaves me.If Madame de Noirmontier arrives from Paris before he is gone, bid herwait there too. I will see her after, and be glad to see her."The attendant had scarcely retired, when Henry III. himself enteredwith a slow step, a dull frowning brow, and lips turned down, givinghis countenance a diabolical expression of sneering malice, whichcontrasted strongly with the white and red paint which he had used,and the gay foppery of his apparel."You sent for us, good mother," he said. "How goes it with you? Hasthe fever left you, or do you still suffer?""My sufferings are of no moment," replied Catherine de Medici. "Theywill soon pass, Henry, and I shall be well again. But the illnesses ofstates pass not so soon, my son; and upon your acts, at the presentmoment, depends the welfare of France for centuries.""I know it, madam," replied Henry sullenly. "But may I ask upon whatparticular occasion your Majesty has thus resumed the maternal rod?""The occasion is this, my son," replied the Queen: "I find that youare opposing Guise, when you have no power to oppose him; and you areopposing him in things where your opposition will not increase yourpower, but will increase his. Were you to oppose him firmly butstedfastly on points where reason, and right, and the welfare of theState were upon your side, however blind they might be for a time, thepeople would come over to your side in the end. But if you oppose himin things where your pride, or your vanity, or your selfishness isconcerned, depend upon it his party will every day increase; for Guisehaving identified himself with the people and the Catholic Church, hisfoibles will be treated far more leniently by both church and peoplethan yours.""Guise!--Guise!--Guise!" cried the King in a bitter tone. "For ever,Guise! I am sick to death of the very name. What would you have,Madam? Have I not yielded almost every thing to him? Have not all hisdemands been granted, till they become so numerous that I have notwherewithal to stop their mouths? Did I not sign the decree of July?Did I not declare old scarlet Bourbon next heir to the Crown? Did Inot satisfy the cravings of Nemours and of Mayenne? Did I not banishEpernon; give the Duke all sorts of posts; yield him up towns andcities? Did I not render him king of one half of France? What is itthat I have refused him?""In many points you mistake, my son," replied the Queen. "You haveyielded more than one of these things, not to him, but to the League.You refused to him, too, the sword of Constable; and in that perhapsyou were right. At all events he himself seemed to think that you wereso, for he has not pressed the demand: but after promising to theLeague, as one of their towns of surety, the city of Orleans, whichboth you and I know was promised, you would now persuade Guise and theLeague that it was inserted in the edict by mistake, and that the townpromised was Dourlans, a heap of hovels on a little hill, as if youthought that, by such a trumpery evasion, you could deceive the keenwit of a Lorraine. Guise, of course, set his foot upon the smalldeception. But what are you doing now? Quarrelling with him because hedemands that which has been recognised as a right of everygeneralissimo in the kingdom; namely, the right of having his ownprevt and guards. Such has ever been the case, as you well know. Thematter is a trifle, except to your own jealous disposition; and evenwere he not right, it would still be but a trifle. But when he isright, and you are wrong, the refusal is an insult, and the matterbecomes of importance.""Madam," said the King bitterly, "in spite of all you say. Guise shallnot absolutely be King of France. Has he not here, within these threedays, refused me an impost necessary to maintain my dignity as a King,and to provide for the safety of the State? Does he not try to keep mea beggar, that I may have no means of asserting my own rights anddignity?""No," replied the Queen; "No, Henry! He did not refuse you the impost;it was the States. If I heard rightly, he spoke in favour of it.""Ay, spoke!" cried the King. "But how did he speak?Lukewarmly--unwillingly. The States soon saw which way his wishesturned. Had he not been playing the hypocrite, he would have commandedit in a moment. Did he not show how he could command in that businessof Savoy? Four-and-twenty hours were sufficient for him to make everyman in Clergy and in Commons eat their words. This is something verylike sovereign power, madam. It is power such as I never possessedmyself.""Ay, and then you were grateful to him for its exercise," repliedCatherine; "and swore eternal friendship to him on the altar!""Certainly, but his ambitious views have become far more outrageoussince then," replied the King angrily. "Has he not exacted that Henryof Navarre shall be excluded by name from the succession? Has he notforced the Count de Soissons to receive absolution from the Pope? Hasnot he blazed abroad, throughout all the world, the letters of thePope himself, thanking him for his efforts to put down heresy, andexhorting him to persevere, as if he and none other were King ofFrance? And now he must have guards, must he! now he must have guards!When will the crown be wanted? His leading staff is already thesceptre, for it sways all things; his chair is already the throne, forfrom it emanates every movement of the States-General of France. Yes,madam, yes! the throne and sceptre he has gained; and I see the leavesof his ducal coronet gradually changing themselves into fleurs-de-lis,and the bandlets of the close crown ready to meet above his head.""But to the guards which he demands," said Catherine de Medici, "hehas a right, as Lieutenant-general of the kingdom; and why should youoppose him on a point where he is right?"Ay, the guards! the guards!" cried Henry. "Let him have them, madam;let him have them. But nevertheless, in a few days, all this will beover." And so saying, without waiting for further reply, the Kingturned and quitted his mother's chamber.Following a private staircase, which had been so constructed as onlyto afford a means of communication between the various apartments ofthe royal family, the King descended to a large chamber, or sort ofhall, with a deep window looking out towards the Loire. He foundalready in that chamber several of his most intimate and confidentialfriends and favourites, who, notwithstanding the high degree ofconfidence which the King placed in them, viewed the gloomy sullennessof his countenance with some sort of apprehension. In truth, when thefit was upon him, it could never be told where the blow would fall;and he often thus deprived himself of counsel and assistance in hismoments of greatest need.There were some, however, then present, whose purpose it was toexasperate the irritation which he suffered, even at the risk ofinjuring, in some degree, themselves; and the Marchal d'Aumont, whohad been waiting there for his return, advanced, and though the Kingaddressed not one word to him, but walked on sullenly till he hadalmost touched him, he began the conversation first, speaking in a lowtone. At length the King stopped abruptly, and, gazing in his face,exclaimed, "What, without my veto; without my consent and approbation?Do the States propose that their determinations be law without theKing?""They do, Sire," replied the Marchal d'Aumont; "and I doubt not theywould consider that the approbation of the Duke of Guise would bequite sufficient. They have already made him feel that such is thecase, Sire; for one of his creatures offered me not long ago, if Iwould attach myself to him, to make me Governor of Normandy, declaringthat the States, at a word from the Duke, would make your Majesty takeit from the Duke of Montpensier, to whom you had given it."The King paused for a moment, with his hands clasped, and his eyesgazing on the ground. At length he raised them suddenly, saying, "Harkye, D'Aumont!" and then spoke a few words in a whisper, as the Marshalbent down his ear.D'Aumont turned somewhat pale as he listened; his brows knit, and acertain degree of wildness came into his eyes; but he answered, themoment the King had done, "I have not rightly understood your Majesty.But it seems to me, that the only way a sovereign can deal withrebellious subjects and traitors, is to cause them to be arrested, anddeliver them over to their natural judges, to be tried according tolaw."Henry waved his hand with a look of contemptuous disappointment, andthen added, looking fixedly in D'Aumont's face, "You will be silent!""On my honour, Sire," replied D'Aumont; and bowing low, but with aface still pale, he quitted the chamber.Without noticing the other gentlemen who were standing at the farthercorner of the room, Henry called to a page, and descended by thestaircase into the gardens. He looked up for a moment at the brightand cheerful sunshine, and then upon the clear wintry scene around;but the sight seemed only to plunge him in deeper gloom than ever; andturning to the boy he said, "Run back to the hall, and bid MonsieurCrillon come here alone."He then stood with his arms crossed upon his chest, gazing upon theground beneath his feet, and when Crillon approached he took him bythe arm, and walked slowly on with him to the other side of thegardens. He was silent for some moments; but then turning to Crillonhe said, "You are colonel of my French guards, Crillon, and there is aservice which I want you and them to perform.""Speak, Sire," replied Crillon with his bluff manner. "If there be anything that a soldier and a man of honour can do for you, I am ready todo it.""Are not kings the highest magistrates in their realm, Crillon?" saidthe King, gazing in his face; "and have they not a right to judgetheir own subjects, and pass sentence upon them?""I wish to Heaven I were a lawyer, Sire," replied the old soldier,"and then I would give your Majesty an answer. But on my honour, atpresent, I have not considered the subject.""Well then, Crillon," continued the King, "to put it in another shape:I have a subject who is more king than myself; who stands between meand the sun; who grasps at all the power in the realm; and who, day byday, is increasing in ambition and insolence.""Your Majesty means the Duke of Guise," said Crillon; "I know him in aminute by the description.""You are right," said Henry. "But this must not continue long,Crillon. Methinks a small body of my guards, with a brave anddetermined commander, might rid me of this enemy, of this viper. Themost learned lawyers of my realm have assured me that law and justiceand right authorise me to cause this deed to be done. Will youundertake it, Crillon?""Sire," replied Crillon, "I beg your Majesty's pardon for remindingyou, that there is a public executioner appointed by law, and I mustnot interfere with any other man's office. As to my becoming anassassin, that your Majesty does not conceive possible for a moment."Henry looked bitterly down upon the ground, and then said, in a tonebetween wrath and anguish, "My friends desert me!""No, Sire, they don't," replied Crillon. "There is a way of settlingthe matter, which your Majesty has forgotten, but which suits myfeelings and habits better than any other way. I will now humbly takeleave of your Majesty, and going up to the cabinet of his Highness ofGuise, I will insult him before his people, tell him that he haswronged his King and his country, and bid him accompany me to thefield with equal arms. The Duke, bad as he is, is not a man to refusesuch an invitation; and I think I can insure your Majesty, that youshall not be troubled with the Duke of Guise for a long time to come."The King smiled; "Alas! Crillon," he said, "you deceive yourself. Youforget what you undertake. Remember, you purpose to strive with, handto hand, the most powerful man in Europe--the most dexterous andskilful in the use of every weapon upon the face of the earth,--themost fearless, the most active, the most prompt, whose hand nevertrembles, whose eye never winks, whose foot never slips. He would slaythee, Crillon; he would slay thee in a moment.""I know it, Sire," replied Crillon calmly; "but not before I have slainhim. If I choose to make my body a sheath for his sword, I will makehis body a sheath for mine, while my hand holds tight against mybreast the hilt of his weapon, to keep in my own spirit till I see hisfled. This can be done, Sire, and it shall be done within these twohours. I give your Majesty good day, for there is no time to spare.""Stay, Crillon, stay!" said the King, "I command you not to think ofit. If you attempt it, you will ruin all my plans. I thank you foryour willingness. I owe you no ill-will for your refusal. You willfind the page at the door: tell him to send Monsieur de Laugnac tome--Montpizat Laugnac, you know.""Oh, I know him, Sire," replied Crillon. "He is a man of smallscruples. I will tell the page as your Majesty bids me." And heretired from the presence of the King with a quick step.The manner in which the King dealt with Laugnac formed a strangecontrast with his manner towards Crillon. The moment that the former,who was first gentleman of his chamber, and captain of the famous bandof Quarante-cinq, joined him in the garden, the King seized him by thehand, saying, "Laugnac, the Duke of Guise must die!""Certainly, Sire," replied Languac, as if it were a thing perfectlynatural. "I have thought so some time.""Will you undertake it, Laugnac," demanded the King. "You and yourQuarante-cinq?""I must have more help than that, Sire," said Laugnac, "if it is to bedone out in the streets, in the open day, which I suppose must be thecase, as he is seldom out at night.""Oh no, no, no! that will never do!" exclaimed the King. "We must haveno rashness, Laugnac. He never rides but with a train, which would setyou at defiance; and, besides, the town is filled with Guisards. Youwould have men enough upon you to slay you all in five minutes. Wemust put him off his guard; we must lull him into tranquillity, andthen draw him to some private place, where you and your good fellows,posted behind the arras, can strike him to the heart before he isaware.""It is an excellent good plan, Sire," exclaimed Laugnacenthusiastically. "I will speak with my good friend, Larchant, who isa bold man and strong, a mortal enemy of the Guise, and a most devotedservant of your Majesty. We will soon arrange a plan together whichcannot fail.""Swear him to secrecy," cried the King; "and remember to-morrow mustnot pass without its being done. If you can find Villequier too, whoought to be returned by this time, for we have much to do togetherto-morrow, consult with him, for in a matter of poisoning or of theknife you know, Laugnac, he has not his equal in France."The King smiled, and Laugnac smiled too, at the imputation which theycast on another of the dark deeds exactly similar to those they wereboth plotting themselves."Do you not think, your Majesty," said the latter, "that it could bedone just about the time of the Duke's coming to the Counciltomorrow?""Excellent, good," said the King, "for that will cut him off, just erethis marriage that is talked of. But go quick, Laugnac, and make allthe arrangements, and let me know the plan to-night; for look wherethe very man comes:" and he pointed down the alley that led to thechteau, where the Duke of Guise was seen approaching alone."He is alone," said Laugnac. "Could it not be done now? I and anothercould make sure of it, if your Majesty would detain him here till Iseek aid.""On no account," said the King, grasping his wrist tight. "On noaccount, Laugnac. You forget all the windows of the chteau see us.The rest of his creatures would escape, and I must have not a few ofthem in prison. No! we will be tender with him. He shall be our sweetcousin of Guise, our well-beloved counsellor and friend. Greet himgracefully as you pass by him, and tell the page to seek, high andlow, for Villequier, and bring him to me."Laugnac bowed low, and walked away, and as he went he left the Duke ofGuise the whole of the path, pulling off his hat till the plumesalmost swept the ground, but without speaking. Guise bowed to himgraciously; but, evidently in haste, passed on towards the King, whomhe saluted with every demonstration of respect, and on whom in returnHenry smiled with the most gracious expression that he could assume."What seeks our fair cousin of Guise?" said the King. "I know this isa busy hour with him in general, and therefore judge that it must bematter of some importance brings him now.""Not exactly so, Sire," replied the Duke. "There is but littlebusiness of importance stirring now, when so many of the multitude,lately collected in Blois, have returned to their own homes for theapproaching festival. I came, however, to beseech your Majesty togrant me permission to absent myself for a few days on the same joyfuloccasion. All business for the time ceasing, my presence will not benecessary.""Assuredly, assuredly!" replied Henry, turning pale at the very ideaof the Duke escaping from his hands. "But do you go soon, fair cousin.I thought that you proposed the marriage of your fair ward forto-morrow; indeed, I heard that every thing was prepared, and I myselfintended to be one of the guests.""We have not forgotten your Majesty's gracious promise," replied theDuke. "Every thing is prepared, and half an hour before high mass weshall all be waiting for your Majesty in the revestry of the chapel.Never yet have I seen two young beings so happy in their mutual love;and as we have broken through some cold forms, in consideration of themany services which the lover has rendered to his future bride, theyare always together, and clinging to each other, as if they fanciedthat something would yet separate them."Henry smiled, but there was a certain mixture in it, which rendered itdifficult to say whether the expression was gracious or ironical."Well then, good cousin," he said, "as you have such mighty businesstoward, we had better hold our council as early as possible to-morrow,and not wait till the usual hour. Let it be as near day-break aspossible. The god of day does not open his eyes too soon at thisseason of the year. And yet I fear that the business of various kinds,that we have before us, will occupy more time than one council canafford. Thus we may be obliged to detain you at Blois, fair cousin,longer than you expect, I fear.""I did not intend to go, Sire," replied the Duke, "till somewhereabout twelve on Christmas-day, which would give me the opportunity ofbeing present at two councils; and I shall be also absent so short aspace of time--certainly not longer than three whole days--that theinterruption will not be great.""Well, be it so; be it so," replied the King. "We know that youractivity makes rapidly up for time lost. As to the marriage, I willsign the contract in the revestry, where I meet you; and I think that,notwithstanding the poverty of my treasury, I have a jewel yet of someprice to give the bride.""I beseech your Majesty think not of it," replied the Duke of Guise."She and her good husband will be equally devoted to your servicewithout such a mark of your condescension."After a few more words of the same kind, the Duke took leave, andHenry remained in the garden walking to and fro, and growing everymoment more and more impatient for the arrival of Villequier."Where can he be?" he muttered to himself. "He promised to be backbefore nine o'clock this morning. What can detain him? By Heavens! hewill lose the best part of our enterprise if he stays. Can he have metwith some mishap by the way--or has some lady poisoned him withchampignons or with Cyprus wine--or tried cold steel upon him--or shothim with a silver bullet in honour of his great master. No steel wouldtouch him, I should think, if all tales are true. But here he comes;here he comes, alive and well, with the eye of a wolf and the footfallof a cat.--He is a handsome animal notwithstanding, even now, if hewould but paint his lips a little, for they are too pale. Somethinghas gone wrong. He seems agitated; and to see Villequier moved by anything is indeed a wonder. Why, how now, dear friend? What is it thataffects you? I declare your lip quivers, and your cheek is red. Whatis the meaning of this?""Why, Sire," replied Villequier, "I just met the Duke of Guise in thehall of the chteau, and he not only tells me that the marriage of hisniece goes forward, but that your Majesty has promised to sign thecontract, and to be present at the ceremony. How you intend towithdraw yourself, I do not know: but to throw, at least, someobstacle in the way, I said that my signature had not been asked; andwhile my application was before the Parliament of Paris, the marriagecould not take place without that signature. He answered haughtily,Sire, not by requesting, but by commanding, me to be in the revestryof the chapel at the hour of half-past eleven; and he added, with asignificant tone, that he would teach me the use of pen and ink."Henry showed no wrath: his mind was made up to his proceedings; hisdark determination taken; and utterly remorseless himself, he sportedin his own imagination with the idea of Guise's death, and only smiledat his conduct to Villequier, as the skilful angler sees amused thelarge trout dash at the gilded fly, knowing that a moment after hewill have the tyrant of the stream upon his own hook, and panting onthe bank."You shall be in the revestry, Villequier," said the King; "you shallsign the marriage contract, for the King commands you as well as theDuke of Guise; and surely two such potent voices must be obeyed."Villequier paused for a minute or two ere he replied, calculating whatmight be the King's motives in his present conduct. He knew Henrywell, and knew his vacillating changeable disposition; and hesuspected that he was determined to violate his promise to Gaspar deMontsoreau upon some inducement, either of hope or fear, held out tohim by the Duke of Guise. He was well aware, however, that if themeans taken had been disagreeable, the King, though he might haveendured them smilingly in the presence of the Duke, would have burstforth into passion, almost frantic, when conversing with him. Hetherefore replied straightforwardly, "I suppose, Sire, the youngerbrother has outbid the elder.""Wrong, wrong, good friend," replied the King. "Your hawk has missedits stroke, Villequier. The Duke of Guise wills it so! Is not thatquite sufficient in France?""I hope it will not be so long, Sire," replied Villequier, nowbeginning, though indistinctly, to catch the King's meaning. "I hopeit will not be so long.""Ha, Ren! Do you understand me now?" said Henry. "Hark ye! Are younot this girl's guardian beyond all doubt, were the Duke out of theway?""Indubitably," answered Villequier; "for the only thing that affectsmy right, even now, is her father's will, appointing this same Henry,Duke of Guise to be her guardian: the other brothers are not named.""Well then," said Henry, "have a contract of marriage in due andproper form drawn out, this very night, in the names of Marie deClairvaut and Gaspar, Marquis of Montsoreau. Be in the revestry at thehour named, and bring with you your gay bridegroom with all his goldencrowns. You shall sign the contract, and I will sign the contract, andwe will find means I think to make the fair Lady sign the contracttoo, while the Duke of Guise's bridegroom discovers his way into adungeon of the chteau. You have been so long absent, I feared youwould not come in time to hear all this.""Why, Sire," replied Villequier, "I was forced to be absent; foralthough your Majesty seems to have forgotten a certain paper given tothe Abb de Boisguerin, I have not.""Ha!" said the King, "I had forgotten indeed. We must suppress that,Villequier; we must suppress that, if he will not consent to ourplans; which, I see by your face, it is not your opinion that theworthy Abb will do. You must get it from him and suppress it."Villequier smiled at the very thought. "He will never give it up to besuppressed, Sire," replied the Marquis. "Your Majesty little knows theman.""Well, then, suppress him!" said the King with a laugh; "suppress him,Villequier, and the paper with him. Under the great blaze made by thisbusiness of the Guise, his affair will be but as one of the wax tapersthat a country girl, with a sore eye, buys for half a denier to hangup before St. Radigonde. Suppress him, Villequier; suppress him. Iknow no one so capable of sweeping the window clear of such flies.""Yes, Sire," replied Villequier; "but he is a wasp, not a fly. He hasantidotes for poison, and sureties against the knife. He has, besides,more powerful friends, it seems, than any of us believed, or at leastmore powerful means of gaining them. The Pope has been induced to sethim free of his vows. I find, too, that Epernon sent for himimmediately after that business of the attempt upon his life atAugoulme, and they are now sworn friends and comrades, levying forcestogether, holding counsel every other hour; and here is the formerAbb now disporting himself as Seigneur de Boisguerin; and, just likea butterfly that has cast its slough, he arrives in Blois last nightin gilded apparel, with a train of twenty horse behind him, and anumber of sumpter mules. I saw him in his gay attire near Augoulme,and find that he aspires to the hand of the fair heiress himself.""But what is to be done, Villequier?" said the King smiling. "It seemsto me that all the world are seeking her. Suppose we send for anauctioneer, and set her up aux enchres. But, to speak seriously,what will you do with this cidevant Abb?""I have done with him something already," replied Villequier, "thatwith all his art he could not prevent nor know. I found this youngMarquis of Montsoreau somewhat stubborn to counsel. He loved not theplan of coming and lying concealed at Blois. Though he is politic andartful at seasons himself, yet now he was all passion and fury.Nothing would serve him but he must come to Blois in open day, with ahundred lances at his back. He would fight his brother, it seemed, andcut his throat. He would beard the Guise; and he would compel yourMajesty and me to fulfil our promise to the letter. That the girl hadescaped he attributed to my connivance; and, by Heavens! I almostfeared he would have laid violent hands upon me. In short, Sire, by alittle skilful teazing, I found that this same Abb de Boisguerin,whose credit I had once greatly shaken, had resumed the mastery, andwas urging on his former pupil to every sort of rash and violent act,probably with the hope of getting him killed out of his way. I soothedthe good youth down, however, and told him I would give him proof ofhis friend's regard. I hid him where he could hear all that passed,and then entrapped the Abb into talking of the paper that we hadsigned for him. I told him that the person for whom your Majesty and Idestined this fair Helen, was the young Marquis of Montsoreau. Ireminded him that he had obtained that paper with an absolute anddirect view to that marriage; at least, that he had told me so; and Iasked him immediately to sign his consent to the alliance. YourMajesty may imagine his answers; and the youth's rage was such thatmost assuredly he would have broken in upon us, if I had not stationedtwo men to stop him. However, he became afterwards as docile as alamb, was convinced, by what passed, that we had throughout beendealing sincerely with him, and will be ready at the hour to-morrow.When the good Abb, perhaps, hears that the whole affair is concluded,that Guise is gone, and your Majesty powerful, he may judge it morewise to be silent and resigned. We can tempt him, first, with somepost; we can alarm him, if that will not do, with some peril; andlastly, if we fail in both, then we must find some way of putting anend to the matter altogether.""That will be easily done," replied the King, his mind reverting tothe Duke of Guise. "But come, Villequier, let us go and consult withLaugnac. I told him, before you came, to seek for you and consult withyou. We must trust as few as possible in this business, and I must seeto the whole myself, for this is a step on which, if we but slip, wefall to inevitable perdition."CHAP. XI.Was the Duke of Guise unconscious of the dangers that surrounded him?Was he unaware that the power which he assumed, and the power whichthe States also put upon him, could not but render him obnoxious inthe highest degree to the King, who, though weak and indolent, wasjealous of that authority which he failed himself to exercise for thebenefit of his people? Was the Duke ignorant that the Monarch was astreacherous as feeble, was as remorseless as vicious? Was it unknownto him, that to all the creatures who surrounded the King he was anobject of hatred and jealousy; and that there were ready hands andbase hearts enough to attempt any thing which the royal authoritymight warrant?He was not so ignorant, or so unaware: he had been warnedsufficiently, days and weeks before; but even had that not been thecase, on that very night he received sufficient intimations of hisdanger to put him on his guard.He had presided at the supper-table as Grand Master of the King'shousehold, and he had received his guests with easy courtesy. The mealwas over somewhat sooner than usual; and, the business of the Statebeing considerably slackened, in consequence of the approachingfestival of Christmas, he sat in his cabinet with Charles ofMontsoreau and Marie de Clairvaut only, enjoying an hour ofrefreshment in calm and tranquil conversation upon subjects, which,however agitating to them, was merely a matter of pleasant interest tohim.Charles of Montsoreau sat by his side making some notes of variouslittle things that the Duke told him, and Marie de Clairvaut wasseated on a stool at his feet, while he looked down upon her, fromtime to time, with the sort of parental tenderness which he haddisplayed towards her from her infancy.A pleasing sort of melancholy had come over him,--a sadness withoutgrief, and mingling even occasionally with gaiety. It was that sort ofpresent consciousness of the emptiness of all worldly things, whichevery man at some moment feels, even the ambitious, the greedy, thezealous, the passionate. Perhaps that which had brought such a moodupon him, was the contrast of all the arrangements for his fair ward'smarriage and the deep and intense feelings which that event excited inthe bosom of herself and Charles of Montsoreau, with the eager andfiery struggles in which he had been lately taking part, while engagedin the dark fierce strife of ambition, or tossed in the turbidwhirlpool of political intrigue. And thus he sat, and thus he talkedwith them of their future prospects and their coming happiness,sometimes speaking seriously, nay gravely--sometimes jesting lightly,and smiling when he had made Marie cast down her eyes.As he thus sat there was a tap at the door of his cabinet, and theDuke knowing it to be the page, bade him enter; when the boy Ignatiappearing, informed him that the Count de Schomberg was without."Bid him come in," replied the Duke, keeping his seat, and making asign for his companions not to stir. "Welcome, Schomberg," he said;"you see that I am plotting no treason here. What do you think of mytwo children? Joinville will be jealous of my eldest son. But, jestingapart, I think you know the Count de Logres. My niece, Marie, I knowyou have had many a time upon your knee in her infancy."Schomberg bowed to each, but gravely; and replied to the Duke, whoheld out his hand to him, "My dear Duke, I wish every body were aswell persuaded that you are plotting no treason as I am. But I come tospeak to your Highness upon a matter of business. I have a warning togive you," he added in a whisper."Oh! speak it aloud; speak it aloud," replied the Duke. "If itconcerns myself, you may well speak it before these two.""Indeed!" said Schomberg, apparently hesitating, and running his eyesover the tapestry, as if calculating how he had best proceed. "My goodLord Duke," he said, at length, "I believe you know that there are fewwho love you better than myself, though I neither am nor affect to bea zealot, but rather what your people call one of the Politics.""I know Schomberg, what you mean," said the Duke; "you are my friend,but not my partisan. I can make the distinction, Schomberg, and lovethe friend no less. What have you to say?""Why this, my Lord," replied Schomberg. "Look up above the doorthere, just before your eyes. Do you see how beautifully they havecarved in the black oak the figure of a porcupine, and how all thesharp and prickly quills stick out, ready to wound the hand thattouches it?""Yes, I see," replied the Duke. "But do you know the history of thatporcupine, Schomberg?""Yes," answered the Count, "I know it well, my Lord of Guise. Both inthe stonework and the woodwork of this castle, there are many such.They were placed there, I think, my Lord--am I not right?--by an oldmonarch of France, as a sort of device, to signify that whoever graspsroyalty too rudely, will suffer injury in consequence."The Duke smiled in the same placid mood as before, but replied, "Inthe next chamber, Schomberg, which is my own bedchamber, you may seethe device of Francis the First too,--a salamander unhurt in the midstof flames; which may be interpreted to mean, that strong courage isnever more at ease than in the midst of perils."A grave smile came over the face of Schomberg, to find the figures inwhich he involved his warning so easily retorted by the Duke of Guise."I have heard of your Highness," he said, without noticing the Duke'sreply, "that not very many years ago you were known to swim againstthe stream of the Loire armed at all points. You are a strong man, myLord Duke; but there are other streams you cannot swim against, dependupon it.""Then I will try to go with the current, Schomberg," replied the Duke."As long as that is with me, it will bear me up.""But it may dash you against a rock, Duke," replied Schomberg; "and Isee one straight before you."He spoke sternly and impressively, and Guise listened to him with moreattention. "Speak, Schomberg, he said; speak; you may speak clearlybefore them. But sit, good friend; pray thee sit. Standing therebefore me, with your sad aspect and warning voice, you look like aspectre.""Well, my Lord," said Schomberg, seating himself, "I have certaininformation that there are evil designs against you, ripe, or almostripe, for execution. Your life is in danger. Guise; I tell you truly,I tell you sincerely, and I beseech you to hear me. Your life is indanger, and you have no time to lose if you would place it in safety.""Why, what would you have me to do, Schomberg?" said the Duke in atone not exactly indifferent, but still showing no great interest inthe subject."I would have you mount your horse this night," replied Schomberg, "orat day-break tomorrow. I would have you gather your train together,take these two young people with you, and retiring to Paris, informthe King that you had proof your life was not safe at Blois."The Duke of Guise meditated for a moment, and then replied,"Schomberg, I cannot grasp this fear. Brought up to arms from myyouth, cradled in the tented field, with death surrounding me at everyhour of life, I cannot feel as other men might feel in moments ofperil to myself. Neither will I ever have it said of me, that Iwillingly fled from my post under the apprehension of any personaldanger.""By our old friendship. Guise," replied Schomberg, "by ourcompanionship in the fields of other days, I beseech you to considerand to judge wisely. Remember, if the vengeance of a monarch, or theinstigation of villanous courtiers, were to have success, and you wereto fall beneath the blow of an assassin, what would become of yourchildren, all yet in their youth? what would become of your relationsand your friends, placed, as you have placed them, on a high pinnacle,to be aimed at by a crowd of idle minions with their bird-bolts? Whatwould become of your son?""Joinville must make his own fame," replied the Duke, "and guard hisown rights with his own sword. I was left earlier than he is without aparent's care; with a host of enemies around me; with my father'sname, giving me a heritage of envy and hatred; and with no support butmy own sword. With that sword I have bowed those enemies to the dust,and Joinville must show himself worthy to bear it too."He paused, and meditated for a moment or two, and then added, "Afterall, Schomberg, I do not see that there can be much danger. Here, inthe castle, I am as strong or stronger than the King. When I go forth,I am so well accompanied, that it would be difficult to surprise me,if they attacked me with numbers. A single assassin might dog mysteps, it is true; but I do not know that man upon the face of theearth, who, hand to hand with me, would not have more than an equalshare of fear and danger. However, I will think of what you have said,and will take good care to be more upon my guard than ever. At thesame time, Schomberg, I thank you most sincerely, and look upon yourregard as one of the best possessions that I have.""Guise," said Schomberg, rising and approaching the door, "I havefailed with you. But I yield not my point yet. I will send those toyou who may have more influence.""Stay, Schomberg, stay!" cried the Duke; but his friend passed throughthe door and would not return.Charles of Montsoreau then raised his voice in the same cause asSchomberg, and Marie de Clairvaut entreated anxiously that he wouldyield to what had been proposed. But at them the Duke only laughed."Hush, hush!" he said. "Logres, you do not know what you say. There,kiss her and be gone. To-morrow she shall be yours, no more to part.Say no more, silly girl; say no more. You, a child of a Guise, talk tome of fear! Call thy maidens, get thee to thy bed, and rise to-morrowwith bright eyes and blooming cheeks. Fare thee well, sweet one. Ilong to be quit of thy guardianship."Remonstrance was useless, and they parted; and the Duke of Guisesitting down for a moment, gave himself up to thought. His eyes werefixed upon the dark tapestry opposite, where was depicted a woodyscene, the particulars of which could not be well distinguished by thedim light of the lamp.After he had gazed for a moment or two, however, his eyes assumed apeculiar expression, a fixed, intense, and somewhat bewildered stare.He passed his hand twice before them, as if he felt them dim ordazzled; then clasped his hands together and gazed, still muttering tohimself, "Strange, very strange! It is there still!" And starting upfrom the table, he seized the lamp, and advanced directly towards theside of the room on which his eyes had been fixed, still gazingstedfastly on the same spot. At length, as he approached close to thewall, his features relaxed, and he said with a smile, "It is gone!These delusions of the sight are wonderful!"He had not yet returned to his seat, when the door on his right handopened gently, and the form of a woman glided in. It was that of thebeautiful being with whom he had parted in some anger at the King'sball, and she gazed at him, evidently surprised to see him standingwith the lamp in his hand close to the wall, on a side where there wasno exit."In the name of Heaven, Guise! what is the matter?" she said. "I heardyou speaking as I came in. You are pale; your lip quivers!""It is nothing; it is nothing," replied the Duke, putting down thelamp, and taking her hand. "This is, indeed, dear and kind of you,Charlotte. I trusted, I was sure, that your anger for a light offencewould not last long.""It would have lasted long, Guise," she said, "or at least its effectswould not have passed away, had it not been for the warning that Ihave received concerning you. Guise, you would not have seen menow--you would never have seen me in these rooms again----""Nay, nay," interrupted the Duke, "traduce not so your own nature. Saynot that a few unthinking words would render her so harsh, who is sogentle.""They were not unthinking words, Henry of Guise," replied the Lady."They were words of deep meaning, to be read and understood at once.Think you that I could misunderstand them? Think you that I could notread that Guise would not suffer the pure to dwell with the impure?However," she added quickly, seeing that the Duke was going tointerrupt her, "let me speak of other things. I was about to say thatyou would not have seen me this night, you would never have seen me inthese chambers again, had I not learned that your life was in danger;and then my fears for you showed me that my love was unchanged, and Icame, at all risks, to warn you, and to beseech you to be gone.""Nay, nay," replied the Duke. "How can I be gone when you are here,Charlotte? And, besides, there is no real danger. It is Schomberg hasfrightened you, I know. He came here with the same tale; but I showedhim there was no danger.""It was not from Schomberg!" said Madame de Noirmontier vehemently. "Ihave never seen Schomberg since I have been here. It was from theQueen; it was from Catherine herself that I heard it. She told me totell you; she told me to warn you. Her son, she said, had not divulgedto her his scheme; but from her knowledge of the man, and from thewords he used, she was certain that he would attempt your life withinthree days.""Then his attempt will fail, dear Charlotte," said the Duke, holdingher hand tenderly in his. "Fear not for me; I am fully upon my guard;and in this chteau, and this town, am stronger than the Kinghimself.""Oh Guise, Guise, you are deceiving yourself," she said, bursting intotears. "Twice I have been at your door this night, but the page toldme there was some one with you; and now I have come determined not toleave you, till I see you making preparations to depart. Let meentreat you, let me beseech you," she continued, as Guise wiped awayher tears. "Nay, Guise, nay; in this I will take no refusal. If notfor your own sake, for my love you shall fly. You shall treat me ill,as you did before, again and again. You shall make a servant of me--aslave. You will not surely refuse me, when you see me kneeling at yourfeet." And she sunk upon her knees before him, and clasped her fairhands in entreaty. The Duke was raising her tenderly, when the page'sknock was heard at the door; and before he could well give the commandto enter, the boy was in the room."My Lord," he said, "there is Monsieur Chapelle Marteau, and severalother gentlemen, desiring earnestly to speak with you."Madame de Noirmontier looked wildly round the room, and seemed aboutto pass through the door by which the page had entered. "Be notalarmed," said the Duke, "you cannot pass there, Charlotte. These menwill not be with me above a few minutes. Pass into that room, and waittill they are gone. I have a thousand things to say to you, and willdismiss them soon."After a moment's hesitation she did as he directed, and turning to thepage, the Duke bade him admit the party who were waiting without. Itconsisted of Chapelle Marteau, the President de Neuilli, a gentlemanof the name of Mandreville, the Duke's brother the Cardinal de Guise,and the Archbishop of Lyons.The Duke received them with that winning grace for which he wasfamous, and soon learned from them that their visit was owing to theinformation received from the Count de Schomberg. Every one thenpresent, but the Archbishop of Lyons, urged him strongly to quit Bloisimmediately. They had come in a body, they said, in hopes that theirremonstrances might have the greater effect. Each had heard in thecourse of the evening those rumours which generally announce greatevents; some had been told that the Duke was arrested; some that hehad been absolutely assassinated in the gardens of the chteau; andsome that the act was to be performed that night by a number ofsoldiers, who had been privately introduced into the castle.Guise listened silently and with great attention, displaying indemeanour every sort of deference and respect for the opinions ofthose who showed such an interest in his fate. He replied, however,that he trusted and hoped that both the rumours they had heard, andthe intelligence given by Schomberg, originated in nothing butmistaken words, or in those idle and unfounded reports which alwaysmultiply themselves in moments of great political agitation andexcitement. Besides this, he said, even if the King were disposed toattempt his life, the execution of such an act would be verydifficult, if not impossible; and that, considering before all thingshis duty to his country, the very fact of the King seeking such athing ought to be the strongest reason for his stay, inasmuch as theMonarch's animosity could only be excited towards him out of enmity tothe Catholic Church, and a disposition to repress and tyrannise overthe States."If such be his feelings," continued the Duke, "we must considerourselves as two armies in presence of each other, and the one thatretreats of course awards the victory to his adversary."The Archbishop of Lyons, perhaps, was the person who decided the fateof the Duke of Guise; for had the party which came to him beenunanimous and urgent in their remonstrance, there is a probabilitythat he would have yielded; but the Archbishop seemed doubtful andundecided. He said that he thought, indeed, it might be well the Dukeshould go; at least for a time. But they had to consider, also, theprobabilities of the King making any attempt upon the Duke. Thoughweak, timid, and indolent, Henry was shrewd and farseeing, he said.The only result that could follow an attempt upon a person so belovedby the whole nation, and especially by the States, as the Duke ofGuise, would be to arm the people of France in an instant against thesovereign authority. This the King must well know, he continued; andthat consideration made him less eager upon the subject, though hethought it might be as well that his Highness should retire for atime.His speech more than counterbalanced the exhortations of all the rest;and from that moment the resolution of the Duke became immovable. Hisdauntless mind, which might have yielded had he stood absolutely alonein opinion, came instantly to the conclusion, that if there were asingle individual who doubted whether he should fly or not, he himselfought to decide upon remaining. He made no answer to the Archbishop'sspeech, but suffered Mandreville to combat his arguments withoutinterruption. That gentleman replied that Henry, far from being theperson represented, though cunning, was any thing but prudent. Hadthey ever seen, he demanded, the cunning of the King, even in theleast degree, restrain or control him? Had the self-evident risk ofhis throne, of his life, and of the welfare of his people, ever madehim pause in the commission of one frantic, vicious, or criminal act?He was no better, the deputy said, than a cunning madman, such as wasfrequently seen, who, having determined upon any act, however absurdor evil might be the consequences, even to the destruction of his ownself, would arrive at it by some means, and go directly to hispurpose, in despite of all obstacles. He contended that they had goodreason to know that the King devised evil against the Duke; and theymight depend upon it that no consideration of policy, right, orreligion, would prevent him from executing his purpose by some means.He spoke truly, and with more thorough insight into the character ofthe King than any one previously had done; but the resolution of theDuke of Guise, as we have said before, was already taken."My good friends," he said in conclusion, "I thank you most sincerely,and I shall ever feel grateful for the interest that you have taken inme, and for your anxiety regarding me on the present occasion. But myresolution is taken, and must be unalterable. I cannot but acknowledgethat the view of Monsieur de Mandreville may have much truth in it;but, nevertheless, matters are now at such a point, that if I were tosee death coming in at that window, I would not seek the door."Against a determination so forcibly expressed, there was, of course,no possibility of holding further argument; and after a word or twomore on different subjects of less interest--the Duke of Guisereplying as briefly as possible to every thing that was said--theparty took their leave and retired.CHAP. XII.There was at that time a large open space round the church of St.Sauveur, in Blois, where the people from the country used occasionallyto exhibit their fruits and flowers for sale; and exactly opposite thegreat door of the church stood a large and splendid mansion, with aninternal court-yard, part of which had been let to some of thedeputies for the States-General. The principal floor, however,consisting of sixteen rooms, and several large passages and corridors,had been left untenanted, in consequence of the proprietor asking anexorbitant rent, till two or three days before the period of which wespeak. Then, however, the apartment was taken suddenly, a number ofattendants in new and splendid dresses appeared therein; and, as wehave seen from the account of Villequier to the King, the Abb deBoisguerin arrived in Blois, with a splendid train of attendants, andtook up his abode as the master of that dwelling.About the same time that the conversations which we have detailed inthe last chapter were going on in the cabinet of the Duke of Guise,the Abb was seated in one of the rooms, which he had fixed upon forhis own peculiar saloon. It was very customary in those days, and inFrance, for every chamber, except a great hall of reception, to beused also as a bed-room. But that was not the case in this instance;for the chamber, which was small, though very lofty, had been used bythe former occupants as a cabinet, and had been chosen by the Abbprobably on account of its being so completely detached from everyother chamber, that no sound of what was done or said therein could beoverheard by any one.He sat in a large arm-chair, with his feet towards the fire, and withhis right elbow resting on a table covered with various sorts ofdelicacies. Those delicacies, however, were not the productions of theland in which he then lived, but rather such as he had been accustomedto in other days, and which recalled former habits of life. There werefine dried fruits from the Levant, tunny and other fish from theMediterranean; and the wines, though inferior to those of France, werefrom foreign vineyards.Before him was standing a man whom we have had occasion to mentionmore than once--that Italian vagabond named Orbi, from whom, it may beremembered, Charles of Montsoreau delivered the boy Ignati. He was nowdressed in a very different guise, however, from that which he hadborne while wandering as a mere stroller from house to house. Hisshaggy black hair was trimmed and smooth; his beard was partiallyshaved and reduced to fair proportions, with a sleek mustachio, wellturned and oiled, gracing his upper lip; his face, too, was clean; anda suit somewhat sombre in colour, but of good materials, displaying inthe ruff and at the sleeves a great quantity of fine white linen andrich lace, left scarcely a vestige of the fierce Italian vagabond,half bravo, half minstrel, which he had appeared not a year before.The conversation which was going on between him and the master he nowserved, was evidently one of great interest. The Abb's wine remainedhalf finished in the glass; the preserved fruits upon his plate werescarcely tasted; and he exclaimed, "So, so! Villequier sends me noanswer to my letter! A bare message, by word of mouth, that the Dukeof Guise wills it to be so; and that the Duke's will is all powerfulat the Court of France! The King sets at nought his own royal word,does he?""He said something, sir," said the Italian, "about his knowing, andthe King also, that they must pay a penalty; but that no sum was to begrudged, rather than offend the Duke at this time.""Sum!" cried the Abb de Boisguerin, starting up and pushing the chairvehemently from him. "What is any sum to me?" And with flashing eyes,and a countenance all inflamed, he strode up and down the chamber fora moment or two, with his heart swelling with bitterness anddisappointed passion. "A curse upon this bungling hand," he cried,striking it upon the table, "that it should fail me at such a momentas that! I thought the young viper had been swept from my way forever!--My aim was steady and true, too! His heart must be in someother place than other men's.""Ha! my Lord," joined in the Italian in the tone of a connoisseur,"the arquebus is a pretty weapon, I dare say, in a general battle, butit is desperate uncertain in private affairs like that. You can nevertell, to an inch or two, where the ball will hit. But, with a dagger,you can make sure to a button-hole; and even if there should be astruggle, it is always quite easy so to salve the point of your blade,that you make sure of your friend, even if you give him but a scratch.Now the attempt to poison a ball is all nonsense, for the firedestroys the venom.""At what hour said you, Orbi?" demanded the Abb, without attending tohis dissertation."Half an hour before high mass," replied the man, "the marriage is totake place."Again the Abb de Boisguerin burst into a vehement fit of passion, andstrode up and down the room cursing and blaspheming, till accidentallyhis eyes fell upon a small Venetian mirror, and the aspect of his owncountenance, ordinarily so calm and unmoved, now distorted by rage anddisappointment, made him start. A smile of scorn, even at himself,curled his lip; and calming his countenance by a great effort, heagain seated himself, and mused for a moment."This must not, and shall not be," he said at length. "Orbi, you arean experienced hand, and doubtless dexterous. Will you stop this goingforward?"The man smiled, stroked back his mustachios, and replied, "I thoughtyou would be obliged to take my way at last. Well, Monseigneur, I haveno objection; but the time is short. I told you what I expected forsuch an affair when I offered to do it in Paris.""You shall have it! you shall have it!" replied the Abb. "But if youdo it, so that no suspicion ever falls on me, you shall have as muchagain this day two years; for nothing but the lives of these two youngmen stands between me and immense wealth.""The worst of it all is," said the Italian, "that there is so short atime. It is to take place in the castle chapel; so there will be nogoing through the streets. To find him alone will be a matter ofdifficulty; and though I went over the passages, thinking it mightcome to this, yet I saw no one place, but at the door of the roomcalled the revestry, where one could strike easily.""I have seen the place," said the Abb, "long ago; but I do notremember it so perfectly as to give you any aid. I know that thewindow of the room you mention looks into the court and gardens, andunder the garden wall shall be a swift horse to bear you away. That isall I can do for you.""I must do the rest for myself," replied the man, "and will find somemeans, depend upon it. Perhaps he may not wait for the other if he beeager, but may come first by himself, and then it will be easily done.However, I will now go and get the dagger ready, and I can undertakethat the least scratch shall not leave an hour's life in him."The Abb de Boisguerin nodded his head and smiled as the otherdeparted. "They know not," he said to himself, "they know not the manthey have to deal with. These mighty men, these haughty Guises, mayfind that every man of strong determination and unflinching couragemay thwart, if he cannot master, them; may destroy their plans, if hecannot accomplish his own. But there is another still to be dealtwith. There is this proud, unfeeling, contemptuous girl; she whohas been rejoicing in the reappearance of this crafty fair-facedboy.--There is now no going back; and why should I not risk life towin her too, and gratify both my love and my revenge?--Yet that seemsscarcely possible," he continued. "Closely watched within the castle,never going out but strongly accompanied, she is put, it would seem,entirely out of my power, now that Villequier has fallen off fromme.--And yet," he continued meditating, "and yet, there is nothingimpossible to the dauntless and the daring.--Could I not bring her tothe postern gate of the garden an hour before this marriage is to takeplace, and then, with swift horses and a carriage ready, convey heronce more far away?--We have done as bold and difficult a feat before;and methinks, if I could tell her that I have news to give herconcerning her uncle's safety--for rumours of his danger must havereached her ears--she will not fail to come, and come alone.--Oh! if Ionce more get her in my power, she shall find no means to fly again,till, on the contrary, she shall be more inclined to kneel at my feet,and beseech that I would wed her.--So it shall be! I will write to herthat, if at ten o'clock she will be alone at the postern gate of thecastle, she will hear news that may save her uncle's life. Then, withthe swiftest horses we can find, a few hours will take us far frompursuit!--I will carry her into Spain! Epernon is with me and theway open!--It shall be done!" he said aloud; "it shall be done! But,then, this boy's death is scarcely needful! Why should I mind hisliving?--It will be but the greater torture to him to know that she ismine!--And yet, it were better he should die. All the tidings, and therumours, and the bustle of his violent death in the castle will toomuch occupy the minds of men to let them notice our flight; so that weshall gain an hour or two. There is an eager and a daring spirit,also, within him--a keen and active mind--which might frustrate meonce more in the very moment of hope. He must die! I have set my ownlife upon the chance; and what matters it whether one or two othersare swept away before me? He must die! and then, without protection,she is mine. Once into Tourraine, and I am safe!--Ha! you are backagain quickly, my good friend Orbi. Is all ready?""Everything, sir," replied the man; "and if I could but get into thechteau, and stumble upon the youth alone, I might be able toaccomplish the matter to-night. Could you not furnish me with a billetto this Villequier, or some one? It matters not what; any empty words,just to make them admit me at the gates.""Not to Villequier," said the Abb; "not to Villequier. But I willwrite a few words to Mademoiselle de Clairvaut herself.""That will do well! that will do well!" replied the man. "I am morelikely to find him hanging about her apartments than any where else;and then one slight blow does the deed.""Bring me paper and pens from the next room," cried the Abb. "Itshall be done this moment." And as soon as implements for writing wereprocured, he wrote a subtle epistle to Marie de Clairvaut, beseechingher to speak for a moment, at the postern gate of the chteau gardensearly on the following day, to a person who would communicatesomething to her, which might save the life of her guardian the Dukeof Guise. It was written in a feigned hand, and under the character ofan utter stranger to her. Some mistakes too were made in theorthography of her name, and in regard to other circumstances, for thepurpose of rendering the deception complete. When this was concludedand sealed, he placed it in the hands of Orbi, and after a few morewords they parted.While the Abb busied himself in causing a carriage to be bought forthe proposed enterprise of the following day, and in ordering theswiftest horses that could be found, to be obtained--not from theroyal post, by which his course might have been tracked, but from oneof the keepers of relais, as the irregular posting houses werecalled, which were then tolerated in France; the Italian proceeded onhis task, with feelings in his heart which might well have beenreceived as a reason for abating the price of the deed he was about toperform.To tell the truth it might be considered fully as much his own act asthat of the Abb, for the same malevolent feelings were in the heartsof each; and he went not there merely as the common hired assassin, todo the work of his trade, as a matter of course; but he went also toavenge a long remembered blow, which still rankled in his heart, withthe same bitterness that he had felt at the moment that it wasreceived.He met with some difficulty in obtaining entrance to the chteau at solate an hour of the night; but the letter addressed to Mademoiselle deClairvaut enabled him to effect that object at length, and he wasdirected towards the suite of apartments assigned to the Duke of Guiseand his family. When he had once passed the two first gates, he metwith no obstruction, but wandered through the long dimly lightedcorridors, scarcely encountering a waking being on his way, andcertainly none who seemed inclined to speak to him.When he had reached that part of the building to which he had beendirected, he looked round for some one to give him fartherinformation, not absolutely intending to seek the apartments ofMademoiselle de Clairvaut, and deliver the note, but merely to obtaina general knowledge of how the different chambers were allotted. Afterpassing on some way, without meeting any one or hearing a sound, hesaw a door half open, with the light streaming out, and quietlyapproaching he looked in.There was a boy in the dress of a page, sitting before a largeChristmas fire reading a book; but though he walked stealthily, thefirst step which the Italian took in the room caught the youth's quickear, and starting up he showed the Italian the face of his formerbondman, Ignatius Marone. The man started when he saw him; butrecovering himself instantly, he went up and endeavoured to soothe theboy with fair and flattering words."Ah, my little Ignati," he said, "here thou art then, and doubtlesswell off with this young Lord of thine.""I am well off, Signor Orbi," was the boy's brief reply; and seeingthat the man paused and kept gazing round him, the boy added, "Butwhat is your business here?""I am only looking about me," replied the man in somewhat of acontemptuous tone, which he could not smother, although it was hisfull intention to cajole the boy into giving him all the informationhe wanted, and perhaps even to induce him unconsciously to aid hispurpose."Come, come, Signor Orbi," replied the boy, "I know you well,remember; and I know, that though you may have changed your doublet,you cannot have changed what is within it. If you do not sayimmediately what you want, I will call those who will make you." Andhe approached one of the other doors which the room displayed, andraised his hand towards the latch."Hist, hist, Ignati!" cried the Italian. "By Heavens! if you do, youshall never hear what I have got to tell you,--something that wouldmake your heart beat with joy if you knew it.""And what is that?" said the boy, still standing near the door, andlooking at his fellow-countryman with a face of scorn and doubt."Come hither, and I will tell you," said the Italian; but the boyshook his head, and Orbi added in a low tone, "You know who yourmother was, Ignati; but do you know your father?"The boy gazed at him bitterly and in silence, without making anyfurther answer; and the man added, "He is now in Blois."Ignati instantly sprang forward towards him, exclaiming, "Where?Where? Where can I find him? I have still the letter from my deadmother. I have still all the proofs given me by the Marone. Where ishe? where is he?""Come, let us sit down by the fire," said the man, "and I will tellthee more;" and finding the boy now quite willing to do what hewished, the man sat down by the fire with him, calculating the variousresults of particular lines of conduct open before him, but withoutsuffering any one good principle or feeling to mingle at all with hisconsiderations.He had spoken the words which had called Ignati to him simply as amatter of impulse, and the first question he asked himself was,whether he should tell the boy more of the truth or not. Variousconsiderations, however, induced him to go on, for he had a littlescheme in his head which rendered it expedient for him to embarrassthe proceedings of the Abb de Boisguerin, on the following morningafter the deed proposed was done, as much as possible."You know, Ignati," he said, "that I always loved you, my good youth.""You gave me bitter proofs of it," replied Ignati."Nay, nay; it was my way," replied the Italian. "If you had been myown son, it would have been the same.""I dare say," replied Ignati, "you would have murdered your own sonalmost as readily as you tried to murder me.""Nay, boy, I tried not to murder thee," rejoined the man. "I was notsuch a fool; that would never have answered my purpose.""You did it by halves," said the boy. "But come, Master Orbi, tell memore about this matter you spoke of; and tell me too what brings youhere? Where is my father to be found, if, as you say, he is here?""He is to be found," said Orbi, "in the great house by the church ofSt. Sauveur. I remember him well, for when your mother fled out ofRome before you were born, and was glad to get what assistance shecould, she sent me three times back into the city to speak with theAbb of Laurans, as he was then called.""And what is he called now?" exclaimed Ignati eagerly. "What is hecalled now?""He is called the Abb de Boisguerin," replied the man, "or theSeigneur de Boisguerin, as it now is.""Then I have seen him," cried Ignati. "Then I have seen him; and hecalled her----" But the boy suddenly checked himself, "And now, whatis it you want here?" he said."No harm, Master Ignati," replied the man, with a look half sneering,half dogged. "You seem as grateful as any one else, and as soon as youget all you want, you turn upon one. I suppose you are waiting foryour young master coming back from some gay revel, for the whole placeseems as silent as if every body were gone to bed but you.""Oh, no," answered Ignati. "There are six of the Duke's men sitting upin the next room; and all I fear is, that the gentlemen who are withthe Duke himself should come out and find you here.""Then, I suppose, your master is with them," said the Italian.The boy smiled. "My master is with them," he said, "for my master isthe Duke of Guise; but if you mean the young Count who took me fromyou, he has been gone to bed an hour ago. Ay, Master Orbi, and has twostout men sleeping across his door. I hav'n't forgot that he struckyou a blow one day; nor you either, it seems.""You are out there, Sharp-wits," said the Italian. "I bear the boy nogrudge. I got his money, if he gave me a blow into the bargain; so weare quits.""I doubt you," muttered Ignati to himself; but the man went on withoutattending to him, saying, "No, no; what I came for really, if you wantto know, was to give a letter to a young lady here, from an oldgentleman at the other side of the castle. Here it is! Ma'mselle deClairvaut is the name.""Ay, she is gone to bed long ago too," replied the page. "Let me lookat the letter.""It is of no great consequence, I believe," replied the Italian, whofancied the letter a mere pretext. "It is of no great consequence; allabout a Persian cat, I believe. So you may take it and give it herto-morrow, if she is gone to bed now. There it is. But how is it youare not with the young Count now? The Duke of Guise!--Page to the Dukeof Guise! Why, that is a step, indeed!""Hush!" cried Ignati, hearing the door of the Duke's cabinet openbehind the arras. "Hush! get you gone with all speed! They are comingout; and if they find you here, I would not answer for your ears, ormy own either."The man started up, and ran out of the door by which he had entered,as fast as possible. But he had scarcely made his escape, when thetapestry which covered the doorway into the Duke's cabinet was drawnaside, and the Cardinal de Guise, with the Archbishop of Lyons, andthe rest of Leaguers, came forth from their conference with the Duke.CHAP. XIII.It is now necessary to turn to other apartments in the chteauof Blois: namely, a suite inhabited by the King himself. Itcomprised--besides several others both above and below--the King'sbed-room, into which opened four doors--one communicating with theMonarch's private staircase, which we have already spoken of--one tothe right entering into a small dressing-room--one to the left, whichgave admittance to a chamber called the old cabinet--and onecommunicating by a short and narrow passage with the large chamber,which, during the residence of the King at Blois, was employed as acouncil-room. The walls of the council-room were bare; but those ofthe King's chamber and the two cabinets were lined throughout withrich old tapestry.Before five o'clock on the morning of the 23d of December, Henry hadrisen from his bed and dressed himself in haste, and as soon as histoilet was completed, one of his valets was dispatched with all speedto bear a message, which had already been entrusted to him. The Kingthen passed out of his dressing-room into his bed-chamber, holding alight in his hand, and approached the door which led to the privatestaircase. There was eagerness and much anxiety in his countenance,and his eyes were fixed upon the top of the stairs with an intensegaze, which seemed to strain them from their orbits.At length a heavy foot was heard ascending, and then several more, andin a moment after the head and shoulders of an armed man, carrying alight, appeared at the mouth of the staircase."Ah, Laugnac, this is well!" cried the King, as soon as he saw him."You are punctual and prepared, I see. Whom have you with you?""Nine of my most determined fellows, Sire," replied Laugnac. "There isnot one, indeed, of the Forty-five that would not shed his life'sblood for your Majesty. But these gentlemen I know well for men whowould kill the devil himself, I believe, if you were to bid them."As he spoke, half a dozen steps behind him appeared, man after man,nine of the Gascon band, called the "Quarante-cinq," in whosecountenances might be read that sort of remorseless determination,which was suited to the moment and the deed, and whose framesdisplayed the strength requisite to execute whatever violent act wasentrusted to them."This is well; this is well," said the King, as they entered. "Butwhere is Larchant, Laugnac?""He remained behind, Sire," replied the other, "as it will benecessary to secure the doors of the council-chamber. Whenever theenemy has entered, he will come round and join your Majesty.""I should like to have some one with me in the cabinet," said theKing. "Run and tell Ornano, Bonnivet, and la Grange, to come to me,"he continued, speaking to a valet. "Bring them by the back staircase."The valet went away with a pale countenance, feeling all the agitationwhich such events might well produce; and while he was gone, the King,after asking Laugnac if he had explained to his companions what wasthe task in which they were about to be employed, addressed them allin a short speech, not without eloquence and fire.When he had concluded, he made Laugnac open one of the large chestswhich formed the window-seats of his bed-room, and taking thence anumber of long, sharp, and well-pointed knives, he gave them with hisown hands to the assassins, saying, "Here, gentlemen, are the avengersof your liberty and mine! and I command and authorise you to use themfor the punishment of the greatest criminal in my kingdom. Every law,divine and human, requires his death; and where power prevents theordinary course of justice from taking place, it is a right and aprivilege of the sovereign to execute judgment by any means thatpresent themselves! Now, follow me, gentlemen!" And leading them on tothe other side of the chamber, he posted them himself,--the principalpart of them in the old cabinet, and the rest behind the arras roundthe door of the bed-room itself. Most of those even who were in thecabinet were concealed also behind the arras near the entrance, andthe door was left open.By the time this had been arranged a page had entered the King'sbed-room, and now informed him that the gentlemen he had sent for hadarrived, adding, "Monsieur de Nambu is there also, Sire, saying youtold him last night to come at this hour.""I did, I did," said the King. "Bid them all come up;" and greetingthe others briefly, he took Nambu by the arm and led him into thepassage which conducted to the council-chamber. Through the door whichled thither voices were heard speaking beyond."Stay there, Nambu," he said in a whisper, "and let no one passwithout my especial order. The council cannot have begun its sittingyet, for it is still dark, I see.""As I passed by I saw into the room," said Nambu, "and there were nonebut ushers and such people: but I heard that the Duke had been sentfor according to the commands your Majesty gave last night."The King then left him, and returned into his room, where he foundLaugnac and the rest of the gentlemen, whom he led towards the door ofhis dressing-room."I have taken off my head-piece and cuirass, Sire," said Laugnac, "asI intend to remain here at the door of your Majesty's dressing-roomtill the matter is settled, and the sight of arms might scare theprey.""Right, right, Laugnac!" replied the King. "Bid the page send forRevol by the back staircase. We shall want him to fetch the Duke."And, this said, he retired into his cabinet.The page ran round at once to the door of the council-chamber, wherehe found Revol just about to enter; and whispering a word to him, theSecretary of State gave the bag of papers which he had in his hand toone of the ushers, bidding him hold it till he returned, and followedthe King's domestic, forbidding the servants, who had accompanied himthither, to go any farther. The spot where they remained was the largeopen space at the top of the great staircase, and a number of otherpersons were there collected, while the company of the King's guardmight be seen at the foot of the staircase, not, indeed, under arms,or drawn up in regular order, but waiting apparently for the arrivalof some one to give them directions.After the departure of Revol, the statesmen who had been summoned tothe council arrived rapidly one after the other. The Cardinal ofVendme was amongst the first, and then followed the Marshals de Retzand d'Aumont. Some other members of the council came next, and thenthe Archbishop of Lyons. But still neither the Cardinal de Guise northe Duke had made their appearance. Time was now wearing on, andoccasionally a page, or valet-de-chambre, known to belong to the King,was seen to come and speak with some of the people at the top of thestaircase, and then return suddenly.While this was going on, a boy, bearing the habiliments of a page ofthe Duke of Guise, passed along at the foot of the staircase; and,seeing a number of archers of the guard collected there, he ranlightly up the steps and mingled with the various persons collected.He passed rapidly along from one to another, as if he was looking forsome person, spoke to two or three of those whose faces he knew, andthen hurrying away down the stairs, passed with a step of light to theapartments of the Duke of Guise. He found that Prince just quittinghis cabinet and entering the antechamber. A number of gentlemen andofficers followed him, but the boy advanced straight towards him witha degree of familiarity, neither insolent nor ungraceful, and kissinghis hand said, with his slight Italian accent, "May so humble a beingas I am detain your Highness for one moment?""What is it, Ignati? Speak!" said the Duke of Guise, "I am alreadylate for the council, my good boy.""Your Highness promised to grant me any favour I asked," replied theboy, "and as the greatest at this moment, I ask to speak with yourHighness alone.""What is it?" said the Duke somewhat impatiently; "what is it?" And hedrew him a little on one side, motioning the rest to remain."My Lord," said Ignati, "there is danger going forward, I am sure.All the archers of the guard are at the foot of the staircase;there are many strange faces, not usually seen at the door of thecouncil-chamber. Twice I saw a servant of the King's come and speak toHenville, and hearing you had not arrived, go round again, as if bythe back staircase, to the King's apartments. I am sure, sir, there issomething wrong."The Duke smiled, but it was somewhat thoughtfully. "Thank you, my goodboy," he said. "I know rumours often precede the act; but I cannotpause to consider such things now.""Oh, sir, think!" the boy ventured to exclaim; "think how the welfareof the State and the welfare of a thousand individuals depend entirelyupon your safety. What would become of me? What would become of theyoung Count and his bride, if----""Ay, well bethought," replied the Duke. "Bring me here paper and theink-horn;" and when the boy brought them, Guise bent down over a largecoffer that stood near, and wrote a few lines."Take that to the Count," he said, as soon as he had finished writing."Quick, Ignati: but, after all, these warnings are but nonsense. Thereis nobody in France dares do it. Look, I have delayed too long. Herecomes a messenger from the King.""As I find your Highness coming," said the usher, approaching theDuke, "it is needless, perhaps, to deliver the King's message: but Iwas directed to say to your Highness that the council waited, and thatHis Majesty was extremely anxious that the business of the day shouldgo on, as he wished to proceed to Clery in time for dinner. If yourHighness were not well, he said, perhaps you would not object to thecouncil being held without you.""You see!" said the Duke in a low voice, turning towards Ignati with asmile, "you see!" And following the usher, he walked on upon his waytowards the council-chamber.At the bottom of the staircase he found Larchant and the whole body ofarchers of the guard, who now pressed round him somewhat closely."What is it, Larchant? what is it, my good friend?" said the Duke."Your presence here is unusual, I think.""We are here, your Highness," replied Larchant, "to solicit in a bodyyour mediation with the King. You promised me yesterday, my Lord, thatyou would present our petition to his Majesty, and advocate our causein the council. These poor fellows have not received any pay formonths; I might almost say years.""I did advocate your cause, yesterday," said the Duke, "and hisMajesty graciously sent an order upon the treasurer by one of theushers.""But the treasurer ungraciously told us, sir, that there was not asous in his coffers," replied Larchant; and the Duke taking the paperout of his hand, began to mount the stairs, saying, "I will see to it,Larchant; I will see to it."Larchant and the archers followed him up the steps, still pressingclose upon him; and he heard a low deep voice say from the midst ofthem, "Look to yourself, my Lord Duke, there are bad men abroad!"The Duke passed on, however, without notice and entered the hall ofthe council, the ushers drawing back with low bows as he appeared, andthrowing open the doors for him to go in. The moment after those fataldoors had closed behind him, the archers drew up across them at thehead of the stairs. Larchant hurried away towards the chamber of theKing, and Villequier, passing rapidly by, said in a low voice to oneof the attendants, "Go down to Monsieur de Crillon, at the Corps deGarde; tell him to shut and guard the gates, as the Duke has gone in."Though he spoke low, he seemed little to heed who listened to thewords; and they were heard by the boy Ignati, who, with the painfulconviction that some great evil was about to befall the Duke, hadfollowed him step by step to the council-chamber. The boy put his handto his brow with a look of painful anxiety, and darted away once moretowards the apartments of the Duke of Guise. The first person he metwith there was Pericard, the Duke's secretary; and grasping his arm,he exclaimed, "They will murder him! they will murder him! They areclosing the gates of the castle and guarding them!"Pericard rushed to one of the windows that looked out into the court."Too true, indeed!" he exclaimed. "Too true, indeed! It may be yettime to save him though. Run quick, Ignati, and get one of theDuke's handkerchiefs while I write." And with a rapid hand he wrotedown,--"My Lord, your death is resolved. They are barring and guardingthe gates. I beseech you come out from the hall of the council to yourown apartments. We can make them good against all the world, till thetown rises to protect you."Before he had done, the boy was back again with the handkerchief; andenveloping the note therein, Pericard gave it to him, exclaiming,"Fly, fly with that to the door of the council-chamber, Ignati. Theushers will let you in, surely, to give it to the Duke, if you saythat he has forgotten his handkerchief.""They have let me in before," said Ignati; "but I doubt it now. I willtry and make my way at all events."Again he flew to the top of the staircase, and, as if a matter ofcourse, pushed up towards the door, endeavouring to force his waythrough the archers."Stand back, saucy spright," cried one of the men; "you cannot passhere.""But I must pass," cried the boy, turning upon him with a fierce airof authority. "I am the Duke of Guise's page, and bring him hishandkerchief, which he forgot. Make way, saucy archer, or I will teachyou to whom you speak.""Listen to the insolence of these Guisards," said the man. "But theirday is over. Stand back, fool, or I'll knock you down with mypartisan."The boy laid his hand upon his dagger, still striving to push forward;and the man, without further words, struck him a blow over the headwith the staff of his halbert, which laid him prostrate upon theground. For a moment he seemed stunned, but then, starting up, heturned away, and went down the stairs, bursting into tears ere hereached the bottom, not with the pain of the blow he had received, butwith the bitter conviction that the last effort had failed, and thefate of Guise was sealed.In the meantime the Duke of Guise entered the council-room, carryingin his hand the petition of the guards. Every one rose at hisapproach; and as the greater part of those present were personallyfriendly towards him, he went round and spoke to them with his usualgrace and suavity, and then laying the petition on the table,approached the fire, saying, "It is awfully cold this morning! Has nothis Majesty yet appeared?""Not yet," replied the Cardinal de Guise, "though we expected himbefore, for he sent down to hasten our coming. But what is the matterwith your Highness? there is blood trickling over your mustachio.""The cold has made my nose bleed twice this morning," replied theDuke, and putting his hand in his pocket he said, "My people have beennegligent; they have forgotten to give me a handkerchief. St Prix," hecontinued, turning his head to one of the King's valets-de-chambre,who stood on the inside of the door communicating with the King'sapartments. "I wish you would send to my rooms for a handkerchief. Youwill find some of my people at the door.""There are plenty, my Lord, belonging to the King," replied St. Prix,"in this little cabinet:" and crossing the hall of the council, hetook one out and gave it to the Duke, who thanked him graciously, andstill sitting by the fire fell into a deep fit of thought. Suddenly,however, he turned pale; his eyes assumed the same expression as theyhad done the night before, when he had fancied he saw a figure in theroom with him, and taking a small silver bonbonnire from his pocket,he opened it, as if seeking for something that it usually contained,saying at the same time, "I feel very faint!--My people have neglectedevery thing," he added, "this morning."Several members of the council gathered round him, and St. Prix, thevalet, brought him from the cabinet where the handkerchief had beenfound, some of the dried plums of Brignolles, which were then held asa restorative. The Duke took one of them and ate it, and placed theothers in the bonbonnire. After a little, his colour returned, and hesaid, "I am better now. How strange these attacks are, and howfortunate that one never feels them on occasions of battle or danger!"A moment or two after, he took a turn or two up and down the room, andseemed perfectly recovered; and as he was about to resume his seat,the door of the passage leading to the King's chamber was opened, andthe Secretary of State, Revol, entered, saying, "Monseigneur, hisMajesty wishes to speak a word with your Highness before the businessof the council commences. You will find him in the old cabinet to theleft."Revol was as pale as death. But the Duke of Guise took not theslightest notice; and, passing through the door, which St. Prix heldopen for him and closed after him, he advanced towards the chamber ofthe King.On entering it he saw Laugnac seated upon the coffer at the fartherend of the room; and he remarked, with an angry frown, that the King'sattendant did not rise when he entered. He said nothing, however, butturned towards the door of the old cabinet, which was too low tosuffer him to pass without bowing his head. He accordingly stooped forthe purpose; and, raising the tapestry with his left hand, while heheld his hat in the right, he passed on.He had scarcely taken a step into the cabinet, however, when he atonce saw several men in arms standing round. At the same moment therewas a sound close to him; and, springing from behind the arras, afierce and powerful man, named St. Malines, rushed upon him.The Duke dropped his hat, and moved his hand towards his sword; but atthe same moment some one seized the hilt with both hands, and St.Malines struck him a blow with a knife over the left shoulder, buryingthe weapon in his bosom.Another and another blow succeeded from the hands of those around him:the blood rushed up into his mouth and throat; but still, withprodigious power, he seized two of those who were assailing him, anddashed them headlong to the ground, exclaiming at the same time, "Ah,traitors!"Rushing towards the door, he dragged another along with him into thechamber of the King; and seeing Laugnac still there, and marking himas the instigator of his murder, with a brow awful in the struggle ofthe strong spirit against the power of death, with hands clenched, andteeth set, he darted towards him.Ere he had taken two steps, however, his brain reeled, his eyes losttheir sight, and Laugnac starting up saw, by the fearful swimming ofthose visionless orbs, that the terrible deed was fully accomplished,that the life of Guise was at an end; and though the Duke still rushedforward upon him with the convulsive impulse of his last sensation,the Captain of the Quarante-cinq did not even unsheath his sword, butmerely struck him a light blow with the weapon in the scabbard, andGuise fell headlong on the carpet by the King's bedside.The sound of that deep heavy fall was enough, and Henry, coming forthfrom his cabinet, gazed for several minutes earnestly upon the deadman, while the dark blood rushed forth, and formed a pool round theMonarch's feet.The countenance of every one there present, lips and cheek alike, wereas white as parchment; and for two or three minutes not a word wasspoken, till at length the King exclaimed, "What a height he was! Heseems to me taller even dead than living!"Then setting his foot upon the dead man's neck, he cruelly repeatedthe cruel words which Guise himself had used at the death of Coligny,"Venomous beast, thou shalt spit forth no more poison!"CHAP. XIV.From the door of the council-chamber the boy Ignati flew back to theapartments of the Duke of Guise, and the tidings which he broughtspread confusion and terror through the whole of the Duke's domestics:but Ignati was of a clinging and affectionate disposition, and afterthe Duke, his master, his next thoughts turned to Charles ofMontsoreau. To his apartments then the boy proceeded with all possiblespeed, having in his hand the note from the Duke of Guise, which hehad almost forgotten in the agitation of the late events. He found theyoung nobleman already dressed, and concluding with his attendantsvarious arrangements for his approaching union with her he loved--anunion, indeed, entirely dependent upon the life of him who was at thatvery moment falling under the blows of assassins.With the natural hopefulness of youth and of high courage, Charles ofMontsoreau, though still somewhat anxious, had nearly forgotten theapprehensions of the night before. But the terrified countenance ofIgnati, and the cut upon the boy's brow from the blow he had received,showed the young Count at once that something had gone wrong; anddemanding what was the matter, but without waiting for an answer, heopened the billet of the Duke of Guise, and read.The words which he found there written were as follows:--"I have had many warnings, Logres, which personally, it does notbecome me to attend to. However, should these warnings prove to havebeen justly given, and you see Henry of Guise no more, take your fairbride with you at once; fly to my brother of Mayenne; be united assoon as possible, without waiting for any ceremony but the blessing ofthe priest; and, to the best of your power, avenge the death of himwho was your friend to the last.""Where is the Duke, Ignati?" demanded the young Count, eagerly. "Hashe yet gone to the council?""He is gone! he is gone!" replied the boy; "and he will never return!"And in a rapid manner he told him all that had taken place, as far ashe himself yet knew it."Fly to the apartments of Mademoiselle de Clairvaut instantly," saidthe Count. "Ask if I can speak with her, and give her that note. Ifshe is not in her own apartment, she is in that of the Duchess ofNemours, which is by the side of it. Quick, Ignati; tell her there isnot a moment to be lost."The boy sped away. The Count then gave a few rapid orders to Gondrin,bidding him discover if there was any means of issuing forth from thecastle; and then turned his steps, as speedily as possible, towardsthe chamber of Marie de Clairvaut.In the narrow passage, however, which led towards the apartments ofthe Duchess of Nemours, he was passed by Pericard, the Duke'ssecretary, who slackened not his pace for an instant, but said, "Fly,sir! Fly! The Duke is dead!" and rushed on. The next moment, Charlesmet the fair girl herself, coming towards him with as swift a pace ashis own, and followed by the boy Ignati, who from time to time turnedback his head, as if to see that they were not pursued. Marie was aspale as death."Oh, Charles," she said, "I fear we cannot obey my uncle's commands.What has happened to him, I know not; but the guards have justarrested the Duchess de Nemours and my poor cousin Joinville. It isimpossible to pass in that direction, and I fear all the gates areguarded.""Run to the chapel," said the boy. "Run to the chapel by the backstaircase and the little corridor behind the Duke's room. There willbe no one in the chapel in this time of confusion, and there is a wayfrom the chapel into the gardens. The postern may be left unguarded.""Excellently bethought," replied Charles of Montsoreau. "Speed on,Ignati; speed on before us, and see that there is no one on the watch.If you find Gondrin, send him to the chapel without a moment's delay.We must fly, sweet Marie; we must fly, as your uncle has ordered. Itis clear--though it is terrible to say--it is clear that he is dead.They would not have dared to arrest his son and mother had he beenliving. But we must find you some cloak or covering, sweet girl. Youcannot go forth in all this bridal array."Marie bent down her head and wept, for though she had suffered muchwithin the last few months, it had not been with that withering kindof suffering which dries up the fountain of our tears. She hurried onwith her lover, however, and in his apartments a mantle was speedilyfound to cover the bright and happy attire which she had that morningput on with feelings of hope and joy. In few but distinct wordsCharles of Montsoreau told the two servants, whom he found there, toget out, if possible, by any means into the town, and to bring roundthe rest of his train and his horses to the farther side of thegardens; and then hurrying on by the way which the boy had suggested,he led Marie de Clairvaut towards the chapel, where they were to havebeen united.The little corridor which they followed entered at once into a smallroom, called the revestry, by the side of the chapel itself, and asCharles of Montsoreau approached, he heard voices and paused tolisten. He then plainly distinguished the tones of Gondrin and thepage; and though another deep voice was also heard, he hurried on,feeling certain that they would have come to give him warning hadthere been danger.The door was partly open, and throwing it back, the Count beheld ascene which made all his blood run cold, while the fair girl whom hewas leading forward recoiled in terror and dismay.Stretched upon the floor, with his sword half drawn from the sheath,and a deep wound in his left breast, lay Gaspar de Montsoreau.A pool of blood surrounded him, and the expression of his wholecountenance showed in a moment that the spirit had departed some time.Scattered--some upon the ground, some upon the table in the midst ofthe room, some even in the midst of the blood itself--were a number ofpieces of gold; and two leathern bags, one open and half empty of itscontents, were seen upon the ground.At the further side of the room, near the door leading into thechapel, was standing Gondrin, with his sword naked, and his foot uponthe chest of the Italian Orbi; while the boy Ignati knelt beside theassassin, and with his drawn dagger held over him, seemed putting tohim some quick and eager questions."I tell you true," answered the man, as Charles of Montsoreau entered;"I tell you true. It was he who set me on and paid me: the Abb deBoisguerin, and no one else."The boy sprang up and moved away on the young Count's appearance; anda few words from Gondrin explained to him, that coming from thegardens--where he had found all solitary, the key in the lock of thepostern gate, and the way clear--he had heard a low cry from the sideof the chapel, and on entering that room had discovered the unhappyMarquis de Montsoreau weltering in his blood, and the Italian Orbigathering up some of the gold pieces, which seemed to have fallen tothe ground in a brief struggle between him and the Marquis.During this account, Marie de Clairvaut, pale as death and terriblyagitated, supported herself by one of the high-backed chairs, andturned her eyes from the horrible sight which that room exhibited; andCharles of Montsoreau gazed for a moment on the dead form of hisbrother, with those feelings of fraternal love which no unkindness orill treatment had been able to banish.Every instant, however, was precious; and recovering himself asspeedily as possible, he turned to Gondrin, bidding him disarm theItalian who had still his sword, though the weapon with which he hadcommitted the murder had been dropped beside the dead body."Shall I kill him, sir?" said Gondrin, pressing the man down morefirmly with his foot, as he found him make a slight effort to escape."Oh, in pity, in pity, Charles," cried Marie, clasping her handstowards him, "do not; do not!""No, no!" replied Charles of Montsoreau; "cut that rope from thewindow, Ignati. Bind him hand and foot, Gondrin, and leave him to thejustice of those who come after."It was done in a moment; and Charles of Montsoreau only pausing oncemore for a moment to gaze on his brother's corpse, exclaimed withsincere sorrow, "Alas, poor Gaspar!" and then with a quick step ledMarie de Clairvaut from that terrible chamber into the gardens andtowards the postern gate.All was clear, and Charles of Montsoreau turned the key and threw thegate back. The moment that it was opened, two men darted forward fromthe other side, as if to seize the person coming out, and in one ofthem, though entirely changed in dress and appearance, Charlesinstantly recognised the Abb de Boisguerin, who, before he saw thatany one had accompanied Mademoiselle de Clairvaut, had caught herviolently by the arm.The memory of a thousand wrongs flashed upon the young Count's mind ina moment; his sword sprung from the sheath, glittered for a singleinstant in the air, and then passed through the body of the base manbefore him, piercing him from side to side.The Abb uttered a shrill and piercing cry, and, when the Countwithdrew his weapon, fell instantly back upon the ground, quivering inthe agonies of death. The other man who had stood beside the Abb fledamain; but on the road, about fifty yards from the garden wall, stooda carriage with six horses and their drivers, with a group of somenine or ten men on horseback.On the Abb's first cry the horsemen began to ride towards the spot,but the appearance of Gondrin coming through the low door behind theCount, and then the page, made them pause, hesitate, and seem toconsult. In another moment or two the sound of horses coming from theside of the town caused them to withdraw still farther from the spot;and with joy that is scarcely to be expressed, Charles of Montsoreausaw his own colours in the scarfs of the horsemen that approached. Ina moment after, he was surrounded by at least twenty of his own armedattendants: led horses, too, were there in plenty; and he nowwhispered words of hope that he really felt to Marie de Clairvaut, whoclung almost fainting to his arm."Stop the carriage, Gondrin!" he exclaimed, seeing the drivers in theact of mounting, as if to hasten away after the horsemen, who, ontheir part, had taken flight at the first sight of the young Count'sfollowers. "We must make use of it, whether they will or not; butpromise them large rewards. There is a mystery here I do notunderstand; but it is evidently some new villany. Come, dear Marie,come; we must not pause." And leading her forward to the carriage, hespoke to the drivers himself.One of them was the master of the horses which the Abb had hired, andhe was found not at all unwilling to enter into any arrangement thatthe Count chose to propose. Marie de Clairvaut was placed in thecarriage, the horsemen surrounded it, and Charles himself was about tomount his horse, when he perceived that the boy Ignati had notfollowed him, but remained kneeling by the side of the Abb deBoisguerin. Turning quickly back, to his utter surprise he found theyouth weeping bitterly; and when he urged him to rise and come withthe carriage, Ignati shook his head saying, "No, no! I cannot leavehim like dead carrion for the hawks and ravens.--He was my father! Goon, my Lord Count, and God speed you!--I must see him buried, andmasses said for his soul!"The Count was moved, but he could not remain; and giving the boy somemoney, he said, "Spend that upon his funeral, Ignati; and then followme with all speed to Lyons. I grieve for you, my boy, though Iunderstand not how this can be."Only one more difficulty existed, which was, to pass through that partof the town leading to the bridge over the Loire. But the servants whohad made their escape from the castle, and brought round their fellowsto his assistance, assured the Count that the news of the Duke ofGuise's murder had already spread through the city, and that everything was in such a state of confusion and dismay, he might pass withthe greatest security.Such he found to be the case; all the guard of the King was within thewalls of the chteau; the gates of the bridges, and of the townitself, were in the hands of the faction of the League; and noquestions were asked of one who was known to have been the dear andintimate friend of the murdered Duke.Taking his way through a part of the country devoted to the League,Charles of Montsoreau and his fair companion found no difficulty inreaching Lyons, where the history of all that had taken place was soontold to the Duke of Mayenne, and the last lines which the hand ofHenry of Guise ever traced were shown to him, who was destinedthenceforth to be the great head of the League.Had the words and the wishes of his brother not been sufficient forMayenne, the necessity of binding to his cause for ever one whose aidwas so important as that of Charles of Montsoreau, would have beenenough to decide the Duke's conduct towards him: and as soon aspossible, after all the anguish, difficulty, and danger, which theyhad undergone together, the fate of the young Count of Logres andMarie de Clairvaut was united for ever.In regard to them it need only be said that they loved each other tothe last hours of life.The boy Ignati followed the young Count to Lyons, but he would notremain with the man who had taken his father's life. He subsequentlydevoted himself to the church, and in the end rose high, by the greatinterest that was exercised on his behalf.The wars of the League succeeded: but the feelings of Charles ofMontsoreau were greatly changed by the death of the Duke of Guise; andthough he waged war, as zealously as any body could possibly do,against the murderer of his lost friend, yet, when Henry III. himselffell under the blow of an assassin, the young Count of Logres wouldno longer contend against a monarch so generous, so noble, and sochivalrous, as the King who next ascended the throne.He sheathed the sword then, after the accession of Henri Quatre, andthe rest of his days passed in peace and calm retirement, in thesociety of her whom he loved ever, and loved alone.THE END.