Project Gutenberg's The Daltons, Volume I (of II), by Charles James LeverThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: The Daltons, Volume I (of II)Or,Three Roads In LifeAuthor: Charles James LeverIllustrator: Phiz.Release Date: April 19, 2010 [EBook #32061]Last Updated: February 27, 2018Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DALTONS, VOLUME I (OF II) ***Produced by David WidgerTHE DALTONS:OR,THREE ROADS IN LIFEBy Charles James LeverWith Illustrations By Phiz.In Two VolumesVol. I.Boston: Little, Brown, And Company1895.To LORD METHUEN.MY DEAR METHUEN, Some idle folk have pretended that certain livingcharacters have been depicted under the fictitious names of thesevolumes. There is, I assure you, but one personality contained in it,and that is of a right true-hearted Englishman, hospitable, and manlyin all his dealings; and to him I wish to dedicate my book, in testimonynot only of the gratitude which, in common with all his countrymen here,I feel to be his due, but in recognition of many happy hours passed inhis society, and the honor of his friendship. The personality begins andends with this dedication, which I beg you to accept of, and amEver yours faithfully,CHARLES LEVER.PALAZZO CAPPONI, FLORENCE, Feb. 28, 1852.PREFACE.IF the original conception of this tale was owing to the story of an oldand valued schoolfellow who took service in Austria, and rose to rankand honors there, all the rest was purely fictitious. My friend had madea deep impression on my mind by his narratives of that strange life,wherein, in the very midst of our modern civilization, an old-worldtradition still has its influence, making the army of to-day theveritable sons and descendants of those who grouped around the bivouacfires in Wallenstein's camp. Of that more than Oriental submission thatgraduated deference to military rank that chivalrous devotion to the"Kaiser" whicli enter into the soldier heart of Austria, I have beenunable to reproduce any but the very faintest outlines, and yet thesewere the traits which, pervaded all my friend's stories and gave themcharacter and distinctiveness.Many of the other characters in this tale were drawn from the life, withsuch changes added and omitted features as might rescue them from anycharge of personality. With all my care on this score, one or two havebeen believed to be recognizable; and if so I have only to hope thatI have touched on peculiarities of disposition inoffensively, andonly depicted such traits as may "point a moral," without wounding thepossessor.The last portion of the story includes some scenes from the Italiancampaign, which had just come to a close while I was writing. If abetter experience of Italy than I then possessed might modify some ofthe opinions I entertained at that time, and induce me to form someconclusions at least at variance with those I then expressed, I stillprefer to leave the whole unaltered, lest in changing I might injure theimpression under which the fulness of my once conviction had impelled meto pronounce.Writing these lines now, while men's hearts are throbbing anxiously forthe tidings any day may produce, and when the earth is already tremulousunder the march of distant squadrons, I own that even the faint, weakpicture of that struggle in this story appeals to myself with amore than common interest. I have no more to add than my gratefulacknowledgments to such as still hold me in their favor, and to writemyself their devoted servant,CHARLES LEVER.THE DALTONS, OR THREE ROADS IN LIFE.CHAPTER I. BADEN OUT OF SEASON.A THEATRE by daylight, a great historical picture in the process ofcleaning, a ballet-dancer of a wet day hastening to rehearsal, thefavorite for the Oaks dead-lame in a straw-yard, are scarcelymore stripped of their legitimate illusions than is a fashionablewatering-place on the approach of winter. The gay shops and stalls offlaunting wares are closed; the promenades, lately kept in trimmestorder, are weed-grown and neglected; the "sear and yellow leaves" arefluttering and rustling along the alleys where "Beauty's step waswont to tread." Both music and fountains have ceased to play; the verystatues are putting on great overcoats of snow, while the orange-treesfile off like a sad funeral procession to hide themselves in dusky shedstill the coming spring.You see as you look around you that nature has been as unreal as artitself, and that all the bright hues of foliage and flower, all theodors that floated from bed and parterre, all the rippling flow ofstream and fountain, have been just as artistically devised, and as much"got up," as the transparencies or the Tyrolese singers, the fireworksor the fancy fair, or any other of those ingenious "spectacles" whichamuse the grown children of fashion. The few who yet linger seem to haveundergone a strange transmutation.The smiling landlord of the "Adler" we refer particularly to Germanyas the very land of watering-places is a half-sulky, farmer-lookingpersonage, busily engaged in storing up his Indian corn and his firewoodand his forage, against the season of snows. The bland "croupier," onwhose impassive countenance no shade of fortune was able to mark evena passing emotion, is now seen higgling with a peasant for a sack ofcharcoal, in all the eagerness of avarice. The trim maiden, whose goldenlocks and soft blue eyes made the bouquets she sold seem fairer to lookon, is a stout wench, whose uncouth fur cap and wooden shoes are thevery antidotes to romance. All the transformations take the same sadcolors. It is a pantomime read backwards.Such was Baden-Baden in the November of 182-. Some weeks of bad andbroken weather had scattered and dispersed all the gay company. Thehotels and assembly-rooms were closed for the winter. The ball-room,which so lately was alight with a thousand tapers, was now barricadedlike a jail. The very post-office, around which each morning an eagerand pressing crowd used to gather, was shut up, one small aperture aloneremaining, as if to show to what a fraction all correspondence had beenreduced. The Hotel de Russie was the only house open in the little town;but although the door lay ajar, no busy throng of waiters, no lamps,invited the traveller to believe a hospitable reception might await himwithin. A very brief glance inside would soon have dispelled any suchillusion, had it ever existed. The wide staircase, formerly lined withorange-trees and camellias, was stripped of all its bright foliage;the marble statues were removed; the great thermometer, whose crystaldecorations had arrested many a passing look, was now encased within awooden box, as if its tell-tale face might reveal unpleasant truths, ifleft exposed.The spacious "Saal," where some eighty guests assembled every day, wasdenuded of all its furniture, mirrors, and lustres; bronzes and pictureswere gone, and nothing remained but a huge earthenware stove,within whose grating a faded nosegay left there in summer defied allspeculations as to a fire.In this comfortless chamber three persons now paraded with that quickstep and brisk motion that bespeak a walk for warmth and exercise; fordismal as it was within doors, it was still preferable to the scenewithout, where a cold incessant rain was falling, that, on the hillsaround, took the form of snow. The last lingerers at a watering-place,like those who cling on to a wreck, have usually something peculiarlysad in their aspect. Unable, as it were, to brave the waves like strongswimmers, they hold on to the last with some vague hope of escape, and,like a shipwrecked crew, drawing closer to each other in adversity thanin more prosperous times, they condescend now to acquaintance, andeven intimacy, where, before, a mere nod of recognition was aloneinterchanged. Such were the three who now, buttoned up to the chin,and with hands deeply thrust into side-pockets, paced backwards andforwards, sometimes exchanging a few words, but in that brokenand discursive fashion that showed that no tie of mutual taste orcompanionship had bound them together.The youngest of the party was a small and very slightly made man ofabout five or six-and-twenty, whose face, voice, and figure were almostfeminine, and, only for a very slight line of black moustache, mighthave warranted the suspicion of a disguise. His lacquered boots andspotless yellow gloves appeared somewhat out of season, as well as thevery light textured coat which he wore; but Mr. Albert Jekyl had beenaccidentally detained at Baden, waiting for that cruel remittance which,whether the sin be that of agent or relative, is ever so slow of coming.That he bore the inconvenience admirably (and without the slightest showof impatience) it is but fair to confess; and whatever chagrin eitherthe detention, the bad weather, or the solitude may have occasioned, novestige of discontent appeared upon features where a look of practisedcourtesy, and a most bland smile, gave the predominant expression. "Whohe was," or, in other words, whence he came, of what family, with whatfortune, pursuits, or expectations, we are not ashamed to confess ourutter ignorance, seeing that it was shared by all those that tarriedthat season at Baden, with whom, however, he lived on terms of easy andfamiliar intercourse.The next to him was a bilious-looking man, somewhat past the middle oflife, with that hard and severe cast of features that rather repels thaninvites intimacy. In figure he was compactly and stoutly built, hisstep as he walked, and his air as he stood, showed one whose militarytraining had given the whole tone to his character. Certain strong linesabout the mouth, and a peculiar puckering of the angles of the eyes,boded a turn for sarcasm, which all his instincts, and they were Scotchones, could not completely repress. His voice was loud, sharp, andringing, the voice of a man who, when he said a thing, would not brookbeing asked to repeat it. That Colonel Haggerstone knew how to besapling as well as oak, was a tradition among those who had served withhim; still it is right to add, that his more congenial mood was theimperative, and that which he usually practised. The accidental lamenessof one of his horses had detained him some weeks at Baden, adurance which assuredly appeared to push his temper to its very lastintrenchments.The third representative of forlorn humanity was a very tall, muscularman, whose jockey-cut green coat and wide-brimmed hat contrasted oddlywith a pair of huge white moustaches, that would have done credit toa captain of the Old Guard. On features, originally handsome, time,poverty, and dissipation had left many a mark; but still the half-droll,half-truculent twinkle of his clear gray eyes showed him one whom noturn of fortune could thoroughly subdue, and who, even in the veryhardest of his trials, could find heart to indulge his humor for PeterDalton was an Irishman; and although many years an absentee, held thedear island and its prejudices as green in his memory as though he hadleft it but a week before.Such were the three, who, without one sympathy in common, without apoint of contact in character, were now drawn into a chance acquaintanceby the mere accident of bad weather. Their conversation if such it couldbe called showed how little progress could be made in intimacy by thosewhose roads in life lie apart. The bygone season, the company, theplay-table and its adventures, were all discussed so often, that nothingremained but the weather. That topic, so inexhaustible to Englishmen,however, offered little variety now, for it had been uniformly bad forsome weeks past."Where do you propose to pass the winter, sir?" said Haggerstone toJekyl, after a somewhat lengthy lamentation over the probable conditionof all the Alpine passes."I 've scarcely thought of it yet," simpered out the other, with hishabitual smile. "There's no saying where one ought to pitch his tenttill the Carnival opens.""And you, sir?" asked Haggerstone of his companion on the other side."Upon my honor, I don't know then," said Dalton; "but I would n't wonderif I stayed here, or hereabouts.""Here! why, this is Tobolsk, sir! You surely couldn't mean to pass awinter here?""I once knew a man who did it," interposed Jekyl, blandly. "They cleanedhim out at 'the tables;' and so he had nothing for it but to remain.He made rather a good thing of it, too; for it seems these worthypeople, however conversant with the great arts of ruin, had never seenthe royal game of thimble-rig; and Frank Mathews walked into them all,and contrived to keep himself in beet-root and boiled beef by his littletalents.""Was n't that the fellow who was broke at Kilmagund?" croakedHaggerstone."Something happened to him in India; I never well knew what," simperedJekyl. "Some said he had caught the cholera; others, that he had gotinto the Company's service.""By way of a mishap, sir, I suppose," said the Colonel, tartly."He would n't have minded it, in the least. For certain," resumed theother, coolly, "he was a sharp-witted fellow; always ready to take thetone of any society."The Colonel's cheek grew yellower, and his eyes sparkled with an angrierlustre; but he made no rejoinder."That's the place to make a fortune, I'm told," said Dalton. "I hearthere's not the like of it all the world over.""Or to spend one," added Haggerstone, curtly."Well, and why not?" replied Dalton. "I 'm sure it 's as pleasant assaving barring a man 's a Scotchman.""And if he should be, sir? and if he were one that now stands beforeyou?" said Haggerstone, drawing himself proudly up, and looking theother sternly in the face."No offence no offence in life. I did n't mean to hurt your feelings.Sure, a man can't help where he 's going to be born.""I fancy we'd all have booked ourselves for a cradle in BuckinghamPalace," interposed Jekyl, "if the matter were optional.""Faith! I don't think so," broke in Dalton. "Give me backCorrig-O'Neal, as my grandfather Pearce had it, with the whole baronyof Kilmurray-O'Mahon, two packs of hounds, and the first cellar inthe county, and to the devil I'd fling all the royal residences ever Iseen.""The sentiment is scarcely a loyal one, sir," said Haggerstone, "and, asone wearing his Majesty's cloth, I beg to take the liberty of remindingyou of it.""Maybe it isn't; and what then?" said Dalton, over whose good-naturedcountenance a passing cloud of displeasure lowered."Simply, sir, that it shouldn't be uttered in my presence," saidHaggerstone."Phew!" said Dalton, with a long whistle, "is that what you 're at? See,now" here he turned fully round, so as to face the Colonel "see, now,I 'm the dullest fellow in the world at what is called 'taking a thingup;' but make it clear for me let me only see what is pleasing to thecompany, and it is n't Peter Dalton will balk your fancy.""May I venture to remark," said Jekyl, blandly, "that you are both inerror, and however I may (the cold of the season being considered) envyyour warmth, it is after all only so much caloric needlessly expended.""I was n't choleric at all," broke in Dalton, mistaking the word, andthus happily, by the hearty laugh his blunder created, bringing thesilly altercation to an end."Well," said Haggerstone, "since we are all so perfectly agreed in oursentiments, we could n't do better than dine together, and have a bumperto the King's health.""I always dine at two, or half-past," simpered Jekyl; "besides, I'm on aregimen, and never drink wine.""There 's nobody likes a bit of conviviality better than myself,"said Dal ton; "but I 've a kind of engagement, a promise I made thismorning."There was an evident confusion in the way these words were uttered,which did not escape either of the others, who exchanged the mostsignificant glances as he spoke."What have we here?" cried Jekyl, as he sprang to the window and lookedout. "A courier, by all that's muddy! Who could have expected such anapparition at this time?""What can bring people here now?" said Haggerstone, as with his glassto his eye he surveyed the little well-fed figure, who, in his tawdryjacket all slashed with gold, and heavy jack-boots, was closely lockedin the embraces of the landlord.Jekyl at once issued forth to learn the news, and, although not fullythree minutes absent, returned to his companions with a full account ofthe expected arrivals."It's that rich banker, Sir Stafford Onslow, with his family. They wereon their way to Italy, and made a mess of it somehow in the BlackForest they got swept away by a torrent, or crushed by an avalanche, orsomething of the kind, and Sir Stafford was seized with the gout, and sothey 've put back, glad even to make such a port as Baden.""If it's the gout's the matter with him," said Dalton, "I 've the finestreceipt in the world. Take a pint of spirits poteen if you can get itbeat up two eggs and a pat of butter in it; throw in a clove of garlicand a few scrapings of horseradish, let it simmer over the fire for aminute or two, stir it with a sprig of rosemary to give it a flavor, andthen drink it off.""Gracious Heaven! what a dose!" exclaimed Jekyl, in horror."Well, then, I never knew it fail. My father took it for forty years,and there wasn't a haler man in the country. If it was n't that he gaveup the horseradish for he did n't like the taste of it he 'd, maybe, bealive at this hour.""The cure was rather slow of operation," said Haggerstone, with a sneer."'Twas only the more like all remedies for Irish grievances, then,"observed Dal ton, and his face grew a shade graver as he spoke."Who was it this Onslow married?" said the Colonel, turning to Jekyl."One of the Headworths, I think.""Ah, to be sure; Lady Hester. She was a handsome woman when I sawher first, but she fell off sadly; and indeed, if she had not, she 'dscarcely have condescended to an alliance with a man in trade, eventhough he were Sir Gilbert Stafford.""Sir Gilbert Stafford!" repeated Dalton."Yes, sir; and now Sir Gilbert Stafford Onslow. He took the name fromthat estate in Warwickshire; Skepton Park, I believe they call it.""By my conscience, I wish that was the only thing he took," ejaculatedDalton, with a degree of fervor that astonished the others, "for hetook an elegant estate that belonged by right to my wife. Maybe you haveheard tell of Corrig-O'Neal?"Haggerstone shook his head, while with his elbow he nudged hiscompanion, to intimate his total disbelief in the whole narrative."Surely you must have heard of the murder of Arthur Godfrey, ofCorrig-O'Neal; was n't the whole world ringing with it?"Another negative sign answered this appeal."Well, well, that beats all ever I heard! but so it is, sorrow bit theycare in England if we all murdered each other! Arthur Godfrey, as I wassaying, was my wife's brother, there were just the two of them, Arthurand Jane; she was my wife.""Ah! here they come!" exclaimed Jekyl, not sorry for the event which soopportunely interrupted Dalton's unpromising history. And now a heavytravelling-carriage, loaded with imperials and beset with boxes, wasdragged up to the door by six smoking horses. The courier and thelandlord were immediately in attendance, and after a brief delay thesteps were lowered, and a short, stout man, with a very red face anda very yellow wig, descended, and assisted a lady to alight. She was atall woman, whose figure and carriage were characterized by an air offashion. After her came a younger lady; and lastly, moving with greatdifficulty, and showing by his worn looks and enfeebled frame thesuffering he had endured, came a very thin, mild-looking man of aboutsixty. Leaning upon the arm of the courier at one side, and of his stoutcompanion, whom he called Doctor, at the other, he slowly followed theladies into the house. They had scarcely disappeared when a caleche,drawn by three horses at a sharp gallop, drew up, and a young fellowsprang out, whose easy gestures and active movements showed that allthe enjoyments of wealth and all the blandishments of fashion had notundermined the elastic vigor of body which young Englishmen owe to thepractice of field sports."This place quite deserted, I suppose," cried he, addressing thelandlord. "No one here?""No one, sir. All gone," was the reply.Haggerstone's head shook with a movement of impatience as he heardthis remark, disparaging as it was, to his own importance; but he saidnothing, and resumed his walk as before."Our Irish friend is gone away, I perceive," said Jekyl, as he lookedaround in vain for Dalton. "Do you believe all that story of the estatehe told us?""Not a syllable of it, sir. I never yet met an Irishman and it has beenmy lot to know some scores of them who had not been cheated out of amagnificent property, and was not related to half the peerage to boot.Now, I take it that our highly connected friend is rather out at elbows!"And he laughed his own peculiar hard laugh, as though the mere fancyof another man's poverty was something inconceivably pleasant andamusing."Dinner, sir," said the waiter, entering and addressing the Colonel."Glad of it," cried he; "it's the only way to kill time in this cursedplace;" and so saying, and without the ceremony of a good-bye to hiscompanion, the Colonel bustled out of the room with a step intended torepresent extreme youth and activity. "That gentleman dines at two?"asked he of the waiter, as he followed him up the stairs."He has not dined at all, sir, for some days back," said the waiter. "Acup of coffee in the morning, and a biscuit, are all that he takes."The Colonel made an expressive gesture by turning out the lining of hispocket."Yes, sir," replied the other, significantly; "very much that way, Ibelieve." And with that he uncovered the soup, and the Colonel arrangedhis napkin and prepared to dine.CHAPTER II. AN HUMBLE INTERIORWHEN Dalton parted from his companions at the "Russie," it was toproceed by many an intricate and narrow passage to a remote part of theupper town, where close to the garden wall of the Ducal Palace stood,and still stands, a little solitary two-storied house, framed in wood,and the partitions displaying some very faded traces of fresco painting.Here was the well-known shop of a toy-maker; and although now closelybarred and shuttered, in summer many a gay and merry troop of childrendevoured with eager eyes the treasures of Hans Roeckle.Entering a dark and narrow passage beside the shop, Dalton ascended thelittle creaking stairs which led to the second story. The landing placewas covered with firewood, great branches of newly-hewn beech and oak,in the midst of which stood a youth, hatchet in hand, busily engagedin chopping and splitting the heavy masses around him. The flush ofexercise upon his cheek suited well the character of a figure which,clothed only in shirt and trousers, presented a perfect picture ofyouthful health and symmetry."Tired, Frank?" asked the old man, as he came up."Tired, father! not a bit of it. I only wish I had as much more to splitfor you, since the winter will be a cold one.""Come in and sit down, boy, now," said the father, with a slighttremor as he spoke. "We cannot have many more opportunities of talkingtogether. To-morrow is the 28th of November.""Yes; and I must be in Vienna by the fourth, so Uncle Stephen writes.""You must not call him uncle, Frank, he forbids it himself; besides, heis my uncle, and not yours. My father and he were brothers, but neversaw each other after fifteen years of age, when the Count that 's whatwe always called him entered the Austrian service, so that we are allstrangers to each other.""His letter does n't show any lively desire for a closer intimacy," saidthe boy, laughing. "A droll composition it is, spelling and all.""He left Ireland when he was a child, and lucky he was to do so," sighedDalton, heavily. "I wish I had done the same."The chamber into which they entered was, although scrupulously clean andneat, marked by every sign of poverty. The furniture was scanty and ofthe humblest kind; the table linen, such as used by the peasantry, whilethe great jug of water that stood on the board seemed the very climax ofnarrow fortune in a land where the very poorest are wine-drinkers.A small knapsack with a light travelling-cap on it, and a staff besideit, seemed to attract Dalton's eyes as he sat down. "It is but a poorequipment, that yonder. Frank," said he at last, with a forced smile."The easier carried," replied the lad, gayly."Very true," sighed the other. "You must make the journey on foot.""And why not, father? Of what use all this good blood, of which I havebeen told so often and so much, if it will not enable a man to competewith the low-born peasant. And see how well this knapsack sits," criedhe, as he threw it on his shoulder. "I doubt if the Emperor's pack willbe as pleasant to carry.""So long as you haven't to carry a heavy heart, boy," said Dalton, withdeep emotion, "I believe no load is too much.""If it were not for leaving you and the girls, I never could be happier,never more full of hope, father. Why should not I win my way upward asCount Stephen has done? Loyalty and courage are not the birthright ofonly one of our name!""Bad luck was all the birthright ever I inherited," said the old man,passionately; "bad luck in everything I touched through life! Whereothers grew rich, I became a beggar; where they found happiness, I metmisery and ruin! But it's not of this I ought to be thinking now," criedhe, changing his tone. "Let us see, where are the girls?" And so saying,he entered a little kitchen which adjoined the room, and where, engagedin the task of preparing the dinner, was a girl, who, though severalyears older, bore a striking resemblance to the boy. Over features thatmust once have been the very type of buoyant gayety, years of sorrow andsuffering had left their deep traces, and the dark circles around theeyes betrayed how deeply she had known affliction. Ellen Dalton's figurewas faulty for want of height in proportion to her size, but had anotherand more grievous defect in a lameness, which made her walk with thegreatest difficulty. This was the consequence of an accident whenriding, a horse having fallen upon her and fractured the hip-bone. Itwas said, too, that she had been engaged to be married at the time, butthat her lover, shocked by the disfigurement, had broken off the match,and thus made this calamity the sorrow of a life long."Where's Kate?" said the father, as he cast a glance around the chamber.Ellen drew near, and whispered a few words in his ear."Not in this dreadful weather; surely, Ellen, you didn't let her go outin such a night as this?""Hush!" murmured she, "Frank will hear you; and remember, father, it ishis last night with us.""Could n't old Andy have found the place?" asked Daiton; and as hespoke, he turned his eyes to a corner of the kitchen, where a littleold man sat in a straw chair peeling turnips, while he croned a ditty tohimself in a low singsong tone; his thin, wizened features, brownedby years and smoke, his small scratch wig, and the remains of an oldscarlet hunting-coat that he wore, giving him the strongest resemblanceto one of the monkeys one sees in a street exhibition."Poor Andy!" cried Ellen, "he'd have lost his way twenty times before hegot to the bridge.""Faith, then, he must be greatly altered," said Dalton, "for I 've seenhim track a fox for twenty miles of ground, when not a dog of the packcould come on the trace. Eh, Andy!" cried he, aloud, and stoopingdown so as to be heard by the old man, "do you remember the cover atCorralin?""Don't ask him, father," said Ellen, eagerly; "he cannot sleep for thewhole night after his old memories have been awakened."The spell, however, had begun to work; and the old man, letting fallboth knife and turnip, placed his hands on his knees, and in a weak,reedy treble began a strange, monotonous kind of air, as if to remindhimself of the words, which, after a minute or two, he remembered thus."There was old Tom Whaley,And Anthony Baillie,And Fitzgerald, the Knight of Glynn,And Father Clare,On his big brown mare,That moruin' at Corralin!""Well done, Andy! well done!" exclaimed Dalton. "You 're as fresh as afour-year-old.""Iss!" said Andy, and went on with his song."And Miles O'Shea,On his cropped tail bay,Was soon seen ridin' in.He was vexed and crossedAt the light hoar frost,That mornin' at Corralin.""Go on, Andy! go on, my boy!" exclaimed Dalton, in a rapture at thewords that reminded him of many a day in the field and many a night'scarouse. "What comes next?""Ay!" cried Andy."Says he, 'When the windLaves no scent behind,To keep the dogs out 's a sin;I 'll be d--d if I stay,To lose my day,This mornin' at Corralin.'"But ye see he was out in his reck'nin'!" cried Andy; "for, as if"To give him the lie,There rose a cry,As the hounds came yelpin' in;And from every throatThere swelled one note,That moruin' at Corralin."A fit of coughing, brought on by a vigorous attempt to imitate the cryof a pack, here closed Andy's minstrelsy; and Ellen, who seemed to haveanticipated some such catastrophe, now induced her father to returnto the sitting-room, while she proceeded to use those principles ofdomestic medicine clapping on the back and cold water usually deemed ofefficacy in like cases."There now, no more singing, but take up your knife and do what I badeyou," said she, affecting an air of rebuke; while the old man, whoseperceptions did not rise above those of a spaniel, hung down his headin silence. At the same moment the outer door of the kitchen opened, andKate Dalton entered. Taller and several years younger than her sister,she was in the full pride of that beauty of which blue eyes and darkhair are the chief characteristics, and is deemed by many as peculiarlyIrish. Delicately fair, and with features regular as a Grecian model,there was a look of brilliant, almost of haughty, defiance about her, towhich her gait and carriage seemed to contribute; nor could the humblecharacter of her dress, where strictest poverty declared itself,disguise the sentiment."How soon you're back, dearest!" said Ellen, as she took off thedripping cloak from her sister's shoulders."And only think, Ellen, I was obliged to go to Lichtenthal, where littleHans spends all his evenings in the winter season, at the 'Hahn!' Andjust fancy his gallantry! He would see me home, and would hold upthe umbrella, too, over my head, although it kept his own arm at fullstretch; while, by the pace we walked, I did as much for his legs. It isvery ungrateful to laugh at him, for he said a hundred pretty things tome, about my courage to venture out in such weather, about my accent asI spoke German, and lastly, in praise of my skill as a sculptor. Onlyfancy, Ellen, what a humiliation for me to confess that these prettydevices were yours, and not mine; and that my craft went no further thanseeking for the material which your genius was to fashion.""Genius, Kate!" exclaimed Ellen, laughing. "Has Master Hans been givingyou a lesson in flattery; but tell me of your success which has hetaken?""All everything!" cried Kate; "for although at the beginning the littlefellow would select one figure and then change it for another, it waseasy to see that he could not bring himself to part with any of them:now sitting down in rapture before the 'Travelling Student,' now gazingdelightedly at the 'Charcoal-Burners,' but all his warmest enthusiasmbursting forth as I produced the 'Forest Maiden at the Well.' He did,indeed, think the 'Pedler' too handsome, but he found no such faultwith the Maiden: and here, dearest, here are the proceeds, for I toldhim that we must have ducats in shining gold for Frank's new crimsonpurse; and here they are;" and she held up a purse of gay colors,through whose meshes the bright metal glittered."Poor Hans!" said Ellen, feelingly. "It is seldom that so humble anartist meets so generous a patron.""He's coming to-night," said Kate, as she smoothed down the braids ofher glossy hair before a little glass, "he's coming to say good-bye toFrank.""He is so fond of Frank.""And of Frank's sister Nelly; nay, no blushing, dearest; for myself,I am free to own admiration never comes amiss, even when offered by ashumble a creature as the dwarf, Hans Roeckle.""For shame, Kate, for shame! It is this idle vanity that stifles honestpride, as rank weeds destroy the soil for wholesome plants to live in.""It is very well for you, Nelly, to talk of pride, but poor things likemyself are fain to content themselves with the baser metal, and even putup with vanity! There, now, no sermons, no seriousness; I'll listento nothing to-day that savors of sadness, and, as I hear pa and Franklaughing, I'll be of the party."The glance of affection and admiration which Ellen bestowed upon hersister was not unmixed with an expression of painful anxiety, and thesigh that escaped her told with what tender interest she watched overher.The little dinner, prepared with more than usual care, at lengthappeared, and the family sat around the humble board with a sense ofhappiness dashed by one only reflection, that on the morrow Frank'splace would be vacant.Still each exerted himself to overcome the sadness of that thought, oreven to dally with it, as one suggestive of pleasure; and when Ellenplaced unexpectedly a great flask of Margraer before them to drink theyoung soldier's health, the zest and merriment rose to the highest. Norwas old Andy forgotten in the general joy. A large bumper of wine wasput before him, and the door of the sitting-room left open, as if to lethim participate in the merry noises that prevailed there. How naturally,and instinctively, too, their hopes gave color to all they said, as theytold each other that the occasion was a happy one! that dear Frank wouldsoon be an officer, and of course distinguished by the favor of someone high in power; and lastly, they dwelt with such complacency onthe affectionate regard and influence of "Count Stephen" as certainto secure the youth's advancement. They had often heard of the Count'sgreat military fame, and the esteem in which he was held by the Court ofVienna; and now they speculated on the delight it would afford the oldwarrior who had never been married himself to have one like Frank, toassist by his patronage, and promote by his influence, and with suchenthusiasm did they discuss the point, that at last they actuallypersuaded themselves that Frank's entering the service was a species ofdevotion to his relative's interest, by affording him an object worthyof his regard and affection.While Ellen loved to dwell upon the great advantages of one who shouldbe like a father to the boy, aiding him by wise counsel, and guiding himin every difficulty, Kate preferred to fancy the Count introducing Frankinto all the brilliant society of the splendid capital, presenting himto those whose acquaintance was distinction, and at once launching himinto the world of fashion and enjoyment. The promptitude with which heacceded to their father's application on Frank's behalf, was constantlyreferred to as the evidence of his affectionate feeling for the family;and if his one solitary letter was of the very briefest and driest ofall epistolary essays, they accounted for this very naturally by thelength of time which had elapsed since he had either spoken or writtenhis native language.In the midst of these self-gratulations and pleasant fancies the dooropened, and Hans Roeckle appeared, covered from head to foot by a lighthoar-frost, that made him look like the figure with which an ingeniousconfectioner sometimes decorates a cake. The dwarf stood staring at thesigns of a conviviality so new and unexpected."Is this Christmas time, or Holy Monday, or the Three Kings' festival,or what is it, that I see you all feasting?" cried Hans, shaking thesnow off his hat, and proceeding to remove a cloak which he had drapedover his shoulder in most artistic folds."We were drinking Frank's health, Master Hans," said Dalton, "before heleaves us. Come over and pledge him too, and wish him all success, andthat he may live to be a good and valued soldier of the Emperor."Hans had by this time taken off his cloak, which, by mounting on achair, he contrived to hang up, and now approached the table with greatsolemnity, a pair of immense boots of Russian leather, that reached tohis hips, giving him a peculiarly cumbrous and heavy gait; but these,as well as a long vest of rabbit skins that buttoned close to the neck,made his invariable costume in the winter."I drink," said the dwarf, as, filling a bumper, he turned to each ofthe company severally "I drink to the venerable father and the fairmaidens, and the promising youth of this good family, and I wish themevery blessing good Christians ought to ask for; but as for killing andslaying, for burning villages and laying waste cities, I 've no sympathywith these.""But you are speaking of barbarous times, Master Hans," said Kate, whosecheek mantled into scarlet as she spoke, "when to be strong was to becruel, and when ill-disciplined hordes tyrannized over good citizens."[Illustration:  040]"I am talking of soldiers, such as the world has ever seen them," criedHans, passionately; but of whose military experiences, it is but fairto say, his own little toyshop supplied all the source. "What are they?"cried he, "but toys that never last, whether he who plays with them bechild or kaiser! always getting smashed, heads knocked off here, armsand legs astray there; ay, and strangest of all, thought most of whenmost disabled! and then at last packed up in a box or a barrack, itmatters not which, to be forgotten and seen no more! Hadst thou thoughtof something useful, boy some good craft, a Jager with a corkscrewinside of him, a tailor that turns into a pair of snuffers, a Dutch ladythat makes a pin-cushion, these are toys people don't weary of but asoldier! to stand ever thus" and Hans shouldered the fire-shovel, andstood "at the present." "To wheel about so walk ten steps here ten backthere never so much as a glance at the pretty girl who is passingclose beside you." Here he gave a look of such indescribable tendernesstowards Kate, that the whole party burst into a fit of laughter. "Theywould have drawn me for the conscription," said Hans, proudly, "but Iwas the only son of a widow, and they could not.""And are you never grieved to think what glorious opportunities ofdistinction have been thus lost to you?" said Kate, who, notwithstandingEllen's imploring looks, could not resist the temptation of amusingherself with the dwarf's vanity."I have never suffered that thought to weigh upon me," cried Hans, withthe most unsuspecting simplicity. "It is true, I might have risen torank and honors; but how would they have suited me, or I them? Orhow should I have made those dearest to me sharers in a fortune sounbecoming to us? Think of poor Hans's old mother, if her son were toask her blessing with a coat all glittering with stars and crosses; andthen think of her as I have seen her, when I go, as I do every year, tovisit her in the Bregentzer Wald, when she comes out to meet me with ourwhole village, proud of her son, and yet not ashamed of herself. That isglory that is distinction enough for Hans Roeckle."The earnestness of his voice, and the honest manliness of hissentiments, were more than enough to cover the venial errors of a vanitythat was all simplicity. It is true that Hans saw the world only throughthe medium of his own calling, and that not a very exalted one; butstill there went through all the narrowness of his views a tone ofkindliness a hearty spirit of benevolence, that made his simplicity attimes rise into something almost akin to wisdom. He had known the Daltons as his tenants, and soon perceived that they were not like thoserich English, from whom his countrymen derive such abundant gains. Hesaw them arrive at a season when all others were taking their departure,and detected in all their efforts at economy, not alone that they werepoor, but, sadder still, that they were of those who seem never toaccustom themselves to the privations of narrow fortune; for, while somesubmit in patience to their humble lot, with others life is one long andhard-fought struggle, wherein health, hope, and temper are expended invain. That the Daltons maintained a distance and reserve towards othersof like fortune did, indeed, puzzle honest Hans, perhaps it displeasedhim, too, for he thought it might be pride; but then their treatmentof himself disarmed that suspicion, for they not only received him evercordially, but with every sign of real affection; and what was he toexpect such? Nor were these the only traits that fascinated him; for allthe rugged shell the kernel was a heart as tender, as warm, and asfull of generous emotions as ever beat within an ampler breast. The twosisters, in Hans's eyes, were alike beautiful; each had some graceor charm that he had never met with before, nor could he ever satisfyhimself whether his fancy was more taken by Kate's wit or by Ellen'sgentleness.If anything were needed to complete the measure of his admiration, theirskill in carving those wooden figures, which he sold, would have beensufficient. These were in his eyes nor was he a mean connoisseur highefforts of genius; and Hans saw in them a poetry and a truthfulness tonature that such productions rarely, if ever, possess. To sell, suchthings as mere toys, he regarded as little short of a sacrilege, whileeven to part with them at all cost him a pang like that the gold-workerof Florence experienced when he saw some treasure of Benvenuto's chiselleave his possession. Not, indeed, that honest Hans had to struggleagainst that criminal passion which prompted the jeweller, even by deedsof assassination, to repossess himself of the coveted objects; nay, onthe contrary, he felt a kindness and a degree of interest towards thosein whose keeping they were, as if some secret sympathy united them toeach other.Is it any wonder if poor Hans forgot himself in such pleasant company,and sat a full hour and a half longer than he ought? To him the littleintervals of silence that were occasionally suffered to intervene werebut moments of dreamy and delicious revery, wherein his fancy wanderedaway in a thousand pleasant paths; and when at last the watchman forremember, good reader, they were in that primitive Germany where customschange not too abruptly announced two o'clock, little Hans did notvouchsafe a grateful response to the quaint old rhyme that was chantedbeneath the window."That little chap would sit to the day of judgment, and never ask to wethis lips," said Dal ton, as Frank accompanied the dwarf downstairs tothe street door."I believe he not only forgot the hour, but where he was, and everythingelse," said Kate."And poor Frank! who should have been in bed some hours ago," sighedNelly."Gone at last, girls!" exclaimed Frank, as he entered, laughing. "If ithadn't been a gust of wind that caught him at the door, and carriedhim clean away, our leave-taking might have lasted till morning. Poorfellow! he had so many cautions to give me, such mountains of goodcounsel; and see, here is a holy medal he made me accept. He told me the'Swedes' would never harm me so long as I wore it; he still fanciesthat we are in the Thirty Years' War."In a hearty laugh over Hans Roeckle's political knowledge, they wishedeach other an affectionate good-night, and separated. Frank was to havehis breakfast by daybreak, and each sister affected to leave the care ofthat meal to the other, secretly resolving to be up and stirring first.Save old Andy, there was not one disposed to sleep that night. All weretoo full of their own cares. Even Dalton himself, blunted as werehis feelings by a long life of suffering, his mind was tortured byanxieties; and one sad question arose again and again before him,without an answer ever occurring: "What is to become of the girls whenI am gone? Without a home, they will soon be without a protector!"The bright fancies, the hopeful visions in which the evening had beenpassed, made the revulsion to these gloomy thoughts the darker. He laywith his hands pressed upon his face, while the hot tears gushed fromeyes that never before knew weeping.At moments he half resolved not to let Frank depart, but an instant'sthought showed him how futile would be the change. It would be butleaving him to share the poverty, to depend upon the scanty pittancealready too little for themselves. "Would Count Stephen befriend thepoor girls?" he asked himself over and over; and in his difficulty heturned to the strange epistle in which the old general announced Frank'sappointment as a cadet.The paper, the square folding, the straight, stiff letters, well suiteda style which plainly proclaimed how many years his English had lain atrest. The note ran thus:GRABEN-WIEN, Octobre 9, 18--WORTHY SIR AND NEPHEW, Your kindly greeting, but long-timeon-the-road-coming letter is in my hands. It is to mepleasure that I announce the appointment of your son as aCadet in the seventh battalion of the Carl-Franz Infanterie.So with, let him in all speed of time report himself here atWien, before the War's Minister, bringing his Tauf scheinBaptism's sign as proof of Individualism.I am yours, well to command, and much-loving kinsman,GRAF DALTON VON AUERSBERG, Lieut.-General andFeldzeugmeister, K.K.A.To the high and well-born, the Freiherr v. Dalton, in Baden Baden.CHAPTER III. THE FOREST ROAD.THIS dry epistle Dalton read and re-read, trying, if not to discoversome touch of kindliness or interest, to detect, at least, some clewto its writer's nature; but to no use, its quaint formalism baffled allspeculation, and he gave up the pursuit in despair. That "the Count"was his father's only brother, and a "Dalton," were the only grains ofcomfort he could extract from his meditations; but he had lived longenough in the world to know how little binding were the ties of kindredwhen once slackened by years and distance. The Count might, therefore,regard them in the light of intruders, and feel the very reverse ofpleasure at the revival of a relationship which had slept for more thanhalf a century. Dalton's pride or what he thought his pride revoltedagainst this thought; for, although this same pride would not havewithheld him from asking a favor of the Count, it would have assumed amost indignant attitude if refused, or even grudgingly accorded.When the thought first occurred to him of applying to his uncle inFrank's behalf, he never hesitated about the propriety of addressinga request to one with whom he had never interchanged a line in all hislife; and now he was quite ready to take offence, if all the warmthof blood relationship should not fill the heart of him who had been anexile from home and family since his earliest boyhood.An easy, indolent selfishness had been the spirit of Dalton's wholelife. He liked to keep a good house, and to see company about him;and this obtained for him the reputation of hospitality. He dislikedunpopularity, and dreaded the "bad word" of the people; and hence hesuffered his tenantry to fall into arrears and his estate into ruin. Avain rivalry with wealthier neighbors prevented retrenchment whenhis means were lessened. The unthinking selfishness of his nature wasapparent even in his marriage, since it was in obedience to an oldpledge extracted years before that Miss Godfrey accepted him, and partedin anger with her brother, who had ever loved her with the warmestaffection. Mr. Godfrey never forgave his sister; and at his death, themysterious' circumstances of which were never cleared up, his estatepassed to a distant relative, the rick Sir Gilbert Stafford.Dalton, who long cherished the hope of a reconciliation, saw allprospect vanish when his wife died, which she did, it was said, of abroken heart. His debts were already considerable, and all the resourcesof borrowing and mortgage had been long since exhausted; nothing wasthen left for him but an arrangement with his creditors, which, givinghim a pittance scarcely above the very closest poverty, enabled him todrag out life in the cheap places of the Continent; and thus, for nightwenty years, had he wandered about from Dieppe to Ostend, to Bruges, toDusseldorf, to Coblentz, and so on, among the small Ducal cities, till,with still failing fortune, he was fain to seek a residence for thewinter in Baden, where house-rent, at least, would be almost saved tohim.The same apathy that had brought on his ruin enabled him to bear it.Nothing has such a mock resemblance to wisdom as utter heartlessness;with all the seeming of true philosophy, it assumes a port and bearingabove the trials of the world; holds on "the even tenor of its way,"undeterred by the reverses which overwhelm others, and even meets thesternest frowns of fortune with the bland smile of equanimity.In this way Dalton had deceived many who had known him in better days,and who now saw him, even in his adversity, with the same careless,good-natured look, as when he took the field with his own hounds, orpassed round the claret at his own table. Even his own children weresharers in this delusion, and heard him with wondering admiration, as hetold of the life he used to lead, and the style he once kept up at MountDalton. These were his favorite topics; and, as he grew older, heseemed to find a kind of consolation in contrasting all the hard rubs ofpresent adversity with his once splendor.Upon Ellen Dalton, who had known and could still remember her mother,these recitals produced an impression of profound grief, associated asthey were with the sufferings of a sick-bed and the closing sorrows of alife; while, in the others, they served to keep up a species of pride ofbirth, and an assumption of superiority to others of like fortune,which their father gloried in, representing, as he used to say, "the oldspirit of the Dal tons."As for Kate, she felt it a compensation for present poverty to know thatthey were of gentle blood, and that if fortune, at some distant future,would deal kindly by them, to think that they should not obtrudethemselves like upstarts on the world, but resume, as it were, the placethat was long their own.In Frank the evil had taken a deeper root. Taught from his earliestinfancy to believe himself the heir of an ancient house, pride of birthand station instilled into his mind by old Andy, the huntsman, the onlydependant, whom, with characteristic wisdom, they had carried withthem from Ireland, he never ceased to ponder on the subject, and wonderwithin himself if he should live to have "his own" again.Such a hold had this passion taken of him, that, even as a child, hewould wander away for days long into lonely and unfrequented spots,thinking over the stories he had heard, and trying to conjure up beforehis eyes some resemblance to that ancient house and venerable domainwhich had been so long in his family. It was no part of his teaching toknow by what spendthrift and reckless waste, by what a long career offolly, extravagance, and dissipation, the fortune of his family had beenwrecked; or rather, many vague and shadowy suspicions had been leftto fester in his mind of wrongs and injuries done them; of severe lawsimposed by English ignorance or cruelty; of injustice, on this handheartless indifference of friends on the other; the unrelenting angerof his uncle Godfrey filling up the measure of their calamities. FrankDalton's education went very little further than this; but, bad as itwas, its effect was blunted by the natural frankness and generosity ofhis character, its worst fruits being an over-estimate of himself andhis pretensions, errors which the world has always the watchful kindnessto correct in those who wear threadbare coats and patched boots.He was warmly and devotedly attached to his father and sisters, andwhatever bitterness found its way into his heart was from seeing themenduring the many trials of poverty.All his enthusiasm for the service in which he was about to enter was,therefore, barely sufficient to overcome the sorrow of parting withthose, whom alone of all the world he loved; and when the moment drewnigh for his departure, he forgot the bright illusions by which he hadso often fed his hopes, and could only think of the grief of separation.His candle had burned down nearly to the socket, when he arose andlooked at his watch. It was all dark as midnight without, although nighsix o'clock. He opened the window, and a thin snowdrift came slantingin, borne on a cutting north wind; he closed it hastily, and shudderedas he thought of the long and lonely march before him. All was silentin the house as he dressed himself and prepared for the road. Withnoiseless step he drew near his father's door and listened; everythingwas still. He could not bring himself to disturb him, so he passed onto the room where his sisters slept. The door lay ajar, and a candle wasburning on the table. Frank entered on tiptoe and drew near the bed, butit was empty and had not been lain in. As he turned round he beheld Kateasleep in a chair, dressed as he had last seen her. She had never laindown, and the prayer-book, which had dropped from her hand, told how herlast waking moments were passed.He kissed her twice, but even the hot tears that fell from his eyes uponher cheek did not break her slumber. He looked about him for some tokento leave, that might tell he had been there, but there was nothing, and,with a low sigh, he stole from the room.As he passed out into the kitchen, Ellen was there. She had alreadyprepared his breakfast, and was spreading the table when he entered."How good of you how kind, Ellen," said he, as he passed his arm aroundher neck."Hush, Frank, they are both sleeping. Poor papa never closed his eyestill half an hour ago, and Kate was fairly overcome ere she yielded.""You will say that I kissed them, Nelly, kissed them twice," said he,in a low, broken voice, "and that I could n't bear to awake them.Leave-taking is so sorrowful. Oh, Ellen, if I knew that you were allhappy, that there were no hardships before you, when I 'm away!""And why should we not, Frank?" said she, firmly. "There is no dishonorin this poverty, so long as there are no straits to make it seem otherthan it is. Let us rather pray for the spirit that may befit any lot weare thrown in, than for a fortune to which we might be unsuited.""Would you forget who we are, Ellen?" said he, half reproachfully."I would remember it, Frank, in a temper less of pride than humility.""I do not see much of the family spirit in all this," rejoined he,almost angrily."The family spirit," echoed she, feelingly. "What has it ever done forus, save injury? Has it suggested a high=bearing courage against theills of narrow fortune? Has it told us how to bear poverty with dignity,or taught us one single lesson of patience and submission? Or has it, onthe contrary, been ever present to whisper the changes in our conditionhow altered our lot making us ashamed of that companionship which ourstation rendered possible for us, and leaving us in the isolation offriendlessness for the sake of I blush to abuse the word our Pride! Oh,Frank, my dear, dear brother, take it not ill of me, that in our lastmoments together, perhaps for years, I speak what may jar upon your earsto hear; but remember that I am much older, that I have seen far moreof the world, at least of its sorrows and cares, than you have. I haveindeed known affliction in many ways, but have never found a poorercomforter in its troubles than what we call our Pride!""You would have me forget I am a Dalton, then?" said the boy, in a toneof sorrowful meaning."Never! when the recollection could prompt a generous or a noble action,a manly ambition, or a high-hearted thought; but the name will haveno spell in it, if used to instil an imperious, discontented spirit,a regretful contrast of what we are, with what we might have been, orwhat, in a worldly sense, is more destructive still, a false reliance onthe distinction of a family to which we have contributed nothing."[Illustration:    050]"You do not know, Nelly dearest, of what a comfort you have robbed me,"said Frank, sorrowfully."Do not say so, my dearest brother," cried she, passing her arm aroundhim; "a deception, a mere illusion, is unworthy of that name. Look abovethe gratification of mere vanity, and you will become steeled againstthe many wounds self-love is sure to receive in intercourse with theworld. I cannot tell how, or with what associates, you are about tolive, but I feel certain that in every station a man of truth and honorwill make himself respected. Be such, dearest Frank. If family pride ifthe name of Dalton have value in your eyes, remember that upon you itrests to assert its right to distinction. If, as I would fondly hope,your heart dwells here with us, bethink ye what joy what holy gratitudeyou will diffuse around our humble hearth to know that our brother is agood man."It was some moments ere either could speak again. Emotions, verydifferent ones, perhaps, filled their hearts, and each was too deeplymoved for words. Frank's eyes were full of tears, and his cheekquivering, as he threw his knapsack on his shoulder."You will write from Innspruck, Frank; but how many days will it takeere you reach that city?""Twelve or fourteen at least, if I go on foot. There, Nelly, do not helpme, dearest; I shall not have you tomorrow to fasten these straps.""This is not to be forgotten, Frank; it's Kate's present. How sorry shewill be not to have given it with her own hands!" And so saying, shegave him the purse her sister had worked."But there is gold in it," said the boy, growing pale with emotion."Very little, Frank dearest," replied she, smiling. "A cadet must alwayshave gold in his purse, so little Hans tells us; and you know how wisehe is in all these matters.""And is it from a home like this that I am to take gold away!" cried he,passionately."Nay, Frank, you must not persuade us that we are so very poor. Iwill not consent to any sense of martyrdom, I promise you." It was notwithout difficulty she could overcome his scruples; nor, perhaps, hadshe succeeded at all, if his thoughts had not been diverted into anotherchannel by a light tapping at the door. It was Hans Roeckle come toawake him.Again and again the brother and sister embraced; and in a very agony oftears Frank tore himself away, and hastened down the stairs. The nextmoment the heavy house door banged loudly, and he was gone.Oh, the loneliness of mind in which he threaded his way through the darkand narrow streets, where the snow already lay deeply! With what sinkingof the heart he turned to look for the last time at the window where thelight the only one to be seen still glimmered. How little could all thepromptings of hope suffice against the sad and dark reality that he wasleaving all he loved, and all who loved him, to adventure upon a worldwhere all was bleak and friendless!But not all his dark forebodings could equal hers from whom he had justparted. Loving her brother with an affection more like that of motherthan sister, she had often thought over the traits of his character,where, with many a noble gift, the evil seeds of wrong teaching hadleft, like tall weeds among flowers, the baneful errors of inordinateself-esteem and pride. Ignorant of the career on which he was about toenter, Ellen could but speculate vaguely how such a character would beesteemed, and whether his native frankness and generosity would coverover, or make appear as foibles, these graver faults. Their own narrowfortunes, the very straits and privations of poverty, with all theircruel wounds to honest pride, and all their sore trials of temper, shecould bear up against with an undaunted courage. She had learned herlesson in the only school wherein it is taught, and daily habit hadinstilled its own powers of endurance; but, for Frank, her ambitionhoped a higher and brighter destiny, and now, in her solitude, and witha swelling heart, she knelt down and prayed for him. And, oh! if theutter ings of such devotion never rise to Heaven or meet acceptancethere, they at least bring balm to the spirit of him who syllablesthem, building up a hope whose foundations are above the casualties ofhumanity, and giving a courage that mere self-reliance never gave.Little Hans not only came to awaken Frank, but to give him companionshipfor some miles of his way, a thoughtful kindness, for which the youth'sdeep preoccupation seemed to offer but a poor return. Indeed, Frankscarcely knew that he was not travelling in utter solitude, and all theskilful devices of the worthy dwarf to turn the channel of his thoughtswere fruitless. Had there been sufficient light to have surveyed theequipment of his companion, it is more than probable that the sightwould have done more to produce this diversion of gloom than anyarguments which could have been used. Master Roeckle, whose mind wasa perfect storehouse of German horrors, earthly and unearthly, and whoimagined that a great majority of the human population of the globe wereeither bandits or witches, had surrounded himself with a whole museumof amulets and charms of various kinds. In his cap he wore the tail ofa black squirrel, as a safeguard against the "Forest Imp;" a large driedtoad hung around his neck, like an order, to protect him from the evileye; a duck's foot was fastened to the tassel of his boot, as a talismanagainst drowning; while strings of medals, coins, precious stones,blessed beads, and dried insects, hung round and about him in everydirection. Of all the portions of his equipment, however, what seemedthe most absurd was a huge pole-axe of the fifteenth century, and whichhe carried as a defence against mere mortal foes, but which, from itsweight and size, appeared far more likely to lay its bearer low thaninflict injury upon others. It had been originally stored up in the RustKammer, at Prague, and was said to be the identical weapon with whichConrad slew the giant at Leutmeritz, a fact which warranted Hans inexpending two hundred florins in purchasing it; as, to use his ownemphatic words, "it was not every day one knew where to find the weaponto bring down a giant."As Hans, encumbered by his various adjuncts, trotted along beside hisstalwart companion, he soon discovered that all his conversationalability to exert which cost him so dearly was utterly unattended to;he fell into a moody silence, and thus they journeyed for miles of waywithout interchanging a word. At last they came in sight of the littlevillage of Hernitz Kretschen, whence by a by road Frank was to reachthe regular line that leads through the Hohlen Thai to the Lake ofConstance, and where they were to part."I feel as though I could almost go all the way with you," said Hans, asthey stopped to gaze upon the little valley where lay the village, andbeyond which stretched a deep forest of dark pine-trees, traversed by asingle road."Nay, Hans," said Frank, smiling, as for the first time he beheld thestrange figure beside him; "you must go back to your pleasant littlevillage and live happily, to do many a kindness to others, as you havedone to me to-day!""I would like to take service with the Empress myself," said Hans, "ifit were for some good and great cause, like the defence of the Churchagainst the Turks, or the extermination of the race of dragons thatinfest the Lower Danube.""But you forget, Hans, it is an Emperor, rules over Austria now," saidFrank, preferring to offer a correction to the less startling of hishallucinations."No, no, Master Frank, they have not deposed the good Maria Teresa,they would never do that. I saw her picture over the doorway of theBurgermeister the last time I went to visit my mother in the BregertzerWald, and by the same token her crown and sceptre were just newly gilt,a thing they would not have done if she were not on the throne.""What if she were dead, and her son too?" said Frank; but his words werescarce uttered when he regretted to have said them, so striking was thechange that came over the dwarf's features."If that were indeed true, Heaven have mercy on us!" exclaimed he,piously. "Old Frederick will have but little pity for good Catholics!But no, Master Frank, this cannot be. The last time I received soldiersfrom Nuremberg they wore the same uniforms as ever, and the 'Moriamurpro Rege nostro, M. T.' was in gold letters on every banner as before."Frank was in no humor to disturb so innocent and so pleasing a delusion,and he gave no further opposition; and now they both descended thepath which led to the little inn of the village. Here Hans insisted onperforming the part of host, and soon the table was covered with brownbread and hard eggs, and those great massive sausages which Germanslove, together with various flasks of Margrafler and other "Badisch"wines."Who knows," said Hans, as he pledged his guest by ringing hiswine-glass against the other's, "if, when we meet again, thou wouldstsit down at the table with such as me?""How so, Hanserl?" asked the boy, in astonishment."I mean, Master Franz, that you may become a colonel, or perhaps ageneral, with, mayhap, the 'St. Joseph' at your button-hole, or the'Maria Teresa' around your neck; and if so, how could you take yourplace at the board with the poor toy-maker?""I am not ashamed to do so now," said Frank, haughtily; "and the Emperorcannot make me more a gentleman than my birth has done. Were I to beashamed of those who befriended me, I should both disgrace my rank andname together.""These are good words, albeit too proud ones," said Hans, thoughtfully."As a guide through life, pride will do well enough when the roads aregood and your equipage costly; but when you come upon mountain-paths andstony tracts, with many a wild torrent to cross, and many a dark glen totraverse, humility even a child's humility will give better teaching.""I have no right to be other than humble!" said the boy; but theflashing brightness of his eyes, and the heightened color of his cheek,seemed to contradict his words.For a while the conversation flagged, or was maintained in short andbroken sentences, when at length Frank said,"You will often go to see them, Hanserl, won't you? You'll sit withthem, too, of an evening? for they will feel lonely now; and my fatherwill like to tell you his stories about home, as he calls it still.""That will I," said Hans; "they are the happiest hours of my life when Isit beside that hearth."Frank drew his hand across his eyes, and his lips quivered as he triedto speak."You'll be kind to poor Ellen, too; she is so timid, Hans. You cannotbelieve how anxious she is, lest her little carvings should be thoughtunworthy of praise.""They are gems! they are treasures of art!" cried Hans,enthusiastically."And my sweet Kate!" cried the boy, as his eyes ran over, while a throngof emotions seemed to stop his utterance."She is so beautiful!" exclaimed Hans, fervently. "Except the BlessedMaria at the Holy Cross, I never beheld such loveliness. There is theAngelus ringing; let us pray a blessing on them;" and they both kneltdown in deep devotion. Frank's lips never moved, but with swelling heartand clasped hands he remained fixed as a statue; while Hanserl in somequaint old rhyme uttered his devotions."And yonder is the dog-star, bright and splendid," said Hans, as hearose. "There never was a happier omen for the beginning of a journey.You 'll be lucky, boy; there is the earnest of good fortune. That samestar was shining along the path as I entered Baden, eighteen years ago;and see what a lucky life has mine been!"Frank could not but smile at the poor dwarf's appreciation of hisfortune; but Hanserl's features wore a look that betokened a happy andcontented nature."And yours has been a lucky life, Hanserl?" said he, half in question."Lucky? ay, that has it. I was a poor boy, barefooted and hungry in mynative forest deformed, and stunted, too a thing to pity too weak towork, and with none to teach me, and yet even I was not forgotten by Himwho made the world so fair and beautiful; but in my heart was planteda desire to be something to do something, that others might benefit by.The children used to mock me as I passed along the road; but a voicewhispered within me, 'Be of courage, Hanserl, they will bless thee yet,they will greet thee with many a merry laugh and joyous cry, and callthee their own kind Hanserl:' and so have I lived to see it! My nameis far and wide over Germany. Little boys and girls know and speak ofme amongst the first words they syllable; and from the palace to thebauer's hut, Hans Roeckle has his friends; and who knows that whenthis poor clay is mingled with the earth, but that my spirit will hoveraround the Christmas-tree when glad voices call upon me! I often thinkit will be so."Frank's eyes glistened as he gazed upon the dwarf, who spoke with adegree of emotion and feeling very different from his wont."So you see, Master Franz," said he, smiling, "there are ambitions ofevery hue, and this of mine you may deem of the very faintest, but itis enough for me. Had I been a great painter, or a poet, I would haverevelled in the thought that my genius adorned the walls of many a noblepalace, and that my verses kindled emotions in many a heart that feltlike my own; but as one whom nature has not gifted, poor, ignoble, andunlettered, am I not lucky to have found a little world of joyous heartsand merry voices, who care for me % and speak of me, ay, and who wouldgive me a higher place in their esteem than to Jean Paul, or Goethehimself?"The friends had but time to pledge each other in a parting glass, whenthe stage drove up by which Hans was to return to Baden. A few hurriedwords, half cheering, half sorrowful, a close embrace, one long andlingering squeeze of the hand,"Farewell, kind Hanserl!""God guide thee, Franz!" and they parted.Frank stood in the little "Platz," where the crowd yet lingered,watching the retiring "Post," uncertain which, way to turn him.He dreaded to find himself all alone, and yet he shrank from newcompanionship. The newly risen moon and the calm air invited him topursue his road; so he set out once more, the very exercise being arelief against his sad thoughts.Few words are more easily spoken than "He went to seek his fortune;"and what a whole world lies within the narrow compass! A world ofhigh-hearted hopes and doubting fear, of noble ambition to be won, andglorious paths to be trod, mingled with tender thoughts of home andthose who made it such. What sustaining courage must be his who daresthis course and braves that terrible conflict the toughest that ever manfought between his own bright coloring of life and the stern reality ofthe world! How many hopes has he to abandon, how many illusions togive up! How often is his faith to be falsified and his trustfulnessbetrayed; and, worst of all, what a fatal change do these trials impressupon himself, how different is he from what he had been!Young and untried as Frank Dalton was in life, he was not altogetherunprepared for the vicissitudes that awaited him; his sister Nelly'steachings had done much to temper the over-buoyant spirit of his nature,and make him feel that he must draw upon that same courage to sustainthe present, rather than to gild the future.His heart was sorrowful, too, at leaving a home where unitedly theyhad, perhaps, borne up better against poverty. He felt for his own heartrevealed it how much can be endured in companionship, and how the burdenof misfortune like every other load is light when many bear it. Nowthinking of these things, now fancying the kind of life that might liebefore him, he marched along. Then he wondered whether the Count wouldresemble his father. The Daltons were remarkable for strong traits offamily likeness, not alone in feature, but in character; and what acomfort Frank felt in fancying that the old general would be a thoroughDalton in frankness and kindliness of nature, easy in disposition, withall the careless freedom of his own father! How he should love him, asone of themselves!It is a well-known fact, that certain families are remarkable aboveothers for the importance that they attach to the ties of kindred,making the boast of relationship always superior to the claims ofself-formed friendships. This is perhaps more peculiarly the case amongthose who live little in the world, and whose daily sayings and doingsare chiefly confined to the narrow circle of home. But yet it issingular how long this prejudice for perhaps it deserves no bettername can stand the conflict of actual life. The Daltons were a specialinstance of what we mean. Certain characteristics of look and featuredistinguished them all, and they all agreed in maintaining the claim ofrelationship as the strongest bond of union; and it was strange intohow many minor channels this stream meandered. Every old ruin, everymonument, every fragment of armor, or ancient volume associated withtheir name, assumed a kind of religious value in their eyes, and theword Dalton was a talisman to exalt the veriest trifle into the rank ofrelic. From his earliest infancy Frank had been taught these lessons.They were the traditions of the parlor and the kitchen, and by the mereforce of repetition became a part of his very nature. Corrig-O'Neal wasthe theme of every story. The ancient house of the family, and which,although by time's changes it had fallen into the hands of the Godfreysfrom whom his mother came was yet regarded with all the feelings ofancient pride. Over and over again was he told of the once princelystate that his ancestors held there, the troops of retainers, themounted followers that ever accompanied them. The old house itself wasexalted to the rank of a palace, and its wide-spreading but neglectedgrounds spoken of like the park of royalty.To see this old house of his fathers, to behold with his own eyes theseat of their once greatness, became the passion of the boy's heart.Never did the Bedouin of the Desert long after Mecca with moreheart-straining desire. To such a pitch had this passion gained onhim, that, unable any longer to resist an impulse that neither lefthis thoughts by day nor his dreams by night, he fled from his school atBruges, and when only ten years old made his way to Ostend, and underpretence of seeking a return to his family, persuaded the skipper of atrading-vessel to give him a passage to Limerick. It would take us toofar from our road already a long one were we to follow his wanderingsand tell of all the difficulties that beset the little fellow on hislonely journey. Enough that we say, he did at last reach the goal, ofhis hopes, and, after a journey of eight long days, find himself at theancient gate of Corrig-O'Neal.At first the disappointment was dreadful. The proud mansion, of whoseglorious splendor his imagination had created an Oriental palace, wasan antiquated brick edifice, in front of which ran a long terrace, onceadorned with statues, but of which the pedestals alone remained. A fewhedges of yew, with here and there the fragments of a marble figure orfountain, showed that the old French chateau taste had once prevailedthere; and of this a quaint straight avenue of lime-trees, reachingdirectly from the door to the river, also bore evidence. The tone ofsadness and desertion was on everything; many of the lower windows werewalled up; the great door itself was fastened and barricaded in such away as to show it had been long disused. Not a creature was to be seenstirring about the place, and save that at night the flickering lightof a candle might be descried from a small casement that looked upon thegarden, the house might have been deemed uninhabited. Perhaps somethingin the mysterious desolation of the scene had its influence over theboy's mind; but as hour by hour he lingered in those silent woods, andlay in the deep grass, watching the cloud shadows as they stole along,he grew fondly attached to the place; now losing himself in some reveryof the long past, now following out some half-remembered narrative ofhis mother's childhood, when she herself dwelt there.All his little resources of pocket-money expended, his clothes, savesuch as he wore, sold, he could scarcely tear himself from a scene thatfilled every avenue of his heart. The time, however, came, when a ship,about to sail for the Scheldt, gave him the opportunity of returninghome; and now this was to be his last day at Corrig-O'Neal.And what a day of conflicting thought was it! now half resolved toapproach the house, and ask to see his uncle, and now repelled byremembering all his unkindness to his father. Then marvelling whethersome change might not have taken place in the old man's mind, andwhether in his lonely desolation he might not wish once more to see hiskindred near him.He knew not what to do, and evening found him still undecided, andsitting on a little rising spot, from which the view extended over thegarden at the back of the house, and whence he had often watched thesolitary light that marked the old man's vigils.Wearied by long watching and thought, he fell asleep; and when he awokethe light was gone, the light which hitherto had always burned tilldaybreak! and from the darkness it must now be far from that hour.While Frank wondered what this might mean, he was startled by hearingfootsteps near him at least so they sounded on the gravel-walk of thegarden, and in a few minutes after the grating sound of a key, and theopening of a small door which led out into the wood. He now perceivedthat a man was standing at the foot of the knoll, who seemed irresoluteand undecided; for he twice returned to the door, once introduced thekey, and again withdrew it, as if with a changed purpose. Suddenly heappeared to have made up his mind, for, stooping down, he began to digwith the greatest energy, stopping at intervals to listen, and againcontinuing his work when satisfied that he was unobserved.The hour the scene itself the evident secrecy of the man, almostparalyzed the boy with terror; nor was it till long after the turf wasreplaced, dry leaves and dead branches were strewn over the spot, andthe man himself gone, that Frank gained courage to move away. This hedid at first cautiously and timidly, and then with a speed that sooncarried him far away from the spot. The following day he was at sea;and if at first the strange scene never left his thoughts, with time theimpression faded away, till at length it assumed the indistinctness of avision, or of some picture created by mere imagination.When he did return home, he never revealed, except to Nelly, where hehad been, and the object for which he went; but, even to her, from somestrange love of mystery, he told nothing of the last night's experience:this was a secret, which he hoarded like a miser's treasure, and lovedto think that he only knew of. The stirring events of a schoolboy'slife, at first, and subsequently the changeful scenes of openingmanhood, gradually effaced the impression of what he had seen, or merelyleft it to all the indistinctness of a dream.And thus are thoughts often sealed up in the memory for years unnoticedand unknown till, after a long interval, they are all called forth, andbecome the very pivots on which turns our destiny.CHAPTER IV. THE ONSLOWSTHE little town of Baden was thrown into a state of considerableexcitement by the unexpected arrival we have chronicled in a precedingchapter, and the host of the "Russie" reduced to the most uncommonstraits to restore the effective of a staff, now brought down to theclosest economy of retrenchment. Cooks, waiters, and housemaids weresought after in every quarter, while emissaries were despatched rightand left to replenish the larder and provide for the wants of the mighty"Englander." Nor was all the bustle and commotion limited to within thehotel, but extended throughout the village itself, where many a rusticpony, laid up in ordinary for the winter, was again trimmed and curriedand shod, to be paraded before the windows with a scarlet saddle-clothand a worsted tassel to the bridle, in all the seductive attraction ofa palfrey. Even flower-girls made their appearance again with a fewfrost-nipped buds and leaves; while a bassoon and a triangle, votingthemselves a band, gave horrid signs of their means of persecution.Meanwhile were the fortunate individuals for whose benefit theseexertions were evoked, in the most blissful ignorance of all theinterest they were awakening. From the first moment of their arrivalnone had even seen them. Waited upon by their own servants, scarcelyheard, not even appearing at the windows, they were unconsciouslyministering to a mystery that now engaged every tongue and eararound them. As, however, nothing of secrecy had any share in theirproceedings, we have no scruple in invading the presence and introducingthe reader to the company.Sir Stafford Onslow was an immensely rich London banker, who in hiscapacity of borough member had voted steadily with the Whigs for somefive-and-twenty years; supporting them by all the influence of hiswealth and family, and who now came abroad, in a pet of sulk with hisparty, on being refused the peerage. By nature generous, kind-hearted,and affectionate, the constant pressure of a more ambitious wife hadinvolved him in a career to which neither his tastes nor habitssuited him. The fortune which he would have dispensed with dignityand munificence he was eternally taught to believe should be thestepping-stone to something higher in rank. All his influence in theCity, of which he was justly proud, he was told was a mere vulgarambition in comparison with that a coronet would bestow on him; and,in fact, having believed himself the leading man of a great section insociety, he was led to look upon his position with discontent, and fancythat his just claims were disregarded and denied. Lady Hester Onslow,who having once been a beauty and the admired belle of royalty itself,had accepted the banker in a moment of pique, and never forgave himafterwards the unhappy preference.Belonging to a very ancient but poor family, few were surprised at heraccepting a husband some thirty-odd years her senior; and it is probablethat she would fully have recognized the prudence of her choice if, bythe death of a distant relative in India, which occurred a few monthsafter her marriage, she had not acquired a very large fortune. Thissudden accession of wealth coming, as she herself said, "too late,"embittered every hour of her after-life.Had she been but wealthy a few months back, she had married the manshe loved, or whom she thought she loved, the heartless, handsome,well-mannered Lord Norwood, a penniless viscount, ruined before he cameof age, and with no other means of support than the faculties whichknavery had sharpened into talent.Miss Onslow and her brother, both the children of a former marriage,were strikingly like their father, not alone in feature, but in thetraits of his frank and generous character. They were devotedly attachedto him, not the less, perhaps, from the circumstances of a marriage towhich they were strongly opposed, and whose results they now saw in manya passage of discord and disagreement.George and Sydney Onslow were both dark-complexioned and black-eyed,and had many traits of Spanish origin in appearance, their mother havingbeen from that country. Lady Hester was a blonde, and affected to thinkthat the Southern tint was but an approximation to the negro. Nor wasshe less critical on their manners, whose joyous freedom she pronouncedessentially vulgar. Such, in a few words, were the discordant elementswhich Fate had bound up as a family, and who now, by the sudden illnessof Sir Stafford, were driven to seek refuge in the deserted town ofBaden. Nor can we omit another who, although not tied to the rest bykindred, had been long a member of the circle. This was Dr. Grounsell,an old college friend of Sir Stafford's, and who, having lost everyshilling of his fortune by a speculation, had taken up his home atthe banker's many years previous to his second marriage. Lady Hester'sdislike to him amounted to actual hatred. She detested him for theinfluence he possessed over her husband, for the sturdiness of acharacter that resisted every blandishment, for a quaintness thatcertainly verged upon vulgarity, and, most of all, for the open andundisguised manner he always declared against every scheme for theattainment of a title.As Sir Stafford's physician, the only one in whom he had confidence, thedoctor was enabled to stand his ground against attacks which must haveconquered him; and by dint of long resistance and a certain obstinacyof character, he had grown to take pleasure in an opposition which, toa man of more refinement and feeling, must have proved intolerable;and although decidedly attached to Sir Stafford and his children, it isprobable that he was still more bound to them by hate to "my Lady," thanby all his affection for themselves.Grounsell detested the Continent, yet he followed them abroad, resolvednever to give up an inch of ground uncontested; and although assailed bya thousand slights and petty insults, he stood stoutly up against themall, defying every effort of fine-ladyism, French cookery, homoeopathy,puppyism, and the water-cure, to dislodge him from his position. Therewas very possibly more of dogged malice in all this than amiability orattachment to his friends; but it is due to the doctor to say that hewas no hypocrite, and would never have blinked the acknowledgment iffairly confronted with the charge.Although, if it had not been for my Lady's resentful notice ofthe ministerial neglect, the whole family would have been snuglydomesticated in their beautiful villa beside the Thames at Richmond,she artfully contrived to throw the whole weight of every annoyance theyexperienced upon every one's shoulders rather than her own; and asshe certainly called to her aid no remarkable philosophy against theinconveniences of travel, the budget of her grievances assumed a mostimposing bulk.Dressed in the very perfection of a morning costume, her cap, hergloves, her embroidered slippers, all in the most accurate keepingwith that assumed air of seclusion by which fine ladies compliment thevisitor fortunate enough to be admitted to their presence, Lady Hestersat at a window, occasionally looking from the deep lace that borderedher handkerchief to the picturesque scene of mountain and river that laybefore her. A fastidious taste might have found something to be pleasedwith in either, but assuredly her handsome features evinced no agreeableemotion, and her expression was that of utter ennui and listlessness.At another window sat Sydney Onslow drawing; her brother standing behindher chair, and from time to time adding his counsels, but in a tonestudiously low and whispered. "Get that shadow in something deeper, Syd,and you 'll have more effect in the distance.""What is that I hear about effect and distance?" sighed out my Lady."You surely are not drawing?""Only sketching; making a hurried note of that wheel, and the quaintold-fashioned house beside it," said Sydney, diffidently."What a refinement of cruelty! The detestable noise of that mill keptme awake all night, and you mean to perpetuate the remembrance by apicture. Pray, be a good child and throw it out of the window."Sydney looked up in her brother's face, where already a crimson flush ofanger was gathering, but before she could reply he spoke for her. "Thedrawing is for me, Lady Onslow. You 'll. excuse me if I do not consentto the fate you propose for it.""Let me look at it," said she, languidly; and the young girl aroseand presented the drawing to her. "How droll!" said she, laughing; "Isuppose it is peculiar to Germany that water can run up hill.""The shadow will correct that," said Sydney, smiling; "and whenthe foreground is darker." A violent slam of the door cut short theexplanation. It was George Onslow, who, too indignant at the practisedimpertinence toward his sister, dashed out of the room in a passion."How underbred your brother will persist in being, my love," said she,calmly; "that vile trick of slamming a door, they learn, I 'm told,in the Guards' Club. I 'm sure I always thought it was confined to themelodrames one sees at the Porte St. Martin."At this moment a servant appeared at the door. "Colonel Haggerstone'scompliments, my Lady, and begs to know how Sir Stafford is to-day.""Something better," replied she, curtly; and as the man disappeared, sheadded, "Whose compliments did he say?""I did not hear the name; it sounded like Haggerstone.""Impossible, child; we know of no such person. What hour is it?""A few minutes past two.""Oh dear! I fancied it had been four or five or six," sighed she,drearily. "The amiable doctor has not made his report to-day of yourpapa, and he went to see him immediately after breakfast.""He told George that there was no amendment," said Sydney, gravely."He told George! Then he did not deign to tell me.""You were not here at the moment. It was as he passed through the roomhurriedly.""I conclude that I was in my dressing-room. But it is only in keepingwith Mr. Grounsell's studied disrespect, a line of conduct I grieve tosee him supported in by members of this family.""Mr. Alfred Jekyl, my Lady," said a servant, "with inquiry for SirStafford.""You appear to know best, my dear, how your papa is. Pray answer thaiinquiry.""Sir Stafford is not better," said Sydney to the servant."Who can all these people be, my dear?" said Lady Hester, with moreanimation of manner than she had yet exhibited. "Jekyl is a name oneknows. There are Northamptonshire Jekyls, and, if I mistake not, it wasa Jekyl married Lady Olivia Drossmore, was it not? Oh, what a fool I amto ask you, who never know anything of family or connection! And yetI 'm certain I 've told you over and over the importance the actualnecessity of this knowledge. If you only bestowed upon Burke a tithe ofthe patience and time I have seen you devote to Lyell, you 'd not committhe shocking mistake you fell into t' other day of discussing the Duchessof Dartley's character with Lord Brandford, from whom she was divorced.Now you 'd never offend quartz and sandstone by miscalling theiraffinities. But here comes the doctor."If Dr. Grounsell had been intended by nature to outrage allultra-refined notions regarding personal appearance, he could notpossibly have been more cunningly fashioned. Somewhat below the middlesize, and squarely formed, his legs did not occupy more than a third ofhis height; his head was preternaturally large, and seemed even largerfrom a crop of curly yellowish hair, whose flaring ochre only rescuedit from the imputation of being a wig. His hands and feet were enormous,requiring a muscular effort to move them that made all his gesturesgrotesque and uncouth. In addition to these native graces, his clotheswere always made much too large for him, from his avowed dislike to theover-tightening and squeezing of modern fashion.As his whole life had been passed in the superintendence of a greatmilitary hospital in the East, wherein all his conversations with hisbrethren were maintained in technicalities, he had never converted theprofessional jargon into a popular currency, but used the terms of artupon all occasions, regardless of the inability of the unmedical worldto understand him."Well, sir, what is your report to-day?" said Lady Onslow, assuming hervery stateliest of manners."Better, and worse, madam. The arthritis relieved, the cardiac symptomsmore imminent.'"Please to bear in mind, sir, that I have not studied at Apothecaries'Hall.""Nor I, madam; but at Edinburgh and Aberdeen, in the faculties ofmedicine and surgery," said Grounsell, drawing down his waistcoat, andarranging himself in what he considered an order of battle."Is papa better, doctor?" said Sydney, mildly."The articular affection is certainly alleviated, but there is mischiefhere," said Grounsell, placing his hand over his heart; "fibroustissues, my dear Miss Onslow, fibrous tissues are ticklish affairs.""Is this advice to be construed in a moral rather than a medical sense?"said Lady Onslow, with a malicious smile."Either or both," replied the doctor. "The heart will always be highlysusceptible of nervous influence.""But papa" broke in Sydney, eagerly."Is suffering under metastasis migratory gout, it may be termed changingfrom articular to large organic structures.""And, of course, you are giving him the old poisons that were in usefifty years ago?""What do you mean, madam?" said Grounsell, sternly."That shocking thing that drives people mad colocynth, or colchicum, orsomething like that. You know what I mean?""Happily for me, madam, I can guess it.""And are you still as obstinate as ever about the globules?""The homoeopathic humbug?""If you are polite enough so to designate what I put the most implicittrust in. But I warn you, sir, I mean to exert my just and rightfulinfluence with Sir Stafford; and in case a very great change does notappear to-morrow, I shall insist upon his trying the aconite.""If you do, madam, the insurance offices shall hear of it!" saidGrounsell, with a sternness that made the threat most significant."I 'll send for that man from Heidelberg at once, Sydney," said LadyHester, as, pale with passion, she seated herself at her writing-table."Take care what you do, madam," said Grounsell, approaching where shesat, and speaking in a low and solemn voice. "Let not any feeling ofdispleasure with me induce you to an act of rashness or imprudence. Myold friend's state is critical; it may at any moment become dangerous.I am convinced that what I am doing offers the most reasonable hope ofserving him. Take care lest you weaken his confidence in me, when he maynot be prepared to repose it in another.""Here, Sydney, you write German; and it is possible he may not readFrench. This is his name, I got it in Paris Graeffnell. Tell him to comeat once in fact, let Francois take a carriage for him."Sydney Onslow looked at her mother and then at the doctor. At thelatter her glance was almost imploring, but he never noticed it, turningabruptly toward the window without uttering a word."Can you consult with him, doctor?" asked Sydney, timidly."Of course not; he 's a mountebank.""Write, as I bade you, Miss Onslow," said Lady Hester. "Dr. Graeffnellis one of the first men in Germany. Lady Heskisson sent for him when theEarl fell ill at Wiesbaden.""And the Countess was a widow in four days after. Don't forget thedenouement of the story, madam."Sydney dropped the pen, and her hands fell powerless to her side. Therewas something in the sternness of the doctor that seemed to aweeven Lady Onslow, for she made no reply; while Grounsell, seeing hisadvantage, left the room at once, without further parley.Our readers will probably forgive us if we follow his example, and notremain to listen to the eloquent monologue in which Lady Onslow lamentedher sad condition in life. Not only did she bewail her destiny, but,like one of those classic personages the Greek Chorus presents us to,she proceeded to speculate upon every possible mischance futurity mighthave in store for her, ingeniously inventing "situations," anddevising "predicaments" that nothing less gifted than a self-tormentingimagination can conceive. Leaving her to all the pleasure such a pastimecan give, we shall quit the house, and, although a cold, raw evening isclosing in, wander out into the street.CHAPTER V. THE PATIENTALONG the dark and narrow street, over which the coming night cast adreary shadow, a single lamp was seen to shine at the door of LudwigKraus, the apothecary; a beacon, it is but fair to add, lighted lesswith the hope of attracting custom than in obedience to the requirementsof the law, for Herr Kraus was a "state" official, and bound to conformto the dictates of the government. His shop was a small triangularspace, in which there was barely room for the learned dispenser and asingle client at the same moment, thus giving to all his interviews thesecrecy of the confessional itself. Jars, phials, flasks, and drawersrose on every side, not inscribed with the vulgar nomenclature of modernphysic, but bearing the enigmatical marks and hieroglyphics known toGalen and Paracelsus. Arabic letters, dragons, strange monsters, andzodiacal signs met the eye everywhere, and did not consort ill with thespare form and high bald head of the proprietor, whose quaint-figureddressing-gown and black velvet cap gave him a kind of resemblance to analchemist in his workshop. As Grounsell approached the glass doorand peeped in, the scene that presented itself rather assisted thisillusion, for straight in front of the little counter over which Krauswas leaning, sat the dwarf, Hans Roeckle, talking away with considerableanimation, and from time to time seeming to expatiate upon the meritsof a wooden figure which he held carefully in his hands. The small,half-lighted chamber, the passive, motionless features of the chemist,the strange wild gestures of little Hans, as, in his tongue ofmysterious gutturals he poured out a flood of words, amazed Grounsell,and excited his curiosity to the utmost. He continued to gaze in for aconsiderable time, without being able to guess what it might mean, andat last abandoning all conjecture he resolved to enter. Scarcely hadhe touched the handle of the door, however, than the dwarf, seizing thefigure, concealed it beneath the skirt of his fur mantle, and retiredto a corner of the shop. Dr. Grounsell's errand was to obtain certainmedicines for his patient, which, from his ignorance of German, he hadtaken the precaution to write down in Latin. He passed the paper insilence over the counter, and waited patiently as the chemist spelt outthe words. Having read it through, he handed back the paper with afew dry words, which, being in his native tongue, were totallyincomprehensible."You must have these things, surely," exclaimed Grounsell; "they are thecommonest of all medicines;" and then remembering himself, he made signsin the direction of the drawers and phials to express his meaning. Againthe chemist uttered some dozen words.The doctor produced his purse, where certain gold pieces glittered, asthough to imply that he was willing to pay handsomely for his ignorance;but the other pushed it away, and shook his head in resolute refusal."This is too bad," muttered Grounsell, angrily. "I 'll be sworn hehas the things, and will not give them." The chemist motioned Hans toapproach, and whispered a few words in his hearing, on which thedwarf, removing his cap in courteous salutation, addressed Grounsell:"High-born and much-learned Saar. De laws make no oder that doctorenhave recht to write physics.""What!" cried Grounsell, not understanding the meaning of this speech.Hans repeated it more slowly, and at length succeeded in conveying thefact that physicians alone were qualified to procure medicines."But I am a doctor, my worthy friend, a physician of long standing.""Das ist possible who knows?""I know, and I say it," rejoined the other, tersely."Ja! ja!" responded Hans, as though to say the theme were not worthbeing warm about, one way or t' other."Come, my dear sir," said Grounsell, coaxingly; "pray be good enough toexplain that I want these medicines for a sick friend, who is now at thehotel here, dangerously ill of gout.""Podagra gout!" exclaimed Hans, with sudden animation, "and dese are decure for gout?""They will, I hope, be of service against it.""You shall have dem Saar on one condition. That ist, you will visitanoder sick man mit gout an Englessman, too verh ill verb sick; and norich you understan'.""Yes, yes; I understand perfectly; I'll see him with pleasure. Tell thisworthy man to make up these for me, and I 'll go along with you now.""Gut! verh good," said Hans, as in a few words of German he expressedto the apothecary that he might venture to transgress the law in thepresent case when the season was over, and no one to be the wiser.As Hans issued forth to show the way, he never ceased to insist uponthe fact that the present was not a case for a fee, and that the doctorshould well understand the condition upon which his visit was to bepaid; and still inveighing on this theme, he arrived at the house wherethe Daltons dwelt. "Remember, too," said Hans, "that, though they arepoor, they are of guten stamm how say you, noble?" Grounsell listenedwith due attention to all Hanserl's cautions, following, not withoutdifficulty, his strange and guttural utterances."I will go before. Stay here," said Hans, as they gained thelanding-place; and so saying, he pushed open the door and disappeared.As Grounsell stood alone and in the dark, he wondered within himselfwhat strange chances should have brought a fellow-countryman into thiscompanionship, for there was something so grotesque in Hans's appearanceand manner, that it routed all notion of his being admitted to anyfooting of friendly equality.The door at length opened, and the doctor followed Hans into a dimlylighted room, where Dalton lay, half dressed, upon his bed. BeforeGrounsell had well passed the entrance, the sick man said, "I am afraid,sir, that my little friend here has taken a bit of liberty with bothof us, since I believe you wanted a patient just as little as I did adoctor."The anxious, lustrous eye, the flushed cheek, and tremulous lip of thespeaker gave, at the same time, a striking contradiction to his words.Grounsell's practised glance read these signs rapidly, and drawing nearthe bed, he seated himself beside it, saying, "It is quite clear, sir,that you are not well, and although, if we were both of us in our owncountry, this visit of mine would, as you observe, be a considerableliberty, seeing that we are in a foreign land, I hope you will not deemmy intrusion of this nature, but suffer me, if I can, to be of someservice to you."Less the words themselves than a certain purpose-like kindliness in thespeaker's manner, induced Dalton to accept the offer, and reply to thequestions which the other proposed to him. "No, no, doctor," said he,after a few moments; "there is no great mischief brewing after all. Thetruth is, I was fretted harassed a little. It was about a boy of mineI have only one and he 's gone away to be a soldier with the Austrians.You know, of course as who does n't? how hard it is to do anything for ayoung man now-a-days. If family or high connection could do it, we 'dbe as well off as our neighbors. We belong to the Daltons of Garrigmore,that you know are full blood with the O'Neals of Cappagh. But what 'sthe use of blood now? devil a good it does a man. It would be betterto have your father a cotton-spinner, or an iron-master, than thedescendant of Shane Mohr na Manna.""I believe you are right," observed the doctor, dryly."I know I am; I feel it myself, and I 'm almost ashamed to tell it. Heream I, Peter Dalton, the last of them now; and may I never leave thisbed, if I could make a barony constable in the county where the king'swrit could n't run once without our leave.""But Ireland herself has changed more than your own fortunes," remarkedGrounsell."That's true, that 's true," sighed the sick man. "I don't remember thebest days of it, but I 've heard of them often and often from my father.The fine old times, when Mount Dalton was filled with company from theground to the slates, and two lords in the granary; a pipe of port winein the hall, with a silver cup beside it; the Modereen hounds, huntsmenand all, living at rack and manger, as many as fifty sitting down inthe parlor, and I won't say how many in the servants' hall; the finesthunters in the west country in the stables, there was life for you! Showme the equal of that in the wide world.""And what is the present condition of the scene of those festivities?"said Grounsell, with a calm but searching look."The present condition?" echoed Dalton, starting up to a sittingposture, and grasping the curtain with a convulsive grip; "I can't tellyou what it is to-day, this ninth of November, but I 'll tell what itwas when I left it, eighteen years ago. The house was a ruin; the lawna common; the timber cut down; the garden a waste; the tenants beggared;the landlord an exile. That 's a pleasant catalogue, is n't it?""But there must come a remedy for all this," remarked Grounsell, whoseideas were following out a very different channel."Do you mean by a poor-law? Is it by taxing the half ruined to feed thelazy? or by rooting out all that once was a gentry, to fill their placesby greedy speculators from Manchester and Leeds? Is that your remedy?It 's wishing it well I am! No; if you want to do good to the country,leave Ireland to be Ireland, and don't try to make Norfolk of her. Lether have her own Parliament, that knows the people and their wants.Teach her to have a pride in her own nationality, and not to be alwayslooking at herself in shame beside her rich sister. Give her a word ofkindness now and then, as you do the Scotch; but, above all, leave us toourselves. We understand one another; you never did, nor never will. Wequarrelled, and made friends again, and all went right with us; youcame over with your Chancery Courts, and your police, and whenever wediffered, you never stopped till we were beggared or hanged.""You take a very original view of our efforts at civilization, Iconfess," said Grounsell, smiling. "Civilization! Civilization! I hatethe very sound of the word; it brings to my mind nothing but countyjails, bridewells, turnpikes, and ministers' money. If it was n't forcivilization, would there be a receiver over my estate of Mount Dalton?Would the poor tenants be racked for the rent that I always gave timefor? Would there be a big poor-house, with its ugly front staring tothe highway, as they tell me there is, and a police barrack to keep itcompany, opposite? I tell you again, sir, that your meddling has donenothing but mischief. Our little quarrels you converted into seriousanimosities; our estrangements into the feuds of two opposing races; ourvery poverty, that we had grown accustomed to, you taught us to regardas a 'national disgrace,' without ever instructing us how to relieve it;and there we are now on your hands, neither English in industry, norIrish in submission, neither willing to work, nor content to be hungry!"The doctor saw by the agitated look and tone of the sick man that thesubject was one of too much excitement for him, and hastened to changethe topic by jocularly expressing a hope that he might prove moresuccessful with him than England had been with his countrymen."I doubt it, sir," said Dalton, gravely; "not thanking you the lessfor your kindness. I believe, like my poor country, that I 'm pastdoctoring." He paused for a few seconds, and then added: "It's allfretting. It's thinking about the girls. Frank there is no fear of. That's what ails me."Grounsell saw that to prolong his visit would be but to encourage a toneof depression that must prove injurious; so promising to return to seehim in the morning, he shook Dalton's hand cordially, and followed Hansinto the adjoining room, where writing materials were prepared for him.The two girls were standing at the fire as he entered; and simple as wastheir dress, homely even to poverty, every trait of their costume, theirlooks, bespoke them of gentle blood. Their anxious glances as he cameforward showed their eagerness to hear his tidings; but they did notspeak a word."Do not be uneasy, young ladies," said he, hastening to relieve theirfears. "Your father's illness has nothing serious about it. A few dayswill, I trust, see him perfectly restored to health. Meanwhile you arehis best physicians, who can minister to his spirits and cheer him up.""Since my brother left us, sir, he appeared to sink hour by hour; hecannot get over the shock," said Ellen."I never knew him to give way before," interposed Kate. "He used to say,when anything grieved him, 'he 'd pay some one to fret for him.""With better health you 'll see his old courage return," said thedoctor, as he hastily wrote a few lines of prescription, and then layinghis head in his hand, seemed for some minutes lost in thought. Therewere little comforts, mat-' ters of trifling luxury he wished to order,and yet he hesitated, for he did not know how far they were compatiblewith their means; nor could he venture upon the hazard of offending byquestioning them. As in his uncertainty he raised his eyes, they fellupon the wooden figure which the dwarf had exhibited in the apothecary'sshop, and which now stood upon a table near. It was a child sleeping atthe foot of a cross, around which its arms were entwined. The emaciatedlimbs and wasted cheek portrayed fasting and exhaustion, while in theattitude itself, sleep seemed verging upon death."What is that?" asked he, hastily, as he pointed with his pen to theobject."A poor child was found thus, frozen to death upon the Arlberg," saidKate; "and my sister carved that figure from a description of theevent.""Your sister! This was done by you," said Grounsell, slowly, as heturned his gaze from the work to the artist."Yes," cried Hans, whose face beamed with delight; "is it not'lieblich?' is it not vonderful? Dass, I say, alway; none have taste nownone have de love to admire!"Stooping down to examine it better, Grounsell was struck by theexpression of the face, whereon a smile of trustfulness and hope seemedwarring with the rigid lines of coming death; so that the impressionconveyed was more of a victory over suffering than of a terrible fate."She is self-taught, sir; none even so much as assisted Ler by advice,"said Kate, proudly."That will be perhaps but too apparent from my efforts," said Ellen,smiling faintly.[Illustration:    078]"I'm no artist, young lady," said Grounsell, bluntly, "but I am wellversed in every variety of the human expression in suffering, and ofmere truth to nature I can speak confidently. This is a fine work! nay,do not blush, I am not a flatterer. May I take it with me, and show itto others more conversant with art than I am?""Upon one condition you may," said the girl, in a low, deep voice."Be it so; on any condition you wish.""We are agreed, then?""Perfectly.""The figure is yours Nay, sir your promise!"Groimsell stammered, and blushed, and looked confused; indeed, no manwas less able to extricate himself from any position of embarrassment;and here the difficulties pressed on every side, for while he scrupledto accept what he deemed a gift of real value, he felt that they too hada right to free themselves from the obligation that his presence as adoctor imposed. At last he saw nothing better than to yield; and inall the confusion of a bashfully awkward man, he mumbled out hisacknowledgments and catching up the figure, departed.Hans alone seemed dissatisfied at the result, for as he cast his wistfullooks after the wooden image, his eyes swam with his tears, and hemuttered as he went some words of deep desponding cadence.CHAPTER VI. A FIRST VISIT.THE dreary weather of November showed no signs of "taking up." Loweringdays of fog and gloom alternated with cold winds and sleet, so that allout-door occupation was utterly denied to that imprisoned party, whowere left with so few resources to pass the time within. It is true theydid not make the best of the bad. Lady Hester grew hourly more irritableand peevish. Sydney Onslow seldom left her room. George took to thehills every morning, and never returned before a late dinner; while thedoctor, when not with Sir Stafford, spent all his time at the Dal tons',with whom he had already established a close intimacy.Lady Hester had exhausted every possible means she could imagine towhile away the hours; she had spent whole days in letter-writing foliosof "tirades" to every one she could think of. She had all the carriagesinspected, and the imperials searched, for books she well knew hadbeen left behind. She had sent for the landlord's daughter to give herlessons in German, which she thought of learning during the week. Shehad given a morning to the Italian boy with his white mice, and poredfor hours long over the "Livre des Voyageurs," reading the names offriends who, with better fortune, had taken their departure for Italy.But at last there came an end even to these frail resources, and shewas left utterly without an occupation to engage, or even a thought toemploy her. The five minutes of morning altercation with Grounsell over,the dreary time was unbroken by a single event, or uncheckered by asingle hope. Sir Stafford was indeed recovering, but so slowly thatweeks might be required ere he could proceed on his journey. How werethey to be passed? was the fearful question to which she could find noanswer. She looked with actual envy at the party of boors who played atdominos in the beer-house opposite, and followed with longing eyes thelittle mail-cart as it left the village. If she could read Germau, therewere scores of books at her service. If she could but take a charitableturn, there was poverty enough to give her occupation from morn tillnight. She never knew what it was to think seriously, for meditation isthe manufacture that cannot work without its raw material, and with thisher mind was not stored.It was in this pitiable frame of mind she was walking up and down thedrawing-room one morning, just as the doctor had taken his departure,and with him the last little scene that was to relieve the day, whenthe servant entered with the card of Colonel Haggerstone, and the dailyrepeated inquiry for Sir Stafford's health.Had the gallant colonel presented himself at Wilton Crescent, or theVilla, it is more than likely that the well-instructed porter had notvised his passport, but at once consigned a name of such unimposingconsonants to gentle obscurity, while such an entry in the visiting-bookhad been coolly set down as a mistake. Not so now, however. Lady Hestertook up the card, and, instead of the habitual curt rejoinder, "SirStafford is better," said, "You may tell Colonel Haggerstone that LadyHester will receive him."The gallant colonel, who was negligently slapping his boots with hisriding-whip below stairs, was not a little amazed at the message.There had been a time when he would have interpreted the favor mostflatteringly. He would have whispered to himself, "She has seen mepassing the window, she was struck with me as I rode by." Time had,however, toned down these bright illusions, and he read the permissionwith a nearer approach to truth, as a fine-lady caprice in a moment ofennui. "I thought as much," muttered he to himself as he slowly ascendedthe stairs; "the blockade was too strictly enforced not to tell at last.No newspapers, no books ha! ha! Could n't help surrendering!"The colonel had by this time given his whiskers and moustaches thelast curl, thrown back his head into a position of calm dignity, as theservant, throwing wide the folding-doors, announced him. Advancing twopaces, and bowing low, Colonel Haggerstone said, "Your Ladyship willpardon the liberty the very great liberty I have taken in my respectfulinquiries for some days past; but although probably not remembered bySir Stafford, I once did enjoy the honor of his acquaintance, we met atLord Kerrison's, in Scotland."Lady Onslow cut short this very uninteresting explanation by a bland butsomewhat supercilious smile, that seemed to say, "What possible mattercan it be?" while at the same time she motioned him to be seated."May I hope that Sir Stafford continues to improve?" said he, bowingagain."He's better to-day," said Lady Onslow, languidly. "Perhaps as wellas anyone can be in this wretched place. You heard, I suppose, of theseries of misfortunes that befell us, and compelled us to return here?"The colonel looked mildly compassionate and inquisitive. He anticipatedthe possible pleasure her Ladyship might feel in a personal narrative,and he was an accomplished listener. This time, however, he was wrong.Lady Onslow either did not think the occasion or the audience worth thetrouble of the exertion, and merely said, "We had a break-down somewherewith an odious name. Sir Stafford would travel by that road through theHohlen Thai, where somebody made his famous march. Who was it?""Massena, I think," said the colonel, at a haphazard, thinking that atleast the name was ben trovato, just as Sunday-school children fathereverything remarkable on John the Baptist."Oh dear, no; it was Moreau. We stopped to breakfast at the little innwhere he held his headquarters, and in the garden of which he amusedhimself in pistol-shooting, strange, was it not? Are you a good shot,Colonel?""Good among bad ones," said the colonel, modestly."Then we must have a match. I am so fond of it! You have pistols, ofcourse?""I am fortunate enough to have a case of Schlessinger's best, and atyour Ladyship's disposal.""Well, that is agreed upon. You 'll be kind enough to select a suitablespot in the garden, and if to-morrow be fine By the way what isto-morrow not Sunday I hope?"The colonel relieved her anxieties by the assurance that the next daywould be Monday, consequently that the present one was Sunday."How strange! One does make sad confusion in these things abroad," saidshe, sighing. "I think we are better in England in that respect, don'tyou?"The question was not a very clear one, but the colonel never hesitatedto give in his adhesion."Sir Stafford always took that view in the House, and consequentlydiffered from his party, as well as about Ireland. Poor dear Ireland!what is to be done for her?"This was a rather more embarrassing demand than the previous one, andthe colonel hemmed and coughed, and prepared for a speech of subtlegeneralities; but the dexterity was all unnecessary, for her Ladyshiphad already forgotten the theme, and everything about it, as she wenton. "How I pity those dear Wreckingtons, who are condemned to livethere! The Earl, you know, had promised solemnly that he would go anylengths for the party when he got his blue riband; and so they took himat his word, and actually named him to the viceroyalty. It was a verycruel thing, but I hear nothing could be better than his conduct onhearing it: and dear Lady Wreckington insisted upon accompanying him.It was exactly like the story of what was that man's name, who assistedin the murder of the Emperor Paul Geroboffskoi, or something like that,and whose wife followed him to the mines."The colonel avowed that the cases were precisely alike, and now theconversation if the word can be degraded to mean that bald disjointedchat ran upon London people and events their marriages, their dinners,their separations, coalitions, divorces, and departures; on allwhich themes Haggerstone affected a considerable degree of knowledge,although, to any one less occupied with herself than her Ladyship, itwould have been at once apparent that all his information was derivedfrom the newspapers. It was at the close of a lamentation on the utterstupidity of everything and everywhere, that he adroitly asked where shemeant to pass the winter."I wish I knew," said she, languidly. "The Dollingtons say Naples; theUpsleys tell us Rome; and, for my part, I pronounce for neither. LadyDollingtou is my aversion, and the three Upsley girls, with their pinknoses and red hair, are insufferable.""What does your Ladyship think of Florence?" asked the colonel,soothingly."Pretty much what I might of one of the Tonga Islands. I know nothing ofthe place, the people, or the climate. Pray tell me about it.""There is very little to say," said Haggerstone, shrugging hisshoulders; "not but the place might be very agreeable, if there weresome one of really fashionable standing to take the lead and give a toneto the society; some one who would unite indispensable rank and wealthwith personal graces, and thus, as it were, by prescriptive right,assume the first place. Then, I say, Florence would be second to no cityof Italy. Would that your Ladyship would condescend to accept the vacantthrone!""I!" said she, affecting astonishment; and then laughingly added: "Ohno! I detest mock sovereignty. I actually shudder at the idea of thelady-patroness part; besides, whom should one have to reign over?Not the Browns and Smiths and Perkinses; not the full-pensioned EastIndians, the half-pay colonels, and the no-pay Irish gentilities, thatform the staple of small city society. You surely would not recommend meto such a sad pre-eminence."The colonel smiled flatteringly at her Ladyship's smartness, andhastened to assure her that such heresy was far from his thoughts; andthen with a practised readiness ran over a list of foreign celebritiesFrench, Russian, and German whose names, at least, clinked like the truemetal.This looked promisingly; it was very like cutting all English society,and had the appearance of something very exclusive, very impertinent,and very ungenerous; and now she lent a willing ear as Haggerstonerevealed a plan of operations for a whole winter campaign. Accordingto his account, it was a perfect terra incognita, where the territoriallimits and laws might be laid down at will; it was a state which calledfor a great dictatorship, and the sway of unlimited authority.Now, Lady Hester had never at least since her marriage, and very rarelyeven before it been more than on the periphery of fashionable society.When she did obtain a footing within the charmed circle, it was by noprescriptive right, but rather on some ground of patronage, or someaccidental political crisis, which made Sir Stafford's influence amatter of moment. There was, therefore, a flattery in the thought ofthus becoming a leader in society; and she shrewdly remembered, thatthough there might be little real power, there would be all the tyrannyof a larger sovereignty.It is true she suffered no symptom of this satisfaction to escapeher; on the contrary, she compassionated the "poor dear things," thatthought themselves "the world," in such a place, and smiled with angelicpity at their sweet simplicity; but Haggerstone saw through all thesedisguises, and read her real sentiments, as a practised toadeater neverfails to do, where only affectation is the pretence. Adroitly avoidingto press the question, he adverted to Baden and its dreary weather;offered his books, his newspapers, his horses, his phaeton, andeverything that was his, even his companionship as a guide to the bestriding or walking roads, and, like a clever actor, made his exit at thevery moment when his presence became most desirable.Lady Hester looked out of the window, and saw, in the street beneath,the saddle-horses of the colonel, which were led up and down by agroom in the most accurate of costumes. The nags themselves, too, werehandsome and in top condition. It was a little gleam of civilization,in the midst of universal barrenness, that brought up memories, some ofwhich at least were not devoid of pain, so far as the expression of herfeatures might be trusted. "I wonder who he can be?" said she, musing."It's a shocking name! Haggerstone. Perhaps Sir Stafford may rememberhim. It's very sad to think that one should be reduced to such people."So, with a slight sigh, she sat down to indulge in a mood of deep andsincere commiseration for herself and her sorrows.From these reveries she was aroused by the arrival of a package of booksand papers from the colonel. They included some of the latest things ofthe day, both French and English, and were exactly the kind of readingshe cared for, that half-gossipry that revolves around a certain set,and busies itself about the people and incidents of one very smallworld. There were books of travel by noble authors, and novels by titledauthoresses; the one as tamely well bred and tiresome as the others werewarm and impassioned, no bad corroborative evidence, by the way, ofthe French maxim, that the "safety of the Lady Georginas has an immenserelation to the coldness of the Lord Georges." There were books ofbeauty, wherein loveliness was most aristocratic; and annuals wherenobility condescended to write twaddle. There were analyses of newoperas, wherein the list of the spectators was the only matter ofinterest, and better than these were the last fashions of "Longchamps,"the newest bulletins of that great campaign which began in Adam'sgarden, and will endure to the "very crack of doom."Lady Hester's spirits rallied at once from these well-timed stimulants;and when the party gathered together before dinner, George and hissister were amazed at the happy change in her manner."I have had a visitor," said she, after a short mystification; "acertain colonel, who assumes to be known to your father, but I fancywill scarcely be remembered by him, he calls himself Haggerstone.""Haggerstone!" said George, repeating the name twice or thrice. "Is notthat the name of the man who was always with Arlington, and of whom allthe stories are told?""As I never heard of Arlington's companion, nor the stories in question,I can't say. Pray enlighten us," said Lady Hester, tartly."Haggerstone sounds so like the name," repeated George to himself."So like what name? Do be good enough to explain.""I am unwilling to tell a story which, if not justly attributable to theman, will certainly attach unpleasantly to his name hereafter.""And in your excessive caution for yourself, you are pleased to forgetme, Mr. Onslow. Pray remember that if I admit him to acquaintance--""But surely you don't mean to do so?""And why not?""In the first place, you know nothing about him.""Which is your fault.""Be it so. I have at least told you enough to inspire reserve andcaution.""Quite enough to suggest curiosity and give a degree of interest to avery commonplace character.""Is he young, may I ask?" said George, with a half smile."No, far from it.""Good-looking?""Just as little.""Very agreeable and well-mannered?""Rather prosy, and too military in tone for my taste.""Does he come under the recommendatory 'firman' of any dear friend oracquaintance?""Nothing of the kind. There is his passport," said she, pointing to hisvisiting ticket."Your Ladyship used to be more difficult of access," said George, dryly."Very true; and so I may possibly become again. To make selections fromthe world of one's acquaintance is a very necessary duty; but, as myfather used to say, no one thinks of using a sieve for chaff.""This gentleman is, then, fortunate in his obscurity.""Here comes Miss Onslow," said Lady Hester, "who will probably be moregrateful to me when she learns that our solitude is to be enlivened bythe gallant colonel."Sydney scanned over the books and journals on the table, and thenquietly remarked, "If a man is to be judged of by his associates, thesedo not augur very favorably for the gentleman's taste.""I see that you are both bent on making him a favorite of mine," saidLady Hester, pettishly; "and if Dr. Grounsell will only discover someatrocious circumstance in his history or character, I shall be preparedto call him 'charming.'"The announcement of dinner fortunately broke up a discussion thatalready promised unfavorably; nor were any of the party sorry at theinterruption.CHAPTER VII. A LESSON IN PISTOL-SHOOTINGTHERE are two great currents which divide public opinion in the wholeworld, and all mankind may be classed into one or other of thesewide categories, "the people who praise, and the people who abuseeverything." In certain sets, all is as it ought to be, in this life.Everybody is good, dear, and amiable. All the men are gifted andagreeable; all the women fascinating and pretty. An indiscriminateshower of laudations falls upon everything or everybody, and the onlysurprise the bearer feels is how a world, so chuck full of excellence,can possibly consist with what one reads occasionally in the "Times" andthe "Chronicle."The second category is the Roland to this Oliver, and embraces those whohave a good word for nobody, and in whose estimation the globe is onegreat penal settlement, the overseers being neither more nor less thanthe best-conducted among the convicts. The chief business of thesepeople in life is to chronicle family disgraces and misfortunes, tostore their memories with defalcations, frauds, suicides, disreputabletransactions at play, unfair duels, seductions, and the like, and to bealways prepared, on the first mention of a name, to connect its owner,or his grandmother, with some memorable blot, or some unfortunate eventof years before. If the everlasting laudations of the one set makelife too sweet to be wholesome, the eternal disparagement of the otherrenders it too bitter to be enjoyable; nor would it be easy to saywhether society suffers more from the exercise of this mock charity onthe one side, or the practice of universal malevolence on the other.Perhaps our readers will feel grateful when we assure them that we arenot intent upon pushing the investigation further. The considerationwas forced upon us by thinking of Colonel Haggerstone, who was adistinguished member of class No. 2. His mind was a police sheet, orrather like a page of that celebrated "Livre Noir," wherein all theunexpiated offences of a nation are registered. He knew the familydisasters of all Europe, and not a name could be mentioned in societyto which he could not tag either a seduction, a fraud, a swindle, or apoltroonery; and when such revelations are given prosaically, with allthe circumstances of date, time, and place, unrelieved by the slightestspice of wit or imagination, but simply narrated as "Memoires pourservir a l'Histoire" of an individual, the world is very apt to acceptthem as evidences of knowledge of life, rather than what they reallyare, proofs of a malignant disposition. In this way, Haggerstone seemedto many the mere "old soldier," and nothing more; whereas, if nature hadgiven him either fancy or epigrammatic smartness, he would have been setdown for the incarnation of slander.It may seem strange that Lady Hester, who had lived a good deal in theworld, should never have met a character of this type, but so it was;she belonged to a certain "fast set" in society, who seem to ask for akind of indemnity for all they do, by never, on any occasion, stoppingto criticise their neighbors. This semblance of good nature is a betterdefensive armor than the uninitiated know of, enlisting all loosesympathies with its possessor, and even gaining for its advocates thatgreat floating majority who speak much and think little.In London, Haggerstone would have at once appeared the very worst"ton," and she would have avoided the acquaintance of a man so unhappilygifted; but here, at Baden, with nothing to do, none to speak to, hebecame actually a prize, and she listened to him for hours with pleasureas he recounted all the misdeeds of those "dear, dear friends" who hadmade up her own "world." There was at heart, too, the soothing flatterythat whispered, "He can say nothing of me; the worst he can hint is,that I married a man old enough to be my father, and if I did, I amheartily sorry for the mistake."He was shrewd enough soon to detect the family differences thatprevailed, and to take advantage of them, not by any imprudent orill-advised allusion to what would have enlisted her Ladyship's pridein opposition, but by suggesting occupations and amusements that he sawwould be distasteful to the others, and thus alienate her more and morefrom their companionship. In fact, his great object was to make LadyHester a disciple of that new school which owns Georges Sand for itspatron, "and calls itself Lionue." It would be foreign to our purposehere were we to stop and seek to what social causes this new sect owesexistence. In a great measure it may be traced to the prevailing tasteof men for club life, to that lounging ease which exacts no tribute ofrespect or even attention, but suffers men to indulge their caprices toany extent of selfishness; thus unfitting them for ladies' society,or only such society as that of ladies condescending enough to unsexthemselves, and to talk upon themes and discuss subjects that usuallyare reserved for other audiences.Certain clever men liked this liberty, these receptions were a kind offree port, where all could be admitted duty free. Nothing was forbiddenin this wide tariff, and so conversation, emancipated from therestriction of better society, permitted a thousand occasions ofdisplay, that gradually attracted people to these reunions, and made allother society appear cold, formal, and hypocritical by contrast. Thisnew invention had not reached England when Lady Hester quitted it, butshe listened to a description of its merits with considerable interest.There were many points, too, in which it chimed in with her notions. Ithad novelty, liberty, and unbounded caprice amongst its recommendations;and lastly, it was certain to outrage the "Onslows." It was a "part"which admitted of any amount of interpolations. Under its sanction shewould be free to say anything, know any one, and go anywhere. Blessedimmunity that permitted all and denied nothing!With all the vulgar requirements of "Lionism" she was alreadysufficiently conversant. She could ride, drive, shoot, and fence; wasa very tolerable billiard-player, and could row a little. But with thehigher walks of the craft she had made no acquaintance; she had notlearned to swim, had never smoked, and was in dark ignorance of thatform of language which, half mystical and all-mischievous, is in voguewith the members of this sect. That she could acquire all thesethings rapidly and easily the colonel assured her, and, by wayof "matriculating," reminded her of her challenge respecting thepistol-shooting, for which he had made every preparation in the gardenof the hotel.True to his word, he had selected a very pretty alley, at the end ofwhich rose a wall sufficiently high to guard against accidents fromstray shots. On a table were displayed, in all the dandyism suchobjects are capable of, a handsome case of pistols, with all the variedappliances of kid leather for wadding, bullet-moulds, rammers, hammers,screws, and rests, even to a russia-leather bound note-book, to recordthe successes, nothing had been forgotten; and Lady Hester surveyed withpleasure preparations which at least implied an anxious attention to herwishes."Only fancy the barbarism of the land we live in," said he; "I have sentemissaries on every side to seek for some of those plaster images socommon in every city of Europe, but in vain. Instead of your ladyshipcutting off Joan of Arc's head, or sending your bullet through someredoubtable enemy of England, you must waste your prowess and skillupon an ignoble jar of porcelain, or a vase of Bohemian glass; unless,indeed, my last messenger shall have proved more fortunate, and Ibelieve such is the case." As he spoke, his servant came up with a smallparcel carefully enveloped in paper."I have got this figure, sir," said he, "with the greatest difficulty,and only indeed by pretending we wanted it as an ornamental statue. Thelittle fellow of the toy-shop parted with it in tears, as if it had beenhis brother.""It is very beautiful!" said Lady Hester, as she surveyed a small woodenstatue of Goethe's "Marguerite," in the attitude of plucking the petalsof a flower to decide upon her lover's fidelity."A mere toy!" said Haggerstone. "These things are carved by every childin the Black Forest. Does your Ladyship think you could hit the featherof her cap without hurting the head?""I couldn't think of such profanation," replied she; "there is reallysomething very pretty in the attitude and expression. Pray let usreserve her for some less terrible destiny."But the colonel persisted in assuring her that these were the commonestknick-knacks that adorned every peasant's cabin, that every boor with arusty knife carved similar figures, and in the midst of his explanationshe placed the statue upon a little stone pillar about twenty paces off.Lady Hester's objection had been little more than a caprice; indeed, hadshe been convinced that the figure was a valuable work of art, shewould have felt rather flattered than otherwise at the costliness of theentertainment provided for her. Like Cleopatra's pearl, it would havehad the charm of extravagance at least; but she never gave the colonelcredit for such gallantry, and the more readily believed all he said onthe subject.Colonel Haggerstone proceeded to load the pistols with all that pomp andcircumstance so amusingly displayed by certain people on like occasions.The bullets, encased in little globes of chamois, carefully powderedwith emery, were forced down the barrels by a hammer, the hair triggeradjusted, and the weapon delivered to Lady Hester with due solemnity."If I go wide of the mark, Colonel, I beg you to remember that I havenot had a pistol in my hand for above three years; indeed, it must benearly four years since I shot a match with Lord Norwood.""Lord Norwood! indeed!" said Haggerstone. "I wasn't aware that yourLadyship had ever been his antagonist."Had not Lady Hester been herself anxious to hide the confusion theallusion to the viscount always occasioned her, she could not havefailed to remark how uncomfortably astonished was Haggerstone at themention of that name. Nervously eager to do something anything thatmight relieve her embarrassment she pulled the trigger; but the aim wasan erring one, and no trace of the bullet to be seen."There 's no use in looking for it, Colonel Haggerstone," said she,pettishly; "I'm certain I was very wide of the mark.""I 'm positive I saw the plaster drop from the wall somewherehereabouts," said the complaisant Colonel, pointing to a spot closebeside the figure. "Yes, and the twigs are broken here.""No matter; I certainly missed, and that's quite enough. I told you Ishould, before I fired; and when one has the anticipation of failure, itis so easy to vindicate the impression."[Illustration:   094]It was in evident chagrin at her want of success that she spoke, and allher companion's flatteries went for nothing. Meanwhile, he presented thesecond pistol, which, taking hastily, and without giving herself timefor an aim, she discharged with a like result."I 'll not try again," said she, pettishly. "Either the pistols don'tsuit me, or the place or the light is bad. Something is wrong, that'scertain."Haggerstone bit his lip in silence, and went on reloading the pistolswithout trusting himself to reply. A little conflict was going on withinhim, and all his intended flatteries for her Ladyship were warring withthe desire to display his own skill, for he was a celebrated shot, andnot a little vain of the accomplishment. Vanity carried the day at last,and taking up the weapon, he raised it slowly to a level with his eye. Asecond or two he held it thus, his hand steady as a piece of marble."I have taken my aim, and now you may give the word for me to fire whenyou please," said he, turning his eyes from the object, and lookingstraight at Lady Hester.She stared at him as if to reassure herself of the direction of hisglance, and then called out "Fire!" The shot rang out clear and sharp;with it arose a shrill cry of agony, and straight before them, at thefoot of the pillar, lay something which looked like a roll of clothes,only that by its panting motion it indicated life. Haggerstone sprangforward, and to his horror discovered the dwarf, Hans Roeckle, who, withhis arm broken, lay actually bathed in blood. With his remaining hand heclasped the little statue to his bosom, while he muttered to himself thewords "Gerettet! saved! saved!"While Lady Hester hurried for assistance, Haggerstone bound up thebleeding vessels with his handkerchief; and in such German as he couldcommand, asked how the accident had befallen.A few low muttering sounds were all the dwarf uttered, but he kissed thelittle image with a devotion that seemed like insanity. Meanwhile thecolonel's servant, coming up, at once recognized Hans, and exclaimed,"It is the little fellow of the toy-shop, sir. I told you with whatreluctance he parted with this figure. He must be mad, I think."The wild looks and eager expressions of the dwarf, as he clutched theimage and pressed it to his heart, seemed to warrant the suspicion; andHaggerstone thought he could read insanity in every line of the poorcreature's face. To the crowd that instantaneously gathered around theinn door, and which included many of his friends and acquaintances, Hanswould give no other explanation of the event than that it was a mereaccident; that he was passing, and received the shot by chance; nothingmore."Is he not mad, or a fool?" asked Haggerstone of the innkeeper."Neither, sir; Hans Roeckle is an old and respected burgher of our town,and although eccentric and odd in his way, is not wanting for good senseor good nature.""Ay! ay!" cried two or three of his townsfolk, to whom the landlordtranslated the Colonel's question; "Hans is a kind-hearted fellow, andif he loves his dolls and wooden images over-much, he never lacks inaffection for living creatures."While these and such-like observations were making around him, thedwarf's wounds were being dressed by his friend, Ludwig Kraus, anoperation of considerable pain, that the little fellow bore with heroictranquillity. Not a word of complaint, not a syllable of impatienceescaped him; and while from his half-closed lips a low, mutteredexclamation of "Saved! saved!" came forth from time to time, thebystanders deemed it the utterance of gratitude for his own escape withlife.But once only did any expression of irritation burst from him, it waswhen Haggerstone pulled out his purse, and with an ostentatious displayof munificence asked him to name his recompense. "Take me home; take mehence!" said Hans, impatiently. "Tell the rich 'Englander' that thereare wounds for which sorrow would be an ample cure, but there are otherswhich insult is sure to fester."CHAPTER VIII. THE NIGHT EXCURSIONTHE remainder of the day after the dwarf's misfortune was passed by LadyHester in a state of feverish irritability. Sorry as she felt for the"sad accident," her own phrase, she was still more grieved for theeffects it produced upon herself; the jar and worry of excited feelings,the uncomfortableness of being anxious about anything or anybody.Epicurean in her code of manners as of morals, she detested whateveroccasioned even a passing sensation of dissatisfaction, and hence uponthe luckless colonel, the author of the present evil, fell no measuredshare of her displeasure. "He should have taken precautions againstsuch a mishap; he ought to have had sufficient presence of mind to havearrested his aim; he should have fired in the air, in fact, he ought tohave done anything but what he did do;" which was to agitate the nerves,and irritate the sensibilities, of a fine lady.The conduct of the family, too, was the very reverse of soothing. SirStafford's gout had relapsed on hearing of the event; George Onslow'sanger was such that he could not trust himself to speak of theoccurrence; and as for Sydney, though full of sorrow for the dwarf, shehad not a single sympathy to bestow upon her stepmother. "Were thereever such people?" she asked herself again and again. Not one had takenthe trouble to ask how she bore up, or express the slightest anxiety forthe consequences the shock might occasion her.Grounsell was actually insufferable; and even hinted that if anythinguntoward were to happen, the very grave question might arise as tothe guilt of the parties who appeared in arms without a Governmentpermission. He reminded her Ladyship that they were not in England, butin a land beset with its own peculiar prejudices and notions, and innothing so rigorous as in the penalties on accidents that took theirorigin in illegality.As for the wound itself, he informed her that the bullet had "traversedthe deltoid, but without dividing the brachial artery; and, for thepresent, sympathetic fever and subcutaneous inflammation would be theworst consequences." These tidings were neither very reassuring norintelligible; but all her cross-examination could elicit little better."Has Colonel Haggerstone been to see him?" asked she."No, madam. His groom called with a present of two florins.""Oh! impossible, sir.""Perfectly true, madam. I was present when the money was returned to theman by a young lady, whose attentions to the sufferer saved him the painthis indignity would have cost him.""A young lady, did you say? How does he happen to be so fortunate in hisattendance?""Her father chances to be this poor creature's tenant, and many mutualacts of kindness have passed between them.""Not even scandal could asperse her motives in the present case," saidLady Hester, with an insolent laugh. "It looked hardly human when theylifted it from the ground.""Scandal has been guilty of as gross things, madam," said Grounsell,sternly, "but I would defy her here, although there is beauty enoughto excite all her malevolence." And with this speech, delivered with apointedness there was no mistaking, the doctor left the room.Impressions, or what she herself would have called "feelings," chasedeach other so rapidly through Lady Hester's mind, that her wholeattention was now directed to the young lady of whom Grounsell spoke,and whose singular charity excited all her curiosity. There is a strangetendency to imitation among those whose intelligences lie unexercisedby any call of duty or necessity. No suggestion coming from within, theylook without themselves for occupation and amusement. Lady Hester was aprominent disciple of this school; all her life she had been following,eager to see whether the fashions that became, or the pleasures thatbeguiled, others, might not suit herself. If such a course of existenceinevitably conduces to ennui and discontent, it is no less difficult tostrive against; and they who follow in the track of others' footstepshave all the weariness of the road without the cheering excitement ofthe journey.If the young lady found pleasure in charity, why should n't she?Benevolence, too, for aught she knew, might be very becoming. There werea hundred little devices of costume and manner which might be adopted todisplay it. What a pretty version of the good Samaritan modernizedone might give in a Shetland scarf and a cottage bonnet the very thingChalons would like to paint; and what an effective "interior" mightbe made of the dwarf's chamber, crowded with rude peasant faces, allabashed and almost awe-struck as she entered.The longer she dwelt upon the theme the more fascinating it became. "Itwould be really worth while to realize," said she to herself at last "soamusing and so odd, an actual adventure; besides, in point of fact, itwas her duty to look after this poor creature." Just so; there never wasa frivolous action, or a notion struck out by passing folly, forwhich its author could not find a justification in PRINCIPLE! We areeverlastingly declaring against the knaveries and deceptions practisedon us in life; but if we only took count of the cheats we play off uponourselves, we should find that there are no such impostors as our ownhearts.Nobody was ever less likely to make this discovery than Lady Hester. Shebelieved herself everything that was good and amiable; she knew that shewas handsome. Whatever contrarieties she met with in life, she was quitecertain they came not from any fault of hers; and if self-esteem couldgive happiness, she must have enjoyed it. But it cannot. The wideneutral territory between what we think of ourselves and others think ofus is filled with daring enemies to our peace, and it is impossible toventure into it without a wound of self-love.To make her visit to the dwarf sufficient of an adventure, it mustbe done in secret; nobody should know it but Celestine, her maid, whoshould accompany her. Affecting a slight indisposition, she could retireto her room in the evening, and then there would be abundant time to puther plan into execution. Even these few precautions against discoverywere needless, for George did not return to dinner on that day, andSydney made a headache an excuse for not appearing.Nothing short of the love of adventure and the indulgence of a capricecould have induced Lady Hester to venture out in such a night. Therain fell in torrents, and swooped along the narrow streets in channelsswollen to the size of rivulets. The river itself, fed by many amountain stream, fell tumbling over the rocks with a deafening roar,amid which the crashing branches of the pine-trees were heard atintervals. What would not have been her anxieties and lamentingsif exposed to such a storm when travelling, surrounded with all theappliances that wealth can compass! and yet now, of her own free will,she wended her way on foot through the darkness and the hurricane, notonly without complaining, but actually excited to a species of pleasurein the notion of her imaginary heroism.The courier who preceded her, as guide, enjoyed no such agreeableillusions, but muttered to himself, as he went, certain reflections byno means complimentary, to the whims of fine ladies; while MademoiselleCelestine inwardly protested that anything, "not positively wrong,"would be dearly purchased by the dangers of such an excursion."Gregoire! Gregoire! where is he now!" exclaimed Lady Hester, as shelost sight of her guide altogether."Here, miladi," grunted out the courier, in evident pain; "I fail tobreak my neck over de stone bench.""Where 's the lantern, Gregoire?""Blowed away, zum Teufel, I believe." "What 's he saying, Celestine?what does he mean?"But mademoiselle could only answer by a sob of agony over her capote deParis, flattened to her head like a Highland bonnet."Have you no light? You must get a light, Gregoire.""Impossible, miladi; dere 's nobody livin' in dese houses at all.""Then you must go back to the inn for one; we 'll wait here till youreturn."A faint shriek from Mademoiselle Celestine expressed all the terror sucha proposition suggested."Miladi will be lost if she remain here all alone.""Perdue! sans doute!" exclaimed Celestiue."I am determined to have my way. Do as I bade you, Gregoire; returnfor a light, and we'll take such shelter as this door affords in themeanwhile."It was in no spirit of general benevolence that Gregoire tracked hisroad back to the "Russie," since, if truth must be told, he himself hadextinguished the light, in the hope of forcing Lady Hester to a retreat.Muttering a choice selection of those pleasant phrases with which hisnative German abounds, he trudged along, secretly resolving that hewould allow his mistress a reasonable interval of time to reflectover her madcap expedition. Meanwhile, Lady Hester and her maid stoodshivering and storm-beaten beneath the drip of a narrow eave. The spiritof opposition alone sustained her Ladyship at this conjuncture, for shewas wet through, her shoes soaked with rain, and the cold blast thatswept along seemed as if it would freeze the very blood in her heart.Celestine could supply but little of comfort or consolation, and keptrepeating the words, "Quelle aventure! quelle aventure!" in everyvariety of lamentation."He could easily have been back by this," said Lady Hester, after a longpause, and an anxious attention to every sound that might portend hiscoming: "I 'm certain it is full half an hour since he left us. What anight!""Et quelle aventure!" exclaimed Celestine, anew.None knew better than Lady Hester the significant depreciation of theFrenchwoman's phrase, and how differently had she rated all the hazardsof the enterprise if any compromise of character were to have followedit. However, it was no time for discussion, and she let it pass."If he should have missed the way, and not be able to find us!" shesaid, after another pause."We shall be found dead in the morning," cried Celestine; "et pourquelle a venture, mon Dieu, pour quelle aventure!"The possibility that her fears suggested, and the increasing severityof the storm for now the thunder rolled overhead, and the very groundseemed to shake with the reverberation served to alarm Lady Hester, andfor the first time she became frightened at their situation."We could scarcely find our way back, Celestine!" said she, rather inthe tone of one asking for comfort than putting a question."Impossible, miladi.""And Gregoire says that these houses are all uninhabited.""Quelle aventure!" sobbed the maid."What can have become of him? It is more than an hour now! What wasthat, Ce'lestine? was it lightning? there, don't you see it yonder,towards the end of the street? I declare it is Gregoire; I see thelantern."A cry of joy burst from both together, for already hope had begun towane, and a crowd of fearful anticipations had taken its place.Lady Hester tried to call his name, but the clattering noise of thestorm drowned the weak effort. The light, however, came nearer ateach instant, and there was no longer any doubt of their rescue, whensuddenly it turned and disappeared at an angle of the street. LadyHester uttered a piercing cry, and at the instant the lantern was againseen, showing that the bearer had heard the sounds."Here, Gregoire, we are here!" exclaimed she, in her loudest voice, andspeaking in English.Whoever carried the lantern seemed for a moment uncertain how to act,for there was no reply, nor any change of position for a few seconds,when at length the light was seen approaching where Lady Hester stood."I think I heard an English voice," said one whose accents proclaimedher to be a woman."Oh yes!" cried Lady Hester, passionately, "I am English. We have lostour way. Our courier went back to the inn for a lantern, and has neverreturned, and we are almost dead with cold and terror. Can you guide usto the Hotel de Russie?""The house I live in is only a few yards off. It is better you shouldtake shelter there for the present.""Take care, miladi!" whispered Celestine, eagerly. "This may be a plotto rob and murder us.""Have no fears on that score, mademoiselle," said the unknown, laughing,and speaking in French; "we are not very rich, but as surely we areperfectly safe company."Few as these words were, there was in their utterance that indescribabletone of good breeding and ease which at once reassured Lady Hester, whonow replied to her unseen acquaintance with the observance due to anequal, and willingly accepted the arm she offered for guidance andsupport."At the end of this little street, scarcely two minutes' walking, andyou will be there," said the unknown.Lady Hester scarcely heard the remark, as she ran on with voluble levityon the dangers they had run, the terrific storm, the desertion ofthe courier, her own fortitude, her maid's cowardice, what must havehappened if they had not been discovered, till at last she bethought herof asking by what singular accident the other should have been abroad insuch a terrible night."A neighbor and a friend of ours is very ill, madam, and I have been tothe doctor's to fetch some medicine for him.""And I, too, was bent upon a charitable errand," said Lady Hester, quitepleased with the opportunity of parading her own merits, "to visit apoor creature who was accidentally wounded this morning.""It is Hans Roeckle, our poor neighbor, you mean," cried the other,eagerly; "and here we are at his house." And so saying, she pushed opena door, to which a bell, attached on the inside, gave speedy warning oftheir approach."Dearest Kate!" cried a voice from within, "how uneasy I have been atyour absence!" And the same moment a young girl appeared with a light,which, as she shaded it with her hand, left her unaware of the presenceof strangers."Think rather of this lady, and what she must have suffered," said Kate,as, drawing courteously back, she presented her sister to Lady Hester."Or rather, what I might have suffered," interposed Lady Hester, "butfor the fortunate accident of your coming. A few moments back, as Istood shivering beneath the storm, I little thought that I should owemy rescue to a countrywoman. May I learn the name of one to whom I am sodeeply indebted?""Dalton, madam," said Nelly; and then with a slight confusion, added,"we ought, perhaps, to tell the circumstances which induced my sister tobe abroad at such an hour.""She knows it all," broke in Kate, "and can the more readily forgive it,as it was her own errand. But will not this lady come near the fire?"said she, addressing Mademoiselle Celestiue, who, as she followed therest into the humble chamber, was bestowing a most depreciatory glanceupon the place, the furniture, and the people."It is only my maid," said Lady Hester, carelessly. "And now it is timeI should introduce myself, and say that Lady Hester Onslow owes you allher gratitude." Ellen courtesied respectfully at the announcement, butKate Dalton's cheek colored slightly, and she bent a look of more thancommon admiration at the handsome figure of the stranger. An innatereverence for rank and title was rooted in her heart, and she wasoverjoyed to think that their chance acquaintance should be one of thatclass so distinctively marked out for honor. Prepared to admire everygrace and fascination of the high-born, Kate watched with eager anddelighted looks the slightest gestures, the least traits of manner, ofthe fashionable beauty. They were all attractions to which her heartgave a ready response. The accent in which she spoke, the carelesselegance of her attitude as she lay back in her chair, the charmingnegligence with which she wore the little portions of dress exchangedfor her own, were all inimitable graces in the eye of the simple girl.As for Lady Hester, accustomed to all the servile offices of her ownattendants, to be punctiliously obeyed and waited on, it was yet a newsensation to watch the zealous and eager devotion with which the twosisters ministered to her wants. In utter forgetfulness of themselves,they had brought forth the little resources of their humble wardrobe,too happy, as it seemed, when they saw their services so willinglyaccepted. Fortunately, they did not perceive the contemptuous lookswith which "mademoiselle" regarded their attentions, nor overheardher exclamation of "Mon Dieu! where did they gather together thesechiffons?" as she surveyed the somewhat antiquated stores of theirtoilette.Even had Lady Hester's good breeding not prompted a gracious receptionof what was so generously offered, the very singularity of the scenewould have had its charm in her estimation. She was delighted witheverything, even to Kate Dalton's slippers, which, by a most happyflattery, were a little too large for her. She fancied, too, that hercostume, curiously made up of shreds and patches the most incongruous,was the dress of an Irish peasant, and was in an ecstasy at the thoughtof a similar one at her next fancy ball. Besides all these internalsources of self-satisfaction, the admiration of the two sisters wasanother and more legitimate cause of pleasure; for even Ellen, with allher natural reserve and caution, was scarcely less impressed than Katewith the charm of those fascinations which, however destined but for oneclass of society, are equally successful in all.Ellen Dalton's life had not been devoid of trials, nor had they failedto teach their own peculiar lessons; and yet her experiences had notshown her how very like right feeling good breeding can be, and howclosely good manners may simulate every trait of a high and generousnature.CHAPTER IX. A FINE LADY'S BLANDISHMENTS.WE left Lady Hester, in our last chapter, employed in the exercise ofthose fascinations which, however unlike in other respects, have thisresemblance to virtue, that they are assuredly their own reward. Thecharm of courtesy never conferred one half the pleasure on those forwhom it was exercised as to him who wielded it. It matters littlewhether the magician be prince or "charlatan," the art of pleasing isone of the most agreeable faculties human nature can be endowed with.Whether Lady Hester was aware of the theory or not, she felt the fact,as she saw the undisguised admiration in the faces of the two sisters;for while she had won over Nelly by the elevation of her sentiments andthe kindness of her expressions, Kate was fascinated by her beauty, hergrace, her easy gayety, and a certain voluble lightness that simulatesfrankness.Without anything that approached the prying of curiosity, for she wasboth too well bred and too little interested to have so felt such amotive, she inquired by what accident the Daltons remained at Baden solate in the season, affected to see some similarity between their casesand her own, asked in the most feeling terms for their father, whoseill-health she deplored, and then took such an interest in "dear Frank,"that Kate could not resist showing a portrait of him, which, howeverhumble its claims to art, still conveyed a not unfaithful resemblance ofthe handsome youth.While thus hearing about them, she was equally communicative aboutherself, and enlisted all the sympathies of the girls as she recountedtheir escape from the torrent in the Black Forest, and their subsequentrefuge in Baden.Thence she diverged to Sir Stafford's illness, her own life of seclusionand sadness, and, by an easy transition, came round to poor HansRoeckle and the accident of that morning."Do tell me everything about the poor dear thing," said she, poutingly."They say it is mad.""No, madam," said Nelly, gravely; "Hans, with many eccentricities ofmanner, is very far from deficient in good sense or judgment, and ismore than ordinarily endowed with right feeling and kindness of heart.""He is a dwarf, surely?""Yes, but in intelligence--""Oh, that, of course," interrupted she; "they are rarely deficient inacuteness, but so spiteful, so full of malice. My dear child, there 'sno trusting them. They never forget an injury, nor even an imaginaryslight. There was that creature what was his name? that Polish thing,Benywowski, I think you remember, they baked him in a pie, to amuseCharles II. well, he never forgave it after wards, and to the day of hisdeath could never bear the sight of pastry.""I must except poor Hans from this category," said Nelly, mildly, andwith difficulty restraining a smile. "He is amiability itself."Lady Hester shook her head doubtfully, and went on."Their very caprices, my dear, lead them into all kinds ofextravagances. For instance, this poor thing, it would seem, is soenamored of these wooden toys that he makes himself, that he cannot bearto part with them. Now, there 's no saying to what excesses he mightbe carried by this absurd passion. I have read of the most atrociousmurders committed under a similar fanaticism.""I assure you, madam, there need be no fear of such in the presentinstance. In the first case, Hans is too good; in the second, theobjects are too valueless.""Very true, so they are; but he doesn't think them so, you know.""Nay, my Lady; nor would you either, were you to regard them withattention," broke in Kate, whose cheek was now one glow of scarlet."Even this, half finished as it is, may lay claim to merit." And as shespoke, she removed a napkin from a little statue, before which she heldthe candle."For shame, Kate, dearest Kate!" cried Nelly, standing up in bashfuldiscomfiture."It is a statuette of poor Frank, madam," continued Kate, who, totallyregardless of her sister's interruption now exhibited the figure nearer."You see him just as he left us, his knapsack on his shoulder, his swordfastened across it, his little cap on one side of his head, andthat happy smile upon his lips. Poor dear fellow! how sad a heart itcovered!""And was this his work?" asked Lady Hester, in astonishment."No, madam; my sister Nelly was the artist of this, as of all theothers. Unaided and untaught, her own ingenuity alone suggesting themeans, as her imagination supplied the conception.""Kate! dear, dear Kate!" said Ellen, with a voice of almost rebuke."You forget how unworthy these poor efforts are of such high-soundingepithets." Then, turning to Lady Hester, she continued: "Were it to earsless charitable than yours, madam, these foolish words were spoken, Ishould fear the criticism our presumption would seem to call forth. Butyou will not think harshly of us for ignorance.""But this figure is admirable; the attitude is graceful; the characterof the head, the features, are in good keeping. I know, of course,nothing of the resemblance to your brother, but, as a work of art, I amcompetent to say it has high merit. Do tell me how the thought of doingthese things first occurred to you.""I learned drawing as a child, madam, and was always fond of it," saidEllen, with a degree of constraint that seemed as if the question werepainful to answer."Yes, and so have I spent months ay, I believe I might say years at theeasel, copying every Giorgione at Venice and every Vandyk at Genoa, andyet such a thought never suggested itself to me.""I am happy to think so, madam," was the low response."Why so? how do you mean?" asked Lady Hester, eagerly."That the motive in my case never could have been yours, madam.""And what was the motive?""Poverty, madam. The word is not a pleasant word to syllable, but it iseven better than any attempt at disguise. These trifles, while beguilingmany a dreary hour, have helped us through a season of more than usualdifficulty.""Yes, madam," broke in Kate. "You are aware that papa's property is inIreland, and for some years back it has been totally unproductive.""How very sad how dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Hester. But whether theexpressions referred to the condition of the Daltons or of Ireland, itis not quite clear."I doubt, madam, if I should have ventured on the confession," saidEllen, with a voice of calm firmness, "were it not for the opportunityit offers of bearing testimony to the kindness of our poor friendyonder, Hans Roeckle. These efforts of mine have met such favor inhis eyes that he accepts them all, taking them as rapidly as they arefinished, and, I need not say, treating me with a generosity that wouldbecome a more exalted patron and a better artist.""It is quite a romance, I declare!" cried Lady Hester. "The Wood Demonand the Maiden. Only he is not in love with you, I hope?""I'm not quite sure of that," said Kate, laughing; "at least, when somerivalry of her own wooden images does not intervene.""Hush! Hans is awaking," said Ellen, as on tiptoe she crossed the roomnoiselessly, and opened the door of the chamber where the dwarf lay.Lady Hester and Kate now drew near and peeped in. On a low settle overwhich an old scarlet saddle-cloth, fringed with tarnished lace, wasspread as a quilt lay Hans Roeckle, his wounded arm supported by apillow at his side; his dark eyes glistened with the bright glareof fever, and his cheeks were flushed and burning, as his lips movedunceasingly, with a low muttering, which he continued, regardless of thepresence of those who now approached his bedside."What is it he is saying? Does he complain of pain?" asked Lady Hester.[Illustration:   110]"I cannot understand him," said Nelly; "for ever since his accident hehas spoken in his native dialect the patois of the Bregentzer Wald ofwhich I am utterly ignorant; still he will reply to me in good Germanwhen questioned." Then, stooping down, she asked, "Are you better,Hans?"Hans looked up steadfastly in her face without speaking; it seemed as ifher voice had arrested his wandering faculties, but yet not awakened anyintelligence."You are thirsty, Hans," said she, gently, as she lifted a cup of waterto his lips. He drank greedily, and then passed his hand across hisbrow, as if trying to dispel some tormenting fancies. After a second ortwo, he said: "It was in Nuremberg, in the Oden Gasse, it happened. TheRitter von Ottocar stabbed her as she knelt at the cross; and the dwarf,Der Mohrchen, as they called him, tore off his turban to bind up thewound; and what was his reward, maiden? tell me that! Are ye all soshamed that ye dare not speak it?""We know it not, Hans; we never heard of the Ritter nor the Mohrchenbefore.""I 'll tell you, then. They burned him as a warlock in the Hohen Platznext morning." With a wild burst of savage laughter he closed thisspeech, which he spoke in good German; but immediately after histhoughts seemed to turn to his old Tyrol haunts and the familiarlanguage of his native land, as he sang, in a low voice, the followingwords:"A Buchsel zu schiessen,A Stossring zu schlagn,A Dienal zu Liebn,Muss a Rue hahn.""What does he mean? Do tell me," said Lady Hester, whose interest in thescene was more that of curiosity than compassion."It is a peasant dialect; but means, that a rifle to shoot with, aweapon to wield, and a maiden to love, are all that a good Tyrolerneeds in life," said Kate, while Nelly busied herself in arranging theposition of the wounded limb, little offices for which the poor dwarflooked his gratitude silently."How wild his looks are!" said Lady Hester. "See how his eyes glancealong the walls, as if some objects were moving before them!" And soin reality was it. Hanserl's looks were riveted upon the strange andincongruous assemblage of toys which, either suspended from nails orranged on shelves, decorated the sides of the chamber. "Ay," said heat last, with a melancholy smile, "thou 'lt have to put off all thisbravery soon, my pretty damsels, and don the black veil and the hood,for thy master Hans is dying!""He is talking to the wax figures," whispered Kate."And ye too, my brave hussars, and ye Uhlaners with your floatingbanners, must lower your lances as ye march in the funeral procession,when Hanserl is dead! Take down the wine-bush from the door, hostess,and kneel reverently, for the bell is ringing; and here comes the priestin his alb, and with the pix before him. Hush! they are chanting hisrequiem. Ah! yes. Hanserl is away to the far-off land,Wo sind die Tage lang genug,Wo sind die Nachte mild.""Come away, we do but excite his mind to wanderings," said Ellen: "solong as there is light to see these toys, his fancy endows them all withlife and feeling, and his poor brain is never at rest." The sound ofvoices in the outer room at the same moment caught their attention, andthey heard the courier of Lady Hester in deep converse with MademoiselleCelestine. He, deploring the two hours he had passed in hunting afterhis mistress through the dark streets of the village; and she, not lesseloquently, bewailing the misery of a night spent in that comfortlesscabin. "To visit a wretched dwarf, too! Parbleu! had it been arendezvous with some one worth while, but an excursion without anobject, sans emotion meme, it is too bad!""Que voulez-vous!" said Monsieur Gregoire, with a shrug of theshoulders; "she is English!""Ah! that is no reason for a vulgar caprice, and I, for one, will notendure it longer. I cannot do so. Such things compromise one's self.I 'll give warning to-morrow. What would my poor dear mistress, laMarquise, say, if she only knew how mes petits talents were employed?""Do not be rash, mademoiselle," interposed the courier; "they are rich,very rich, and we are going to Italy too, the real pays de Cocagne ofour profession."How far his persuasions might have gone in inducing her to reconsiderher determination there is no saying, when they were suddenlyinterrupted by Lady Hester's appearance.Her first care was to ascertain that her absence from the hotel had notbeen remarked, her secret, as she loved to fancy it, remained sacred.Having learned thus much, she listened with a kind of childish pleasureto the courier's version of all his unhappy wanderings in search ofher, until he at last descried a light, the only one that shone from anywindow in the whole village.As Gregoire had provided himself with a sufficient number of shawls,cloaks, and clogs, and as the storm had now passed over, Lady Hesterprepared to take her leave, delighted with her whole night's adventure.There had been excitement enough to make it all she could desire; nordid she well know whether most to admire her heroism during the storm,or the success with which she captivated the two sisters; the couragewhich planned the expedition, or the grace with which it was executed."You'll come and see me, Miss Dalton; mind, I'm always at home.Remember, Miss Kate Dalton, that they must not deny me to you" saidshe, in her most winning of manners. The two girls gave their promise inbashful diffidence, while she continued,"You'll say to your papa, too, that Sir Stafford will wait on himwhenever he is able to leave the house. Mr. Onslow, indeed, ought tocall at once; but he is so odd. Never mind, we shall be great friends;and you 'll bring all your little carving tools and your models withyou, and work in my room. Your sister her embroidery, or her lace, orher crochet, or whatever it is, or you 'll read German for me, like adear child, that will be so delightful. I can't understand a word of it,but it sounds so soft, and you 'll tell me all it 's about won't you?And then this poor thing must want for nothing.""Nay, madam, he is in no need of anything but kindness. In a land wheresuch simple habits prevail, Hans Roeckle passes for rich.""How strange! how very odd! but I remember that poor Prince ofStolzenheimer. Papa used to say that he had six cordons, but only onecoat! I believe it was true.""Hanserl is better off, madam," replied Nelly, smiling; "at least asregards the coats.""Tell him, then, that I've been to see him, and am so grieved at hisaccident, but that it was all Colonel Haggerstone's fault, a bit ofsilly vanity to show how well he could shoot, and I 'm certain it justcomes of being used to the pistols. I never missed when I fired withNorwood's!"The utterance of that name seemed to recall her from the discursivebabble. She paused, and for a moment or two she was silent. At last,turning to the sisters, she reiterated her hopes of a speedy meeting,and with a cordial pressure of the hand to each, wished her lastgood-night, and departed.CHAPTER X. A FAMILY DISCUSSION.LONG before Lady Hester awoke on the following morning everycircumstance of her visit was known to Grounsell. It was the doctor'scustom to see Dalton early each day, and before Sir Stafford wasstirring, and to chat away an hour or so with the invalid, tellingthe current news of the time, and cheering his spirits by those littledevices which are not among the worst resources of the Materia Medica.With all his knowledge of Lady Hester's character, her caprices,her whims, and her insatiable passion for excitement, he was stillastonished beyond measure at this step: not that the false air ofbenevolence or charity deceived him, he was too old a practitioner inmedicine, and had seen far too much of the dark side of human nature,to be easily gulled, but his surprise arose from the novelty of hercondescending to know, and even propitiate, the good graces of peoplewhom she usually professed to regard as the least interesting of allclasses of mankind. The "reduced lady or gentleman" had only presentedthemselves to Lady Hester's mind by the medium of an occasionalcuriously worded advertisement in a morning paper, and were invariablyassociated with a subsequent police report, where the object ofcharity was sure to be confronted with half a dozen peers or members ofparliament, whose sympathies he had put under contribution, to support alife of infamy or extravagance. "A begging impostor" rang in her mindas a phrase whose ingredient words could not be divorced, and she wasthoroughly convinced that imposture and poverty were convertible terms.The very notion of any one having once been well off, and being now inembarrassment, was, to her deeming, most satisfactory evidence of pastmisconduct and present knavery. Grounsell had beard her hold forthon this theme more than once, "embroidering the sentiment" with anoccasional sly allusion to himself and his own fortunes, so that hehad often thought over the difficulty of serving the Daltons with SirStafford, by reflecting on the hostility any project would meet withfrom "my Lady," and now accident, or something very like it, had donewhat all his ingenuity could not succeed in discovering.The announcement at first rendered him perfectly mute; he heard itwithout power to make the slightest observation; and it was only at theend of a lengthy description from the two sisters, that he exclaimed, ina kind of half soliloquy, "By Jove, it is so like her, after all!""I 'm sure of it," said Nelly; "her manner was kindness and gentlenessitself. You should have seen the tender way she took poor Hansells handin her own, and how eagerly she asked us to translate for her the fewstray words he uttered.""Of course she did. I could swear to it all, now that my eyes areopened.""And with what winning grace she spoke!" cried Kate. "How the leastphrase came from her lips with a fascination that still haunts me!""Just so, just so!" muttered Grounsell."How such traits of benevolence ennoble high station!" said Nelly."How easy to credit all that one hears of the charms of intercourse,where manner like hers prevails on every side!" cried Kate,enthusiastically."How thoughtful in all her kindness!""What elegance in every movement!""With what inborn courtesy she accepted the little valueless attentions,which were all we could render her!""How beautiful she looked, in all the disorder of a dress so unlike herown splendor! I could almost fancy that old straw chair to be a handsomefauteuil since she sat in it.""How delightful it must be to be admitted to the freedom of dailyintercourse with such a person, to live within the atmosphere of suchgoodness and such refinement!" And thus they went on ringing the changesupon every gift and grace, from the genial warmth of her heart, to thesnowy whiteness of her dimpled hands; while Grouusell fidgeted in hischair, searched for his handkerchief, his spectacles, his snuff-box,dropped them all in turn, and gathered them up again, in a perfect feverof embarrassment and indecision."And you see her every day, doctor?" said Nelly."Yes, every day, madam," said he, hastily, and not noticing nor thinkingto whom he was replying."And is she always as charming, always as fascinating?""Pretty much the same, I think," said he, with a grunt."How delightful! And always in the same buoyancy of spirits?""Very little changed in that respect," said he, with another grunt."We have often felt for poor Sir Stafford being taken ill away fromhis home, and obliged to put up with the miserable resources of awatering-place in winter; but I own, when I think of the companionshipof Lady Hester, much of my compassion vanishes.""He needs it all, then," said Grounsell, as, thrusting his hands intothe recesses of his pockets, he sat a perfect picture of strugglingembarrassment."Are his sufferings so very great?"Grounsell nodded abruptly, for now he was debating within himself whatcourse to take; for while, on one side, he deemed it a point of honornot to divulge to strangers, as were the Daltons, any of the domesticcircumstances of those with whom he lived, he felt, on the other,reluctant to suffer Lady Hester's blandishments to pass for qualitiesmore sterling and praiseworthy."She asked the girls to go and see her," said Dalton, now breakingsilence for the first time; for although flattered in the main by whathe heard of the fine lady's manner towards his daughters, he was notwithout misgivings that what they interpreted as courtesy might just asprobably be called condescension, against which his Irish pride of birthand blood most sturdily rebelled. "She asked them to go and see her, andit was running in my head if she mio'ht not have heard something of thefamily connection.""Possibly!" asserted Grounsell, too deep in his own calculations towaste a thought on such a speculation."My wife's uncle, Joe Godfrey, married an Englishwoman. The sisterwas aunt to some rich city banker; and indeed, to tell the truth, hisfriends in Ireland never thought much of the connection but you seetimes are changed. They are up now, and we are down, the way of theworld! It 's little I ever thought of claiming relationship with thelike o' them!""But if it 's they who seek us, papa?" whispered Kate."Ay, that alters the case, my dear; not but I'd as soon excuse thepoliteness. Here we are, living in a small way; till matters come roundin Ireland, we can't entertain them, not even give them a dinner-party.""Oh, dearest papa," broke in Nelly, "is not our poverty a blessing if itsave us the humiliation of being absurd? Why should we think of such athing? Why should we, with our straitened means and the habits narrowfortune teaches, presume even to a momentary equality with those so muchabove us.""Faith, it's true enough!" cried Dalton, his cheek flushed with anger."We are changed, there's no doubt of it; or it is not a Dalton would saythe words you 've just said. I never knew before that the best in theland wasn't proud to come under our roof.""When we had a roof," said Nelly, firmly. "And if these ancestors hadpossessed a true and a higher pride, mayhap we might still have one.Had they felt shame to participate in schemes of extravagance and costlydisplay, had they withheld encouragement from a ruinous mode of living,we might still be dwellers in our own home and our own country."Dalton seemed thunderstruck at the boldness of a speech so unlike thegentle character of her who had uttered it. To have attributed anyportion of the family calamities to their own misconduct to havelaid the blame of their downfall to any score save that of Englishlegislation, acts of parliament, grand-jury laws, failure of the potatocrop, tithes, Terry alts, or smut in the wheat was a heresy he never, inhis gloomiest moments, had imagined, and now he was to hear it from thelips of his own child."Nelly Nelly Dal ton," said he; "but why do I call you Dalton? Have youa drop of our blood in your veins at all, or is it the Godfreys you takeafter? Extravagance, ruinous living, waste, what 'll you say next?" Hecould n't continue, indignation and anger seemed almost to suffocatehim."Papa, dearest, kindest papa!" cried Nelly, as the tears burst from hereyes, "be not angry with me, nor suppose that any ungenerous repiningagainst our altered lot finds a place in my heart. God knows that Igrieve not for myself; in the humble sphere in which I am placed, I havefound true contentment, greater, perhaps, than higher fortunes wouldhave given me; for here my duties are better defined, and my sense ofthem is clearer. If I feel sorrow, it is for you and my dear sister,for you, papa, who suffer from many a privation; for her, who might welladorn a more exalted station. But for me the lame Nelly, as childrenused to call me" She was not suffered to finish her speech, for alreadyher father had clasped his arms around her, and Kate, in a gush oftears, was sobbing on his shoulder."Where's the doctor? what's become of him?" said Dalton, as, recoveringfrom his emotion, he wished to give a different direction to theirthoughts."He went away half an hour ago, papa," said Kate. "He always goes offwithout saying good-bye, whenever there is a word said about family.""I noticed that, too, my dear," said Dalton, "and I would n't wonderif he came of low people; not but he 's a kind creature, and mightygood-hearted."Nelly could probably have suggested a better reason for the doctor'sconduct, but she prudently forbore from again alluding to a themealready too painful.With the reader's permission, we will now follow him as, with a gestureof impatience, he abruptly left the room on the very first mention byDalton of that genealogical tree in whose branches he loved to perchhimself."An old fool!" muttered Grounsell, as he passed downstairs, "an oldfool, that no experience will ever make wiser! Well may his nativecountry be a stumbling-block to legislators, if his countrymen be alllike him, with his family pride and pretension! Confound him! can'the see that there 's no independence for a man in debt, and no trueself-respect left for him who can't pay his tailor? For himself there'sno help; but the poor girls! he'll be the ruin of them. Kate is alreadya willing listener to his nonsensical diatribes about blood and family;and poor Nelly's spirits will be broken in the hopeless conflict withhis folly! Just so, that will be the end of it; he will turn the head ofone, and break the heart of the other; and yet, all the while, he firmlybelieves he is leaving a far better heritage behind him in this emptypride, than if he could bequeath every acre that once belonged tothem." Thus soliloquizing, he went on ringing changes over every form ofimprudence, waste, vanity, and absurdity, which, by applying to them thesimple adjective of "Irish," he fancied were at once intelligible, andneeded no other explanation. In this mood he made his entrance intoSir Stafford's chamber, and so full of his own thoughts that the worthybaronet could not fail to notice his preoccupation."Eh! Grounsel, what 's the matter, another row with my Lady, eh?" saidhe, smiling with his own quiet smile."Not to-day. We 've not met this morning, and, consequently, thearmistice of yesterday is still unbroken! The fatigue of last night has,doubtless, induced her to sleep a little longer, and so I have contrivedto arrive at noon without the risk of an apoplexy.""What fatigue do you allude to?""Oh, I forgot I have a long story for you. What do you suppose herLadyship has been performing now?""I 've heard all about it," said Sir Stafford, pettishly. "George hasgiven me the whole narrative of that unlucky business. We must take careof the poor fellow, Grounsell, and see that he wants for nothing.""You 're thinking of the pistol-shooting; but that 's not her Ladyship'slast," said the doctor, with a malicious laugh. "It is as a LadyBountiful she has come out, and made her debut last night I am boundto say with infinite success." And, without further preface, Grounsellrelated the whole adventure of Lady Hester's visit to the dwarf,omitting nothing of those details we have already laid beforethe reader, and dilating with all his own skill upon the possibleconsequences of the step. "I have told you already about thesepeople: of that old fool, the father, with his Irish pride, his Irishpretensions, his poverty, and his insane notions about family. Well,his head a poor thing in the best of times is gone clean mad about thisvisit. And then the girls! good, dear, affectionate children as theyare, they 're in a kind of paroxysm of ecstasy about her Ladyship'sstyle, her beauty, her dress, the charm of her amiability, thefascination of her manner. Their little round of daily duties willhenceforth seem a dreary toil; the very offices of their charitywill lose all the glow of zeal when deprived of that elegance whichrefinement can throw over the veriest trifle. Ay! don't smile at it, thefact is a stubborn one. They 'd barter the deepest devotion they everrendered to assuage pain for one trick of that flattery with which myLady captivated them. Will all the poetry of poor Nelly's heart shut outthe memory of graces associated with the vanities of fashion? Will allKate's dutiful affection exalt those household drudgeries in her esteem,the performances of which will henceforth serve to separate her more andmore from one her imagination has already enshrined as an idol?""You take the matter too seriously to heart, Grounsell," said SirStafford, smiling."Not a bit of it; I 've studied symptoms too long and too carefully notto be ever on the look-out for results. To Lady Hester, this visit isa little episode as easily forgotten as any chance incident of thejourney. But what an event is it in the simple story of their lives!""Well, well, it cannot be helped now; the thing is done, and there 'san end of it," said Sir Stafford, pettishly; "and I confess I cannot seethe matter as you do, for I have been thinking for two days back aboutthese Daltons, and of some mode of being of service to them, and thisvery accident may suggest the way. I have been looking over some oldletters and papers, and I 've no doubt that I have had unintentionally,of course a share in the poor fellow's ruin. Do you know, Grounsell,that this is the very same Peter Dalton who once wrote to me the mostinsulting letters, and even a defiance to fight a duel, because adistant relative bequeathed to me a certain estate that more naturallyshould have descended to him. At first, I treated the epistles asunworthy of any serious attention, they were scarcely intelligible,and not distinguished by anything like a show of reason; but when frominsult the writer proceeded to menace, I mentioned the affair to mylawyer, and, indeed, gave him permission to take any steps that might benecessary to rid me of so unpleasant a correspondent. I never heard moreof the matter; but now, on looking over some papers, I see that the casewent hardly with Dalton, for there was a 'rule to show cause,' and an'attachment,' and I don't know what besides, obtained against him fromthe King's Bench, and he was actually imprisoned eight months for thisvery business; so that, besides having succeeded to this poor fellow'sproperty, I have also deprived him of his liberty. Quite enough ofhardship to have suffered at the hands of any one man and that one, notan enemy.""And would you believe it, Onslow, we have talked over you and youraffairs a hundred times together, and yet he has never even alluded tothis? One would think that such an event would make an impression uponmost men; but, assuredly, he is either the most forgetful or the mostgenerous fellow on earth.""How very strange! And so you tell me that he remembers my name, and allthe circumstances of that singular bequest for singular it was from aman whom I never saw since he was a boy.""He remembers it all. It was the last blow fortune dealt him, and,indeed, he seemed scarcely to require so heavy a stroke to fellhim, for, by his own account, he had been struggling on, in debt anddifficulty, for many a year, putting off creditors by the plausible pleathat a considerable estate must eventually fall in to him. It is quitecertain that he believed this himself, but he also maintained a courseof expenditure that, were he even in possession of the property, itwould have been impossible to keep up. His brother-in-law's parsimony,too, was a constant source of self-gratulation to him, fancying, as hedid, that a considerable sum in Bank stock would be among the benefitsof this bequest. To find himself cut off, without even a mention of hisname, was, then, to know that he was utterly, irretrievably ruined.""Poor fellow!" exclaimed Onslow; "I never suspected the case had beenso hard a one. His letters you shall see them yourself bore all theevidence of a man more touchy on the score of a point of honor thanmindful of a mere money matter. He seemed desirous of imputing to mewho, as I have told you, never saw Mr. Godfrey for above forty yearssomething like undue influence, and, in fact, of having prejudiced hisbrother-in-law against him. He dated his angry epistles from a park or acastle I forget which and they bore a seal of armorial pretensionssuch as an archduke might acknowledge. All these signs seemed to me soindicative of fortune and standing, that I set my friend down for a verybloodthirsty Irishman, but assuredly never imagined that poverty hadcontributed its sting to the injury.""I can easily conceive all that," said Grounsell. "At this very moment,with want staring him on every side, he 'd rather talk of his formerstyle at confound the barbarous place, I never can remember the nameof it than he 'd listen to any suggestion for the future benefit of hischildren.""I have been a grievous enemy to him," said Sir Stafford, musingly."He reckons the loss at something like six thousand a year," saidGrounsell."Not the half of it, doctor; the estate, when I succeeded to it, wasin a ruinous condition. A pauper and rebellious tenantry holding theirtenures on nominal rents, and either living in open defiance of all law,or scheming to evade it by a hundred subterfuges. Matters are somewhatbetter; but if so, it has cost me largely to make them so. Disabuse hismind, I beg you, of this error. His loss was at least not so heavy as hereckoned.""Faith, I'll scarcely venture on so very delicate a theme," saidGrounsell, dryly. "I 'm not quite so sure how he 'd take it.""I see, doctor," said Onslow, laughing, "that his duelling tastes haveimpressed you with a proper degree of respect. Well, let us think ofsomething more to the purpose than rectifying a mere mistaken opinion.How can we serve him? What can be done for him?""Ruined gentlemen, like second-hand uniforms, are generally sent to thecolonies," said Grounsell; "but Dalton is scarcely fit for export.""What if we could get him appointed a magistrate in one of the WestIndia Islands?""New rum would finish him the first rainy season.""Is he fit for a consulship?""About as much as for Lord Chancellor. I tell you the man's pride wouldrevolt at anything to which a duty was annexed. Whatever you decide onmust be untrammelled by any condition of this kind.""An annuity, then, some moderate sum sufficient to support them inrespectability," said Onslow; "that is the only thing I see for it, andI am quite ready to do my part, which, indeed, is full as much a matterof honor as generosity.""How will you induce him to accept it?""We can manage that, I fancy, with a little contrivance. I 'll consultPrichard; he 's coming here this very day about these renewals, and he'll find a way of doing it.""You'll have need of great caution," said Grounsell; "without beingnaturally suspicious, misfortune has rendered him very sensitive as toanything like a slight. To this hour he is ignorant that his daughtersells those little figures; and although he sees, in a hundredappliances to his comfort, signs of resources of which he knows nothing,he never troubles his head how the money comes.""What a strange character!""Strange indeed. True pride and false pride, manly patience, childishpetulance, generosity, selfishness, liberality, meanness, even to thespirits alternating between boy-like levity and downright despair! Thewhole is such a mixture as I never saw before, and yet I can fancy it isas much the national temperament as that of the individual."And now Grounsell, launched upon a sea without compass or chart, hurriedoff to lose himself in vague speculation about questions that havepuzzled, and are puzzling, wiser heads than his.CHAPTER XI. A PEEP BETWEEN THE SHUTTERS AT A NEW CHARACTER.NOT even Mademoiselle Celestine herself, nor the two London footmen nowcondemned to exhibit their splendid proportions to the untutored gazeof German rustics, could have chafed and fretted under the unhappydetention at Baden with a greater impatience than did George Onslow,a young Guardsman, who often fancied that London, out of season, wasa species of Palmyra; who lived but for the life that only one capitalaffords; who could not credit the fact that people could ride, dress,dine, and drive anywhere else, was lamentably "ill bestowed" among thehills and valleys, the winding glens and dense pine forests of a littlecorner of Germany.If he liked the excitement of hard exercise, it was when the pleasurewas combined with somewhat of peril, as in a fox-hunt, or heightened bythe animation of a contest, in a rowing-match. Scenery, too, he caredfor, when it came among the incidents of a deer-stalking day in theHighlands. Even walking, if it were a match against time, was positivelynot distasteful; but to ride, walk, row, or exert himself, for the mereexercise, was in his philosophy only a degree better than a sentenceto the treadmill, the slavery being voluntary not serving to exalt themotive.To a mind thus constituted, the delay at Baden was intolerable.Lady Hester's system of small irritations and provocations rendereddomesticity and home life out of the question. She was never much givento reading at any time, and now books were not to be had; Sydney was sotaken up with studying German, that she was quite uncompanionable. Herfather was too weak to bear much conversation; and as for Grounsell,George always set him down for a quiz: good-hearted in his way, but abit of a bore, and too fond of old stories. Had he been a young lady, insuch a predicament, he would have kept a journal, a pretty martyrologyof himself and his feelings, and eked out his sorrows between ChildeHarold and Werther. Had he been an elderly one, he would have writtenfolios by the post, and covered acres of canvas with dogs in worsted,and tigers in Berlin wool. Alas! he had no such resources. Education hadsupplied him with but one comfort and consolation, a cigar; and so hesmoked away incessantly: sometimes as he lounged out of the window,after breakfast, in all the glory of an embroidered velvet cap, and agorgeous dressing-gown; sometimes as he sauntered in the empty saloon,or the deserted corridors, in the weed-grown garden, in the dishabilleof a many-pocketed shooting-jacket and cork-soled shoes; now, as helounged along the dreary streets, or passed along the little woodenbridge, wondering within himself how much longer a man could resist thetemptation that suggested a spring over the balustrade into the darkpool beneath.He had come abroad partly for Sydney's sake, partly because, having"gone somewhat too fast" in town, an absence had become advisable. Butnow, as he sauntered about the deserted streets of the little village,not knowing how long the durance might last, without an occupation,without a resource, both his brotherly love and prudence began tofail him, and he wished he had remained behind, and taken the chances,whatever they might be, of his creditors' forbearance. His moneyedembarrassments involved nothing dishonorable; he had done no more thanwhat some score of very well-principled young men have done, and aredoing at this very hour, ay, good reader, and will do again, when youand I have gone where all our moralizing will not deceive any more, hehad contracted debts, the payment of which must depend upon others; hehad borrowed what no efforts of his own could restore; he had gambled,and lost sums totally disproportionate to his fortune; but, in all thesethings, he was still within the pale of honorable conduct, at least, sosaid the code under which he lived, and George believed it.Sir Stafford, who only learned about the half of his son's liabilities,was thunderstruck at the amount. It was scarcely a year and a half agothat he had paid all George's debts, and they were then no trifle; andnow he saw all the old items revived and magnified, as if there was onlyone beaten road to ruin, and that began at Crocky's, and ended at "theBench." The very names of the dramatis personae were the same. Itwas Lazarus Levi lent the money, at sixty per cent; it was anotherpatriarch, called Gideon Masham, discounted the same. A lucky viscounthad once more "done the trick" at hazard; and if Cribbiter had notbroken down in training, why Madame Pompadour had, and so the sameresult came about. George Onslow had got what Newmarket men call a"squeeze," and was in for about seven thousand pounds.Nothing is more remarkable in our English code social, than theingenuity with which we have contrived to divide ranks and classes ofmen, making distinctions so subtle that only long habit and trainingare able to appreciate. Not alone are the gradations of our nobilityaccurately defined, but the same distinctions prevail among the"untitled" classes, and even descend to the professional and tradingranks; so that the dealer in one commodity shall take the pas ofanother; and he who purveys the glass of port for your dessert, wouldbe outraged if classed with him who contributed the Stilton! Thesehair-splittings are very unintelligible to foreigners; but, as we holdto them, the presumption is, that they suit us; and I should not havestopped now to bestow a passing notice on the system, if it were notthat we see it, in some cases, pushed to a degree of extreme resemblingabsurdity, making even of the same career in life a sliding-scaleof respectability; as, for instance, when a young gentleman of goodexpectations and fair fortune has outraged his guardians and his friendsby extravagance, he is immediately removed from the Guards, and draftedinto the Infantry of the Line; if he misbehaves there, they usuallysend him to India; is he incorrigible, he is compelled to remain in someregiment there; or, in cases of inveterate bad habits, he exchanges intothe Cape Rifles, and gets his next removal from the knife of a Caffre.Ancient geographers have decided, we are not aware on what grounds, thatthere is a place between "H--ll and Connaught." Modern discovery, withmore certitude, has shown one between the Guards and the Line, a speciesof military purgatory, where, after a due expiation of offences, thesinner may return to the paradise of the Household Brigade without evertransgressing the Inferno of a marching regiment. This half-way stage isthe "Rifles." So long as a young fashionable falls no lower, he issafe. There is no impugnment of his character, no injury that cannotbe repaired. Now, George Onslow had reached so far; he was compelled toexchange into the --th, then quartered in Ireland. It is true he did notjoin his regiment; his father had interest enough somewhere to obtain aleave of absence for his son, and First Lieutenant Onslow, vice Ridgwaypromoted, was suffered to amuse himself howsoever and wheresoever hepleased.The "exchange," and the reasons for which it was effected, were bothunpleasant subjects of reflection to George; and as he had few others,these continued to haunt him, till at last he fancied that every one wasfull of the circumstance, each muttering as he passed, "That 's Onslow,that was in the Coldstreams." Lady Hester, indeed, did not alwaysleave the matter purely imaginary, but threw out occasional hints aboutsoldiers who never served, except at St. James's or Windsor, and whowere kept for the wonderment and admiration of foreign sovereigns whenvisiting England, just as Suffolk breeders exhibit a "punch," or aBerkshire farmer will show a hog, for the delectation of swine fanciers.Where children show toys, kings show soldiers, and ours are consideredvery creditable productions of the kind; but Lady Hester averred, withmore of truth than she believed, that a man of spirit would prefer asomewhat different career. These currents, coming as they did in seasonand out of season, did not add to the inducements for keeping the house,and so George usually left home each day, and rarely returned to itbefore nightfall.It is true he might have associated with Haggerstone, who, on beingintroduced, made the most courteous advances to his intimacy; but GeorgeOnslow was bred in a school whose first lesson is a sensitive shrinkingfrom acquaintance, and whose chief characteristic is distrust. Now heeither had heard, or fancied he had heard, something about Haggerstone."The Colonel was n't all right," somehow or other. There was a storyabout him, or somebody of his set, and, in fact, it was as well to becautious; and so the young Guardsman, who would have ventured hisneck in a steeplechase, or his fortune on a "Derby," exhibited allthe deliberative wisdom of a judge as to the formation of a passingacquaintance.If we have been somewhat prolix in explaining the reasons of the younggentleman's solitude, our excuse is, that he had thereby conveyed, notalone all that we know, but all that is necessary to be known, of hischaracter. He was one of a class so large in the world that few peoplecould not count some half-dozen, at least, similar amongst theiracquaintance; and all of whom would be currently set down as incapables,if it were not that now and then, every ten years or so, one of thesewell-looking, well-bred, indolent dandies, as if tired of his ownweariness, turns out to be either a dashing soldier, with a heartto dare, and a head to devise the boldest achievements, or a politicleader, with resources of knowledge, and a skill in debate, to confrontthe most polished and practised veteran in "the Commons."Our own experiences of our own day show that these are no paradoxicalspeculations. But we must not pursue the theme further; and have only toadd, that the reader is not to believe that George Onslow formed one ofthese brilliant exceptions. Whether the fault lies more in himself or inus, we must not inquire.If his lonely walks did not suggest any pleasant reveries, the post didnot bring any more agreeable tidings. Dry statements from Mr. Orson, hislawyer, every young man about town has his lawyer nowadays, about thedifficulty of arranging his affairs, being the chief intelligence hereceived, with, from time to time, a short and pithy epistle from acertain noble creditor, Lord Norwood, who, although having won verylarge sums from Onslow, never seemed in such pressing difficulty assince his good fortune.The viscount's style epistolary was neither so marked by originality,nor so worthy of imitation, that it would be worth communicating; butas one of his letters bears slightly upon the interests of our story,we are induced to give it; and being, like all his correspondence, verybrief, we will communicate it in extenso."Oh, Norwood again!" said Onslow, as he looked at the seal, and read thenot very legible autograph in the corner. "My noble friend does not givea very long respite;" and biting his lips in some impatience, he openedthe paper, and read:DEAR ONSLOW, Orson has paid me the two thousand, as youordered, but positively refuses the seventeen hundred andeighty, the Ascot affair, because I cannot give up theoriginal two bills for twelve hundred passed to me for thatdebt. I told him that they were thrown into the fire beingdevilishly tempted to illustrate the process with himselfsix months ago, when you gave the renewals; but all won'tdo, the old prig persists in his demand, to comply withwhich is clearly impossible, for I have not even preservedthe precious ashes of the incremation. I don't doubt butthat, legally speaking, and in pettifogging parlance, he isall correct but between men of honor such strictness isdownright absurdity and, as Dillhurst says, "somethingmore." Now, my dear boy, you must write to him and at once,too for I 'm in a bad book about "Chanticleer" who is towin, it seems, after all and say that he is acting in directopposition to your wishes, as of course he is; that themoney must be paid without more chaffing. The delay hasalready put me to great inconvenience, and I know how youwill be provoked at his obstinacy. You 've heard, I suppose,that Brentwood is going to marry Lydia Vaughan. She hasthirty thousand pounds, which is exactly what Jack lost lastwinter. Crosbie says he ought to "run away from her afterthe start as he carries no weight:" which is somewhat ofmy own opinion. What any man has to do with a wife nowadays,with the funds at eighty-two, and a dark horse firstfavorite for the Oaks, is more than I know. Doncaster haslevanted, and the Red-House folk will smart for it. He wouldback Hayes's lot, and there 's nothing can ever set himright again. By the way, Orson hints that if I give him arelease, or something of that sort, with respect to thebills, he 'd pay the cash; but this is only a dodge to makea case for lawyers' parchments, stamps, and so forth; so Iwon't stand it. Your writing to him will do the whole thingat once. What a jolly world it would be, old fellow, if thewhole race of Orsons were carried off by the cholera, oranything akin! They are the greatest enemies to human peacein existence.Believe me, yours most faithfully,NORWOOD.P. S. I half fancy Baden is empty by this; but if you chanceupon a little fellow Heaven knows to whom he belongs, orwhence he comes, called Albert Jekyl, will you tell him thatI 'll forward the twenty pounds whenever I win the Oaks, ormarry Miss Home Greville, or any other similar piece of goodfortune. When he lent me the cash, I don't believe he wasthe owner of as much more in the world; but it suited him tohave a viscount in his debt a devilish bad investment, if heknew but all. The chances, therefore, are that he hasfoundered long ago, and you will be spared the trouble ofthe explanation; but if he survive, say somethingapologetic, for letter-writing and foreign postage are onlymaking bad worse.Although, unquestionably, the postscript of this elegant epistle was thepart which reflected most severely upon the writer's good feeling andsense of honor, George Onslow was more struck by what related to his ownaffairs, nor was it till after the lapse of some days that he tookthe trouble of considering the paragraph, or learning the name of theindividual referred to. Even then all that he could remember was, thathe had seen or heard the name "somewhere," and thus, very possibly,the whole matter would have glided from his memory, if accident had notbrought up the recollection.Returning one evening later than usual from his solitary walk, he foundthat the hotel was closed, the door strongly secured, and all the usualprecautions of the night taken, in the belief that the inmates werealready safe within doors. In vain he knocked and thundered at themassive panels; the few servants occupied rooms at a distance, and heardnothing of the uproar. He shouted, he screamed, he threw gravel againstthe windows, and, in his zeal, smashed them too. All was fruitless;nobody stirred, nor could he detect the slightest sign of human presencein the vast and dreary-looking building before him. The prospect wasnot a pleasant one, and a December night in the open air was by no meansdesirable; and yet, where should he turn for shelter? The other hotelswere all closed and deserted, and even of the private houses not onein twenty was inhabited. Resolving to give himself one chance more foradmission, he scaled the paling of the garden, and reached the rear ofthe hotel; but here all his efforts proved just as profitless as theformer, and he was at last about to abandon all hope, when he caughtsight of a faint gleam of light issuing from a small window on the firstfloor. Having failed to attract notice by all his cries and shouts, hedetermined to reach the window, to which, fortunately, a large vine,attached to the wall, offered an easy access. George was an expertclimber, and in less than a minute found himself seated on thewindow-sill, and gazing into a room by the aperture between thehalf-closed shutters. His first impression on looking in was that it wasa servant's room. The bare, whitewashed walls; the humble, uncurtainedbed; three chairs of coarse wood, all strengthened this suspicion, evento the table, covered by a coarse table-cloth, and on which stood a mealif meal it could be called an anchorite might have eaten on Friday. Aplate of the common brown bread of the country was balanced by a littledish of radishes, next to which stood a most diminutive piece of Badencheese, and a capacious decanter of water, a long-wicked tallow candlethrowing its gloomy gleam over the whole. For a moment or two George wasunable to detect the owner of this simple repast, as he was engaged inreplenishing his fire; but he speedily returned, and took his place atthe table, spreading his napkin before him, and surveying the board withan air of self-satisfaction such as a gourmand might bestow upon themost perfect petit diner. In dress, air, and look, he was thoroughlygentlemanlike; a little foppish, perhaps, in the arrangement of hishair, and somewhat too much display in the jewelled ornaments thatstudded his neckcloth. Even in his attitude, as he sat at the table,there was a certain air of studied elegance that formed a curiouscontrast with the miserable meal before him. Helping himself to asmall portion of cheese, and filling out a goblet of that element whichneither cheers nor inebriates, he proceeded to eat his supper. Onslowlooked on with a mingled sense of wonder and ridicule, and while halfdisposed to laugh at the disparity of the entertainment and him whopartook of it, there was something in the scene which repressed hisscorn and rendered him even an interested spectator of what wentforward.[Illustration:    134]The piercing cold of the night at length admonished him thathe should provide for his own admission into the hotel; and althoughnothing was now easier than to make his presence known, yet he felt anatural reluctance at the pain he must occasion to the stranger,whose frugal mode of living and humble interior would be thus sounceremoniously exposed. "The chances are," thought George, "that theseprivations are only endurable because they are practised in secret, andat no sacrifice of worldly estimation. How can I then or what right haveI to inflict the torture of an exposure upon this young man, whoeverhe is!" The conclusion was very rapidly come to, and not less speedilyacted upon; for he determined to spend the night, if need be, inthe open air, rather than accept an alternative so painful in itsconsequences. His resolutions had usually not long to await theiraccomplishment; and, turning his back to the window, and disdaining theslow process by which he had gained the ascent, he sprang with one leapdown to the ground: in doing so, however, his elbow struck the window,and at the same instant that he reached the earth, the shiveredfragments of a pane of glass came clattering after him. In a moment thesash was thrown open, and a head appeared above. "I have smashed thewindow," cried George, in French, "as the only means of being heard.They have locked me out of the hotel, and I don't fancy spending awinter's night in walking the streets of Baden.""You're an Englishman," said the voice from above, in English."Yes; but I don't see what that has to do with the matter," repliedOnslow, testily; "even a Laplander might prefer shelter in such aseason.""If you 'll have the goodness to come round to the front door," saidthe voice, one of the very softest and meekest of voices, "I shall havegreat pleasure in opening it for you." And at the same time the unknownheld forth his candle in polite guidance to the other's steps."Thanks, thanks; never mind the light. I know the way perfectly," saidGeorge, not a little ashamed at the contrast between his own gruffnessand the courtesy of the stranger whose window he had broken.Onslow had barely time to reach the front door of the inn, when it wasopened for him, and he saw before him a very dapper little figure, whowith a profusion of regrets at not having heard him before, offered hiscandle a wax one on this occasion for George's accommodation. Protestingthat the broken pane was not of the slightest inconvenience, that theroom was a small dressing-closet, that it was not worth a moment'sthought, and so forth, he permitted Onslow to escort him to the door ofhis room, and then wished him a good-night. The scene scarcely occupiedthe time we have taken to relate it, and yet in that very short spaceGeorge Onslow had opportunity to see that the unknown had all the easydeportment and quiet breeding of one accustomed to good society. Therewas, perhaps, a little excess of courtesy, at least according to thatschool of politeness in which Onslow had been taught; but this might bethe effect of living abroad, where such a tone usually prevailed. Theurbanity was not exactly cold enough for George's notions. "No matter;he 's no snob, that 's clear," thought he; "and even if he were,he's done me good service." And with this blending of selfishness andspeculation he went to sleep, and slept soundly, too, not harassed byeven a thought of him who passed an hour in the effort to repair hisbroken window, and shivered the rest of the night through from theinsufficiency of his skill.Blessed immunity theirs, who so easily forget the pain they occasionothers, and who deem all things trifles that cost themselvesno afterthought of regret. Happy the nature that can, withoutself-repining, spill the wine over Aunt Betty's one "peach-coloredsatin," or, in careless mood, pluck the solitary flower of her onlygeranium. Enviable stoicism that mislays the keepsake of some poorwidow, or lames the old curate's cob, the fond companion of manyrambles. These, whatever others think, are very enviable traits, andenable the possessors to wear placid countenances, and talk in mostmeritorious strain on the blessings of equanimity and the excellentfruits of a well-trained mind.CHAPTER XII. MR. ALBERT JEKYLONSLOW'S first thought, on awaking the next morning, was of last night'sacquaintance, but all the information he could obtain concerning him wasthat he was an Englishman who had passed the summer in Baden, and duringthe season knew and was known by every one. The waiter called him, inthe usual formulary, "a very nice gentleman;" and seemed by his mannerto infer that any further account might be had by paying for it. Onslow,if he even understood the hint, was not the man to avail himself of it;so he simply ordered him to bring the hotel book, in which the names ofall travellers are inscribed, and at once discovered that the proprietorof the humble entresol, No. 6, was a Mr. Albert Jekyl, with the ordinaryqualification attached to him of "Rentier Anglais." Searching back inthe same instructive volume, he found that, on his arrival in June, Mr.Jekyl had occupied a small apartment on the first floor, from which hehad subsequently removed to the second; thence to a single room in thethird story, and finally settled down in the quiet seclusion of thesmall chamber where George had first seen him. These were very smallmaterials from which to compile a history, but at least they conveyedone inference, and that a very common one, that the height of Mr.Jekyl's fortune and that of his dwelling observed to each other aninverse proportion, and that, as his means went down, he went up. If,then, no very valuable contribution to the gentleman's history wascontained here, at least the page recorded his name; and George,reopening Norwood's letter, satisfied himself that this was the sameconfiding individual who had intrusted the noble viscount with a loanof twenty pounds. George now remembered to have seen his card on LadyHester's table, with inquiry after Sir Stafford. "Poor fellow!" thoughthe; "another victim of 'trente-et-un.' They have cleared him out atthe tables, and he is either ashamed to write home, or his friends haverefused to assist him. And Norwood, too the heartlessness of puttingto contribution a poor young fellow like this!" Onslow thought worse ofthis than of fifty other sharp things of the noble Lord's doing, and ofsome of which he had been himself the victim."I'll call upon him this very morning!" said George, half aloud, andwith the tone and air of a man who feels he has said a very generousthing, and expressed a sentiment that he is well aware will expose himto a certain amount of reprobation. "Jekyl, after all, is a right goodname. Lady Hester said something about Jekyls that she knew, or wasrelated to. Good style of fellow he looked a little tigerish, but thatcomes of the Continent. If he be really presentable, too, my Lady willbe glad to receive him in her present state of destitution. Norwood'sungracious message was a bore, to be sure, but then he need not deliverit there was no necessity of taking trouble to be disagreeable or,better again far better," thought he, and he burst out laughing at thehappy notion, "I 'll misunderstand his meaning, and pay the money.An excellent thought; for as I am about to book up a heavy sum to hisLordship, it 's only deducting twenty pounds and handing it to Jekyl,and I 'll be sworn he wants it most of us all."The more Onslow reflected on it, the more delighted was he with thisadmirable device; and it is but fair to add, that however gratified atthe opportunity of doing a kindness, he was even better pleased at thethought of how their acquaintance at the "Grosvenor" and the "Ultras"would laugh at the "sharp viscount's being sold." There was only one manof all Onslow's set on whom he would have liked to practise this jest,and that man was Norwood. Having decided upon this plan, he next thoughtof the execution of it, and this he determined should be by letter. Ashort note, conveying Norwood's message and the twenty pounds, wouldsave all explanation, and spare Jekyl any unpleasant feeling thediscussion of a private circumstance might occasion.Onslow's note concluded with his "thanks for Mr. Jekyl's kindness on thepreceding evening," and expressing a wish to know "at what hour Mr. J.would receive a visit from him."Within a very few minutes after the billet was despatched, a servantannounced Mr. Albert Jekyl; and that young gentleman, in the glory of avery magnificent brocade dressing-gown, and a Greek cap, with slippersof black velvet embroidered in gold, entered the room.Onslow, himself a distinguished member of that modern school of dandyismwhose pride lies in studs and shirt-pins, in watch-chains, rings, andjewelled canes, was struck by the costly elegance of his visitor'stoilette. The opal buttons at his wrists; the single diamond, of greatsize and brilliancy, on his finger; even the massive amber mouthpieceof the splendid meerschaum he carried in his hand, were all evidences ofthe most expensive tastes. "Could this by possibility be the man he hadseen at supper?" was the question he at once asked himself; but therewas no time to discuss the point, as Jekyl, in a voice almost girlish inits softness, said,"I could not help coming at once to thank you, Mr. Onslow, for yourpolite note, and say how gratified I feel at making your acquaintance.Maynard often spoke of you to me; and I confess I was twenty times a daytempted to introduce myself.""Maynard Sir Horace Maynard!" cried Onslow, with a slight flush, halfpleasure, half surprise, for the baronet was the leader of the setGeorge belonged to, a man of great fortune, ancient family, the mostsuccessful on the English Turf, and the envy of every young fellow abouttown. "Do you know Maynard?""Oh, very well indeed," lisped Jekyl; "and like him much."Onslow could not help a stare at the man who, with perfect coolnessand such an air of patronage, professed his opinion of the mostdistinguished fashionable of the day."He has a very pretty taste in equipage," continued Jekyl, "but nevercould attain to the slightest knowledge of a dinner."Onslow was thunderstruck. Maynard, whose entertainments were the triumphof the Clarendon, thus criticised by the man he had seen supping like amouse on a morsel of mouldy cheese!"Talking of dinners, by the way," said Jekyl, "what became ofMerewater?""Lord Merewater? he was in waiting when we left England.""A very tidy cook he used to have, a Spaniard called Jose, a perfecthand at all the Provencal dishes. Good creature, Merewater. Don't youthink so?"Ouslow muttered a kind of half-assent; and added, "I don't know him."Indeed, the lord in question was reputed as insufferably proud, and asrarely admitting a commoner to the honor of his acquaintance."Poor Merewater! I remember playing him such a trick: to this hour hedoes not know who did it. I stole the menu of one of his grand dinners,and gave it to old Lord Bristock's cook, a creature that might have madethe messes for an emigrant ship, and such a travesty of an entertainmentnever was seen. Merewater affected illness, and went away from the tablefirmly persuaded that the whole was got up to affront him.""I thought the Earl of Bristock lived well and handsomely," said George."Down at Brentwood it was very well one was in the country and grouseand woodcocks, and salmon and pheasants, came all naturally andseasonably; besides, he really had some very remarkable Burgundy; and,though few people will drink it nowadays, Chambertin is a Christmaswine."The cheese and the decanter of water were uppermost in George's mind,but he said nothing, suffering his companion to run on, which he did,over a wide expanse of titled and distinguished families, with allof whom he appeared to have lived on the closest terms of intimacy.Certainly of those Onslow himself knew, Jekyl related twenty littletraits and tokens that showed he was speaking with true knowledge of theparties. Unlike Haggerstone, he rarely, if ever, alluded to any of thosedarker topics which form the staple of scandal. A very gentle ridiculeof some slight eccentricity, a passing quiz of some peculiarity indress, voice, or manner, was about the extent of Jekyl's criticism,which on no occasion betrayed any malice. Even the oddities that heportrayed were usually done by some passing bit of mimicry of theindividual in question. These he threw into the dialogue of his storywithout halt or impediment, and which, being done with great tact, greatcommand of face, and a most thorough appreciation of humor, were veryamusing little talents, and contributed largely to his social success.Onslow laughed heartily at many of the imitations, and thus recognizedcharacters that were introduced into a narrative without the trouble ofannouncing them."You've heard, perhaps, the series of mishaps which compelled us to takerefuge here," said George, leading the way to what he supposed wouldinduce an equal degree of communicativeness on the other side."Oh! yes, the landlord told me of your disasters.""After all, I believe the very worst of them was coming to this place insuch a season.""It is certainly seeing it en papillate" said Jekyl, smiling; "and you,perhaps, are not an admirer of beauty unadorned.""Say, rather, of Nature at her ugliest; for whatever it may be insummer, with foliage, and clear streams, flowers, smart folk airing anddriving about, equipage, music, movement, and merry voices, now it isreally too dismal. Pray, how do you get through the day?"Jekyl smiled one of his quiet, equivocal smiles, and slightly raised hisshoulders without speaking."Do you shoot?""No," said he."But why do I ask? there's nothing to shoot. You ride, then?""No.""Cigars will do a great deal; but, confound it, there must be a largeshare of the day very heavy on your hands, even with a reasonableallowance for reading and writing.""Seldom do either!" said Jekyl, with his usual imperturbed manner."You have n't surely got up a flirtation with some 'Frdulein withyellow hair '?""I cannot lay claim to such good fortune. I really do nothing. I havenot even the usual English resource of a terrier to jump over my stick,nor was I early enough initiated into the mystery of brandy-and-waterin fact, a less occupied individual cannot well be imagined; but somehowyou'll smile if I say I am not bored.""It would be very ungenerous, then, to conceal your secret," criedOnslow; "for assuredly the art of killing time here, without killingone's self, is worth knowing.""The misfortune is, I cannot communicate it; that is, even giving mecredit for possessing one, my skill is like that of some great medicalpractitioner, who has learnt to look on disease with such practised eyesthat the appropriate remedy rises as it were instinctively to his mind,he knows not how or why, and who dies, without being able to transmitthe knowledge to a successor. I have, somewhat in the same way, becomean accomplished idler; and with such success that the dreariest day ofrain that ever darkened the dirty windows of a village inn, the mostscorching dog-day that ever emptied the streets of an Italian city, andsent all the inhabitants to their siesta, never hipped me. I have spenta month with perfect satisfaction in quarantine, and bobbed for threeweeks in a calm at sea, with no other inconvenience than the moans ofmy fellow-passengers. There 's no secret in it, Mr. Onslow; or, if therebe, it lies in this pretty discovery, that we are always bored by ourhabit of throwing ourselves on the resources of somebody else, who, inhis turn, looks out for another, and so on. Now, a man in a fever neverdreams of cooling his hand by laying it on another patient's cheek; yetthis is what we do. To be thoroughly bored, you must associate yourselfwith some half-dozen tired, weary, dyspeptic twaddles, and make up ajoint-stock bank of your several incapacities, learn to growl in chorus,and you'll be able to go home and practise it as a solo.""And have you been completely alone here of late?" said George, whobegan to fear that the sermon on ennui was not unaccompanied by a tasteof the evil."Occasionally I 've chatted for half an hour with two gentlemen whoreside here, a Colonel Haggerstone--""By the way, who is he?" broke in Onslow, eagerly."He has been traced back to Madras, but the most searching inquirieshave failed to elicit anything further.""Is he the man they called Arlington's Colonel Haggerstone?"Jekyl nodded; but with an air that seemed to say, he would not entermore deeply into the subject."And your other companion who is he?""Peter Dalton, of I am ashamed to say I forget where," said Jekyl; who,at once assuming Dalton's bloated look, in a well-feigned Irish accent,went on: "a descendant of as ancient and as honorable a familee as anyin the three kingdoms, and if a little down in the world bad luck tothem that done it! just as ready as ever he was to enjoy agreeablesociety and the ganial flow of soul.""He 's the better of the two, I take it," said Onslow."More interesting, certainly, just as a ruined chateau is amore picturesque object than a new police-station or a cut-stonepenitentiary. There 's another feature also which ought to give him thepreference. I have seen two very pretty faces from time to time asI have passed the windows, and which I conjecture to belong to hisdaughters.""Have you not made their acquaintance?" asked Onslow, in some surprise."I grieve to say I have not," sighed Jekyl, softly."Why, the matter should not be very difficult, one might opine, in sucha place, at such a time, and with--"He hesitated, and Jekyl added,"With such a papa, you were about to say. Well, that is precisely thedifficulty. Had my excellent friend, Peter, been a native of any othercountry, I flatter myself I should have known how to make my advances;but with these dear Irish their very accessibility is a difficulty of nocommon order. Assume an air of deference and respect, and they 'llset you down for a cold formalist, with whom they can have nothing incommon. Try the opposite line, and affect the free and easy, and thechances are that you have a duel to fight before you know you haveoffended. I confess that I have made several small advances, and thrownout repeated little hints about loneliness, and long evenings, and soforth; and although he has concurred with me in every word, yet hispractice has never followed his precept. But I don't despair. What sayyou, if we attack the fortress as allies? I have a notion we shouldsucceed?" "With all my heart. What's your plan?" "At this moment Ihave formed none, nor is there need of any. Let us go out, like theknight-errants of old, in search of adventures, and see if they will notbefall us. The first step will be to make Dalton's acquaintance. Now, healways takes his walk in bad weather in the great Saal below; should henot make his appearance there to-day, as he has already absented himselffor some days, I 'll call to inquire after him at his own house. You 'llaccompany me. The rest we 'll leave to fortune."Although On slow could not see that this step could lead to anythingbeyond a civil reply to a civil demand, he assented readily, andpromised to meet his companion at four o'clock the same evening. As forJekyl, he took a very different view of the whole transaction, forhe knew that while to him there might be considerable difficulty inestablishing any footing with the Daltons, the son of the wealthybaronet would be, in all likelihood, very differently looked on. Inpresenting him, thought he, I shall have become the friend of the familyat once. It had often before been his fortune in life to have madevaluable acquaintances in this manner; and although the poor Daltonswere very unlikely to figure in the category of profitable friends,they would at least afford an agreeable resource against the dulness ofwintry evenings, and prevent what he himself called the "demoralization"of absence from female society. Lastly, the scheme promised to establisha close intimacy between Onslow and himself; and here was a benefitworth all the others.CHAPTER XIII. A SUSPICIOUS VISITORHow far were the Daltons from suspecting that they were the subjectof so much and such varied solicitude, and that, while Lady Hester wasfancying to herself all the fashionable beauties whom Kate would eclipsein loveliness, and what an effect charms like hers would produce onsociety, Sir Stafford was busily concerting with his lawyer the meansof effectually benefiting them; and George Onslow for want of betterspeculated, as he smoked, on "the kind of people" they would prove, andwondered whether the scheme were worth the light trouble it was to costhim. Little did they know of all this, little imagine that outsideof their humble roof there lived one save "dear Frank" whose thoughtsincluded them. "The purple and fine linen" category of this world cannotappreciate the force of this want of sympathy! They, whose slightestgriefs and least afflictions in life are always certain of theconsolations of friends, and the even more bland solace of a fashionablephysician whose woes are re-echoed by the "Morning Post," and whosesorrows are mourned in Court Journals cannot frame to themselves thesense of isolation which narrow fortune impresses. "Poverty," saysa classical authority, "has no heavier evil than that it makes menridiculous." But this wound to self-love, deep and poignant though itbe, is light in comparison with the crushing sense of isolation, thatabstraction from sympathy in which poor men live!The Daltons were seated around Hanserl's bed, silently ministering tothe sick man, and watching with deep and anxious interest the laboredrespiration and convulsive twitches of his fever. The wild and rapidutterance of his lips, and the strange fancies they syllabled,often exciting him to laughter, only deepened the gravity of theircountenances, and cast over the glances they interchanged a tinge ofsadder meaning."He could n't have better luck," muttered Dalton, sorrowfully; "justfrom being a friend to us! If he had never seen nor heard of us, maybe't is happy and healthy he 'd be to-day!""Nay, nay, papa," said Nelly, gently; "this is to speak too gloomily;nor is it good for us to throw on fortune the burden that we each shouldbear patiently.""Don't tell me that there is not such a thing as luck!" replied Dalton,in a tone of irritation. "I know well whether there is or no! Forfive-and-thirty years whatever I put my hand to in life turned outbadly. It was the same whether I did anything on the spur of the moment,or thought over it for weeks. If I wished a thing, that was reasonenough for it to come out wrong!""And even were it all as you fancy, papa dearest," said Nelly, as shefondly drew her arm round him, "is it nothing that these reverses havefound you strong of heart and high of courage to bear them? Over andover again have you told me that the great charm of field sports lay inthe sense of fatigue bravely endured, and peril boldly confronted;that, devoid of these, they were unworthy of men. Is there not a greaterglory, then, in stemming the tide of adverse fortune; and is it not ahigher victory that carries you triumphant over the real trials oflife, kind of heart, trustful, and generous, as in the best days of yourprosperity, and with a more gentle and forbearing spirit than prosperityever taught?""That 's nothing against what I was saying," said Dalton, but with amore subdued face. "There 's poor little Hans, and till a coupleof clays ago he never knew what it was to be unlucky. As he told ushimself, his life was a fairy tale.""True," interposed Nelly; "and happy as it was, and blameless andguileless he who led it, mark how many a gloomy thought, what darkdistressing fancies, hover round his brain, and shadow his sick-bed! No,no! the sorrows of this world are more equally distributed than wethink for, and he who seems to have fewest is oftentimes but he who bestconceals them!"Her voice shook, and became weaker as she spoke; and the last few wordswere barely audible. Dalton did not notice her emotion; but Kate's lookswere bent upon her with an expression of fond and affectionate meaning."There's somebody at the door," whispered Daltou; "see who it is, Kate."Kate arose, and opening the door softly, beheld old Andy; his shrivelledfeatures and lustreless eyes appearing in a state of unusual excitement."What's the matter, Andy? what is it you want?" said she."Is the master here? Where 's the master?""He 's here; what do you want with him?" rejoined she."I want himself," said he, as with his palsied hand he motioned toDalton to come out."What is it, you old fool?" said Dalton, impatiently, as he arose andfollowed him outside of the room."There's one of them again!" said Andy, putting his mouth to Dalton'sear, and whispering in deep confidence."One of what? one of whom?""He's upstairs," muttered Andy."Who's upstairs, who is he?" cried Dalton, angrily."Didn't I know him the minit I seen him! Ayeh! Ould as I am, my eyesisn't that dim yet.""God give me patience with you!" said Dalton; and, to judge from hisface, he was not entreating a vain blessing. "Tell me, I say, what doyou mean, or who is it is upstairs?"Andy put his lips once more to the other's ear, and whispered, "Anattorney!""An attorney!" echoed Dalton."Iss!" said Andy, with a significant nod."And how do you know he 's an attorney?""I seen him!" replied the other, with a grin; "and I locked the door onhim.""What for?""What for! what for, is it? Oh, murther, murther!" whined the oldcreature, who in this unhappy question thought he read the evidence ofhis poor master's wreck of intellect. It was indeed no slight shock tohim to hear that Peter Dalton had grown callous to danger, and couldlisten to the terrible word he had uttered without a sign of emotion."I seen the papers with a red string round 'em," said Andy, as thoughby this incidental trait he might be able to realize all the menaceddanger."Sirrah, ye 're an old fool!" said Dalton, angrily; and, jerking the keyfrom his trembling fingers, he pushed past him, and ascended the stairs.If Dalton's impatience had been excited by the old man's absurd terrorsand foolish warnings, his own heart was not devoid of a certain vaguedread, as he slowly wended his way upwards. It was true he did notpartake of old Andy's fear of the dread official of the law. Andy, who,forgetting time and place, not knowing that they were in another land,where the King's writ never ran, saw in the terrible apparition theshadows of coming misfortune. Every calamity of his master's house hadbeen heralded by such a visit, and he could as soon have disconnectedthe banshee with a sudden death, as the sight of an attorney with anapproaching disaster.It is true, Dalton did not go this far; but still old impressions werenot so easily effaced. And as the liberated captive is said to trembleat the clanking of a chain, so his heart responded to the fear thatmemory called up of past troubles and misfortunes."What can he want with me now?" muttered he, as he stopped to takebreath. "They 've left me nothing but life, and they can't take that. It's not that I 'd care a great deal if they did! Maybe it's more botherabout them titles; but I'll not trouble my head about them. I sold theland, and I spent the money; ay, and what 's more, I spent it at homeamong my own people, like a gentleman! and if I 'm an absentee it 'snot my fault. I suppose he couldn't arrest me," said he, after a pause;"but, God knows, they 're making new laws every day, and it 's hard tosay if they 'll let a man have peace or ease in any quarter of the worldbefore long. Well, well! there's no use guessing. I have nothing to sellnothing to lose; I suppose they don't make it a hanging matter evenfor an Irishman to live a trifle too fast." And with this piece ofreassuring comfort, he pulled up his cravat, threw back the breast ofhis coat, and prepared to confront the enemy bravely.Although Dalton made some noise in unlocking the door, and not less incrossing the little passage that led to the sitting-room, his entrancewas unperceived by the stranger, who was busily engaged in examining ahalf-finished group by Nelly. It represented an old soldier, whoseeyes were covered by a bandage, seated beside a well, while a littledrummer-boy read to him the bulletin of a great victory. She haddestined the work for a present to Frank, and had put forth all hergenius in its composition. The glowing enthusiasm of the blind veteran,his half-opened lips,' his attitude of eagerness as he drank in thewords, were finely contrasted with the childlike simplicity of the boy,more intent, as it seemed, in spelling out the lines than following thesignification.If the stranger was not a finished connoisseur, he was certainly notignorant of art, and was deep in its contemplation when Dalton accostedhim."I beg pardon, Mr. Dalton, I presume; really this clever compositionhas made me forget myself totally. May I ask, is it the work of a nativeartist?""It was done in this place, sir," replied Dalton, whose pride in hisdaughter's skill was overlaid by a less worthy feeling, shame that aDalton should condescend to such an occupation."I have seen very inferior productions highly prized and praised; and ifI am not indiscreet--""To prevent any risk of that kind," observed Dalton, interrupting him,"I 'll take the liberty of asking your name, and the object of thisvisit.""Prichard, sir; of the firm of Prichard and Harding, solicitors,Lincoln's Inn Fields," replied the other, whose voice and manner at onceassumed a business-like tone."I never heard the names before," said Dalton, motioning to a chair. Thestranger seated himself, and, placing a large roll of papers before himon the table, proceeded to untie and arrange them most methodically, andwith the air of a man too deeply impressed with the importance of hisoccupation to waste a thought upon the astonishment of a bystander."Prichard and Harding are mighty cool kind of gentlemen," thoughtDalton, as he took his seat at the opposite side of the table, trying,but not with any remarkable success, to look as much at ease as hisvisitor."Copy of deed draft of instructions bill of sale of stock no, here itis! This is what we want," muttered Prichard, half aloud. "I believethat letter, sir, is in your handwriting?"Dalton put on his spectacles and looked at the document for a fewseconds, during which his countenance gradually appeared to light upwith an expression of joyful meaning; for his eye glistened, and a redflush suffused his cheek."It is, sir, that's mine, every word of it; and what's more, I 'm asready to stand to it to-day as the hour I wrote it."Mr. Prichard, scarcely noticing the reply, was again deep in hisresearches; but the object of them must be reserved for another chapter.CHAPTER XIV. AN EMBARRASSING QUESTION.How very seldom it is that a man looks at a letter he has writtensome twenty years or so before, and peruses it with any degree ofsatisfaction! No matter how pleasurable the theme, or how full ofinterest at the time, years have made such changes in circumstances,have so altered his relations with the world, dispelled illusions here,created new prospects there, that the chances are he can feel nothingbut astonishment for what once were his opinions, and a strange sense ofmisgiving that he ever could have so expressed himself.Rare as this pleasure is, we left Mr. Dalton in the fullest enjoyment ofit, in our last chapter; and as he read and re-read his autograph, everyfeature of his face showed the enjoyment it yielded him."My own writing, sure enough! I wish I never put my hand to paper in aworse cause. Is n't it strange," he muttered, "how a man's heart willoutlive his fingers? I could n't write now as well as I used then, butI can feel just the same. There 's the very words I said." And with thishe read, half aloud, from the paper: "'But if you my consent to sendlawyers and attorneys to the devil, and let the-matter be settledbetween us, like two gentlemen, Peter Dalton will meet you when, where,and how you like, and take the satisfaction as a full release of everyclaim and demand he makes on you.' Just so; and a fairer offer never wasmade; but I grieve to say it wasn't met in the same spirit.""When you wrote that letter, Mr. Dalton," said Prichard, not lookingup from the papers before him, "you were doubtless suffering under theimpression of a wrong at the hands of Sir Stafford Ouslow.""Faith, I believe you. The loss of a fine estate was n't a trifle,whatever you may think it.""The question ought rather to be, what right had you to attribute thatloss to him?""What right is it? All the right in the world. Who got the property?Answer me that. Was n't it he came in as a sole legatee? But what am Italking about? Sure the thing is done and ended, and what more does hewant?""I'm just coming to that very point, sir," said Prichard. "SirStafford's attention having been accidentally called to thistransaction, he perceives that he has unwittingly done you a greatinjustice, and that there is one matter, at least, on which he is bound,even for his own satisfaction.""Satisfaction, is it?" broke in Dalton, catching at the only word thatstruck his ear with a distinct signification. "Better late than never;and it 's proud I am to oblige him. Not but there 's people would tellyou that the time 's gone by, and all that sort of thing; but them wasnever my sentiments. 'Never a bad time for a good deed,' my poor fatherused to say, and you may tell him that I 'll think the better of hiscountrymen to the day of my death, for what he 's going to do now."Prichard laid down the paper he was reading, and stared at the speakerin mute amazement."You 're his friend, I perceive," said Dalton."Sir Stafford is kind enough to consider me in that light.""Faith, the kindness is all the other way," rejoined Dalton, laughing,"at least, in this country; for the seconds are just as guilty as theprincipals, and have no fun for their money. But, sure, we can crossover to Landau; they tell me it's Barbaria there, over the Rhine.""Bavaria, perhaps?" interposed the other."Yes, that 's what I said. We can be over the frontier in two hours.There 's every conveniency in life," said he, rubbing his hands in highglee."Our business, I trust, sir, can be all arranged here, and without muchdelay, either.""Just as you like; I 'm not fond of moving since my knee was bad, and I'm agreeable to anything.""You seem to contemplate a hostile meeting, sir, if I understand youaright," said Prichard, slowly; "but if you had been kind enough tohear me out, you 'd have seen that nothing was further from my friend'sthoughts or my own.""Oh, murther!" groaned Dal ton, as he sank down into a chair."We never entertained any such intention.""No duel?""Nothing of the kind.""Sure, I heard you say satisfaction. I 'll take my oath you saidsatisfaction.""I hope sincerely, sir, that the word may bear a peacefulsignification.""Oh dear, oh dear!" cried Dalton, as, clasping his hands on his knees,he sat, a perfect type of disappointed hope, and totally inattentive toa very eloquent explanation that Prichard was pouring forth."You see, now, sir, I trust," cried the latter, triumphantly, "that ifmy friend's intentions are not precisely what you looked for, they arenot less inspired by an anxious desire to cultivate your friendship andobtain your good opinion.""I wasn't listening to a word you were saying," said Dalton, with asincerity that would have made many men smile; but Mr. Prichard neverlaughed, or only when the joke was uttered by a silk gown, or theinitiative given by the bench itself."I was endeavoring, sir, to convey," said he again, and with infinitepatience, "that, by a clause of the late Mr. Godfrey's will, thesuggestion was made to the effect that, if Sir Stafford Onslow shoulddeem it fitting and suitable, the testator would not be averse to anannuity of from one hundred and fifty to two hundred pounds per annumbeing settled on Mr. Peter Dalton for the term of his life. This clausehas now been brought under Sir Stafford's notice for the first time, ashe never, in fact, saw the will before. The document was lodged in ourhands; and as certain proceedings, of which the letter you have justacknowledged forms a part, at that period placed you in a peculiarposition of hostility to Sir Stafford, we, as his legal advisers, didnot take any remarkable pains to impress this recommendation on hismemory.""Go on; I 'm listening to you," said Dalton."Well, sir, Sir Stafford is now desirous of complying with thisinjunction, the terms of which he reads as more obligatory upon him thanhis legal friends would be willing to substantiate. In fact, he makesthe matter a question of feeling and not of law; and this, of course, isa point wherein we have no right to interpose an opinion. Something liketen years have elapsed since Mr. Godfrey's death, and taking the sum attwo hundred pounds, with interest at five per cent, a balance of abovethree thousand two hundred will now be at your disposal, together withthe annuity on your life; and to arrange the payment of these moneys,and take measures for their future disbursement, I have the honor topresent myself before you. As for these letters, they are your own; andSir Stafford, in restoring them, desires to efface all memory of thetransaction they referred to, and to assure you that, when circumstancesenable him to meet you, it may be on terms of perfect cordiality andfriendship.""Upon my soul and conscience I don't understand a word of it all!" saidDalton, whose bewildered looks gave a perfect concurrence to the speech."Is it that I have a right to all the money?""Exactly, sir; Sir Stafford feels that he is simply carrying out thewishes of your relative, Mr. Godfrey--""But this has nothing to do with the little difference between SirStafford and myself? I mean, it leaves us just where we were before.""Sir Stafford hopes that henceforth a better understanding will subsistbetween you and himself; and that you, seeing how blameless he hasbeen in the whole history of your losses, will receive this act as anevidence of his desire to cultivate your friendship.""And this two hundred a year?""Is Mr. Godfrey's bequest.""But depending on Sir Stafford to pay or not, as he likes.""I have already told you, sir, that he conceives he has no option in thematter; and that the mere expression of a desire on Mr. Godfrey's partbecomes to him a direct injunction.""Faith, he was mighty long in finding it out, then," said Dalton,laughing."I believe I have explained myself on that head," replied Prichard; "butI am quite ready to go over the matter again.""God forbid! my head is 'moidered' enough already, not to make itworse. Explanations, as they call them, always puzzle me more; but ifyou 'd go over the subject to my daughter Nelly, her brain is as clearas the Lord Chancellor's. I'll just call her up here; for, to tell youthe truth, I never see my way right in anything till Nelly makes it outfor me."Mr. Prichard was probably not grieved at the prospect of a moreintelligent listener, and readily assented to the proposition, infurtherance of which Dalton left the room to seek his daughter. Ondescending to the little chamber where he had left the two girls inwaiting beside the dwarf's sick-bed, he now discovered that they hadgone, and that old Andy had replaced them, a change which, to judge fromHansel's excited looks and wild utterance, was not by any means to histaste."Was machst du hier?" cried he, sternly, to the old man."Whisht! alannah! Take a sleep, acushla!" whined old Andy, as, underthe delusion that it was beside an infant his watch was established, hetried to rock the settle-bed like a cradle, and then croned away in acracked voice one of his own native ditties:"I saw a man weeping and makin' sad moan,He was crying and grievin',For he knew their deceivingAn' rockin' a cradle for a child not his own.""Was fur katzen jammer! What for cats' music mak'st thou there?""Where 's the girls, Andy?" whispered Daltou in the old man's ear."They 're gone," muttered he."Gone where? where did they go?""Fort mit ihm. Away with him. Leave him not stay. Mein head is heavy,and mein brain turn round!" screamed Hansel."Will ye tell me where they 're gone, I say?" cried Daiton, angrily."Hushoo! husho!" sang out the old man, as he fancied he was composinghis charge to sleep; and then made signs to Dalton to be still and notawaken him.With an angry muttering Dalton turned away and left the chamber, totallyregardless of Hanserl's entreaties to take Andy along with him."You're just good company for each other!" said he, sulkily, to himself."But where 's these girls, I wonder?""Oh, papa, I have found you at last!" cried Kate, as, bounding down thestairs half a dozen steps at a time, she threw her arm round him. "She'shere! she's upstairs with us; and so delightful, and so kind, and sobeautiful. I never believed any one could be so charming.""And who is she, when she's at home?" said Dalton, half sulkily."Lady Hester, of course, papa. She came while we were sitting withHanserl, came quite alone to see him and us; and when she had talkedto him for a while, so kindly and so sweetly, about his wound, and hisfever, and his home in the Tyrol, and his mother, and everything, sheturned to Nelly and said, 'Now, my dears, for a little conversation withyourselves. Where shall we go to be quite alone and uninterrupted?' Wedid n't know what to say, papa; for we knew that you and the strangegentleman were busy in the sitting-room, and while I was thinking whatexcuse to make, Nelly told her that our only room was occupied. 'Oh, Idon't care for that in the least,' said she; 'let us shut ourselvesup in your dressing-room.' Our dressing-room! I could have laughed andcried at the same moment she said it; but Nelly said that we had none,and invited her upstairs to her bedroom; and there she is now, papa,sitting on the little bed, and making Nelly tell her everything aboutwho we are, and whence we came, and how we chanced to be living here.""I wonder Nelly had n't more sense," said Dalton, angrily; "not as muchas a curtain on the bed, nor a bit of carpet on the floor. What 'll shethink of us all?""Oh, papa, you're quite mistaken; she called it a dear little snuggery;said she envied Nelly so much that lovely view over Eberstein and theSchloss, and said what would she not give to lead our happy and peacefullife, away from that great world she despises so heartily. How sadto think her duties tie her down to a servitude so distasteful andrepulsive!""Isn't my Lady the least taste in life of a humbug, Kitty?" whisperedDalton, as his eyes twinkled with malicious drollery."Papa, papa! you cannot mean--""No harm if she is, darling. I'm sure the pleasantest, ay, and some ofthe worthiest people ever I knew were humbugs, that is, they were alwaysdoing their best to be agreeable to the company; and if they strainedtheir consciences a bit, small blame to them for that same.""Lady Hester is far above such arts, papa; but you shall judge foryourself. Come in now, for she is so anxious to know you."Kate, as she spoke, had opened the door of the little bedroom, and,drawing her arm within her father's, gently led him forward to whereLady Hester was seated upon the humble settle."It's a nice place they showed you into, my Lady," said Dalton, afterthe ceremony of introduction was gone through; "and there was thedrawing-room, or the library, and the breakfast-parlor, all ready toreceive you.""We heard that you were engaged with a gentleman on business, papa.""Well, and if I was, Nelly, transacting a small matter about my estatesin Ireland, sure it was in my own study we were.""I must be permitted to say that I am very grateful for any accidentwhich has given me the privilege of an intimate with my dear youngfriends," said Lady Hester, in her very sweetest of manners; "and as tothe dear little room itself, it is positively charming.""I wish you 'd see Mount Dalton, my Lady. There '& a window, and it isn't bigger than that there, and you can see seven baronies out of itand a part of three counties, Killikelly's flour-mills, and the town ofDrumcoolaghan in the distance; not to speak of the Shannon winding formiles through as elegant a bog as ever you set eyes upon.""Indeed!" smiled her Ladyship, with a glance of deep interest."'T is truth, I 'm telling you, my Lady," continued he; "and, what'smore, 'twas our own, every stick and stone of it. From Crishnamuckto Ballymodereena on one side, and from the chapel at Dooras down toDrumcoolaghan, 'twas the Dalton estate.""What a princely territory!""And why not? Weren't they kings once, or the same as kings? Did n't mygrandfather, Pearce, hold a court for life and death in his own parlor?Them was the happy and the good times, too," sighed he, plaintively."But I trust your late news from Ireland is favorable?""Ah! there isn't much to boast about. The old families is dying outfast, and the properties changing hands. A set of English rogues andbanker-fellows that made their money in dirty lanes and alleys."A sort of imploring, beseeching anxiety from his daughter Kate herebrought Dalton to a dead stop, and he pulled up as suddenly as if on thebrink of a precipice."Pray, go on, Mr. Dalton," said Lady Hester, with a winning smile; "youcannot think how much you have interested me. You are aware that wereally know nothing about poor dear Ireland; and I am so delighted tolearn from one so competent to teach.""I did n't mean any offence, my Lady," stammered out Dalton, inconfusion. "There 's good and bad everywhere; but I wish to the Lord thecotton-spinners would n't come among us, and their steam-engines, andtheir black chimneys, and their big factories; and they say we are notfar from that now."A gentle tap at the door which communicated with the sitting-room washeard at this moment, and Dalton exclaimed,"Come in!" but, not suffering the interruption to stop the current ofhis discourse, he was about to resume, when Mr. Prichard's well-powderedhead appeared at the door."I began to suspect you had forgotten me, Mr. Dalton," said he; butsuddenly catching a glimpse of Lady Hester, he stopped to ask pardon forthe intrusion."Faith, and I just did," said Dalton, laughing; "couldn't you contriveto step in in the morning, and we 'll talk that little matter overagain?""Yes, Prichard; pray don't interrupt us now," said Lady Hester, in atone of half-peevishness. "I cannot possibly spare you, Mr. Dalton,at this moment;" and the man of law withdrew, with a most respectfulobeisance."You'll forgive me, won't you?" said she, addressing Dalton, with aglance whose blandishment had often succeeded in a more difficult case."And now, papa, we'll adjourn to the drawing-room," said Kate, whosomehow continued to notice a hundred deficiencies in the furniture of alittle chamber she had often before deemed perfect.Dalton accordingly offered his arm to Lady Hester, who accepted thecourtesy in all form, and the little party moved into the sitting-room;Nelly following, with an expression of sadness in her pale features,very unlike the triumphant glances of her father and sister."I 'm certain of your pardon, Mr. Dalton, and of yours, too, my dearchild," said Lady Hester, turning towards Kate, as she seated herselfon the stiff old sofa, "when I avow that I have come here determinedto pass the evening with you. I 'm not quite so sure that my dear MissDalton's forgiveness will be so readily accorded me. I see that shealready looks gravely at the prospect of listening to my fiddle-faddleinstead of following out her own charming fancies.""Oh, how you wrong me, my Lady!" broke in Nelly, eagerly. "If it werenot for my fears of our unfitness our inability," she stammered inconfusion and shame; and old Dalton broke in,"Don't mind her, my Lady; we 're as well used to company as any familyin the country; but, you see, we don't generally mix with the people onemeets abroad; and why should we? God knows who they are. There was chapshere last summer at the tables you would n't let into the servants'hall. There was one I seen myself, with an elegant pair of horses, asnice steppers as ever you looked at, and a groom behind with a leatherstrap round him," and here Mr. Dalton performed a pantomime, byextending the fingers of his open hand at the side of his head, torepresent a cockade "what d' ye call it in his hat; and who was he, didyou think? 'Billy Rogers,' of Muck; his father was in the canal--""In the canal!" exclaimed Lady Hester, in affright."Yes, my Lady; in the Grand Canal, an inspector at forty pounds a year,the devil a farthin' more; and if you seen the son here, with two pinsin his cravat, and a gold chain twisting and turning over his waistcoat,with his hat on one side, and yellow gloves, new every morning, throwingdown the 'Naps' at that thieving game they call 'Red and Black,'you'd say he was the Duke of Leinster!""Was he so like his Grace?" asked Lady Hester, with a delightfulsimplicity."No; but grander!" replied Dalton, with a wave of his hand."It is really, as you remark, very true," resumed her Ladyship. "It isquite impossible to venture upon an acquaintance out of England; and Icordially concur in the caution you practise.""So I 'm always telling the girls, 'better no company than trumpery!'not that I don't like a bit of sociality as well as ever I did, a snuglittle party of one's own, people whose mothers and fathers had names,the real old stock of the land. But to be taken up with every chancerapscallion you meet on the cross-roads, to be hand and glove with this,that, and the other, them never was my sentiments."It is but justice to confess there was less of hypocrisy in the blandsmile Lady Hester returned to this speech than might be suspected;for, what between the rapidity of Daiton's utterance, and the peculiaraccentuation he gave to certain words, she did not really comprehendone syllable of what he said. Meanwhile the two girls sat silent andmotionless. Nelly, in all the suffering of shame at the absurdity of herfather's tone, the vulgarity of an assumption she had fondly hoped yearsof poverty might have tamed down, if not obliterated; Kate, in muteadmiration of their lovely visitor, of whose graces she never wearied.Nor did Lady Hester make any effort to include them in the conversation;she had come out expressly for one sole object, to captivate Mr. Dalton;and she would suffer nothing to interfere with her project. To thisend she heard his long and tiresome monologues about Irish misery anddistress, narrated with an adherence to minute and local details thatmade the whole incomprehensible; she listened to him with well-feignedinterest, in his narratives of the Daltons of times long past, of theirriotous and extravagant living, their lawlessness, and their daring;nor did she permit her attention to flag while he recounted scenes andpassages of domestic annals that might almost have filled a page ofsavage history."How sorry you must have felt to leave a country so dear by all itsassociations and habits!" sighed she, as he finished a narrative ofmore than ordinary horrors."Ain't I breaking my heart over it? Ain't I fretting myself to mere skinand bone?" said he, with a glance of condolence over his portly figure."But what could I do? I was forced to come out here for the education ofthe children bother it for education! but it ruins everybody nowadays.When I was a boy, reading and writing, with a trifle of figures, wasenough for any one. If you could tell what twenty bullocks cost, at twopounds four-and-sixpence a beast, and what was the price of a score ofhoggets, at fifteen shillings a head, and wrote your name and addressin a good round hand, 'twas seldom you needed more; but now you have tolearn everything, ay, sorrow bit, but it 's learning the way to do whatevery one knows by nature; riding, dancing, no, but even walking, I 'mtold, they teach too! Then there's French you must learn for talking!and Italian to sing! and German, upon my soul, I believe it's to snorein! and what with music, dancing, and drawing, everybody is brought uplike a play-actor.""There is, as you remark, far too much display in modern education, Mr.Dalton; but you would seem fortunate enough to have avoided the error. Ayoung lady whose genius can accomplish such a work as this--""'Tis one of Nelly's, sure enough," said he, looking at the group towhich she pointed, but feeling even more shame than pride in the avowal.The sound of voices a very unusual noise from the door without, nowbroke in upon the conversation, and Andy's cracked treble could bedistinctly heard in loud altercation."Nelly! Kitty! I say," cried Dalton, "see what's the matter with thatold devil. There's something come over him to-day, I think, for he won'tbe quiet for two minutes together."Kate accordingly hastened to discover the cause of a tumult in which nowthe sound of laughter mingled.As we, however, enjoy the prerogative of knowing the facts before theycould reach her, we may as well inform the reader that Andy, whoseintelligence seemed to have been preternaturally awakened by the sightof an attorney, had been struck by seeing two strangers enter thehouse-door and leisurely ascend the stairs. At such a moment, and withhis weak brain filled with its latest impression, the old man at onceset them down as bailiffs come to arrest his master. He hobbled afterthem, therefore, as well as he could, and just reached the landing asMr. Jekyl, with his friend Onslow, had arrived at the door."Mr. Dalton lives here, I believe?" said Jekyl."Anan," muttered Andy, who, although he heard the question, affected notto have done so, and made this an excuse for inserting himself betweenthem and the door."I was asking if Mr. Dalton lived here!" cried Jekyl, louder, andstaring with some astonishment at the old fellow's manoeuvre."Who said he did, eh?" said Andy, with an effort at fierceness."Perhaps it 's on the lower story?" asked Onslow."Maybe it is, and maybe it isn't, then!" was the answer."We wish to see him, my good man," said Jekyl; "or, at least, to send amessage to him.""Sure! I know well enough what ye want," said Andy, with a wave of hishand. "'T is n't the first of yer like I seen!""And what may that be?" asked Onslow, not a little amused by the blendedsilliness and shrewdness of the old man's face."Ay eh! I know yez well," rejoined he, shaking his head. "Be off, then,and don't provoke the house! Away wid yez, before the servants sees ye.""This is a rare fellow," said Onslow, who, less interested than hiscompanion about the visit, was quite satisfied to amuse himself with oldAndy. "So you 'll not even permit us to send our respects, and ask howyour master is?""I'm certain you'll be more reasonable," simpered Jekyl, as he drew avery weighty-looking purse from his pocket, and, with a considerabledegree of ostentation, seemed preparing to open it.The notion of bribery, and in such a cause, was too much for Andy'sfeelings; and with a sudden jerk of his hand, he dashed the purse outof Jekyl's fingers, and scattered the contents all over the landing andstairs. "Ha, ha!" cried he, wildly, "'t is only ha'pence he has, afterall!" And the taunt was so far true that the ground was strewn withkreutzers and other copper coins of the very smallest value.As for Onslow, the scene was too ludicrous for him any longer torestrain his laughter; and although Jekyl laughed too, and seemed torelish the absurdity of his mistake, as he called it, having put in hispocket a collection of rare and curious coins, his cheek, as he bent togather them up, was suffused with a deeper flush than the mere act ofstooping should occasion. It was precisely at this moment that KateDalton made her appearance."What is the matter, Andy?" asked she, turning to the old man, whoappeared, by his air and attitude, as if determined to guard thedoorway."Two spalpeens, that want to take the master; that's what it is," saidhe, in a voice of passion."Your excellent old servant has much mistaken us, Miss Dalton," saidJekyl, with his most deferential of manners. "My friend, CaptainOnslow," here he moved his hand towards George, who bowed, "and myself,having planned a day's shooting in the 'Moorg,' have come to request thepleasure of Mr. Dalton's company.""Oh, the thievin' villains!" muttered Andy; "that's the way they 'llcatch him."Meanwhile Kate, having promised to convey their polite invitation,expressed her fears that her father's health might be unequal to theexertion. Jekyl immediately took issue upon the point, and hoped, andwondered, and fancied, and "flattered himself" so much, that Kate atlast discovered she had been drawn into a little discussion, whenshe simply meant to have returned a brief answer; and while she washesitating how to put an end to an interview that had already lasted toolong, Dalton himself appeared."Is it with me these gentlemen have their business?" said he, angrily,while he rudely resisted all Andy's endeavors to hold him back."Oh, my dear Mr. Dalton," said Jekyl, warmly, "it is such a pleasure tosee you quite restored to health again! Here we are Captain Onslow, Mr.Dalton thinking of a little excursion after the woodcocks down the MoorgThai; and I have been indulging the hope that you 'll come along withus."The very hint of an attention, the merest suggestion that bordered ona civility, struck a chord in old Dalton's nature that moved all hissympathies. It was at once a recognition of himself and his ancestry forgenerations back. It was a rehabilitation of all the Dal tons of MountDalton for centuries past; and as he extended a hand to each, andinvited them to walk in, he half felt himself at home again, doing thehonors of his house, and extending those hospitalities that had broughthim to beggary."Are you serious about the shooting-party?" whispered Onslow to Jekyl,as he walked forward."Of course not. It's only a 'Grecian horse,' to get inside the citadel.""My daughter, Miss Dalton; Mr. Jekyl Miss Kate Dalton. Your friend'sname, I believe, is--""Captain Onslow."Lady Hester started at the name, and, rising, at once said,"Oh, George, I must introduce you to my fair friends. Miss Dalton, thisgentleman calls me 'mamma;' or, at least, if he does not, it is frompoliteness. Captain Onslow Mr. Dalton. Now, by what fortunate event cameyou here?""Ought I not to ask the same question of your Ladyship?" said George,archly."If you like; only that, as I asked first--""You shall be answered first. Lady Hester Onslow, allow me to presentMr. Albert Jekyl.""Oh, indeed!" drawled out Lady Hester, as, with her very coldest bow,she surveyed Mr. Jekyl through her glass, and then turned away to finishher conversation with Ellen.Jekyl was not the man to feel a slight repulse as a defeat; but, atthe same time, saw that the present was not the moment to risk anengagement. He saw, besides, that, by engaging Dalton in conversation,he should leave Lady Hester and Onslow at liberty to converse withthe two sisters, and, by this act of generosity, entitle himself togratitude on all sides. And, after all, among the smaller martyrdomsof this life, what self-sacrifice exceeds his who, out of purephilanthropy, devotes himself to the "bore" of the party. Honor to himwho can lead the forlorn hope of this stronghold of weariness. Great behis praises who can turn from the seductive smiles of beauty, and thesoft voices of youth, and only give eye and ear to the tiresome anduninteresting. High among the achievements of unobtrusive heroismshould this claim rank; and if you doubt it, my dear reader, if you feeldisposed to hold cheaply such darings, try it, try even for once. Takeyour place beside that deaf old lady in the light auburn wig, or drawyour chair near to that elderly gentleman, whose twinkling gray eyesand tremulous lip bespeak an endless volubility on the score of personalreminiscences. Do this, too, within earshot of pleasant voices and merrylaughter, of that tinkling ripple that tells of conversation flowinglightly on, like a summer stream, clear where shallow, and reflectivewhere deep! Listen to the wearisome bead-roll of family fortunes, thebirths, deaths, and marriages of those you never saw, and hoped neverto see, hear the long narratives of past events, garbled, mistaken, andmisstated, with praise and censure ever misapplied, and then, I say, youwill feel that, although such actions are not rewarded with red ribbonsor blue, they yet demand a moral courage and a perseverance that inwider fields win high distinction.[Illustration:  166]Albert Jekyl was a proficient in this great art; indeed, his powersdeveloped themselves according to the exigency, so that the moreinsufferably tiresome his companion, the more seemingly attentiveand interested did he become. His features were, in fact, a kind of"bore-ometer," in which, from the liveliness of the expression, youmight calculate the stupidity of the tormentor; and the mercury of hisnature rose, not fell, under pressure. And so you would have said hadyou but seen him that evening, as, seated beside Dalton, he heard,for hours long, how Irish gentlemen were ruined and their fortunessquandered. What jolly times they were when men resisted the law andnever feared a debt! Not that, while devouring all the "rapparee"experiences of the father, he had no eye for the daughters, and did notsee what was passing around him. Ay, that did he, and mark well how LadyHester attached herself to Kate Dalton, flattered by every sign of herunbought admiration, and delighted with the wondering homage of theartless girl. He watched Onslow, too, turn from the inanimate charmsof Nelly's sculptured figures, to gaze upon the long dark lashes andbrilliant complexion of her sister. He saw all the little comedy thatwent on around him, even to poor Nelly's confusion, as she assisted Andyto arrange a tea-table, and, for the first time since their arrival,proceed to make use of that little service of white and gold which,placed on a marble table for show, constitutes the invariable decorationof every humble German drawing-room. He even overheard her, as she leftthe room, giving Andy her directions a dozen times over, how he was toprocure the tea, and the sugar, and the milk, extravagances she did notsyllable without a sigh. He saw and heard everything, and rapidly drewhis own inferences, not alone of their poverty, but of their unfitnessto struggle with it."And yet, I'd wager these people," said he to himself, "are revelling insuperfluities; at least, as compared to me! But, so it is, the rock thatone man ties round his neck, another would make a stepping-stone of!"This satisfactory conclusion gave additional sweetness to the blandsmile with which he took his teacup from Nelly's hand, while hepronounced the beverage the very best he had ever tasted out of Moscow.And so we must leave the party.CHAPTER XV. CONTRASTS"So you think, Grounsell, I may be able to leave this in a day or two?"said Sir Stafford, as, on the day following the events we have justrelated, he slowly walked up and down his dressing-room."By the end of the week, if the weather only continue fine, we may be onthe road again.""I'm glad of it, heartily glad of it! Not that, as regarded myself,it mattered much where I was laid up in dock; but I find that thisisolation, instead of drawing the members of my family more closelytogether, has but served to widen the breach between them. Lady Hesterand Sydney rarely meet; George sees neither of them, and rarely comesnear me, so that the sooner we go hence the better for all of us."Grounsell gave a dry nod of assent, without speaking."Sydney is very anxious to go and pass some time with her aunt Conway;but I foresee that, if I consent, the difference between Lady Hester andher will then become an irreconcilable quarrel. You don't agree with me,Grounsell?""I do not. I never knew the ends of a fractured bone unite by gratingthem eternally against each other.""And, as for George, the lounging habits of his service and cigars havesteeped him in an indolence from which there is no emerging. I scarcelyknow what to do with him.""It's hard enough to decide upon," rejoined Grounsell; "he has somepursuits, but not one ambition.""He has very fair abilities, certainly," said Sir Stafford, halfpeevishly."Very fair!" nodded Grounsell."A good memory, a quick apprehension.""He has one immense deficiency, for which nothing can compensate," saidthe doctor, solemnly."Application, industry?""No, with his opportunities a great deal is often acquired withcomparatively light labor. I mean a greater and more important element.""He wants steadiness, you think?""No; I 'll tell you what he wants, he wants pluck!"Sir Stafford's cheek became suddenly crimson, and his blue eyes grewalmost black in the angry expression of the moment."Pluck, sir? My son deficient in courage?""Not as you understand it now," resumed Grouusell, calmly. "He hasenough, and more than enough, to shoot me or anybody else that wouldimpugn it. The quality I mean is of a very different order. It is thedaring to do a thing badly to-day in the certain confidence that you,will do it better to-morrow, and succeed perfectly in it this daytwelvemonth. He has not pluck to encounter repeated failures, and yetreturn every morning to the attack; he has not pluck to be bulliedby mediocrity in the sure and certain confidence that he will live tosurpass it; in a word, he has not that pluck which resists the dictationof inferior minds, and inspires self-reliance through self-respect.""I confess I cannot see that in the station he is likely to occupy suchqualities are at all essential," said Sir Stafford, almost haughtily."Twenty thousand a year is a fine thing, and may dispense with a greatmany gifts in its possessor; and a man like myself, who never owned atwentieth of the amount, may be a precious bad judge of the requisitesto spend it suitably; but I 'll tell you one thing, Onslow, that organthe phrenologists call 'Combativeness' is the best in the whole skull.""I think your Irish friend Dalton must have been imparting some of hisnative prejudices to you," said Onslow, smiling; "and, by the way, whenhave you seen him?""I went to call there last night, but I found a tea-party, and did n'tgo in. Only think of these people, with beggary staring them on everyside, sending out for 'Caravan' tea at I don't know how many florins apound.""I heard of it; but then, once and away--""Once and away! Ay, but once is ruin.""Well, I hope Prichard has arranged everything by this time. He has goneover this morning to complete the business; so that I trust, when weleave Baden, these worthy people will be m the enjoyment of easiercircumstances.""I see him crossing over the street now. I'll leave you together.""No, no, Grounsell; wait and hear his report; we may want your advicebesides, for I 'm not quite clear that this large sum of arrears shouldbe left at Dalton's untrammelled disposal, as Mr. Prichard intended itshould be a test of that excellent gentleman's prudence."Mr. Prichard's knock was now heard at the door, and next momenthe entered. His pale countenance was slightly flushed, and in theexpression of his face it might be read that he had come from a scene ofunusual excitement."I have failed, completely failed, Sir Stafford," said he, with a sigh,as he seated himself, and threw a heavy roll of paper on the tablebefore him.As Sir Stafford did not break the pause that followed these words,Prichard resumed,"I told you last night that Mr. Dalton, not being able clearly tounderstand my communication, which I own, to prevent any searchingscrutiny on his part, I did my best to envelop in a covering oftechnicalities, referred me to his eldest daughter, in whose acutenesshe reposes much confidence. If I was not impressed with the difficultyof engaging such an adversary from his description, still less was Ion meeting with the young lady this morning. A very quietly mannered,unassuming person, with considerable good looks, which once upon atime must have been actual beauty, was seated alone in the drawing-roomawaiting me. Her dress was studiously plain; and were it not for anair of great neatness throughout, I should perhaps call it even poor.I mention all these matters with a certain prolixity, because they bearupon what ensued."Without waiting for me to open my communication, she began by a slightapology for her presence there, occasioned, as she said, by her father'sill-health and consequent incapacity to transact business; afterwhich she added a few words expressive of a hope that I would make mystatement in the most simple and intelligible form, divested so far asmight be of technical phraseology, and such as, to use her own words, avery unlettered person like herself might comprehend."This opening, I confess, somewhat startled me; I scarcely expected somuch from her father's daughter; but I acquiesced and went on. As weconcocted the whole plot together here, Sir Stafford, it is needlessthat I should weary you by a repetition of it. It is enough that I sayI omitted nothing of plausibility, either in proof of the bequest, or inthe description of the feeling that prompted its fulfilment. I descantedupon the happy event which, in the course of what seemed an accident,had brought the two families together, and prefaced their businessintercourse by a friendship. I adverted to the good influence increasedcomforts would exercise upon her father's health. I spoke of her sisterand her brother in the fuller enjoyment of all that became their nameand birth. She heard me to the very end with deep attention, never onceinterrupting, nor even by a look or gesture expressing dissent."At last, when I had concluded, she said, 'This, then, is a bequest?'"I replied affirmatively."'In that case,' said she, 'the terms on which it is conveyed will solveall the difficulty of our position. If my uncle Godfrey intended thislegacy to be a peace-offering, however late it has been in coming,we should have no hesitation in accepting it; if he meant that hisgenerosity should be trammelled by conditions, or subject in any wayto the good pleasure of a third party, the matter will have a differentaspect. Which is the truth?'"I hesitated at this point-blank appeal, so different from what I lookedfor, and she at once asked to see the will. Disconcerted still more, Inow prevaricated, stating that I had not brought the document withme; that a memorandum of its provisions would, I had supposed, provesufficient; and finally assured her that acceptance of the bequestinvolved neither a condition nor a pledge."'It may, however, involve an obligation, sir,' said she, firmly. 'Letus learn if such be the case.'"'Are you so proud, Miss Dalton,' said I, 'that you cannot even submitto an obligation?'"She blushed deeply, and with a weak voice answered,"'We are too poor to incur a debt.'"Seeing it was useless to dwell longer on this part of the subject, Iadverted to her father's increasing age, his breaking health, and thenecessity of affording him a greater share of comforts; but she suddenlystopped me, saying, "'You may make my refusal of this favor for suchit is, and nothing less a more painful duty than I deemed it, but youcannot alter my resolution, sir. Poverty, so long as it is honorable,has nothing mean nor undeserving about it, but dependence can neverbestow happiness. It is true, as you say, that my dear father mighthave around him many of those little luxuries that he once was used to;but with what changed hearts would not his children minister themto him? Where would be that high prompting sense of duty that everyself-sacrifice is met by now? Where that rich reward of an approvingspirit that lightens toil and makes even weariness blessed? Our humblefortunes have linked us closer together; the storms of the world havemade us draw nearer to each other, have given us one heart, hope,and love alike. Leave us, then, to struggle on, nor cast the gloom ofdependence over days that all the ills of poverty could not darken. Weare happy now; who can tell what we should become hereafter?'"I tried to turn her thoughts upon her brother, but she quickly stoppedme, saying,"'Frank is a soldier; the rewards in his career are never withheld fromthe deserving; at all events, wealth would be unsuitable to him. Henever knew but narrow fortunes, and the spirit that becomes a moreexalted condition is not the growth of a day.'"I next ventured, but with every caution and delicacy, to inquirewhether your aid and influence might not avail them in any future plansof life they might form?"'We have no plans," said she, simply; 'or, rather, we have had so manythat they all resolve themselves into mere castle-building. Mydear father longs for Ireland again, for home as he still calls it,forgetting that we have no longer a home there. He fancies warm-heartedfriends and neighbors, an affectionate people, attached to the verytraditions of his name; but it is now wiser to feed this delusion thandestroy it, by telling him that few, scarcely one, of his old companionsstill live, that other influences, other fortunes, other names, havereplaced ours; we should go back there as strangers, and without eventhe stranger's claim to kind acceptance. Then, we had thought of the newworld beyond seas; but these are the lauds of the young, the ardent, andthe enterprising, high in hope and resolute of heart; and so, at last,we deemed it wisest to seek out some quiet spot, in some quiet country,where our poverty would, at least, present nothing remarkable, andthere to live for each other; and we are happy, so happy that, save thepassing dread that this delicious calm of life may not be lasting, wehave few sorrows.'"Again and again I tried to persuade her to recall her decision, butin vain. Once only did she show any sign of hesitation. It was when Icharged her with pride as the reason of refusal. Then suddenly hereyes filled up, and her lip trembled, and such a change came over herfeatures that I grew shocked at my own words."'Pride!' cried she. 'If you mean that inordinate self-esteem thatprefers isolation to sympathy, that rejects an obligation frommere haughtiness, I know not the feeling. Our pride is not in ourself-sufficiency, for every step in life teaches us how much we owe toothers; but in this, that low in lot, and humble in means, we have kept,and hope still to keep, the motives and principles that guided us inhappier fortunes. Yes, you may call us proud, for we are so, proud thatour poverty has not made us mean; proud that in a strange land we haveinspired sentiments of kindness, and even of affection; proud that,without any of the gifts or graces which attract, we have drawn towardsus this instance of noble generosity of which you are now the messenger.I am not ashamed to own pride in all these.'"To press her further was useless; and only asking, that if by anyfuture change of circumstances she might be induced to alter herresolve, she would still consider the proposition as open to heracceptance, I took my leave.""This is most provoking," exclaimed Onslow."Provoking!" cried Grounsell; "you call it provoking! That where yousought to confer a benefit you discover a spirit greater than all thefavors wealth ever gave, or ever will give! A noble nature, that soarsabove every accident of fortune, provoking!""I spoke with reference to myself," replied Onslow, tartly; "and Irepeat, it is most provoking that I am unable to make a recompense whereI have unquestionably inflicted a wrong!""Rather thank God that in this age of money-seeking and gold-huntingthere lives one whose heart is uncorrupted and incorruptible," criedGrouusell."If I had not seen it I could not have believed it!" said Prichard."Of course not, sir," chimed in Grounsell, bluntly. "Yours is not thetrade where such instances are frequently met with; nor have I met withmany myself!""I beg to observe," said Prichard, mildly, "that even in my career Ihave encountered many acts of high generosity.""Generosity! Yes, I know what that means. A sister who surrenders herlegacy to a spendthrift brother; a childless widow that denies herselfthe humblest means of comfort to help the ruined brother of her losthusband; a wife who places in a reckless husband's hand the lastlittle remnant of fortune that was hoarded against the day of utterdestitution; and they are always women who do these things, saving,scraping, careful creatures, full of self-denial and smalleconomies. Not like your generous men, as the world calls them, whosefree-heartedness is nothing but selfishness, whose liberality is thebait to catch flattery. But it is not of generosity I speak here. Togive, even to one's last farthing, is far easier than to refuse helpwhen you are needy. To draw the rags of poverty closer, to make theirfolds drape decently, and hide the penury within, that is the victory,indeed.""Mark you," cried Onslow, laughing, "it is an old bachelor says allthis."Grounsell's face became scarlet, and as suddenly pale as death; andalthough he made an effort to speak, not a sound issued from his lips.For an instant the pause which ensued was unbroken, when a tap washeard at the door. It was a message from Lady Hester, requesting, if SirStafford were disengaged, to be permitted to speak with him."You're not going, Grounsell?" cried Sir Stafford, as he saw the doctorseize his hat; but he hastened out of the room without speaking, whilethe lawyer, gathering up his papers, prepared to follow him."We shall see you at dinner, Prichard?" said Sir Stafford. "I have somehope of joining the party myself to-day."Mr. Prichard bowed his acknowledgments and departed.And now the old baronet sat down to ponder in his mind the reasons forso strange an event as a visit in the forenoon from Lady Hester. "Whatcan it mean? She can't want money," thought he; "'t is but the otherday I sent her a large check. Is she desirous of going back to Englandagain? Are there any new disagreements at work?" This last thoughtreminded him of those of whom he had been so lately hearing, of thosewhose narrow fortunes had drawn them nearer to each other, renderingthem more tolerant and more attached, while in his own family, whereaffluence prevailed, he saw nothing but dissension.As he sat pondering over this not too pleasant problem, a tall andserious-looking footman entered the room, rolling before him anarmchair. Another and not less dignified functionary followed, withcushions and a foot-warmer, signs which Sir Stafford at once read asindicative of a long interview; for her Ladyship's preparations werealways adopted with a degree of forethought and care that she veryrarely exhibited in matters of real consequence.Sir Stafford was contemplating these august demonstrations, when thesolemn voice of an upper servant announced Lady Hester; and, after asecond's pause, she swept into the room in all that gauzy amplitude ofcostume that gives to the wearer a seeming necessity of inhabiting themost spacious apartments of a palace."How d'ye do?" said she, languidly, as she sank down into her chair. "Ihad not the least notion how far this room was off; if Clements has notbeen taking me a tour of the whole house."Mr. Clements, who was still busily engaged in disposing and arrangingthe cushions, blandly assured her Ladyship that they had come by themost direct way."I'm sorry for it," said she, peevishly, "for I shall have the morefatigue in going back again. There, you 're only making it worse. Younever can learn that I don't want to be propped up like an invalid. Thatwill do; you may leave the room. Sir Stafford, would you be good enoughto draw that blind a little lower? the sun is directly in my eyes. Dearme, how yellow you are! or is it the light in this horrid room? Am I sodreadfully bilious-looking?""On the contrary," said he, smiling, "I should pronounce you in the mostperfect enjoyment of health.""Oh, of course, I have no doubt of that. I only wonder you didn't callit 'rude health.' I cannot conceive anything more thoroughly provokingthan the habit of estimating one's sufferings by the very efforts madeto suppress them.""Sufferings, my dear? I really was not aware that you had sufferings.""I am quite sure of that; nor is it my habit to afflict others withcomplaint. I 'm sure your friend, Mr. Grounsell, would be equally unableto acknowledge their existence. How I do hate that man! and I know,Stafford, he hates us. Oh, you smile, as if to say, 'Only some of us;'but I tell you he detests us all, and his old school-fellow, as hevulgarly persists in calling you, as much as the others.""I sincerely hope you are mistaken.""Polite, certainly; you trust that his dislike is limited to myself.Not that, for my own part, I have the least objection to any amount ofdetestation with which he may honor me; it is the tribute the low andobscure invariably render the well-born, and I am quite ready to acceptit; but I own it is a little hard that I must submit to the inflictionbeneath my own roof.""My dear Hester, how often have I assured you that you were mistaken;and that what you regard as disrespect to yourself is the roughness ofan unpolished but sterling nature. The ties which have grown up betweenhim and me since we were boys together ought not to be snapped for thesake of a mere misunderstanding; and if you cannot or will not estimatehim for the good qualities he unquestionably possesses, at least bearwith him for my sake.""So I should, so I strive to do; but the evil does not end there; heinspires everybody with the same habits of disrespect and indifference.Did you remark Clements, a few moments since, when I spoke to him aboutthat cushion?""No, I can't say that I did.""Why should you? nobody ever does trouble his head about anything thatrelates to my happiness! Well, I remarked it, and saw the supercilioussmile he assumed when I told him that the pillow was wrong. He lookedover at you, too, as though to say, 'You see how impossible it is toplease her'.""I certainly saw nothing of that.""Even Prichard, that formerly was the most diffident of men, is nowso much at his ease, so very much at home in my presence, it is quiteamusing. It was but yesterday he asked me to take wine with him atdinner. The anachronism was bad enough, but only fancy the liberty!""And what did you do?" asked Sir Stafford, with difficulty repressing asmile."I affected not to hear, hoping he would not expose himself before theservants by a repetition of the request. But he went on, 'Will yourLadyship' I assure you he said that 'will your Ladyship do me the honorto drink wine with me?' I merely stared at him, but never took anynotice of his speech. Would you believe it? he returned to the chargeagain, and with his hand on his wine-glass, began, 'I have takenthe liberty' I could n't hear more; so I turned to George, and said,'George, will you tell that man not to do that?'"Sir Stafford could not restrain himself any longer, but broke out intoa burst of hearty laughter. "Poor Prichard," said he, at last, "I almostthink I see him before me!""You never think of saying, 'Poor Hester, these are not the associatesyou have been accustomed to live with!' But I could be indifferentto all these if my own family treated me with proper deference. Asfor Sydney and George, however, they have actually coventried me; andalthough I anticipated many sacrifices when I married, this I certainlynever speculated upon. Lady Wallingcroft, indeed, warned me to a certainextent of what I should meet with; but I fondly hoped that disparityof years and certain differences, the fruits of early prejudices andhabits, would be the only drawbacks on my happiness; but I have lived tosee my error!""The event has, indeed, not fulfilled what was expected from it," saidSir Stafford, with a slow and deliberate emphasis on each word."Oh, I comprehend you perfectly," said she, coloring slightly, and forthe first time displaying any trait of animation in her features. "Youhave been as much disappointed as I have. Just what my aunt Wallingcroftprophesied. 'Remember,' said she, and I 'm sure I have had good causeto remember it, 'their ideas are not our ideas; they have not the samehopes, ambitions, or objects that we have; their very morality is notour morality!'""Of what people or nation was her Ladyship speaking?" asked SirStafford, mildly."Of the City, generally," replied Lady Hester, proudly."Not in ignorance, either," rejoined Sir Stafford; "her own father was amerchant in Lombard Street.""But the family are of the best blood in Lancashire, Sir Stafford.""It may be so; but I remember Walter Crofts himself boasting that hehad danced to warm his feet on the very steps of the door in GrosvenorSquare which afterwards acknowledged him as the master; and as he owedhis wealth and station to honest industry and successful enterprise,none heard the speech without thinking the better of him.""The anecdote is new to me," said Lady Hester, superciliously; "andI have little doubt that the worthy man was merely embellishing anincident to suit the tastes of his company.""It was the company around his table, as Lord Mayor of London!""I could have sworn it," said she, laughing; "but what has all this todo with what I wished to speak about if I could but remember what itwas! These eternal digressions have made me forget everything."Although the appeal was palpably directed to Sir Stafford, he sat silentand motionless, patiently awaiting the moment when recollection mightenable her to resume."Dear me! how tiresome it is! I cannot think of what I came about, andyou will not assist me in the least.""Up to this moment you have given me no clew to it," said Sir Stafford,with a smile. "It was not to speak of Grounsell?""Of course not. I hate even to think of him!""Of Prichard, perhaps?" he said, with a half-sly twinkle of the eye."Just as little!""Possibly your friend Colonel Haggerstone was in your thoughts?""Pray do not call him my friend. I know very little of the gentleman; Iintend even to know less. I declined to receive him this morning, whenhe sent up his card.""An attention I fear he has not shown that poor creature he wounded,Grounsell tells me.""Oh, I have it!" said she, suddenly; the allusion to Hans at oncerecalling the Daltons, and bringing to mind the circumstances shedesired to remember. "It was exactly of these poor people I came tospeak. You must know, Sir Stafford, that I have made the acquaintanceof a most interesting family here, a father and two daughters namedDalton.""Grounsell has already told me so," interrupted Sir Stafford."Of course, then, every step I have taken in this intimacy has beenrepresented in the most odious light. The amiable doctor will have,doubtless, imputed to me the least worthy motives for knowing persons intheir station?""On the contrary, Hester. If he expressed any qualification to thecircumstance, it was in the form of a fear lest the charms of yoursociety and the graces of your manner might indispose them to returnwith patience to the dull round of their daily privations.""Indeed!" said she, superciliously. "A weak dose of his own acquaintancewould be, then, the best antidote he could advise them! But, really,I must not speak of this man; any allusion to him is certain to jarmy nerves, and irritate my feelings for the whole day after. I want tointerest you about these Daltons.""Nothing more easy, my dear, since I already know something about them.""The doctor being your informant," said she, snappishly."No, no, Hester; many, many years ago, certain relations existed betweenus, and I grieve to say that Mr. Dalton has reason to regard me in nofavorable light; and it was but the very moment I received your messageI was learning from Prichard the failure of an effort I had made torepair a wrong. I will not weary you with a long and a sad story, butbriefly mention that Mr. Dalton's late wife was a distant relative of myown.""Yes, yes; I see it all. There was a little love in the business, an oldflame revived in after life; nothing serious, of course but jealousiesand misconstructions to any extent. Dear me, and that was the reasonshe died of a broken heart!" It was hard to say if Sir Stafford wasmore amused at the absurdity of this imputation, or stung by the coolindifference with which she uttered it; nor was it easy to know how thestruggle, within him would terminate, when she went on: "It does appearso silly to see a pair of elderly gentlemen raking up a difference outof an amourette of the past century. You are very fortunate to have soquiet a spot to exhibit in!""I am sorry to destroy an illusion so very full of amusement, LadyHester; but I owe it to all parties to say that your pleasant fancy hasnot even the shadow of a color. I never even saw Mrs. Dalton; never haveyet met her husband. The event to which I was about to allude, when youinterrupted me, related to a bequest--""Oh, I know the whole business, now! It was at your suit that dreadfulmortgage was foreclosed, and these dear people were driven away fromtheir ancient seat of Mount Dalton. I 'm sure I 've heard the story atleast ten times over, but never suspected that your name was mixed upwith it. I do assure you, Sir Stafford, that they have never dropped themost distant hint of you in connection with that sad episode.""They have been but just, Lady Hester," said he, gravely. "I never didhold a mortgage over this property; still less exercised the severeright you speak of. But it is quite needless to pursue a narrative thattaxes your patience so severely; enough to say, that through Prichard'smediation I have endeavored to persuade Mr. Dalton that I wasthe trustee, under a will, of a small annuity on his life. He hasperemptorily refused to accept it, although, as I am informed, living incircumstances of great poverty.""Poor they must be, certainly. The house is wretchedly furnished, andthe girls wear such clothes as I never saw before; not that they areeven the worn and faded finery of better days, but actually the coarsestuffs such as the peasants wear!""So I have heard.""Not even an edging of cheap lace round their collars; not a bow ofribbon; not an ornament of the humblest kind about them.""And both handsome, I am told?""The younger, beautiful! the deepest blue eyes in the world, with longfringed lashes, and the most perfect mouth you can imagine. The eldervery pretty, too, but sad-looking, for she has a fearful lameness, poorthing! They say it came from a fall off a horse, but I suspect it musthave begun in infancy; one of those dreadful things they call 'spine.'Like all persons in her condition, she is monstrously clever; carves themost beautiful little groups in boxwood, and models in clay and plaster.She is a dear, mild, gentle thing; but I suspect with all that infirmityof temper that comes of long illness at least, she is seldom in highspirits like her sister. Kate, the younger girl, is my favorite; a fine,generous, warm-hearted creature, full of life and animation, and so fondof me already."If Sir Stafford did not smile at the undue emphasis laid upon the lastfew words, it was not that he had not read their full significance."And Mr. Dalton himself, what is he like?""Like nothing I ever met before; the oddest mixture of right sentimentsand wrong inferences; of benevolence, cruelty, roughness, gentleness;the most refined consideration, and the most utter disregard for otherpeople and their feelings, that ever existed. You never can guess whatwill be his sentiments at any moment, or on any subject, except on thequestion of family, when his pride almost savors of insanity. I believe,in his own country, he would be nothing strange nor singular; but out ofit, he is a figure unsuited to any landscape.""It is hard to say how much of this peculiarity may have come of adversefortune," said Sir Stafford, thoughtfully."I 'm certain he was always the same; at least, it would be impossibleto imagine him anything different. But I have not come to speak of him,but of his daughter Kate, in whom I am deeply interested. You must know,Sir Stafford, that I have formed a little plan, for which I want youraid and concurrence. It is to take this dear girl along with us toItaly.""Take her to Italy! In what position, Lady Hester? You surely neverintended any menial station?""Of course not; a kind of humble friend what they call a 'companion' inthe newspapers to have always with one. She is exactly the creatureto dissipate low spirits and banish ennui, and, with the advantages oftraining and teaching, will become a most attractive girl. As it is, shehas not been quite neglected. Her French accent is very pure; German, Iconclude, she talks fluently, she plays prettily, at least, as well asone can judge on that vile tinkling old harpsichord, whose legs danceevery time it is touched, and sings very pleasingly those little Germanballads that are now getting into fashion. In fact, it is the toneof society that mannerism of the world she is deficient in more thananything else.""She certainly could not study in a better school than yours, LadyHester; but I see some very great objections to the whole scheme, andwithout alluding to such as relate to ourselves, but simply those thatregard the young lady herself. Would it be a kindness to withdraw herfrom the sphere wherein she is happy and contented, to mingle for aseason or so in another and very different rank, contracting new habitsof thought, new ideas, new associations, learning each day to look downupon that humble lot to which she must eventually return?""She need not return to it. She is certain to marry, and marry well. Agirl with so many attractions as she will possess may aspire to a veryhigh match indeed!""This is too hazardous a game of life to please my fancy," said SirStafford, dubiously. "We ought to look every contingency in the face insuch a matter as this.""I have given the subject the very deepest consideration," replied LadyHester, authoritatively. "I have turned the question over and over inmy mind, and have not seen a single difficulty for which there is not aneasy remedy.""Sydney certainly ought to be consulted.""I have done so already. She is charmed with the project. She sees,perhaps, how few companionable qualities she herself possesses, andanticipates that Miss Dalton will supply that place towards me that sheis too indolent and too indifferent to fill.""How would the family receive such a proposition? They seem to be veryproud. Is it likely that they would listen to a project of this nature?""There lies the only difficulty; nor need it be an insuperable one, ifwe manage cleverly. The affair will require delicate treatment, becauseif we merely invite her to accompany us, they will naturally enoughdecline an invitation, to comply with which would involve a costlyoutlay in dress and ornament, quite impossible in their circumstances.This must be a matter of diplomacy, of which the first step is, however,already taken.""The first step! How do you mean?""Simply, that I have already, but in the deepest confidence, hinted thepossibility of the project to Kate Dalton, and she is wild with delightat the bare thought of it. The dear child! with what rapture she heardme speak of the balls, and fetes, and theatres of the great world!of the thousand fascinations society has in store for all who have arightful claim to its homage, the tribute rendered to beauty, greaterthan that conceded to rank or genius itself! I told her of all these,and I showed her my diamonds!"Sir Stafford made, involuntarily, a slight gesture with his hand, asthough to say, "This last was the coup de grace.""So far, then, as Kate is concerned, she will be a willing ally; nor doI anticipate any opposition from her quiet, submissive sister, who seemsto dote upon her. The papa, indeed, is like to prove refractory; butthis must be our business to overcome."Lady Hester, who at the opening of the interview had spoken with all thelistlessness of ennui, had gradually worked herself up to a speciesof ardor that made her words flow rapidly, a sign well known to SirStafford that her mind was bent upon an object that would not admitof gainsay. Some experience had taught him the impolicy of absoluteresistance, and trained him to a tactic of waiting and watching foreventualities, which, whether the campaign be civil, military, orconjugal, is not without a certain degree of merit. In the present casethere were several escape-valves. The Daltons were three in number,and should be unanimous. All the difficulties of the plan should bearranged, not alone to their perfect satisfaction, but without a woundto their delicacy. Grounsell was certain to be a determined opponent tothe measure, and would, of course, be consulted upon it. And, lastly,if everything worked well and favorably, Lady Hester herself was byno means certain to wish for it the day after she had conquered allopposition.These, and many similar reasons, showed Sir Stafford that he mightsafely concede a concurrence that need never become practical, andmaking a merit of his necessity, he affected to yield to arguments thathad no value in his eyes."How do you propose to open the campaign, Hester?" asked he, after apause."I have arranged it all," said she, with animation. "We must visit theDaltons together, or better still you shall go alone. No, no; a letterwill be the right thing, a very carefully written letter, that shallrefute by anticipation every possible objection to the plan, and showthe Daltons the enormous advantages they must derive from it.""As, for instance?" said Sir Stafford, with apparent anxiety to beinstructed."Enormous they certainly will be!" exclaimed she. "First of all, Kate,as I have said, is certain to marry well, and will be thus in a positionto benefit the others, who, poor things, can do nothing for themselves.""Very true, my dear, very true. You see all these things far morerapidly and more clearly than I do.""I have thought so long and so much about it, I suppose there are fewcontingencies of the case have escaped me; and now that I learn how youonce knew and were attached to the poor girl's mother--""I am sorry to rob you of so harmless an illusion," interrupted he,smiling; "but I have already said I never saw her.""Oh, you did say so! I forget all about it. Well, there was something orother that brought the families in relation, no matter what, and it mustbe a great satisfaction to you to see the breach restored, and throughmy intervention, too; for I must needs say, Sir Stafford, there aremany women who would entertain a silly jealousy respecting one who onceoccupied the first place in their husband's esteem.""Must I once more assure you that this whole assumption is groundless;that I never--""Quite enough; more than I ask for, more than I have any right to askfor," broke she in. "If you did not interrupt me, and pardon me if Isay that this habit of yours is calculated to produce innumerablemisconceptions, I say that, if I had not been interrupted, I would havetold you that I regard such jealousies as most mean and unworthy. Wecannot be the arbiters of our affections any more than of ourfortunes; and if in early life we may have formed attachments imprudentattachments." Here her Ladyship, who had unwittingly glided from theconsideration of Sir Stafford's case to that of her own, became confusedand flurried, her cheek flushing and her chest heaving. She lookedoverwhelmed with embarrassment, and it was only after a long struggle toregain the lost clew to her discourse she could falteringly say, "Don'tyou agree with me? I 'm sure you agree with me.""I 'm certain I should if I only understood you aright," said he,good-naturedly, and by his voice and look at once reassuring her."Well, so far, all is settled," said she, rising from her chair. "Andnow for this letter; I conclude the sooner it be done the better. Whenmay we hope to get away from this dreary place?""Grounsell tells me, by Friday or Saturday next I shall be able for thejourney.""If it had not been to provoke me, I 'm certain he would have pronouncedyou quite well ten days ago.""You forget, Hester, my own sensations not to say sufferings couldscarcely deceive me.""On the contrary, Dr. Clarus assured me there is nothing in the world sovery deceptive; that pain is only referred to the diseased part by thebrain, and has no existence whatever, and that there is no such thing aspain at all. He explained it perfectly, and I understood it all at thetime. He is so clever, Dr. Clarus, and gives people such insight intothe nature of their malady, that it really becomes quite interesting tobe ill under his care. I remember when William, the footman, broke hisarm, Clarus used to see him every day; and to show that no union, as itis called, could take place so long as motion continued, he would gentlygrate the fractured ends of the bone together.""And was William convinced of the no-pain doctrine?" cried Sir Stafford,his cheek flashing with momentary anger."The ignorant creature actually screamed out every time he was touched;but Clarus said it would take at least two centuries to conquer theprejudices of the common people.""Not improbable, either!" said Sir Stafford."Dear me, how very late it is," cried she, suddenly; "and we dine atsix!" And with a graceful motion of the hand, she said, "By-by!" andleft the room.CHAPTER XVI. THE "SAAL" OF THE "RUSSIE."HAS the observant reader ever remarked a couple of persons parading thedeck of a ship at sea, walking step for step through half a day, turningwith the same short jerk, to resume the same short path, and yetnever interchanging a word, the rhythm of the footfall the only tie ofcompanionship between them? They halt occasionally, too, to look overthe bulwarks at some white sail far away, or some cloud-bank rising fromthe horizon; mayhap they linger to watch the rolling porpoises as theypass, or the swift nautilus as he glides along; but yet never a soundnor token of mutual intelligence escapes them. It is enough that theylive surrounded by the same influences, breathe the same air, and stepin the same time; they have their separate thoughts, wide, perhaps, asthe poles asunder, and yet by some strange magnetism they feel there isa kind of sociality in their speechless intercourse.From some such cause, perhaps, it was that Colonel Haggerstone and Jekyltook their accustomed walk in the dreary dining-room of the "Hotel deRussie." The evening was cold and cheerless, as on that when first wemet them there, a drifting rain, mingled with sleet, beat against thewindows, and the wind, in mournful cadences, sighed along the dreary anddeserted corridors. It was a comfortless scene within doors and without.A chance glance through the window, an occasional halt to listen whenthe thunder rolled louder and nearer, showed that, to a certain extent,the same emotions were common to each; but nothing else betrayed anycommunity of sentiment between them, as they paced the room from end toend."English people come abroad for climate!" said Haggerstone, as hebuttoned his collar tightly around his neck, and pressed his hat morefirmly on his head. "But who ever saw the like of this in England?""In England you have weather, but no climate!" said Jekyl, with oneof his little smiles of self-approval; for he caressed himself when heuttered a mot, and seemed to feel no slight access of self-satisfaction."It's not the worst thing we have there, sir, I promise you," rejoinedHaggerstone, authoritatively."Our coughs and rheumatics are, indeed, sore drawbacks upon patriotism.""I do not speak of them, sir; I allude to our insolent, overbearingaristocracy, who, sprung from the people as they are, recruited from theranks of trade or law, look down upon the really ancient blood of theland, the untitled nobility. Who are they, sir, that treat us thus? Thefortunate speculator, who has amassed a million; the Attorney-General,who has risen to a Chief-Justiceship; men without ancestry, withoutlanded influence; a lucky banker, perhaps, like our friend upstairs,may stand in the 'Gazette' to-morrow or next day as Baron or Viscount,without one single requirement of the station, save his money.""I confess, if I have a weakness, it is for lords," said Jekyl,simperingly. "I suppose I must have caught it very early in life, for itclings to me like an instinct.""I feel happy to avow that I have none, sir. Six centuries of gentryblood suffice for all my ambitions; but I boil over when I see theoverweening presumption of these new people.""After all, new people, like a new watch, a new coat, and a newcarriage, have the best chance of lasting. Old and worn out are verynearly convertible terms.""These are sentiments, sir, which would, doubtless, do you excellentservice with the family upstairs, but are quite thrown away upon such amere country gentleman as myself."Jekyl smiled, and drew up his cravat, with his habitual simpering air,but said nothing."Do you purpose remaining much longer here?" asked Haggerstone,abruptly."A few days, at most.""Do you turn north or south?""I fancy I shall winter in Italy.""The Onslows, I believe, are bound for Rome?""Can't say," was the short reply."Just the sort of people for Italy. The fashionables of what the Chinesecall 'second chop' go down admirably at Rome or Naples.""Very pleasant places they are, too," said Jekyl, with a smile. "Theclimate permits everything, even dubious intimacies."Haggerstone gave a short "Ha!" at the heresy of this speech, but made noother comment on it."They say that Miss Onslow will have about a hundred thousand pounds?"said Haggerstone, with an air of inquiry."What a deal of maccaroni and parmesan that sum would buy!""Would you have her marry an Italian, sir?""Perhaps not, if she were to consult me on the matter," said Jekyl,blandly; "but as this is, to say the least, not very probable, I may ownthat I like the mixed marriages well enough.""They make miserable menages, sir," broke in Haggerstone."But excessively agreeable houses to visit at.""The Onslows are scarcely the people to succeed in that way," rejoinedHaggerstone, whose thoughts seemed to revolve round this family withoutany power to wander from the theme. "Mere money, nothing but money toguide them.""Not a bad pilot, either, as times go."Haggerstone uttered another short, "Ha!" as though to enter a protestagainst the sentiment without the trouble of a refutation. He hadutterly failed in all his efforts to draw Jekyl into a discussion ofthe banker's family, or even obtain from that excessively cautious younggentleman the slightest approach to an opinion about them; and yet itwas exactly in search of this opinion that he had come down to take hiswalk that evening. It was in the hope that Jekyl might afford him someclew to these people's thoughts, or habits, or their intentions for thecoming winter, that he had promenaded for the last hour and a half."If he know anything of them," thought Haggerstone, "he will be but tooproud to show it, and display the intimacy to its fullest extent!"It was, then, to his utter discomfiture, he learned that Jekyl hadscarcely spoken to Lady Hester, and never even seen Sir Stafford or MissOnslow. It was, then, pure invention of the waiter to say that they wereacquainted. "Jekyl has done nothing," muttered he to himself, "and Isuppose I need not throw away a dinner upon him to tell it."Such were his reasonings; ana long did he balance in his own mindwhether it were worth while to risk a bottle of Burgundy in such acause; for often does it happen that the fluid thrown down the pump isutterly wasted, and that it is vain to moisten the sucker, if the wellbeneath be exhausted.To be, or not to be? was then the eventful point he deliberated withhimself. Haggerstone never threw away a dinner in his life. He was notone of those vulgarly minded folk who ask you, in a parenthesis, to comein to "manger la soupe," as they say, without more preparation than thespreading of your napkin. No; he knew all the importance of adinner, and, be it acknowledged, how to give it also, and could havedistinguished perfectly between the fare to set before an "habitualdiner out," and that suitable to some newly arrived Englishman abroad:he could have measured his guest to a truffle! It was his boast that henever gave a pheasant when a poulet would have sufficed, nor wasted his"Chablis" on the man who would have been contented with "Barsac."The difficulty was not, then, how to have treated Jekyl, but whether totreat him at all. Indeed, the little dinner itself had been all plannedand arranged that morning; and the "trout" from the "Murg," and thegrouse from Eberstein, had been "pricked off," in the bill of fare, for"No. 24," as he was unceremoniously designated, with a special orderabout the dish of whole truffles with butter, in the fair intention ofinviting Mr. Albert Jekyl to partake of them.If a lady reveals some latent desire of conquest in the coquetry of hercostume and the more than ordinary care of her appearance, so yourmale friend may be suspected of a design upon your confidence or yourliberality by the studious propriety of his petit diner. Never fall intothe vulgar error that such things are mere accident. As well ascribeto chance the rotations of the seasons, or the motions of the heavenlybodies. Your printaniere in January, your epigramme d'agneau withasparagus at Christmas, show a solicitude to please to the full asardent, and not a whit less sincere, than the soft glances that havejust set your heart a-beating from the recesses of yonder opera-box."Will you eat your cutlet with me to-day, Mr. Jekyl?" said Haggerstone,after a pause, in which he had weighed long and well all the pros andcons of the invitation."Thanks, but I dine with the Onslows!" lisped out Jekyl, with a languidindifference, that however did not prevent his remarking the almostincredulous amazement in the colonel's face; "and I perceive," added he,"that it 's time to dress."Haggerstone looked after him as he left the room; and then ringing thebell violently, gave orders to his servant to "pack up," for he wouldleave Baden next morning.CHAPTER XVII. A FAMILY DISCUSSION.SOMETHING more than a week after the scenes we have just related hadoccurred, the Daltons were seated round the fire, beside which, in theplace of honor, in an old armchair, propped by many a cushion, reclinedHans Roeckle. A small lamp of three burners such as the peasants usestood upon the table, of which only one was lighted, and threw itsfitful gleam over the board, covered by the materials of a most humblemeal. Even this was untasted; and it was easy to mark in the downcastand depressed countenances of the group that some deep care was weighingupon them.Dalton himself, with folded arms, sat straight opposite the fire, hisheavy brows closely knit, and his eyes staring fixedly at the blaze,as if expecting some revelation of the future from it; an open letter,which seemed to have dropped from his hand, was lying at his feet.Nelly, with bent-down head, was occupied in arranging the littletools and implements she was accustomed to use in carving; but in thetremulous motion of her fingers, and the short, quick heaving of herchest, might be read the signs of a struggle that cost heavily tosubdue.Half-concealed beneath the projection of the fireplace sat Kate Daltonshe was sewing. Although to all seeming intent upon her work, more thanonce did her fingers drop the needle to wipe the gushing tears from hereyes, while at intervals a short sob would burst forth, and break thestillness around.As for Hans, he seemed lost in a dreamy revery, from which he ralliedat times to smile pleasantly at a little wooden figure the same whichoccasioned his disaster placed beside him.There was an air of sadness over everything; and even the old spaniel,Joan, as she retreated from the heat of the fire, crept with stealthystep beneath the table, as if respecting the mournful stillness of thescene. How different the picture from what that humble chamber had sooften presented! What a contrast to those happy evenings, when, as thegirls worked, Hans would read aloud some of those strange mysteries ofJean Paul, or the wild and fanciful imaginings of Chamisso, whileold Dalton would lay down his pipe and break in upon his memoriesof Ireland, to ask at what they were laughing, and Frank look updistractedly from his old chronicles of German war to join in the mirth!How, at such moments, Hans would listen to the interpretation, andwith what greedy ears follow the versions the girls would give of somefavorite passage, as if dreading lest its force should be weakenedor its beauty marred by transmission! And then those outbreaks ofadmiration that would simultaneously gush forth at some sentiment ofhigh and glorious meaning, some godlike gleam of bright intelligence,which, though clothed in the language of a foreign land, spoke home totheir hearts with the force that truth alone can speak!Yes, they were, indeed, happy evenings! when around their humble hearthcame thronging the groups of many a poet's fancy, bright pictures ofmany a glorious scene, emotions of heart that seemed to beat inunison with their own. They felt no longer the poverty of their humblecondition, they had no memory for the little straits and trials of thebygone day, as they trod with Tieck the alley beneath the lindensof some rural village, or sat with Auerbach beneath the porch of theVorsteher's dwelling. The dull realities of life faded before the vividconceptions of fiction, and they imbibed lessons of patient submissionand trustfulness from those brothers and sisters who are poets'children.And yet what no darkness of adversity could rob them of the first gleamof what, to worldly minds at least, would seem better fortune, hadalready despoiled them. Like the traveller in the fable, who had graspedhis cloak the faster through the storm, but who threw it away when thehot, rays scorched him, they could brave the hurricane, but not face thesunshine.The little wooden clock behind the door struck nine, and Dalton startedup suddenly."What did it strike, girls?" asked he, quickly."Nine, papa," replied Kate, in a low voice."At what hour was he to come for the answer?""At ten," said she, still lower."Well, you 'd better write it at once," said he, with a peevishness verydifferent from his ordinary manner. "They've remained here already fourdays isn't it four days she says? to give us time to make up our minds;we cannot detain them any longer.""Lady Hester has shown every consideration for our difficulty," saidKate. "We cannot be too grateful for her kindness.""Tell her so," said he, bitterly. "I suppose women know when to believeeach other.""And what reply am I to make, sir?" said she, calmly, as having putaside her work, she took her place at the writing-table."Faith, I don't care," said he, doggedly. "Nor is it much matterwhat opinion I give. I am nobody now; I have no right to decide uponanything.""The right and duty are both yours, papa.""Duty! So I'm to be taught my duty as well as the rest!" said he,passionately. "Don't you think there are some others might remember thatthey have duties also?""Would that I could fulfil mine as my heart dictates them!" said Ellen;and her lip trembled as she spoke the words."Faith! I scarce know what 's my duty, with all the drilling anddictating I get," muttered he, sulkily. "But this I know, there 's nowill left me I dare not budge this side or that without leave.""Dearest papa, be just to yourself, if not to me.""Isn't it truth I'm saying?" continued he, his anger rising with everyword he spoke. "One day, I'm forbid to ask my friends home with meto dinner. Another, I 'm told I ought n't to go dine with them. I 'mtutored and lectured at every hand's turn. Never a thought crosses me,but it 's sure to be wrong. You din into my ears, how happy it is to bepoor when one 's contented.""The lesson was yours, dear papa," said Nelly, smiling. "Don't disavowyour own teaching.""Well, the more fool me. I know better now. But what's the use of it?When the prospect of a little ease and comfort was offered to me, youpersuaded me to refuse it. Ay, that you did! You began with the oldstory about our happy hearth and contentment; and where is it now?"A sob, so low as to be scarcely heard, broke from Nelly, and she pressedher hand to her heart with a convulsive force."Can you deny it? You made me reject the only piece of kindness ever wasshown me in a life long. There was the opportunity of spending the restof my days in peace, and you wouldn't let me take it. And the fool I wasto listen to you!""Oh, papa, how you wrong her!" cried Kate, as, in a torrent of tears,she bent over his chair. "Dearest Nelly has no thought but for us. Herwhole heart is our own.""If you could but see it!" cried Nelly, with a thick utterance."'T is a droll way of showing affection, then," said Dal ton, "to keepme a beggar, and you no better than a servant-maid. It's little matterabout me, I know. I'm old, and worn out, a reduced Irish gentleman, withnothing but his good blood remaining to him. But you, Kate, that areyoung and handsome, ay, faith! a deal sight better-looking than my Ladyherself, it's a little hard that you are to be denied what might be yourwhole fortune in life.""You surely would not stake all her happiness on the venture, papa?"said Nelly, mildly."Happiness!" said he, scornfully; "what do you call happiness? Is itdragging out life in poverty like this, with the proudest friend in ourlist an old toy-maker?""Poor Hanserl!" murmured Nelly, in a low voice; but soft as were theaccents, the dwarf heard them, and nodded his head twice, as though tothank her for a recognition of whose import he knew nothing."Just so! You have pity enough for strangers, but none for your ownpeople," said Dalton, as he arose and paced the room, the very act ofmotion serving to increase his anger. "He was never used to better; he'sjust what he always was. But think of me! think of the expectations Iwas reared to, the place I used to hold, and see me now!""Dearest, best papa, do not say those bitter words," cried Kate,passionately. "Our own dear Nelly loves us truly. What has her life beenbut self-denial?""And have I not had my share of self-denial?" said he, abruptly. "Isthere left a single one of the comforts I was always accustomed to? 'Tis sick I am of hearing about submission, and patience, and resignation,and the like, and that we never were so happy as now. Faith! I tell you,I 'd rather have one day at Mount Dalton, as it used to be long ago,than I 'd have twenty years of the life I spend here.""No, papa, no," said Nelly, winding her arm around his waist, "you'drather sit at the window yonder, and listen to a song from Kate, one ofyour own favorites, or take a stroll with us after sunset of a summer'sevening, and talk of Frank, than go back to all the gayety of that wildlife you speak of.""Who says so?" asked he, roughly."You yourself. Nay, don't deny it," said she, smiling."If I did I was wrong, then," rejoined he, pushing her rudely away. "Itwas because I believed my children were affectionate and fond, andthat whatever I set my heart on they 'd be sure to wish just as much asmyself.""And when has that time ceased to be?" said she, calmly."What! when has it ceased to be?" said he, sharply. "Is it you that asksthat question, you that made me refuse the legacy?""Nay, papa, be just," interrupted she, mildly. "The merit of thatrefusal was all your own. I did but explain to you the circumstancesunder which this gift it was no less was offered, and your own rightfeeling dictated the reply."Dalton was silent, a struggling sense of pride in his imputed dignity ofbehavior warring with the desire of fault-finding."Maybe I did!" said he, at last, self-esteem gaining the mastery. "MaybeI saw my own reasons for what I was going to do. A Daltou is not the manto mistake what 's due to his name and family; but this is a differentcase. Here 's an invitation, as elegant a piece of politeness as Ihave seen, from one our own equal in every respect; she calls herself aconnection too, we won't say much about that, for we never reckoned theEnglish relations anything, asking my daughter to join them in theirvisit to Italy. When are we to see the like of that again? Is it everyday that some rich family will make us the same offer? It's not to costus a sixpence; read the letter, and you 'll see how nicely it 's hintedthat her Ladyship takes everything upon herself. Well, if any oneobjected it might be myself; 'tis on me will fall the heaviest partof the blow. It was only the other day Frank left me; now I 'm to loseKate, not but I know very well Nelly will do her best."Slight as was the praise, she kissed his hand passionately for it; andit was some seconds ere he could proceed."Yes, I 'm sure you 'll do all you can; but what is it after all? Won'tI miss the songs she sings for me; won't I miss her laughing voice andher sprightly step?""And why should you encounter such privations, papa?" broke Nelly in."These are, as you justly say, the greatest sources of your happiness.Why separate from them? Why rob this humble chamber of its fairestornament? Why darken our hearth by an absence for which nothing canrequite us?""I 'll tell you why, then," said he, and a sparkling gleam of cunninglit up his eye, as the casuistry crossed his mind. "Just because Ican deny myself anything for my children's sake. 'T is for them I amthinking always. Give old Peter Dalton his due, and nobody can call himselfish, not the worst enemy he had! Let me feel that my children arebenefited, and you may leave me to trudge along the weary path beforeme.""Then there only remains to see if this promise of benefit be real,"said Nelly."And why wouldn't it? Doesn't everybody know that travelling and seeingforeign parts is equal to any education? How many things haven't I seenmyself since I came abroad, that I never dreamed about before I lefthome! Look at the way they dress the peas with sugar in them. See howthey shoe a horse with a leg tied up to a post, as if they were goingto cut it off. Mind the droll fashion they have of fastening a piece oftimber to the hind wheel of a coach, by way of a drag! There 's no endto their contrivances.""Let us forget every consideration but one," said Nelly, earnestly."What are the dangers that may beset Kate, in a career of suchdifficulty, when, without an adviser, miles away from us all, she mayneed counsel or comfort. Think of her in sickness or in sorrow, or,worse than both, under temptation. Picture to yourself how dearly boughtwould be every charm of that refinement you covet for her, at the priceof a heart weakened in its attachment to home, bereft of the simplefaith that there was no disgrace in poverty. Think, above all," criedshe and for the first time her lips trembled, and her eyes swam "think,above all, we cannot give her up forever; and yet how is she to comeback again to these humble fortunes, and the daily toil that she willthen regard with shame and disgust? I ask not how differently shall weappear in her eyes, for I know that, however changed in her habits,how wide soever be the range of thought knowledge may have imparted,her fond, true heart will still be all our own; but can you risk herfortunes on an ocean like this; can you peril all her future for solittle?""To hear you talk, Nelty, one might think she was going to Jerusalem orAustralia; sure, after all, it's only a few days away from us she 'llbe; and as for the dangers, devil a one of them I see. Peter Dalton'sdaughter is not likely to be ill-treated anywhere. I 'e were always a'good warrant' for taking care of our own; and, to make short of it,I wish it, and Kate herself wishes it, and I don't see why our hopesshould not be as strong as your fears.'"You remember, too, papa, that Dr. Grounsell agreed with me, and spokeeven more strongly than I did against the scheme?""And did n't I pay him off for his interference? Did n't I give him abit of my mind about it, and tell him that, because a man was employedas a doctor in a family, he ought not to presume to advise them on theirown affairs? Faith, I don't think he'll trouble another patient with hiscounsel.""We must not forget, sir, that if his counsel came unasked, his skillwas unrequited; both came from a nature that wished us well.""The advice and the physic were about the same value both made me sick;and so you 're like to do if you worry me any longer. I tell you now, mymind 's made up, and go she shall!""Oh, papa, not if dear Nelly thinks--""What's that to me don't I know more of the world than she does? Am Icome to this time of life to be taught by a slip of a girl that neverwas ten miles out of her home? Sit down here now, and write the answer."There was a stern determination in the way these last words were utteredthat told Nelly how fruitless would be all further opposition. She hadlong since remarked, besides, how her father's temper reacted upon hishealth, and how invariably any prolonged excitement terminated inan attack of gout. Increasing age gave to these accesses of maladya character of danger, which she already began to remark with deepanxiety. Now she saw that immediate compliance with his wishes was theonly alternative left.She seated herself at the table, and prepared to write. For some secondsthe disturbance of her thoughts, the mingled crowd of sensations thatfilled her mind, prevented all power of calm consideration; but thestruggle was soon over, and she wrote on rapidly.So silent was the chamber, so hushed was all within it, that thescratching noise of the pen alone broke the stillness. Speedily glidedher hand across the paper, on which two heavy tears had already fallen,burning drops of sorrow that gushed from a fevered brain! A whole worldof disaster, a terrible catalogue of ill, revealed itself before her;but she wrote on. She felt that she was to put in motion the series ofevents whose onward course she never could control, as though she wasto push over a precipice the rock that in its downward rush would carryruin and desolation along with it; but she wrote on.At last she ceased, and all was still; not a sound was heard in thelittle room, and Nelly leaned her head down upon the table and wept.But while she wept she prayed, prayed that if the season of troubleher thoughts foreshadowed should be inevitable, and that if the cup ofsorrow must, indeed, be drained, the strength might be sent them forthe effort. It might have been that her mind exaggerated the perils ofseparation, and the dangers that would beset one of Kate's temper anddisposition. Her own bereavement might have impressed her with themisery that follows an unhappy attachment; and her reflective nature,shadowed by an early sorrow, might have colored too darkly a future ofsuch uncertainty. But a deep foreboding, like a heavy weight, lay uponher heart, and she was powerless to resist it.These instincts of our nature are not to be undervalued, nor confoundedwith the weak and groundless terrors of the frivolous. The closingpetals of the flower as the storm draws nigh, the wild cry of thesea-bird as the squall is gathering, the nestling of the sheep withinthe fold while yet the hurricane has not broke, are signs that, to theobservant instincts, peril comes not unannounced."Shall I read it, papa?" said she, as she raised her head, and turnedtowards him a look of calm and beaming affection."You need n't," said he, roughly. "Of course, it 's full of all theelegant phrases women like to cheat each other with. You said she willgo; that's enough."Nelly tried to speak, but the words would not come, and she merelynodded an acquiescence."And, of course, too, you told her Ladyship that if it wasn't to a nearrelation of the family one that had a kind of right, as I may say, toask her that I 'd never have given my consent. Neither would I!""I said that you could give no higher proof of your confidence in LadyHester's goodness and worth, than in committing to her charge all thatwe hold so dear. I spoke of our gratitude" her voice faltered here, andshe hesitated a second or so; our gratitude! strange word to express thefeeling with which we part from what we cling to so fondly! "and I askedof her to be the mother of her who had none!""Oh, Nelly, I cannot go I cannot leave you!" burst out Kate, as sheknelt down, and buried her head in her sister's lap. "I feel already howweak and how unable I am to live among strangers, away from you and dearpapa. I have need of you both!""May I never leave this spot if you're not enough to drive me mad!"exclaimed Dalton. "You cried two nights and a day because there wasopposition to your going. You fretted till your eyes were red, and yourcheeks all furrowed with tears; and now that you get leave to gonow that I consent to to to sacrifice ay, to sacrifice my domesticenjoyments to your benefit you turn short round and say you won't go!""Nay, nay, papa," said Nelly, mildly; "Kate but owns with what fearsshe would consent to leave us, and in this shows a more fitting mind tobrave what may come, than if she went forth with a heart brimful of itsbright anticipations, and only occupied with a future of splendor andenjoyment.""I ask you again, is it into the backwoods of Newfoundland is it intothe deserts of Arabia she is going?" said Dalton, ironically."The country before her has perils to the full as great, if not greaterthan either," rejoined Nelly, lowly."There's a ring at the bell," said Dalton, perhaps not sorry to cutshort a discussion in which his own doubts and fears were often atvariance with his words; for while opposing Nelly with all his might,he was frequently forced to coincide secretly with that he so stoutlyresisted. Vanity alone rose above every other motive, and even hardenedhis heart against separation and absence from his favorite child, vanityto think that his daughter would be the admired beauty in the salons ofthe great and highly born; that she would be daily moving in a rank themost exalted; that his dear Kate would be the attraction of courts,the centre of adulation wherever she went. So blinded was he by falsereasoning, that he actually fancied himself a martyr to his daughter'sfuture advancement, and that this inveterate egotism was a high and holyself-denial! "My worst enemy never called me selfish," was the balm thathe ever laid on his chafed spirit, and always with success. It would,however, have been rather the part of friend, than of enemy, to havewhispered that selfishness was the very bane and poison of his nature.It was his impulse in all the wasteful extravagance of his early life;it was his motive in all the struggles of his adversity. To sustaina mock rank, to affect a mock position, to uphold a mock standard ofgentility, he was willing to submit to a thousand privations of hischildren and himself; and to gratify a foolish notion of family pride,he was ready to endure anything, even to separation from all he helddearest."Lady Hester's courier has come for the answer to her note, papa," saidNelly, twice over, before Dalton heard her, for he was deep sunk in hisown musings."Let him come in and have a glass of wine," said Dalton. "I 'd like toask him a few questions about these people.""Oh, papa!" whispered Nelly, in a tone at once so reproachful, that theold man colored and looked away."I meant about what time they were to start on the journey," said he,confusedly."Lady Hester told us they should leave this to-morrow, sir.""Short notice for us. How is Kate to have all her clothes packed,and everything arranged? I don't think that is treating us with muchrespect, Nelly.""They have waited four days for our decision, papa remember that.""Ay, to be sure. I was forgetting that; and she came every day to pressthe matter more and more; and there was no end to the note-writingbesides. I must say that nothing could beat their politeness. It was amighty nice attention, the old man coming himself to call here; and afine, hale, good-looking man he is! a better figure than ever his sonwill be. I don't much like Mr. George, as they call him.""Somewhat colder, and more reserved, I think, than the other," saidNelly. "But about this answer, papa?""What a hurry they're in. Is it a return to a writ, that they mustpress for it this way? Well, well, I ought to be used to all manner ofinterruptions and disturbances by this time. Fetch me a caudle, till Iseal it;" and he sighed, as he drew forth his old-fashioned watch, towhich, by a massive steel chain, the great family seal was attached',firmly persuaded that in the simple act he was about to perform he wasachieving a mighty labor, at the cost of much fatigue."No rest for the wicked! as my old father used to say," muttered he, ina happy ignorance whether the philosophy emanated from his parent, orfrom some higher authority. "One would think that at my time of lifea man might look for a little peace and ease; but Peter Dalton has n'tsuch luck! Give me the letter," said he, querulously. "There isPeter Dalton's hand and seal, his act and will," muttered he, with ahalf-solemnity, as he pressed the wax with his heavy signet. "'Sempereadem;' there 's the ancient motto of our house, and, faith, I believeCounsellor O'Shea was right when he translated it 'The devil a better!'"He read the address two or three times over to himself, as if there wassomething pleasurable in the very look of the words, and then he turnedhis glance towards Hans, as in a dreamy half-consciousness he sat still,contemplating the little statue of Marguerite."Is n't it droll to think we 'd be writing to the first in the land, andan old toy-maker sitting beside the fire all the time," said Dalton,as he shook his head thoughtfully, in the firm conviction that he haduttered a very wise and profound remark. "Well well well! Life is aqueer thing!""Is it not stranger still that we should have won the friendship of poorHanserl than have attracted the notice of Lady Hester?" said Nelly. "Isit not a prouder thought that we have drawn towards us from affectionateinterest the kindness that has no touch of condescension?""I hope you are not comparing the two," said Dalton, angrily. "What'sthe creature muttering to himself?""It 'B Gretchen's song he 's trying to remember," said Kate."Nach ihm nur schau' ichZum Feuster hinaus!"said Hans, in a low, distinct voice. "'Was kommt nach,' what comes next,Fraulein?""You must ask sister Nelly, Hanserl," said Kate; but Nelly was standingbehind the massive stove, her face covered with her hands."Zum Fenster hinaus," repeated he, slowly; "and then, Fraulein? andthen?""Tell him, Nelly; tell him what follows.""Nach ihm nur schau' ichZum Fenster hinaus;Nach ihm nur geh' ichAus dem Haus!"repeated she."Ja, ja!" cried Hans, delightedly,"Nach ihm nur geh' ichAus dem Haus!""What does that mean?" said Dalton, with impatience. "It's Gretchen'ssong, papa," said Nelly."His figure I gaze on,O'er and o'er;His step I followFrom the door.""I hope it isn't in love the creature is," said Dalton; and he laughedheartily at the conceit, turning at the same time his look from thedwarf, to bestow a most complacent glance at the remains of his own oncehandsome stature. "Oh dear! oh dear!" sighed he; "isn't it wonderful,but there isn't a creth or a cripple that walks the earth that hasn't asweetheart!"A cough, purposely loud enough to announce his presence, here came fromthe courier in the antechamber, and Dalton remembered that the letterhad not yet been despatched."Give it to him, Nelly," said he, curtly.She took the letter in her hand, but stood for a second or two, as ifpowerless to move."Must it be so, dearest papa?" said she, and the words almost choked herutterance.Dalton snatched the letter from her fingers, and left the room. Hisvoice was heard for an instant in conversation with the courier, and themoment after the door banged heavily, and all was still."It is done, Kate!" said she, throwing her arms around her sister'sneck. "Let us now speak of the future; we have much to say, and shorttime to say it; and first let us help poor Hans downstairs."The dwarf, clutching up the wooden image, suffered himself to be aidedwith all the submissiveness of a patient child, and, with one ateither side of him, slowly crept down the stairs to his own chamber.Disengaging himself by a gentle effort as he gained his door, Hansremoved his cap from his head and made a low and deep obeisance to eachof the girls separately, while he bade them a good-night."Leb wohl, Hanserl, Leb wohl!" said Kate, taking his handaffectionately. "Be ever the true friend that thou hast proved hitherto,and let me think of thee, when far away, with gratitude.""Why this? How so, Fraulein?" said Hans, anxiously; "why farewell? Whysayest thou 'Leb wohl,' when it is but 'good-night'?""Kate is about to leave us for a short space," said Nelly, affecting toappear at ease and calm. "She is going to Italy, Hanserl.""Das schone Land! that lovely land!" muttered he, over and over. "Dahin,dahin," cried he, pointing with his finger to the southward, "where thegold orange blooms. There would I wander too.""You'll not forget me, Hanserl?" said the young girl, kindly."Over the great Alps and away!" said Hans, still talking to himself;"over the high snow-peaks which cast their shadows on our cold land, buthave terraces for the vine and olive-garden, yonder! Thou 'It leave us,then, Fraulein?""But for a little while, Hans, to come back afterwards and tell thee allI have seen.""They come not back from the sunshine to the shade," said Hans,solemnly. "Thou 'It leave not the palace for the peasant's hut; butthink of us, Fraulein; think sometimes, when the soft sirocco is playingthrough thy glossy hair; when sounds of music steal over thy sensesamong the orange groves, and near the shadows of old temples, think ofthis simple Fatherland and its green valleys. Think of them with whomthou wert so happy, too! Splendor thou mayst have it is thy beauty'sright; but be not proud, Fraulein. Remember what Chamisso tells us, 'DasNoth lehrt beten,' 'Want teaches Prayer,' and to that must thou come,however high thy fortune.""Kate will be our own wherever she be," said Nelly, clasping her sisteraffectionately to her side."Bethink thee well, Fraulein, in thy wanderings, that the great and thebeautiful are brethren of the good and the simple. The cataract and thedewdrop are kindred. Think of all that teaches thee to think of home;and remember well, that when thou losest the love of this humble hearththou art in peril. If to any of thy childish toys thou sayest 'Ich Hebedich nicht mehr,' then art thou changed indeed." Hans sat down upon hislittle bed as he spoke, and covered his face with his hands.Nelly watched him silently for a few seconds, and then with a gentlehand closed the door and led Kate away.CHAPTER XVIII. CARES AND CROSSESTHE lamp in Kate Dalton's chamber was still burning when the morningdawned, and by its uncertain flicker might be seen the two sisters, who,clasped in each other's arms, sat upon the low settle-bed. Nelly, paleand motionless, supported Kate, as, overcome by watching and emotion,she had fallen into a heavy slumber. Not venturing to stir, lest sheshould awaken her, Nelly had leaned against the wall for support, and,in her unmoved features and deathly pallor, seemed like some monumentalfigure of sorrow.It was not alone the grief of an approaching separation that oppressedher. Sad as it was to part from one to whom she had been mother andsister too, her affliction was tinged with a deeper coloring in herfears for the future. Loving Kate dearer than anything in the world, shewas alive to all the weak traits of her character: her credulity,her trustfulness, her fondness for approbation, even from those whosejudgments she held lightly, her passion for admiration even in trifles,were well known to her; and while, perhaps, these very failings, liketraits of childish temperament, had actually endeared her the moreto Nelly, she could not but dread their effect when they came to beexercised in the world of strangers.Not that Nelly could form the very vaguest conception of what that worldwas like. Its measures and its perils, its engagements and hazards,were all unknown to her. It had never been even the dream-land ofher imagination. Too humble in spirit, too lowly by nature, to feelcompanionship with the great and titled, she had associated allher thoughts with those whose life is labor; with them were all hersympathies. There was a simple beauty in the unchanging fortune of thepeasant's life such as she had seen in the Schwarzwald, for instancethat captivated her. That peaceful domesticity was the very nearestapproach to happiness, to her thinking, and she longed for the day whenher father might consent to the obscurity and solitude of some nameless"Dorf" in the dark recesses of that old forest. With Frank and Kate,such a lot would have been a paradise. But one was already gone, and shewas now to lose the other too. "Strange turn of fortune," as she said,"that prosperity should be more cruel than adversity. In our days offriendless want and necessity we held together; it is only when thepromise of brighter destinies is dawning that we separate. It is butselfishness after all," thought she, "to wish for an existence likethis; such humble and lowly fortunes might naturally enough become 'lameNelly,' but Frank, the high-hearted, daring youth, with ambitious hopesand soaring aspirations, demands another and a different sphere ofaction; and Kate, whose attractions would grace a court, might wellsorrow over a lot of such ignoble obscurity. What would not my sorrowand self-reproach be if I saw that, in submitting to the same monotonyof this quietude, they should have become wearied and careless, neithertaking pleasure in the simple pastimes of the people, nor stooping totheir companionship! And thus all may be for the best," said she, halfaloud, "if I could but feel courage to think so. We may each of us bebut following his true road in life."A long intimacy with affliction will very frequently be found to impresseven a religiously-disposed mind with a strong tinge of fatalism. Theapparent hopelessness of all effort to avert calamity, or stem the tideof evil fortune, often suggests, as its last consolation, the notion ofa predetermined destiny, to which we are bound to submit with patienttrustfulness; a temperament of great humility aids this conviction.Both of these conditions were Nelly's; she had "supped sorrow" from hercradle, while her estimate of herself was the very lowest possible. "Isuppose it is so," said she again; "all is for the best."She already pictured to herself the new spring this change of fortunewould impart to her father's life: with what delight he would read theletters from his children; how he would once more, through them, tasteof that world whose pleasures he was so fondly attached to. "I nevercould have yielded him a gratification like this," said Nelly, as thetears rose in her eyes. "I am but the image of our fallen fortunes, andin me, 'poor lame Nelly,' he can but see reflected our ruined lot. Allis for the best it must be so!" sighed she, heavily; and just as thewords escaped, her father, with noiseless step, entered the chamber."To be sure it is, Nelly darling," said he, as he sat down near her,"and glad I am that you 've come to reason at last. 'T is plain enoughthis is n't the way the Daltons ought to be passing their life, in alittle hole of a place, without society or acquaintance of any kind. Youand I may bear it, not but it's mighty hard upon me sometimes, too, butKate there just look at her and say, is it a girl like that should bewasting away her youth in a dreary village? Lady Hester tells me andsure nobody should know better that there never was the time in theworld when real beauty had the same chance as now, and I 'd like to seethe girl that could stand beside her. Do you know, Nelly," here he drewcloser, so as to speak in a whisper, "do you know, that I do be fancyingthe strangest things might happen to us yet, that Frank might be a greatgeneral, and Kate married to God knows what sort of a grandee, withmoney enough to redeem Mount Dalton, and lay my old bones in thechurchyard with my ancestors? I can't get it out of my head but it willcome about, somehow. What do you think yourself?""I'm but an indifferent castle-builder, papa," said she, laughingsoftly. "I rarely attempt anything beyond a peasant hut or a shealing.""And nobody could make the one or the other more neat and comfortable,that I 'll say for you, Nelly. It would have a look of home about itbefore you were a day under the roof."The young girl blushed deeply; for, humble as the praise might havesounded to other ears, to hers it was the most touching she could havelistened to."I 'm not flattering you a bit. 'T is your own mother you take after;you might put her down in the bleakest spot of Ireland, and 't is agarden she 'd make it. Let her stop for shelter in a cabin, and beforethe shower was over you 'd not know the place. It would be all sweptand clean, and the dishes ranged neatly on the dresser; and the pig shecould n't abide a pig turned out, and the hens driven into the cowshed,and the children's faces washed, and their hair combed, and, maybe, thelittle gossoon of five years old upon her knee, saying his 'Hail, Mary,'or his 'A B C,' while she was teaching his mother how to wind thethread off the wheel; for she could spin a hank of yarn as well as anycottier's wife in the townland. The kind creature she was! But she neverhad a taste for real diversion; it always made her low-spirited andsad.""Perhaps the pleasures you speak of were too dearly purchased, papa,"said Nelly."Indeed, maybe they were," said he, dubiously, and as though the thoughthad now occurred for the first time; "and, now that you say it, I beginto believe it was that same that might have fretted her. The way she wasbrought up made her think so, too. That brother was always talking aboutwastefulness, and extravagance, and so on; and, if it was in her nature,he 'd have made her as stingy as himself; and look what it comes toafter all. We spent it when we had it, the Daltons are a good warrantfor that; and there was he grubbing and grabbing all his days, to leaveit after him to a rich man, that does n't know whether he has so manythousands more or not."Nelly made no reply, not wishing to encourage, by the slightest apparentinterest, the continuance on the theme which invariably suggested herfather's gloomiest reveries."Is that her trunk, Nelly?" said Dalton, breaking silence after along interval, and pointing to an old and journey-worn valise that layhalf-open upon the floor."Yes, papa," said Nelly, with a sigh."Why, it's a mean-looking, scrubby bit of a thing; sure it 's not thesize of a good tea-chest," said he, angrily."And yet too roomy for all its contents, papa. Poor Kate's wardrobe is avery humble one.""I 'd like to know where 's the shops here; where 's the milliners andthe haberdashers? Are we in College Green or Grafton Street, that wecan just send out and have everything at our hand's turn? 'T is n't onmyself I spend the money. Look at these gaiters; they 're nine years oldnext March; and the coat on my back was made by Peter Stevens, that 'sin his grave now. The greatest enemy ever I had could not face me downthat I only took care of myself. If that was my way would I be here now?See the rag I 'm wearing round my throat, a piece of old worsted like arug a thing--"He stopped, and stammered, and then was silent altogether, for hesuddenly remembered it was Nelly herself who had worked the article inquestion."Nay, papa," broke she in, with her own happy smile, "you may give it toAndy to-morrow, for I 've made you a smart new one, of your own favoritecolors, too, the Dalton green and white.""Many a time I 've seen the same colors coming in first on the Corralincourse!" cried Dalton, with enthusiasm; for at the impulse of a new wordhis mind could turn from a topic of deep and painful interest to one inevery way its opposite. "You were too young to remember it; but you werethere, in the 'landau,' with your mother, when Baithershin won the Murrahandicap, the finest day's flat racing I have it from them that seen thebest in England that ever was run in the kingdom. I won eight hundredpounds on it, and, by the same token, lost it all in the evening at'blind hookey' with old Major Haggs, of the 5th Foot, not to say atrifle more besides. And that 's her trunk!" said he, after anotherpause, his voice dropping at the words, as though to say, "What a changeof fortune is there! I wonder neither of you hadn't the sense to takemy old travelling chest; that's twice the size, and as heavy as a leadcoffin, besides. Sorrow one would ever know if she hadn't clothes for awhole lifetime! Two men wouldn't carry it upstairs when it's empty.""When even this valise is too large, papa?""Oh dear, oh dear!" broke in Dalton; "you've no contrivance, after all.Don't you see that it 's not what 's inside I 'm talking about, at all,but the show before the world? Did n't I live at Mount Dalton on thefat of the laud, and every comfort a gentleman could ask, five years andeight months after I was ruined? And had n't I credit wherever I went,and for whatever I ordered? And why? Because of the house and place! Iwas like the big trunk beyond; nobody knew how little there was in it.Oh, Nelly dear, when you 've seen as much of life as me, you 'll knowthat one must be up to many a thing for appearance' sake."Nelly sighed, but made no reply. Perhaps in secret she thought how muchtrouble a little sincerity with the world would save us."We 'll be mighty lonesome after her," said he, after a pause.Nelly nodded her head in sadness."I was looking over the map last night, and it ain't so far away, afterall," said Dalton. "'T is n't much more than the length of my finger onthe paper.""Many a weary mile may lie within that space," said Nelly, softly."And I suppose we'll hear from her every week, at least?" said Dalton,whose mind vacillated between joy and grief, but still looked for itsgreatest consolations from without.Poor Nelly was, however, little able to furnish these. Her mind sawnothing but sorrow for the present; and, for the future, difficulty, ifnot danger."You give one no comfort at all," said Dalton, rising impatiently."That's the way it will be always now, when Kate goes. No more gayety inthe house; not a song nor a merry laugh! I see well what a dreary lifethere is before me.""Oh, dearest papa, I 'll do my very best, not to replace her, for thatI never could do; but to make your days less wearisome. It will besuch pleasure, too, to talk of her, and think of her! To know of herhappiness, and to fancy all the fair stores of knowledge she will bringback with her when she comes home at last!""If I could only live to see them back again, Frank and Kate, one ateach side of me, that 's all I ask for in this world now," muttered he,as he stole noiselessly away and closed the door behind him.CHAPTER XIX. PREPARATIONS FOR THE ROAD.IF the arrival of a great family at an hotel be a scene of unusualbustle and excitement, with teeming speculations as to the rank and thewealth of the new-comers, the departure has also its interests, andeven of a higher nature. In the former case all is vague, shadowy, anduncertain. The eye of the spectator wanders from the muffled figuresas they descend, to scrutinize the lackeys, and even the luggage, asindicative of the strangers' habits and condition; and even to theshrewd perceptions of that dread functionary, the head waiter, theidentity of the traveller assumes no higher form nor any more tangibleshape than that they are No. 42 or 57.When the hour of leave-taking has come, however, their characters havebecome known, their tastes and habits understood, and no mean insightobtained into their prejudices, their passions, and their pursuits. Theimposing old gentleman, whose rubicund nose and white waistcoat are theguarantees for a taste in port, has already inspired the landlord witha sincere regard. "My Lady's" half-invalid caprices about diet, and air,and sunshine, have all written themselves legibly in "the bill." Thetall son's champagne score incurred of a night, and uncounted of amorning, are not unrecorded virtues; while even the pale young ladies,whose sketching propensities involved donkeys, and ponies, and picnics,go not unremembered.Their hours of rising and retiring, their habits of society orseclusion, their preferences for the "Post" or the "Times," have allsilently been ministering to the estimate formed of them; so that in thecommonest items of the hotel ledger are the materials for their history.And with what true charity are their characters weighed! How readilydoes mine host forgive the transgressions which took their origin inhis own Burgundy! how blandly smile at the follies begotten of hisJohannisberg! With what angelic temper does the hostess pardon thelittle liberties "young gentlemen from college will take!" Oh, if ourdear, dear friends would but read us with half the charity, or evenbestow upon our peccadilloes a tithe of this forgiveness! And why shouldit not be so? What are these same friends and acquaintances but guestsin the same great inn which we call "the world"? and who, as they nevertake upon them to settle our score, need surely not trouble themselvesabout the "items."While the Daltons were still occupied in the manner our last chapter hasdescribed, the "Hotel de Russie" was a scene of considerable bustle, thepreparations for departure engaging every department of the householdwithin doors and without. There were carriage-springs to be lashed withnew cordage, drag-chains new tipped with steel, axles to smear, hingesto oil, imperials to buckle on, cap-cases to be secured; and then what adeluge of small articles to be stowed away in most minute recesses,and yet be always at hand when called for! cushions and cordials,and chauffe-pieds and "Quarterlies," smelling-boxes and slippers, andspectacles and cigar-cases, journals and "John Murrays," to be disposedof in the most convenient places. Every corridor and landing was blockedup with baggage, and the courier wiped his forehead, and "sacre'd" inhalf desperation at the mountain of trunks and portmanteaus that laybefore him."This is not ours," said he, as he came to a very smart valise oflacquered leather, with the initials A. J. in brass on the top."No, that 's Mr. Jekyl's," said Mr. George's man, Twig. "He ain'ta-goin' with you; he travels in our britzska.""I'm more like de conducteur of a diligenz than a family courier,"muttered the other, sulkily. "I know noting of de baggage, since we takeup strangers at every stage! and always some Teufeln poor devils thathave not a sou en poche!""What's the matter now, Mister Greg'ry?" said Twig, who very imperfectlyunderstood the other's jargon."The matter is, I will resign my 'fonction' je m'en vais dat 's all!This is noting besser than an 'Eil wagen' mil passengers! Fust of allwe have de doctor, as dey call him, wid his stuff birds and beasts, hisdried blumen and sticks, till de roof is like de Jardin des Plantesat Paris, and he himself like de bear in de middle. Den we have dasverfluchte parroquet of milady, and Flounce, de lapdog, dat must drinkevery post-station, and run up all de hills for exercise. Dam! Ich binkein Hund, and need n't run up de hills too! Mademoiselle Celestine havea what d' ye call 'Affe' a ape; and though he be little, a reg'larteufelchen to hide de keys and de money, when he find 'em. And dendere is de yong lady collectin' all de stones off de road, lauterpaving-stones, which she smash wid a leetle hammer! Ach Gott, what is deworld grow when a Fraulein fall in love wid Felsen and Steine!""Monsieur Gregoire! Monsieur Gregoire!" screamed out a sharp voice froma window overhead."Mademoiselle," replied he, politely touching his cap to thefemme-de-chambre."Be good enough, Monsieur Gregoire, to have my trunks taken down; thereare two in the fourgon, and a cap-case on the large carriage.""Hagel and Sturm! dey are under everything. How am I--""I can't possibly say," broke she in; "but it must be done.""Can't you wait, Mademoiselle, till we reach Basle?""I'm going away, Monsieur Gregoire. I'm off to Paris," was the reply, asthe speaker closed the sash and disappeared."What does she say?" inquired Twig, who, as this dialogue was carried onin French, was in total ignorance of its meaning."She has given her demission," said the courier, pompously. "Resign herportefeuille, and she have made a very bad affair; dat's all. Your grosmilor is very often bien bete; he is very often rude, savage, forgethis manners, and all dat but" and here his voice swelled into the fullsoundness of a perfect connection "but he is alway rich. Ja ja, immerreich!" said he over to himself. "Allons! now to get at her verdammtebaggage, de two trunks, and de leetle box, and de ape, and de sac, andde four or five baskets. Diable d'affaire! Monsieur Tig, do me de graceto mount on high dere, and give me dat box.""I 've nothing to say to your carriage, Mister Greg'ry. I 'm thecaptain's gentleman, and never do take any but a single-handedsituation;" and with this very haughty speech Mr. Twig lighted a freshcigar and strolled away."Alle bose Teufeln holen de good for nichts," sputtered Gregoire, whonow waddled into the house to seek for assistance.Whatever apathy and indifference he might have met with from the Englishservants, the people of the hotel were like his bond-slaves. Old andyoung, men and women, the waiter, and the ostler, and the chambermaid,and that strange species of grande utilite, which in German householdsgoes by the name of "Haus-knecht," a compound of boots, scullion,porter, pimp, and drudge, were all at his command. Nor was he anover-mild monarch; a running fire of abuse and indignity accompaniedevery order he gave, and he stimulated their alacrity by the mostinsulting allusions to their personal defects and deficiencies.Seated upon a capacious cap-case, with his courier's cap set jauntily onone side, his meerschaum like a sceptre in his hand, Gregoire gave outhis edicts right royally, and soon the courtyard was strewn with trunks,boxes, and bags of every shape, size, and color. The scene, indeed, wasnot devoid of tumult; for, while each of the helpers screamed away atthe top of his throat, and Gregoire rejoined in shouts that would havedone credit to a bull, the parrot gave vent to the most terrific criesand yells as the ape poked him through the bars of his cage with thehandle of a parasol."There, that's one of them," cried out Monsieur Gregoire; "that roundbox beside you; down with it here.""Monsieur Gregoire! Monsieur Gre'goire!" cried Mademoiselle from thewindow once more.The courier looked up, and touched his cap."I'm not going, Monsieur Gregoire; the affair is arranged.""Ah! I am charmed to hear it, Mademoiselle," said he, smiling in seemingecstasy, while he muttered a malediction between his teeth."Miladi has made submission, and I forgive everything. You must pardonall the trouble I 've given you.""These happy tidings have made me forget it," said he, with a smilethat verged upon a grin. "Peste!" growled he, under his breath, "we 'dunpacked the whole fourgon.""Ah, que vous etes aimable!" said she, sighing."Belle tigresse!" exclaimed he, returning the leer she bestowed; and thewindow was once more closed upon her exit. "I submitted to the labor,in the hope we had done with you forever," said he, wiping his forehead;"and la voila there you are back again. Throw that ape down; away widhim, cursed beast!" cried he, venting his spite upon the minion, sincehe dare not attack the mistress. "But what have we here?"This latter exclamation was caused by the sudden entrance into thecourtyard of two porters carrying an enormous trunk, whose ironfastenings and massive padlock gave it the resemblance of an emigrant'ssea-chest. A few paces behind walked Mr. Dalton, followed again by OldAndy, who, with a huge oil-silk umbrella under one arm, and a bundleof cloaks, shawls, and hoods on the other, made his way with no smalldifficulty.Gregoire surveyed the procession with cool amazement, and then, with akind of mock civility, he touched his cap, and said, "You have mistak deroad, saar; de diligenz-office is over de way.""And who told you I wanted it?" said Dalton, sternly. "Maybe I'm justwhere I ought to be! Isn't this Sir Stafford Onslow's coach?""Yes, saar; but you please to remember it is not de 'Eil wagen. '""Just hold your prate, my little chap, and it will be pleasanter, andsafer, ay, safer, too, d'ye mind? You see that trunk there; it 's togo up with the luggage and be kept dry, for there 's valuable effectsinside.""Datis not a trunk; it is a sentry-house, a watch-box. No gentleman'scarriage ever support a ting of dat dimension!""It 's a trunk, and belongs to me, and my name is Peter Dalton, as theletters there will show you; and so no more about it, but put it up atonce.""I have de orders about a young lady's luggage, but none about a greatcoffin with iron hoops," said Gregoire, tartly."Be quiet, now, and do as I tell you, my little chap. Put these trifles,too, somewhere inside, and this umbrella in a safe spot; and here 's alittle basket, with a cold pie and a bottle of wine in it.""Himmel und Erde! how you tink milady travel mit dass schweinerei?""It 's not pork; 't is mutton, and a pigeon in the middle," said Dalton,mistaking his meaning. "I brought a taste of cheese, too; but it 's atrifle high, and maybe it 's as well not to send it.""Is the leetle old man to go too?" asked Gregoire, with an insolentgrin, and not touching the profanation of either cheese or basket."That 's my own servant, and he 's not going," said Dalton; "and nowthat you know my orders, just stir yourself a little, my chap, for I 'mnot going to spend my time here with you."A very deliberate stare, without uttering a word, was all the replyGregoire returned to this speech; and then, addressing himself to thehelpers, he gave some orders in German about the other trunks. Daltonwaited patiently for some minutes, but no marks of attention showed thatthe courier even remembered his presence; and at last he said,"I 'm waiting to see that trunk put up; d' ye hear me?""I hear ver well, but I mind noting at all," said Gregoire, with a grin."Oh, that 's it," said Dalton, smiling, but with a twinkle in hisgray eyes that, had the other known him better, he would scarcely havefancied, "that's it, then!" And taking the umbrella from beneath Andy'sarm, he walked deliberately across the yard to where a large tank stood,and which, fed from a small jet d'eau, served as a watering-place forthe post-horses. Some taper rods of ice now stood up in the midst, and atolerably thick coating covered the surface of the basin.Gregoire could not help watching the proceedings of the stranger, aswith the iron-shod umbrella he smashed the ice in one or two places,piercing the mass till the water spouted up through the apertures."Have you any friend who live dere?" said the courier, sneeringly, asthe sound of the blows resembled the noise of a door-knocker."Not exactly, my man," said Dalton, calmly; "but something like it.""What is 't you do, den?" asked Gregoire, curiously."I'll tell you," said Dalton. "I'm breaking the ice for a newacquaintance;" and, as he spoke, he seized the courier by the stoutleather belt which he wore around his waist, and, notwithstanding hisstruggles and his weight, he jerked him off the ground, and, with aswing, would have hurled him head foremost into the tank, when, theleather giving way, he fell heavily to the ground, almost senseless fromshock and fright together. "You may thank that strap for your escape,"said Dalton, contemptuously, as he threw towards him the fragments ofbroken leather."I will have de law, and de polizei, and de Gericht. I will have youin de Kerker, in chains, for dis!" screamed Gregoire, half choked withpassion."May I never see peace, but if you don't hold your prate I 'll put youin it! Sit up there, and mind your business; and, above all, be civil,and do what you 're bid.""I will fort; I will away. Noting make me remain in de service," saidGregoire, brushing off the dirt from his sleeve, and shaking his cap."I am respectable courier travel wid de Fursten vom Koniglichen Hatisenmit Russen, Franzosen, Ostereichen; never mit barbaren, never mit dewilde animalen.""Don't, now don't, I tell you," said Dalton, with another of thosetreacherous smiles whose expression the courier began to comprehend. "Nobalderdash! no nonsense! but go to your work, like a decent servant.""I am no Diener; no serve anybody," cried the courier, indignantly.[Illustration:    222]But somehow there was that in old Dalton's face that gave noencouragement to an open resistance, and Monsieur Gregoire knew well thecase where compliance was the wisest policy. He also knew that in hisvocation there lay a hundred petty vengeances more than sufficient topay off any indignity that could be inflicted upon him. "I will waitmy times," was the reflection with which he soothed down his rage, andaffected to forget the insult he had just suffered under.Dalton, whose mind was cast in a very different mould, and who couldforgive either himself or his neighbor without any great exertion oftemper, turned now coolly away, and sauntered out into the street. Theflush of momentary anger that colored his cheek had fled, and a cast ofpale and melancholy meaning sat upon his features, for his eye restedon the little wooden bridge which crossed the stream, and where now twomuffled figures were standing, that he recognized as his daughters.They were leaning on the balustrade, and gazing at the mountain that,covered with its dense pine-wood, rose abruptly from the river-side.It had been the scene of many a happy ramble in the autumn, of many adelightful excursion, when, with Frank, they used to seek for fragmentsof wood that suited Nelly's sculptures. How often had they carried theirlittle basket up yonder steep path, to eat their humble supper upon therock, from which the setting sun could be seen! There was not a cliffnor crag, not a mossy slope, not a grass bank, they did not know; andnow, as they looked, all the past moments of pleasure were crowding upontheir memory, tinged with the sad foreboding that they were never againto be renewed."That's the Riesen Fels, Nelly, yonder," said Kate, as she pointed to atall dark rock, on whose slopes the drifting snow had settled. "How sadand dreary it is, compared with what it seemed on Frank's birthday,when the nightingale was singing overhead, and the trickling stream camesparkling along the grass when we sat together. I can bear to part withit better thus than if all were as beautiful as then."Nelly sighed, and grasped her sister's hand closer, but made no answer."Do you remember poor Hanserl's song, and his little speech all aboutour meeting there again in the next year, Nelly?""I do," said Nelly, in a low and whispering voice."And then Frank stood up, with his little gilt goblet, and said,'With hearts as free from grief or care,Here 's to our happy--'""Wiederkehr," cried Hanserl, supplying the word so aptly. How we alllaughed, Nelly, at his catching the rhyme!""I remember!" sighed Nelly, still lower."What are you thinking of, Nelly dearest?" said Kate, as she stood for afew seconds gazing at the sorrow-struck features of the other."I was thinking, dearest," said Nelly, "that when we were met togetherthere on that night, none of us foresaw what since has happened. Notthe faintest suspicion of a separation crossed our minds. Our destinies,whatever else might betide, seemed at least bound up together. Our verypoverty was like the guarantee of our unity, and yet see what has cometo pass Frank gone; you, Kate, going to leave us now. How shall wespeculate on the future, then, when the past has so betrayed us? Howpilot our course in the storm, when, even in the calm, still sea, wehave wandered from the track?""Nelly! Nelly! every moment I feel more faint-hearted at the thought ofseparation. It is as though, in the indulgence of a mere caprice, I wereabout to incur some great hazard. Is it thus it appears to you?""With what expectations do you look forward to this great world you aregoing to visit, Kate? Is it mere curiosity to see with your own eyesthe brilliant scenes of which you have only read? Is it with the hopeof finding that elegance and goodness are sisters, that refinement ofmanners is the constant companion of noble sentiments and right actions;or, does there lurk in your heart the longing for a sphere wherein youyourself might contest for the prize of admiration? Oh, if this have ashare in your wishes, my own dear sister, beware of it. The more worthyyou are of such homage, the greater is your peril! It is not that I amremoved from all temptations of this kind; it is not because I have noattractions of beauty, that I speak thus even poor, lame Nelly cannottear from her woman's heart the love of admiration. But for me, I fear,for you, Kate, to whom these temptations will be heightened by your owndeservings. You are beautiful, and you blush as I speak the word; butwhat if the time come when you will hear it unmoved? The modest sense ofshame gone, what will replace it? Pride yes, my dear sister, Prideand Ambition! You will long for a station more in accordance with yourpretensions, more suited to your tastes.""How you wrong me, Nelly!" burst Kate in. "The brightest dream of allthis brilliant future is the hope that I may come back to you moreworthy of your love; that, imbibing some of those traits whosefascinations we have already felt, I may bring beneath our humble roofsome memories, at least, to beguile your toil.""Oh, if that time should come!""And it will come, dearest Nelly," said Kate, as she threw her armsaround her, and kissed her affectionately. "But, see! there is papayonder; he is beckoning to us to join him;" and the two girls hastenedforward to where Dalton was standing, at the corner of the street."I'm thinking we ought to go up there, now," said Dalton, with a motionof his hand in the direction of the hotel. "Take my arm, each of you."They obeyed, and walked along in silence, till they reached the inn,where Dalton entered, with a certain assumed ease and confidence, thatvery commonly, with him, covered a weak purpose and a doubting spirit."Is Sir Stafford at home, or Lady Onslow?" asked he of Mr. Twig, who,with a cigar in his mouth, and a "Galignani" in his hand, never rosefrom the seat he occupied."Can't say, sir," was the cool response, which he delivered withoutlifting his eyes from the newspaper."Do you know, ma'am?" said he, addressing Mademoiselle Celestine, whohappened to pass at the moment "do you know, ma'am, if Lady Onslow 's athome?""She never receive in de morning," was the curt reply. And, with a veryimpudent stare at the two sisters, whose dress imposed no restraint uponher insolence, mademoiselle flounced past. "Come along, girls," saidDalton, angrily, and offended that he should appear to his childrenas if wanting in worldly tact and knowledge "come with me;" and heproceeded boldly up stairs.A folding-door lay open before them into a large chamber, littered withboxes, trunks, and travelling gear of all kinds. Making his way throughthese, while he left his daughters outside, Dalton approached adoor that led into an inner room, and knocked sharply at it with hisknuckles."You may take it away now; I 've used cold water!" cried a voice fromwithin, that at once proclaimed Dr. Grounsell.Dalton repeated his summons more confidently."Go to the devil, I say," cried the doctor; "you've made me cut mychin;" and the enraged Grouusell, with his face covered with lather,and streaming with blood, flung open the door in a passion. "Oh, Dalton,this you, and the ladies here!" said he, springing back ashamed, asKate's hearty burst of laughter greeted him. "Come in, Dalton, come in,"said he, dragging the father forward and shutting the door upon him. "Iwas longing to see you, man; I was just thinking how I could have fiveminutes' talk with you. What answer have you given to the letter they've sent you?""What d' ye think?" said Dalton, jocularly, as he seated himself in acomfortable chair."What do I think?" repeated he, twice or thrice over. "Egad, I don'tknow what to think! I only know what to hope, and wish it may havebeen!""And what's that?" said Dalton, with a look of almost sternness, for hewas not ignorant of the doctor's sentiments on the subject."A refusal, of course," said Grounsell, who never yet was deterred by alook, a sign, or an innuendo, from any expression of his sentiments."And why so, sir?" rejoined Dalton, warmly."On every ground in the world: What has your fine, generous-hearted,dear child in common with that vile world of envy, malice, and allwickedness you 'd throw her amongst? What similarity in thought,feeling, or instinct between her and that artificial class with whom youwould associate her, with their false honor, false principle, and falsedelicacy nothing real and substantial about them but their wickedness?If you were a silly woman, like the mother in the 'Vicar of Wakefield,'I could forgive you; but a man a hardened, worldly man, that has tastedpoverty, and knows the rubs of life. I 've no patience with you, d--n meif I have!""A little more of this, and I 'll have none with you," said Dalton, ashe clenched his fist, and struck his knee a hard blow. "You presume totalk of us as people whose station was always what our present meansimply; but I 'd have you to know that we 've better blood in our veins--""Devil take your blood! you've made me spill mine again," criedGrounsell, as he sliced a piece off his chin, and threw down therazor in a torrent of anger, while Dalton grinned a look of malicioussatisfaction. "Could n't your good blood have kept you above anythinglike dependence?"Dalton sprang to his feet, and clutching the chair, raised it in theair; but as suddenly dashed it on the floor again, without speaking."Go on," cried Grounsell, daring him. "I'd rather you 'd break my skullthan that dear girl's heart; and that 's what you 're bent on. Ay, breakher heart! no less. You can't terrify me, man, by those angry looks. Youcan't wound me, either, by retaliating, and calling me a dependant. Iknow I am such. I know well all the ignominy, all the shame; but I know,too, all the misery of the position. But, mark me, the disgrace and thesorrow end where they begin, with myself alone. I have none to blushfor me; I stand alone in the world, a poor, scathed, sapless, leaflesstrunk. But it is not so with you. Come, come, Dalton, you fancy that youknow something of life because you have passed so many years of it amongyour equals and neighbors in your own 'country; but you know nothingabsolutely nothing of the world as it exists here."A hearty but contemptuous laugh broke from Dalton as he heard thisspeech. It was indeed somewhat of a surprise to listen to such a charge.He, Peter Dalton, that knew a spavined horse, or could detect a windgallbetter than any man in the county; he, that never was "taken in" by aroarer, nor deceived by a crib-biter, to tell him that he knew nothingof life!"That'll do, doctor, that'll do," said he, with a most compassionatingsmile at the other's ignorance. "I hope you know more about medicinethan you seem to do about men and women;" and, with these words, he leftthe room, banging the door after him as he went, and actually ashamedthat he had been betrayed into warmth by one so evidently deficient inthe commonest knowledge of the world.[Illustration:    228]"I 'm sorry I kept you waiting, girls," said he, approaching them. "And,indeed, I might have spent my time better, too. But no matter; we musttry and find out her Ladyship now, for the morning is slipping over."As he spoke, George Onslow appeared, and recognizing the party with muchcordiality, conducted them to the breakfast-room, where Sir Stafford,Lady Hester, and Miss Onslow were seated. If Sydney's reception of thetwo sisters was less enthusiastic than Lady Hester's, it was not lesskind. Nelly was won almost instantaneously by the unaffected easeand simplicity of her manner. As for Dalton himself, her Ladyship haddetermined to carry him by storm. She suffered him to declaim about hisancestors and their wealth; heard him with assumed interest in allhis interminable stories of Dal tons for six generations; and artfullyopposed to his regrets at the approaching departure of his daughterthe ingenious consolation that she was not about to sojourn with merestrangers, but with those united to her by the ties of kindred.George had, meanwhile, made two or three efforts to engage Kate inconversation; but, whether from the preoccupation of her mind, agitatedas it well might be at such a moment, or that his topics were so utterlynew and strange to her, his attempt was not attended with any signalsuccess. A sense of shame, too, at the disparity of her own and hersister's appearance, in contrast with the quiet elegance of Lady Hesterand Miss Onslow's dress, oppressed her. Strange was it that this feelingshould have agitated her now, she who always hitherto had never wasted athought on such matters, and yet she felt it acutely; and as she glancedfrom the rustling robe of silk to the folds of her own homely costume,her heart beat painfully, and her breathing came short. Was she alreadychanged, that thoughts tike these could impress her so strongly? HadAdam's first shame descended to his daughter? "How unlike I am to them!"was the bitter thought that rose to her mind, and ate like a cancer intoher heart.The sense of inferiority, galling and torturing as it is, becomesinfinitely more unendurable when connected with matters of trivialimportance. There is a sense of indignant anger in the feeling thatwe are surpassed by what seem the mere conventionalities and tricks ofsociety, and although Kate knew not the source of her unhappiness, someof it lay in this fact. Every little gesture, every motion, the merestpeculiarities of voice or accent, now struck her as distinctive of aclass, a class to which no imitation would ever give her a resemblance.If it were not for very shame, she would have drawn back now at theeleventh hour. More than once was she on the verge of confessing whatwas passing within her mind; but fears of various kinds, of her father'sanger, of ridicule, of the charge of frivolity, all conspired to keepher silent, and she sat and listened to descriptions of pleasure andscenes wherein she had already lost every interest, and which somehowcame associated with a sense of her own inferiority.Never did home seem so regrettable as in that moment: the humblefireside in winter; the happy evenings with little Hanserl; the summer'sday rambles in the forest; their little feasts beside the waterfall,under the ivy-clad walls of Eberstein, all rose before her. They werepleasures which had no alloy in her own humble lot, and why desert them?She had almost gained courage to say that she would not, when a chanceword caught her ear one word how little to hang a destiny upon! It wasLady Hester, who, conversing in a half-whisper with Mr. Dalton, said,"She will be perfectly beautiful when dressed becomingly."Was this, then, all that was needed to give her the stamp and semblanceof the others? Oh, if she could believe it! If she could but fancy that,at some future time, such graceful elegance should be her own, thatgentle languor, that chastened quietude of Sydney, or that sparklinglightness of Lady Hester herself!"What time de horses, saar?" said the courier, popping his head into theroom."I scarcely know what do you say, Lady Hester?""I 'm quite ready this instant if you like indeed, I 'm always thefirst," said she, gayly; "nobody travels with less preparation than Ido. There, see all I want!" and she pointed to a fan, and a book, and asmelling-bottle, as if all her worldly effects and requirements went nofurther, and that four great imperials and a dozen capacious boxeswere not packed with her wardrobe. "I do detest the worry and fuss somepeople make about a journey for a week, or even a month beforehand; theyunsettle themselves and every one around them; putting under lockand key half the things of every-day utility, and making a kind of'jail-delivery' of all the imprisoned old cloaks and dresses of thetoilet. As for me, I take the road as I 'd go to the Opera, or drive outin the Park I ask for my bonnet, that's all."There was some truth in this. Her Ladyship did, in fact, give herselfnot a whit more thought or consideration for preparation of any kind,than if the excursion had been a promenade."It is now two o'clock," said Sir Stafford, "and if we mean to reachOffenburg to-night we must not lose more time. Isn't it Offenburg youadvise as our halt, Mr. Jekyl?""Yes, Sir Stafford," simpered out that bland personage. "It is a mostcomfortable little inn, and a very praiseworthy cook.""By the bye, has any one thought of ordering luncheon here?" criedGeorge.Jekyl gave a nod, to intimate that he had taken that precaution."And, Mr. Jekyl," said Lady Hester, "what of those bullfinches, for Imust have them?""They are safely caged and packed in our britzska, madam. You 'll alsofind that your sketch-book and the water-colors are available at anymoment, Miss Onslow," said he, with a respectful gesture. She smiled,and bowed her thanks in silence."And de horses, saar?" asked the courier once more, for during thiscolloquy he had been standing in expectation of his orders."Do tell him, Mr. Jekyl," said Lady Hester, with that tone of languorthat bespoke her dislike to the trouble of even a trifling degree ofresolution."I think we shall say in one hour, Gregoire," said Jekyl, mildly. "And,perhaps, it would be better that you should see--" What this matterwas that the courier should bestow his special attention upon is not onrecord in this history, inasmuch as that when the speaker had reachedthus far, he passed out of the door, talking as he went, in a low andconfidential voice."Capital fellow Jekyl!" exclaimed George; "he forgets nothing.""He appears to be a most accomplished traveller," said Sir Stafford."And such a linguist!" said Sydney."And so amusing!" added my Lady."And such a rogue!" muttered Dalton to himself, who, although so open toany imposition that took the form of flattery, could at once detect theknavery that was practised upon others, and who, at a glance, read thecharacter of the new acquaintance."Don't you like the stir and excitement of the road, my dear child?"said Lady Hester to Kate, who, with very red eyes and very pale cheeks,stood in a window to avoid being observed. "There is something soadventurous about a journey always. One may be robbed, you know, or thecarriage upset, as happened to ourselves t' other day; or mistaken forsomebody else, and carried off to prison. It gives such a flurry tothe spirits to think of these things, and a life of monotony is so verydetestable."Kate tried to smile an assent, and Lady Hester ran on in the samestrain, extolling the delights of anything and everything that promisedan excitement. "You know, my dear child, that this little place hasalmost been the death of me," added she. "I never was so bored in all mylife; and I vow I shall detest a mill and a pine-forest to the last dayI live. If it had not been for you and your sweet sister, I do not knowwhat we should have clone; but it 's all over now. The dreary intervalis passed, and when we turn the foot of that hill yonder, we shall haveseen the last of it."Kate's heart was almost bursting as she heard these words. To speak thusof the little valley would have been a profanation at any time, but todo so now, when she was about to leave it, when she was about to tearherself away from all the ties of love and affection, seemed an actualcruelty."Small places are my aversion," continued Lady Hester, who, whensatisfied with her own talk, never cared much what effect it wasproducing upon others. "One grows down insensibly to the measure of apetty locality, with its little interests, its little people, and itslittle gossip don't you think so, dear?""We were so happy here!" murmured Kate, in a voice that a chokingfulness of her throat almost stifled."Of course you were, child, very happy; and it was very good of youto be so. Yes, very good and very right." Here Lady Hester assumed apeculiar tone, which she always put on whenever she fancied that shewas moralizing. "Natural amiability of disposition, and all that sortof thing, is very nice indeed; but there 's luncheon, I see, and now, mydear, let us take our places without loss of time. George, will you giveyour arm to Miss Dalton? Mr. Dalton but where 's Mr. Dalton?""Papa has taken him with him to his dressing-room," answered Sydney,"but begged you'd not wait; they'll be back presently.""No lady does wait at luncheon," said Lady Hester, snappishly, while,drawing Kate's arm within her own, she led her into the adjoining room.The party had scarcely seated themselves at table when they were joinedby Jekyl. Indeed, Lady Hester had only time to complain of his absencewhen he appeared; for it was a trick of that gentleman's tact merely tomake himself sufficiently regretted not to be blamed. And now he cameto say that everything was ready, the postilions in the saddle, thecarriages drawn up before the door, the relays all been ordered alongthe road, the supper bespoken for the end of the journey. These pleasantfacts he contrived to season with a running fire of little gossip andmimicry, in which the landlord, and Gregoire, and Mademoiselle Celestinewere the individuals personated.Never were Mr. Jekyl's peculiar abilities more in request; for themoment was an awkward and embarrassing one for all, and none, savehimself, were able to relieve its seriousness. Even Nelly smiled atthe witty sallies and playful conceits of this clever talker, and feltalmost grateful to him for the momentary distraction he afforded herfrom gloomier thoughts. With such success did he exert himself, that allthe graver sentiments of the occasion were swallowed up in the pleasantcurrent of his small-talk, and no time given for a thought of thatparting which was but a few minutes distant. Sir Stafford and Mr. Daltonwere not sorry to discover the party in this pleasant humor, and readilychimed in with the gayety around them.The bugle of the postilions at length announced that "time was up," andthe half-hour, which German politeness accords to leave-taking, expired.A dead silence succeeded the sound, and, as if moved by the sameinstinctive feeling, the two sisters arose and withdrew into a window.Close locked in each other's arms, neither could speak. Kate's thicksobs came fast and full, and her heart beat against her sister's sideas though it were bursting. As for Nelly, all that she had meant to say,the many things she had kept for the last moment, were forgotten, andshe could but press the wet cheek to her own, and murmur a tremulousblessing."Oh, if I could but remain with you, Nelly dearest," sobbed Kate; "Ifeel even already my isolation. Is it too late, sister dear, is it toolate to go back?""Not if this be not a sudden impulse of sorrow for parting, Kate; not ifyou think you would be happier here.""But papa! how will he--what will he--"She had not time for more, when her father joined them. A certain flurryof his manner showed that he was excited by talking and wine together.There was that in the expression of his features, too, that betokened amind ill at ease with itself a restless alternating between two courses."'Tis you are the lucky girl, Kate," said he, drawing his arm aroundher, and pressing her to him. "This day's good luck pays me off for manya hard blow of fortune. They 're kind people you are going with, realgentry, and our own blood into the bargain."A thick heavy sob was all the answer she could make."To be sure you're sorry; why would n't you be sorry, leaving your ownhome and going away among strangers? and 't is I am sorry to let yougo.""Are you so, dearest papa? Are you really sorry to part with me? Wouldyou rather I 'd stay behind with you and Nelly?" cried she, looking upat him with eyes swimming in tears."Would it, is it?" said he, eagerly, as he kissed her forehead twice;then, suddenly checking himself, he said, in an altered voice, "but thatwould be selfish, Kate, nothing else than downright selfish. Ask Nelly,there, if that's my nature? Not that Nelly will ever give me too gooda character!" added he, bitterly. But poor Ellen neither heard thequestion nor the taunt; her mind was travelling many a long mile away inrealms of dreary speculation."I 'm sorry to interrupt a moment like this," said Sir Stafford, "butI believe I must take you away, Miss Dalton; our time is now of theshortest."One fond and long embrace the sisters took, and Kate was led awaybetween Sir Stafford and her father, while Nelly went through a roundof leave-takings with the others in a state of semi-consciousness thatresembled a dream. The courteous flatteries of Lady Hester fell aspowerless on her ear as the rougher good wishes of Grounsell. GeorgeOnslow's respectful manner was as unnoticed as the flippant smartnessof Albert Jekyl's. Even Sydney's gentle attempt at consolation was heardwithout heeding; and when one by one they had gone and left her alonein that dreary room, she was not more aware of her solitude than whenthey stood around her.Couriers and waiters passed in and out to see that nothing had beenforgotten. Doors were slammed on every side, loud voices were calling,all the turmoil of a departure was there; but she knew nothing of it.Even when the loud cracking of the postilions' whips echoed in thecourtyard, and the quick clatter of horses' feet and heavy wheelsresounded through the arched doorway, she was still unmoved; nor did sherecover full liberty of thought till her father stood beside her, andsaid, "Come, Nelly, let us go home."Then she arose, and took his arm without a word. She would have givenher life to have been able to speak even a few words of comfort to thepoor old man, whose cheeks were wet with tears, but she could not uttera syllable."Ay, indeed," muttered he, "it will be a dreary home now."Not another word was spoken by either as they trod their way along thesilent streets, over which the coming gloom of evening threw a mournfulshadow. They walked, with bent-down heads, as if actually fearing torecognize the objects that they had so often looked upon with her, and,slowly traversing the little Platz, they gained their own door. Therethey halted, and, from habit, pulled the bell. Its little tinkle, heardin the stillness, seemed suddenly to recall them both to thought; forDalton, with a melancholy smile, said,"'T is old Andy is coming now! 'T is n't her foot I hear! Oh, Nelly,Nelly, how did you ever persuade me to this! Sure, I know I 'll never behappy again!"Nelly made no answer. The injustice of the speech was well atoned for inher mind by the thought that, in shifting the blame from himself to her,her father might find some sort of consolation; well satisfied to becomethe subject of his reproach if the sacrifice could alleviate his sorrow."Take that chair away; throw it out of the window," cried he, angrily."It breaks my heart to look at it." And with this he leaned his headupon the table, and sobbed like a child.CHAPTER XX. A VERY SMALL "INTERIOR."IN one of the most favored spots of that pleasant quay which goes bythe name of the Lungo l'Arno, at Florence, there stood a small,miserable-looking, rickety old building, of two stories high, wedged inbetween two massive and imposing palaces, as though a buffer to deadenthe force of collision. In all probability it owed its origin to somepetty usurpation, and had gradually grown up, from the unobtrusivehumility of a cobbler's bulk, to the more permanent nuisance of stoneand mortar. The space occupied was so small as barely to permit ofa door and a little window beside it, within which hung a varietyof bridles, halters, and such-like gear, with here and there thebrass-mounted harnessing of a Calasina, or the gay worsted tasselsand fringed finery of a peasant's Barroccino. The little spot was socompletely crammed with wares, that for all purposes of traffic it wasuseless; hence, everything that pertained to sale was carried on in thestreet, thus contributing by another ingredient to the annoyance of thismisplaced residence. Threats, tyranny, bribery, seductions of twentykinds, intimidation in as many shapes, had all failed in inducing itsowner to remove to another part of the town. Gigi every one in Florenceis known by his Christian name, and we never heard him called by anyother resisted oppressions as manfully as he was proof againstsofter influences, and held his ground, hammering away at his old"demi-piques," burnishing bits and scouring housings, in utterindifference to the jarred nerves and chafed susceptibilities of hisfine neighbors. It was not that the man was indifferent to money. It wasnot that the place was associated with any family reminiscences. It wasnot from its being very favorable to the nature of his dealings, sincehis chief customers were usually the frequenters of the less fashionablelocalities. It was the simple fact that Gigi was a Florentine, and, likea Florentine, he saw no reason why he should n't have the sun andthe Arno as well as the Guiciardoni, who lived at his right, or theRinuncini, who dwelt on his left hand.Small and contracted as that miserable frontage was, the sun did shineupon it just as pleasantly as on its proud neighbors, and the brightArno glided by with its laughing ripples; while, from the little windowabove stairs, the eye ranged over the cypress-clad hill of San Miniatoand the fair gardens of the Boboli. On one side lay the quaint oldstructure of the Ponte Vecchio, with its glittering stores of jewelry,and on the other the graceful elliptic arches of St. Trinita spanned thestream. The quay before the door was the chosen rallying-point ofall Florence; the promenade where lounged all its fashionables of anevening, as they descended from their carriages after the accustomeddrive in the Cascini. The Guardie Nobili passed daily, in all theirscarlet bravery, to and from the Pitti Palace; the Grand Ducal equipagenever took any other road. A continual flow of travellers to the greathotels on the quay contributed its share of bustle and animation to thescene; so that here might be said to meet, as in a focus, all that madeup the life, the stir, and the movement of the capital.Full of amusement and interest as that morning panorama often is,our object is less to linger beside it, than, having squeezed our waybetween the chaotic wares of Gigi's shop, to ascend the little, dark,and creaking stairs which lead to the first story, and into which we nowbeg to introduce our reader. There are but two rooms, each of them ofthe dimensions of closets, but furnished with a degree of pretensionthat cannot fail to cause amazement as you enter. Silk draperies, carvedcabinets, bronzes, china, chairs of ebony, tables of buhl, a Persian rugon the floor, an alabaster lamp suspended from the ceiling, miniaturesin handsome frames, and armor, cover the walls; while, scattered about,are richly bound books, and prints, and drawings in water-color. Throughthe half-drawn curtain that covers the doorway for there is no dooryou can peep into the back room, where a lighter and more modern tasteprevails; the gold-sprigged curtains of a French bed, and the Bohemianglass that glitters everywhere, bespeaking another era of decorativeluxury.It is not with any invidious pleasure for depreciation, but purely inthe interests of truth, that we must now tell our reader that, of allthis seeming elegance and splendor, nothing absolutely nothing is real.The brocaded silks have been old petticoats; the ebony is lacquer; theivory is bone; the statuettes are plaster, glazed so as to look likemarble; the armor is papier mache, even to the owner himself, all isimposition, for he is no other than Albert Jekyl.Now, my dear reader, you and I see these things precisely in the samelight. The illusion of a first glance stripped off, we smile as weexamine, one by one, the ingenious devices meant to counterfeit ancientart or modern elegance. It is possible, too, that we derive as muchamusement from the ingenuity exercised, as we should have had pleasurein contemplating the realities so typified. Still, there is oneindividual to whom this consciousness brings no alloy of enjoyment;Jekyl has persuaded himself to accept all as fact. Like the Indian,who first carves and then worships his god, he has gone through the oldprocess of fabrication, and now gazes on his handiwork with the eyesof a true believer. Gracefully reclined upon an ottoman, the mock ambermouthpiece of a gilt hooka between his lips, he dreams, with half-closedeyes, of Oriental luxury! A Sybarite in every taste, he has invented alittle philosophy of his own. He has seen enough of life to know thatthousands might live in enjoyment out of the superfluities of rich men,and yet make them nothing the poorer. What banquet would not admit ofa guest the more? What fete to which another might not be added? Whatfour-in-hand prances by without some vacant seat, be it even in therumble? What gilded gondola has not a place to spare? To be this"complement" to the world's want is then his mission.No man invents a metier without a strong element of success. The verycreative power is an earnest of victory. It is true that there had beengreat men before Agamemnon. So had there been a race of "diners-out"before Jekyl; but he first reduced the practice to system, showingthat all the triumphs of cookery, all the splendor of equipage, all theblandishments of beauty, all the fascinations of high society, may beenjoyed by one who actually does not hold a "share in the company," and,without the qualification of scrip, takes his place among the directors.Had he brought to this new profession commonplace abilities andinferior acquirements, he would have been lost amid that vulgar herd ofindistinguishables which infest every city, and whose names are not even"writ in water." Jekyl, however, possessed many and varied gifts.He might have made a popular preacher in a watering-place; a verysuccessful doctor for nervous invalids; a clever practitioner at thebar; an admirable member of the newspaper press. He might have been verygood as an actor; he would have been glorious as an auctioneer. Withqualities of this order, a most plastic wit, and an india-rubberconscience, what bound need there be to his success! Nor was there.He was, in all the society of the capital, not alone an admitted andaccepted, but a welcome guest. He might have failed to strike this manas being clever, or that as being agreeable. Some might be disappointedin his smartness; some might think his social claims overrated; nonewere ever offended by anything that fell from him. His great secretseemed to lie in the fact that, if generally easy to be found whenrequired, he was never in the way when not wanted. Had he possessed thegift of invisibility, he could scarcely have been more successful inthis latter good quality. He never interrupted a confidence; nevermarred a tete-a-tete. A kind of instinct would arrest his steps as heapproached a boudoir where his presence would be undesirable; and hehas been known to retire from a door on which he had already placed hishand, with a sudden burst of intelligence suggesting "to come anotherday."These, however, seem mere negative qualities; his positive ones were,however, not less remarkable. The faculties which some men might havedevoted to abstract science or metaphysical inquiry, he, with a keenperception of his own fitness, resolved to exercise upon the worldaround him. His botany was a human classification, all his chemistry ananalysis of men's motives. It is true, perhaps, that the poet's line mayhave been received by him with a peculiar limitation, and that, if"the proper study of mankind is man," his investigations took a shapescarcely contemplated by the writer. It was not man in his freedom ofthought and action, not man in all the consciousness of power, and inthe high hope of a great destiny that attracted him; no! it was forsmall humanity that he cared, for all the struggles and wiles and plotsand schemings of this wicked world; for man amid its pomps and vanities,its balls, its festivals, its intrigues, and its calamities.He felt, with the great dramatist, that "all the world's a stage,"and, the better to enjoy the performance, he merely took a "walkingcharacter," that gave him full leisure to watch the others. Such was ourfriend Albert Jekyl, or, as he was popularly called by his acquaintance,Le Due de Dine-out, to distinguish him from the Talleyrands, who areDues de Dino.Let us now, without further speculation, come back to him, as with hiswindow open to admit the "Arno sun," he lay at full length upon hisottoman, conning over his dinner list. He had been for some time absentfrom Florence, and in the interval a number of new people had arrived,and some of the old had gone away. He was, therefore, running over thenames of the present and the missing, with a speculative thought for thefuture."A bad season, it would seem!" muttered he, as his eye traced rapidlythe list of English names, in which none of any distinction figured."This comes of Carbonari and Illuminati humbug. They frighten John Bull,and he will not come abroad to see a barricade under his window. Greatnumbers have gone away, too, the Scotts, the Carringdons, the Hopleys!three excellent houses; and those dear Milnwoods, who, so lately'reconciled to Rome,' as the phrase is, 'took out their piety' in Fridayfish-dinners."The Russians, too, have left us; the Geroboffskys gone back to theirsnows again, and expiating their 'liberal tendencies' by a tour inSiberia. The Chaptowitsch, recalled in disgrace for asking one of LouisPhilippe's sons to a breakfast! We have got in exchange a few Carlists,half a dozen 'Legitimists,' with very stately manners and smallfortunes. But a good house to dine at, a good salon for a lounge, apleasant haunt for all seasons and at all hours, what is there? Nothing,absolutely nothing. And what a city this was once! crammed, as it usedto be, with dear, delightful 'ruined families;' that is, those wholeft ruin to their creditors at home, to come out and live gloriouslyabroad. And now I look down my list, and, except my little Sunday dinnerat 'Marescotte's,' and that half luncheon thing I take at the VillaPessarole, I really see nothing for the whole week. The Onslows, alone,figure in strong capitals. Let me see, then, how they must be treated. Ihave already housed them at the Palazzo Mazzarini, and, for some days atleast, their time will be filled up with upholsterers, decorators,and such-like. Then the campaign will open, and I can but watcheventualities, and there will be no lack of these. The young Guardsmanlikes play. I must see that Prince Carini does not get hold of him. MissOnslow has a taste for Gothic and stained glass; that, nowadays, oftenends in a love of saints' shin-bones and other relics. My lady isdisposed to be a 'fast one;' and, in fact, except the gruff old doctor,who is a confounded bore, the whole craft is deficient in ballast. ButI was forgetting 'the Dalton,' shame on me, for she is very pretty,indeed!" He seemed to ruminate and reflect for some minutes, and thensaid aloud, "Yes, ma belle Catharine, with the aid of Albert Jekyl, withhis counsel to guide, and his head to direct you, there 's no sayingwhat your destiny might not be! It would be, I know well, very hard toconvince you of the fact, and, possibly, were I to try it, you 'd besilly enough to fancy me in love with you!" Albert Jekyl in love! Theidea was so excellent that he lay back and laughed heartily at it. "Andyet," said he, after a pause, "you 'll see this fact aright one ofthese days. You 'll learn the immense benefit my knowledge would be whenjoined to your own beauty. Ay, Kate! but it will be too late, just so,too late; then, like every one else, you 'll have played all your trumpsbefore you begin to learn the game. A girl who has caught up every trickof manner, every little tactic of society within a month, and who, atthis hour, would stand the scrutiny of the most fastidious eye, is agreat prize in the wheel. This aptitude might lead to great things,though, in all probability, it will never conduce, save to very littleones!"With this reflection Jekyl arose to begin his toilet, an occupationwhich, less from dandyism than pure self-love, he usually prolongedduring the whole morning. It was to him a period of self-examination.He seemed, to use a mercantile figure, to be taking stock of his owncapabilities, and investigating his own means of future success.It was an "open day," that is, he knew not where he should dine; so thathis costume, while partaking of all the characteristics of the morning,had yet combined certain little decorative traits that would not beunsuitable if pressed to accept an unpremeditated hospitality.There were very few, indeed, with whom Jekyl would have condescendedso to dine, not only from the want of dignity incurred, but that onprinciple he would have preferred the humblest fare at home to thevulgarity of a pot-luck dinner, which invariably, as he said himself,deranged your digestion, and led to wrong intimacies.His dress being completed, he looked out along the crowd to see in whosecarriage he was to have a seat to the Cascini. More than one invitinggesture motioned him to a place, as equipage after equipage passed on;but although some of those who sought him were high in rank, and othersdistinguished for beauty and attraction, Jekyl declined the courtesieswith that little wave of the hand so significative in all Italianintercourse. Occasionally, indeed, a bland, regretful smile seemed toconvey the sorrow the refusal cost him; and once he actually placed hishand over where his heart might be, as though to express a perfect pangof suffering; but still he bided his time.At last a very dark visage, surrounded by a whisker of blackest hair,peeped from beneath the head of a very shabby caleche, whose horse andcoachman were all of the "seediest;" and Jekyl cried out, "Morlache!"while he made a sign towards the Cascini. The other replied by spreadingout his hand horizontally from his mouth, and blowing along the surface,a pantomime meant to express a railroad. Jekyl immediately descended andtook his place beside him.CHAPTER XXI. A FAMILY PICTURETHE fashionable life of a great city has a character of samenesswhich defies all attempts at portraiture. Well-bred people, and theiramusements, are all constructed so perfectly alike, certain familytraits pervading them throughout, that every effort at individualizationis certain to be a failure. You may change the venue, if you will, fromLondon to Paris, to Vienna, or St. Petersburg, but the issue is alwaysthe same; the very same interests are at work, and the same passionsexercised, by the self-same kind of people. If such be the rule amongthe first-rate capitals of Europe, it is very far from being the casein those smaller cities which belong to inferior States, and which, fromreasons of health, pleasure, or economy, are the resort of strangersfrom different parts of the world. In these society is less disciplined,social rank less defined; conflicting claims and rival nationalitiesdisturb the scene, and there is, so to say, a kind of struggle forpre-eminence, which in better regulated communities is never witnessed.If, as is unquestionably true, such places rarely present theattractions of good society, they offer to the mere observer infinitelymore varied and amusing views of life than he would ever expect to seeelsewhere. As in the few days of a revolution, when the "barricades areup," and all hurrying to the conflict, more of national character willbe exhibited than in half a century of tame obedience to the law; sohere are displayed, to the sun and the noonday, all those passions andpretensions which rarely see the light in other places.The great besetting sin of this social state is the taste for NOTORIETY.Everything must contribute to this. Not alone wealth, splendor, rank,and genius, but vice, in all its shapes and forms, must be notorious."Better be calumniated in all the moods and tenses than untalked of," isthe grand axiom. Do something that can be reported of you, good, if youwill, bad, if you must; but do it. If you be not rich enough to astonishby the caprices of your wealth, do something by your wits, or even yourwhiskers. The color of a man's gloves has sufficed to make his fortune.Upon this strange ocean, which, if rarely storm-shaken, was neverperfectly tranquil, the Onslows were now launched, as well pleased aspeople usually are who, from being of third or fourth-rate importancein their own country, suddenly awake to the fact that they arecelebrities abroad.The Mazzarini Palace had long been untenanted; its last occupant hadbeen one of the Borghese family, whose princely fortune was still unableto maintain the splendor of a residence fitted only for royalty. Tolearn, therefore, that a rich "milordo" had arrived there with theintention of passing his winter, was a piece of news that occupied everytongue in the city. Gossips were questioned about the private history,the peerage consulted for such facts as were public. Sir Stafford'swealth was actively discussed, and all possible inroads upon it hisson's extravagance might have made debated and decided on. A minuteinvestigation into their probable reasons for leaving England was alsoinstituted, in which conjectures far more ingenious than true figuredprominently. What they were like what they said, did, and meant to dowas the sole table-talk of the capital."They've had their horses out from England," said one; "They 'vetaken the best box at the Pergola," said another; "They've engagedMidchekoff's cook," said a third; "They 've been speaking to Gridaniabout his band," chimed in a fourth; and so on. All their proceedingswere watched and followed by that eager vulturehood which hungers forortolans, and thirsts for iced champagne.Nor were the Onslows without offering food for this curious solicitude.From the hour of her arrival, Lady Hester had been deeply engaged, inconcert with her grand vizier, Albert Jekyl, in preparations for thecoming campaign. An army of upholsterers, decorators, and such-like,beset the Palazzo with enormous vans crammed full of wares. Furniture,that had served royal guests, and was even yet in high preservation, wascondemned, to give way to newer and more costly decoration. Rich stuffsand hangings that had been the admiration of many a visitor, wereruthlessly pulled down, to be replaced by even more gorgeous materials;till at last it was whispered about that, except some antique cabinets,the pictures, and a few tables of malachite or marble, little or nothingremained of what once constituted the splendor of the place.These were mere rumors, however; for as yet, none, save Albert Jekylhimself, had seen the interior; and from him, unless disposed to accordit, all Confidence was hopeless. Indeed, his little vague stare whenquestioned; his simpering, "I shouldn't wonder," "It is very likely," or"Now that you mention it, I begin to think so too," would have disarmedthe suspicion of all who had not studied him deeply. What the Onslowswere going to do, and when they would do it, were, then, the vexedquestions of every coterie. In a few days more the Carnival would begin,and yet no announcement of their intentions had yet gone forth, noprogramme of future festivities been issued to the world. A vague andterrible fear began to prevail that it was possible they meant allthese splendid preparations for themselves alone. Such a treason wasincredible at first; but as day followed day, and no sign was made,suspicion ripened into actual dread; and now the eager expectants beganto whisper among themselves dark reasons for a conduct so strange andinexplicable.Haggerstone contributed his share to these mysterious doublings, for,while not confessing that his acquaintance with the Onslows was of thevery slightest, and dated but from a week before, he spoke of them withall the affected ease and information of one who had known them foryears.Nor were his comments of the most flattering kind, for seeing howdecidedly every effort he made to renew acquaintance was met by asteady opposition, he lost no time in assuming his stand as enemy. Theinterval of doubt which had occurred as to their probable mode of lifewas favorable for this line of action. None knew if they were ever topartake of the splendor and magnificence of the Mazzarini; none couldguess what chance they had of the sumptuous banquets of the rich man'stable. It was a lottery, in which, as yet, they had not even a ticket;and what so natural as to depreciate the scheme!If the courts of law and equity be the recognized tribunals by which therights of property are decided, so there exists in every city certainnot less decisive courts, which pronounce upon all questions of socialclaims, and deliver judgments upon the pretensions of every new arrivalamongst them. High amid the number of these was a certain family calledRicketts, who had been residents of Florence for thirty-odd years back.They consisted of three persons, General Ricketts, his wife, and amaiden sister of the General. They inhabited a small house in a gardenwithin the boulevard, dignified by the name of the "41 Villino Zoe." Ithad originally been the humble residence of a market-gardener, but, bythe aid of paint and plaster, contrived to impose upon the world almostas successfully as did the fair owner herself by the help of similaradjuncts. A word, however, for the humanities before we speak of theirabiding-place. The "General" Heaven alone knew when, where, or inwhat service he became so was a small, delicate little man, with blandmanners, a weak voice, a weak stomach, and a weaker head; his instinctsall mild, gentle, and inoffensive, and his whole pursuit in lifea passion for inventing fortifications, and defending passes andtetes-du-pont by lines, circumvallations, and ravelins, which cost reamsof paper and whole buckets of water-color to describe. The only firewhich burned within his nature was a little flickering flame of hope,that one day the world would awake to the recognition of his greatdiscoveries, and his name be associated with those of Vauban and Carnot.Sustained by this, he bore up against contemporary neglect and actualindifference; he whispered to himself, that, like Nelson, he would oneday "have a gazette of his own," and in this firm conviction, he went onwith rule and compass, measuring and daubing and drawing from morn tillnight, happy, humble, and contented: nothing could possibly be moreinoffensive than such an existence. Even the French our natural enemiesor the Russians our Palmerstonian Betes noires would have forgiven, hadthey but seen, the devices of his patriotism. Never did heroic ardorburn in a milder bosom, for, though his brain revelled in all thehorrors of siege and slaughter, he would not have had the heart to crusha beetle.Unlike him in every respect was the partner of his joys: a morebustling, plotting, scheming existence it was hard to conceive. Mostpretenders are satisfied with aspiring to one crown; her ambitions were"legion." When Columbus received the taunts of the courtiers on the easeof his discovery, and merely replied, that the merit lay simply in thefact that he alone had made it, he was uttering a truth susceptible ofvery wide application. Nine tenths of the inventions which promotethe happiness or secure the ease of mankind have been not a whit moredifficult than that of balancing the egg. They only needed that some oneshould think of them "practically." Thousands may have done so inmoods of speculation or fancy; the grand requisite was a practicalintelligence. Such was Mrs. Ricketts's. As she had seen at Naplesthe lava used for mere road-making, which in other hands, and by othertreatment, might have been fashioned into all the shapes and colorsof Bohemian glass, so did she perceive that a certain raw material wasequally misapplied and devoted to base uses, but which, by the touchof genius, might be made powerful as the wand of an enchanter. This was"Flattery." Do not, like the Spanish courtiers, my dear reader, do notsmile at her discovery, nor suppose that she had been merely exploringan old and exhausted mine. Her flattery was not, as the world employsit, an exaggerated estimate of existing qualities, but a grand poeticand creative power, that actually begot the great sublime it praised.Whatever your walk, rank, or condition in life, she instantly laid holdof it to entrap you. No matter what your size, stature, or symmetry, shecould costume you in a minute! Her praises, like an elastic-web livery,fitted all her slaves; and slaves were they of the most abject slavery,who were led by the dictation of her crafty intelligence!A word about poor Martha, and we have done; nor, indeed, is there anyneed we should say more than that she was universally known as "PoorMartha" by all their acquaintance. Oh! what patience, submission, andlong suffering it takes before the world will confer its degree ofMartyr, before they will condescend to visit, even with so cheap a thingas compassion, the life of an enduring self-devotion. Martha had had butone idol all her life, her brother; and although, when he married latein years, she had almost died broken-hearted at the shock, she clung tohim and his fortunes, unable to separate from one to whose habits shehad been ministering for above thirty years. It was said that originallyshe was a person of good common faculties, and a reasonably fairknowledge of the world; but to see her at the time of which we nowspeak, not a vestige remained of either, not a stone marked where theedifice once stood. Nor can this ba matter of wonderment. Who could havepassed years amid all the phantasmagoria of that unreal existence, andeither not gone clean mad, or made a weak compromise with sanity,by accepting everything as real? Poor Martha had exactly these twoalternatives, either to "believe the crusts mutton," or be eternallyshut out from all hope. Who can tell the long and terrible struggle sucha mind must have endured? what little bursts of honest energy repelledby fear and timidity? what good intentions baffled by natural humility,and the affection she bore her brother?It may have nay, it did cost her much to believe this strange creed ofher sister-in-law; but she ended by doing so. So implicit was her faith,that, like a true devotee, she would not trust the evidence of her ownsenses, if opposed by the articles of her belief. The very picturesat whose purchase she had been present, and whose restoration andrelacquering had been the work of her own hands, she was willing to averhad been the gifts of royal and princely personages. The books for whichshe had herself written to the publishers, she would swear all tributesoffered by the respective writers to the throne of taste and erudition.Every object with whose humble birth and origin she was familiar, wasassociated in her mind with some curious history, which, got off byrote, she repeated with full credulity. Like the well-known athlete, wholifted a bull because he had accustomed himself to the feat sincethe animal had been a calf, rising from small beginnings, she had soeducated her faculties that now nothing was above her powers. Not allthe straits and contrivances by which this motley display was got up,not all the previous schemings and plottings, not all the discussionsas to what King or Kaiser this should be attributed, by what artist thatwas painted, who carved this cup, who enamelled that vase, could shakethe firmness of her faith when the matter was once decided. She mightoppose the Bill in every stage; she might cavil at it in Committee, anddivide on every clause; but when it once became law, she revered it asa statute of the land. All her own doubts faded away on the instant; allher former suggestions vanished at once; a new light seemed to breakon her mind, and she appeared to see with the eyes of truth anddiscernment. We have been led away beyond our intention in this sketch,and have no space to devote to that temple wherein the mysteries werecelebrated. Enough if we say that it was small and ill-arranged, itsdiscomfort increased by the incongruous collection of rare and curiousobjects by which it was filled. Stuffed lions stood in the hall; mockmen in armor guarded the entrance to the library; vast glass casesof mineralogical wealth, botanical specimens, stuffed birds, impaledbutterflies, Indian weapons, Etrurian cups, Irish antiquities, Chinesecuriosities, covered the walls on every side. Not a specimen amongstthem that could not trace its presentation to some illustrious donor.Miniatures of dear, dear friends everywhere; and what a catholicfriendship was that which included every one, from Lord Byron toChalmers, and took in the whole range of morals, from Mrs. Opie to FannyElssler. Indeed, although the fair Zoe was a "rigid virtue," her love ofgenius, her "mind-worship," as she called it, often led her intostrange intimacies with that intellectual class whose strength lies inpirouettes, and whose gifts are short petticoats. In a word, whateverwas "notorious" was her natural prey; a great painter, a great radical,a great basso, a great traveller; any one to lionize, anything to hanghistory upon; to enlist, even "for one night only," in that absurdcomedy which was performed at her house, and to display among heracquaintances as another in that long catalogue of those who came to laythe tribute of their genius at her feet.That a large section of society was disposed to be rude and ungenerousenough to think her a bore, is a fact that we are, however unwilling,obliged to confess; but her actual influence was little affected bythe fact. The real serious business of life is often carried on inlocalities surrounded by innumerable inconveniences. Men buy and selltheir millions, subsidize states, and raise loans in dens dark anddismal enough to be prison-cells. In the same way, the Villino was arecognized rendezvous of all who wanted to hear what was going on in theworld, and who wished to be d la hauteur of every current scandal ofthe day. Not that such was ever the tone of the conversation; on thecontrary, it was "all taste and the musical glasses," the "naughty talk"being the mere asides of the scene.Now, in that season of foreign life which precedes the Carnival, and onthose nights when there is no opera, any one benevolent enough to openhis doors to receive is sure of full houses; so the Villino "improvedthe occasion," by announcing a series of Tuesdays and Fridays, whichwere, as the papers say, frequented by all the rank and fashion of themetropolis. It is at one of these "at homes" that we would now presentour reader, not, indeed, during the full moon of the reception, whenthe crowded rooms, suffocating with heat, were crammed with visitors,talking in every tongue of Europe, and every imaginable dialect of each.The great melee tournament was over, and a few lingered over the nowempty lists, discussing in familiar converse the departed guests and theevents of the evening.This privy council consisted of the reader's old acquaintance,Haggerstone, a Russo-Polish Count Petrolaffski, a dark, sallow-skinned,odd-looking gentleman, whose national predilections had raised him tothe rank of an enemy to the Emperor, but whose private resources, itwas rumored, came from the Imperial treasury to reward his services asa spy; a certain Mr. Scroope Purvis, the brother of Mrs. Ricketts,completing the party. He was a little, rosy-cheeked old man, with a limpand a stutter, perpetually running about retailing gossip, which, bysome accident or other, he invariably got all wrong, never, on even themost trifling occasion, being able to record a fact as it occurred.Such were the individuals of a group which sat around the fire in closeand secret confab., Mrs. Ricketts herself placed in the midst, her fairproportions gracefully disposed in a chair whose embroidery displayedall the quarterings and emblazonment of her family for centuries back.The "Bill" before the house was the Onslows, whose res gestee werecausing a most intense interest everywhere."Have dey return your call, madam?" asked the Pole, with an almostimperceptible glance beneath his dark brows."Not yet, Count; we only left our cards yesterday." This, be it said inparenthesis, was "inexact," the visit had been made eight days before."Nor should we have gone at all, but Lady Foxington begged and entreatedwe would. 'They will be so utterly without guidance of any kind,' shesaid, 'you must really take them in hand.'""And you will take dem in your hand eh?""That depends, my dear Count, that depends," said she, pondering. "Wemust see what line they adopt here; rank and wealth have no influencewith us if ununited with moral and intellectual excellence.""I take it, then, your circle will be more select than amusing thiswinter," said Haggerstone, with one of his whip-cracking enunciations."Be it so, Colonel," sighed she, plaintively. "Like a lone beacon on arock, with I forget the quotation.""With the phos-phos-phos-phate of lime upon it?" said Purvis, "that newdiscov-co-covery?""With no such thing! A figure is, I perceive, a dangerous mode ofexpression.""Ha! ha! ha!" cried he, with a peculiar cackle, whose hysteric notesalways carried himself into the seventh heaven of enjoyment, "you wouldcut a pretty figure if you were to be made a beacon of, and be burnedlike Moses. Ha! ha! ha!"The lady turned from him in disdain, and addressed the Colonel."So you really think that they are embarrassed, and that is the truereason of their coming abroad?""I believe I may say I know it, ma'am!" rejoined he. "There is a kind ofconnection between our families, although I should be very sorry they 'dhear of it, the Badelys and the Harringtons are first cousins.""Oh, to be sure!" broke in Purvis. "Jane Harrington was father; no, no,not father she was mo-mo-mother of Tom Badely; no! that is n't it, shewas his aunt, or his brother-in-law, I forget which.""Pray be good enough, sir, not to involve a respectable family ina breach of common law," said Haggerstone, tartly, "and leave theexplanation to me.""How I do dislike dat English habit of countin' cousins," said thePole; "you never see tree, four English togeder without a leetle treeof genealogie in de middle, and dey do sit all round, fighting for defruit.""Financial reasons, then, might dictate retirement," said Mrs. Ricketts,coming back to the original theme.A very significant nod from Haggerstone inferred that he concurred inthe remark."Four contested elections for a county, ma'am, a spendthrift wife, and agambling son, rarely increase a man's income," said he, sententiously."Do he play? What for play is he fond of?" asked the Pole, eagerly."Play, sir? There is nothing an Englishman will not play at, from theturf, to tossing for sovereigns.""So Hamlet say, in Shakspeare, 'de play is de ting,'" cried the Count,with the air of a man who made a happy quotation."They are going to have plays," broke in Purvis; "Jekyl let it outto-night. They 're going to get up a Vauvau-vau-vau--""A tete de veau, probably, sir," said Haggerstone; "In which case,"continued he, in a whisper, "you would be invaluable.""No, it is n't that," broke in Purvis; "they are to have what they callProverbs.""I trust they have engaged your services as Solomon, sir," saidHaggerstone, with that look of satisfaction which always followed animpudent speech."I heard the subject of one of them," resumed the other, who was far toooccupied with his theme to bestow a thought upon a sarcasm. "There's alady in love with with with her Mam-mam-mam--""Her mamma," suggested the Pole."No, it is n't her mamma; it's her Mam-ame-ameluke her Mameluke slave;and he, who is a native prince, with a great many wives of his own--""Oh, for shame, Scroope, you forget Martha is here," said Mrs. Ricketts,who was always ready to suppress the bore by a call to order on thescore of morals."It isn't wrong, I assure you; just hear me out; let me only explain--""There, pray don't insist, I beg you," said Mrs. Ricketts, with a regalwave of her hand."Why, it's Miss Dalton is to play it, Jekyl says," cried Purvis, in atone of most imploring cadence."And who may Miss Dalton be?" asked Mrs. Ricketts."She is the niece no, she's the aunt or rather her father is aunt toto--""He may be an old lady, sir; but, surely--""Oh, I have it now!" broke in Purvis. "It was her mother; MissDa-a-alton's mother was uncle to a Stafford.""Perhaps I can shorten the pedigree," said Haggerstone, tartly. "Theyoung lady is the daughter of a man whom this same Sir Stafford trickedout of his fortune; they were distant relatives, so he had n't even theplea of blood-relationship to cover his iniquity. It was, however, anIrish fortune, and, like a Spanish chateau, its loss is more a questionof feeling than of fact. The lawyers still say that Dalton's right isunimpeachable, and that the Onslows have not even the shadow of a casefor a jury.""An' have de lady no broder nor sister?" asked the Count, who had heardthis story with much attention."She has, sir, both brother and sister, but both illegitimate, so thatthis girl is the heiress to the estate.""And probably destined to be the wife of the young Guardsman," said Mrs.Ricketts."Guessed with your habitual perspicuity, madam," said Haggerstone,bowing."How very shocking! What worldliness one sees everywhere!" cried she,plaintively."The world is excessively worldly, madam," rejoined Haggerstone; "but Ireally believe that we are not a jot worse than were the patriarchs ofold.""Ah, oui, les patriarches!" echoed the Pole, laughing, and always readyto seize upon an allusion that savored of irreverence."Count! Colonel Haggerstone!" cried Mrs. Ricketts, in reproof, andwith a look to where Martha sat at her embroidery-frame. "And this MissDalton is she pretty?""She is pretty at this moment, madam; but, with a clever hairdresserand a good milliner, would be downright beautiful. Of course theseare adjuncts she is little likely to find during her sojourn with theOnslows.""Poor thing! how glad one would be to offer her a kinder asylum," saidMrs. Ricketts, while she threw her eyes over the cracked chinamonsters and mock Vandykes around her; "a home," added she, "whereintellectuality and refinement might compensate for the vulgar pleasuresof mere wealth!""She may want such, one of these days, yet, or I'm much mistaken," saidHaggerstone. "Onslow has got himself very deep in railway speculations;he has heavy liabilities in some Mexican mining affairs too. They 'veall been living very fast; and a crash a real crash" this word he gavewith a force of utterance that only malignity could compass "is almostcertain to follow! What an excellent stable will come to the hammerthen! There 's a 'Bone setter' colt worth a thousand guineas, with hisengagements."And now there was a little pause in the dialogue, while each followedout the thoughts of his own mind. Haggerstoue's were upon the admirableopportunity of picking up a first-rate batch of horses for a fourthof their value; Mrs. Ricketts was pondering over the good policy ofsecuring possession of a rich heiress as a member of her family, to beheld in bondage as long as possible, and eventually if it must be givenin marriage to some unprovided-for cousin; the Pole's dreams were of arich wife; and Purvis, less ambitious than the rest, merely revelled inthe thought of all the gossip this great event, when it should come off,would afford him; the innumerable anecdotes he would have to retail ofthe family and their wastefulness; the tea-parties he should enlivenby his narratives; the soirees he would amuse with his sallies. Blessedgift of imbecility! how infinitely more pleasurable to its possessorthan all the qualities and attributes of genius!"Dat is ver pretty indeed, tres jolie!" said the Count, bestowing a lookof approval at the embroidery-frame, whereupon, for eight mortal months,poor Martha labored at the emblazonment of the Ricketts' arms; "deleetle dogs are as de life.""They are tigers, Monsieur le Comte," replied she, modestly."Oh, pardon! dey are tigres!""Most puppies are somewhat tigerish nowadays," chimed in Haggerstone,rising to take his leave."You are leaving us early, Colonel," said the old General, as heawoke from a long nap on the little corner sofa, which formed hisresting-place."It is past two, sir; and, even in your society, one cannot cheat time."Then, having acquitted himself of his debt of impertinence, he wishedthem good-night. The others, also, took their leave and departed.CHAPTER XXII. KATE.LET us now return to Kate Dalton, whose life, since we last saw her, hadbeen one round of brilliant enjoyment. To the pleasure of the journey,with all its varied objects of interest, the picturesque scenery of theVia Mala, the desolate grandeur of the Splugen, the calm and tranquilbeauty of Como, succeeded the thousand treasures of art in the greatcities where they halted. At first every image and object seemedassociated by some invisible link with thoughts of home. What wouldNelly think or say of this? was the ever-recurring question of her mind.How should she ever be able to treasure up her own memories and tellof the wonderful things that every moment met her eyes? The quicksuccession of objects, all new and dazzling, were but so many wonders tobring back to that "dear fireside" of home. The Onslows themselves, whosaw everything without enthusiasm of any kind, appeared to take pleasurein the freshness of the young girl's admiration. It gave them, asit were, a kind of reflected pleasure, while, amid galleries andcollections of all that was rare and curious, nothing struck them ashalf so surprising as the boundless delight of her unhackneyed nature.Educated to a certain extent by watching the pursuits of her sister,Kate knew how to observe with taste, and admire with discrimination.Beauty of high order would seem frequently endowed with a power ofappreciating the beauty of art, a species of relation appearing almostto subsist between the two.Gifted with this instinct, there was an intensity in all her enjoyments,which displayed itself in the animation of her manner and the elevatedexpression of her features. The coldest and most worldly natures areseldom able to resist the influence of this enthusiasm; however hard themetal of their hearts, they must melt beneath this flame. Lady HesterOnslow herself could not remain insensible to the pure sincerity andgenerous warmth of this artless girl. For a time the combat, silent,unseen, but eventful, was maintained between these two opposite natures,the principle of good warring with the instincts of evil. The victorymight have rested with the true cause there was every prospect of itsdoing so when Sydney Onslow, all whose sympathies were with Kate, andwhose alliance had every charm of sisterhood, was suddenly recalled toEngland by tidings of her aunt's illness. Educated by her aunt Conway,she had always looked up to her as a mother, nor did the unhappycircumstances of her father's second marriage tend to weaken thisfeeling of attachment. The sad news reached them at Genoa; and Sydney,accompanied by Dr. Grounsell, at once set out for London. If the suddenseparation of the two girls, just at the very moment of a buddingfriendship, was sorrowfully felt by both, to Lady Hester the event wasanything but unwelcome.She never had liked Sydney; she now detested the notion of astep-daughter, almost of her own age, in the same society with herself;she dreaded, besides, the influence that she had already acquired overKate, whose whole heart and nature she had resolved on monopolizing.It was not from any feeling of attachment or affection, it was the puremiser-like desire for possession that animated her. The plan of carryingaway Kate from her friends and home had been her own; she, therefore,owned her; the original title was vested in her: the young girl's wholefuture was to be in her hands; her "road in life" was to be at herdictation. To be free of Sydney and the odious doctor by the same eventwas a double happiness, which, in spite of all the decorous restraintsbad news impose, actually displayed itself in the most palpable form.The Palazzo Mazzarini was now to be opened to the world, with all thesplendor wealth could bestow, untrammelled by any restriction the tasteof Sydney or the prudence of the doctor might impose. Sir Stafford, everready to purchase quiet for himself at any cost of money, objectedto nothing. The cheapness of Italy, the expectations formed of anEnglishman, were the arguments which always silenced him if he venturedon the very mildest remonstrance about expenditure; and Jekyl wasimmediately called into the witness-box, to show that among theeconomies of the Continent nothing was so striking as the facilities ofentertaining. George, as might be supposed, had no dislike to see theirown house the great centre of society, and himself the much sought-afterand caressed youth of the capital.As for Kate, pleasure came associated in her mind with all thatcould elevate and exalt it, refinement of manners, taste, luxury, thefascinations of wit, the glitter of conversational brilliancy. She hadlong known that she was handsome, but she had never felt it till now;never awoke to that thrilling emotion which whispers of power overothers, and which elevates the possessor of a great quality into aspecies of petty sovereignty above their fellows. Her progress inthis conviction was a good deal aided by her maid; for, at Jekyl'ssuggestion, a certain Mademoiselle Nina had been attached to herpersonal staff.It was not easy at first for Kate to believe in the fact at all that sheshould have a peculiar attendant; nor was it without much constraint andconfusion that she could accept of services from one whose whole air andbearing bore the stamp of breeding and tact. Mademoiselle Nina had beenthe maid of the Princess Menzikoff, the most distinguished belleof Florence, the model of taste and elegance in dress; but when thePrincess separated from her husband, some unexplained circumstanceshad involved the name of the femme de chambre, so that, instead of"exchanging without a difference," as a person of her great abilitiesmight readily have done, she had disappeared for a while from the sceneand sphere in which habitually she moved, and only emerged from herseclusion to accept the humble position of Kate Dalton's maid. She was aperfect type of her own countrywomen in her own class of life. Smalland neatly formed, her head was too large for her size, and the foreheadover-large for the face, the brows and temples being developedbeyond all proportion. Her eyes, jet black and deeply set, were cold,stern-looking, and sleepy, sadness, or rather weariness, being thecharacteristic expression of the face. Her mouth, however, when shesmiled, relieved this, and gave a look of softness to her features. Hermanner was that of great distance and respect, the trained observance ofone who had been always held in the firm hand of discipline, and neversuffered to assume the slightest approach to a liberty. She contrived,however, even in her silence, or in the very few words she ever uttered,to throw an air of devotion into her service that took away from theformality of a manner that at first seemed cold and even repulsive.Kate, indeed, in the beginning, was thrown back by the studied reserveand deferential distance she observed; but as days went over, and shegrew more accustomed to the girl's manner, she began to feel pleasedwith the placid and unchanging demeanor that seemed to bespeak a mindadmirably trained and regulated to its own round of duties.While Kate sat at a writing-table, adding a few lines to that letterwhich, began more than a week ago, was still far from being completed,Nina, whose place was beside the window, worked away with bent-downhead, not seeming to have a thought save for the occupation before her.Not so Kate; fancies came and went at every instant, breaking inupon the tenor of her thoughts, or wending far away on errands ofspeculation. Now she would turn her eye from the page to gaze inwondering delight at the tasteful decorations of her little chamber, aperfect gem of elegance in all its details; then she would start up tostep out upon the terrace, where even in winter the orange-trees werestanding, shedding their sweet odor at every breeze from the Arno. Withwhat rapturous delight she would follow the windings of that brightriver, till it was lost in the dark woods of the Cascini! How the soundsof passing equipages, the glitter and display of the moving throng,stirred her heart; and then, as she turned back within the room, withwhat a thrill of ecstasy her eyes rested on the splendid ball-dresswhich Nina had just laid upon the sofa! With a trembling hand shetouched the delicate tissue of Brussels lace, and placed it over herarm in a graceful fold, her cheek flushing and her chest heaving inconsciousness of heightening beauty.[Illustration:  262]Nina's head was never raised, her nimble fingers never ceased to ply;but beneath her dark brows her darker eyes shot forth a glance of deepand subtle meaning, as she watched the young girl's gesture."Nina," cried she, at last, "it is much too handsome for me; althoughI love to look at it, I actually fear to wear it. You know I never haveworn anything like this before.""Mademoiselle is too diffident and too unjust to her own charms;beautiful as is the robe, it only suits the elegance of its wearer.""One ought to be so graceful in every gesture, so perfect in everymovement beneath folds like these," cried Kate, still gazing at the finetracery."Mademoiselle is grace itself!" said she, in a low, soft voice, soquiet in its utterance that it sounded like a reflection utteredunconsciously."Oh, Nina, if I were so! If I only could feel that my every look andmovement were not recalling the peasant girl; for, after all, I havebeen little better, our good blood could not protect us from being poor,and poverty means so much that lowers!"Nina sighed, but so softly as to be inaudible; and Kate went on:"My sister Nelly never thought so; she always felt differently. Oh,Nina, how you would love her if you saw her, and how you would admireher beautiful hair, and those deep blue eyes, so soft, so calm, and yetso meaning."Nina looked up, and seemed to give a glance that implied assent."Nelly would be so happy here, wandering through these galleries, andsitting for hours long in those beautiful churches, surrounded with allthat can elevate feeling or warm imagination; she, too, would knowhow to profit by these treasures of art. The frivolous enjoymentsthat please me would be beneath her. Perhaps she would teach me betterthings; perhaps I might turn from mere sensual pleasure to higher andpurer sources of happiness.""Will Mademoiselle permit me to try this wreath?" said Nina, advancingwith a garland of white roses, which she gracefully placed around Kate'shead.A half cry of delight burst from Kate as she saw the effect in theglass."Beautiful, indeed!" said Nina, as though in concurrence with anunspoken emotion."But, Nina, I scarcely like this it seems as though I cannot tell whatI wish as though I would desire notice I, that am nothing that ought topass unobserved.""You, Mademoiselle," cried Nina, and for the first time a slight warmthcoloring the tone of her manner, "you, Mademoiselle, the belle, thebeauty, the acknowledged beauty of Florence!""Nina! Nina!" cried Kate rebukingly."I hope Mademoiselle will forgive me. I would not for the world fail inmy respect," said Nina, with deep humility; "but I was only repeatingwhat others spoke.""I am not angry, Nina, at least, not with you," said Kate, hurriedly."With myself, indeed, I 'm scarcely quite pleased. But who could havesaid such a silly thing?""Every one, Mademoiselle, every one, as they were standing beneath theterrace t' other evening. I overheard Count Labinski say it to CaptainOnslow; and then my Lady took it up, and said, 'You are quite right,gentlemen; there is nothing that approaches her in beauty.'""Nina! dear Nina!" said Kate, covering her flushed face with both hands."The Count de Melzi was more enthusiastic than even the rest. He vowedthat he had grown out of temper with his Raffaelles since he saw you."A hearty burst of laughter from Kate told that this flattery, at least,had gone too far. And now she resumed her seat at the writing-table.It was of the Splugen Pass and Como she had been writing; of the firstburst of Italy upon the senses, as, crossing the High Alps, the land ofthe terraced vine lay stretched beneath. She tried to fall back upon thememory of that glorious scene as it broke upon her; but it was in vain.Other and far different thoughts had gained the mastery. It was nolonger the calm lake, on whose mirrored surface snow-peaks and glacierswere reflected; it was not of those crags, over which the wild-fig andthe olive, the oleander and the mimosa, are spreading, she could think.Other images crowded to her brain; troops of admirers were before herfancy; the hum of adulation filled her ears; splendid salons, resoundingwith delicious music, and ablaze with a thousand wax-lights, rose beforeher imagination, and her heart swelled with conscious triumph. Thetransition was most abrupt, then, from a description of scenery andnatural objects to a narrative of the actual life of Florence:"Up to this, Nelly, we have seen no one, except Mr. Jekyl,whom you will remember as having met at Baden. He dines hereseveral days every week, and is most amusing with his funnyanecdotes and imitations, for he knows everybody, and is awonderful mimic. You 'd swear Dr. Grounsell was in the nextroom if you heard Mr. Jekyl' s imitation. There has beensome difficulty about an opera-box, for Mr. Jekyl, whomanages everybody, will insist upon having PrinceMidchekoff's, which is better than the royal box, and hasnot succeeded. For this reason we have not yet been to theOpera; and, as the Palace has been undergoing a total changeof decoration and furniture, there has been no receptionhere as yet; but on Tuesday we are to give our first ball.All that I could tell you of splendor, my dearest Nelly,would be nothing to the reality of what I see here. Suchmagnificence in every detail; such troops of servants, allso respectful and obliging, and some dressed in liveriesthat resemble handsome uniforms! Such gold and silver plate!such delicious flowers everywhere on the staircase, in thedrawing-room, here, actually, beside me as I write! And, oh,Nelly, if you could see my dress! Lace, with bouquets of redcamellia, and looped up with strings of small pearls. Thinkof me, of poor Kate Dal ton, wearing such splendor! And,strange enough, too, I do not feel awkward in it. My hair,that you used to think I dressed so well myself, has beenpronounced a perfect horror; and although I own it did shockme at first to hear it, I now see that they were perfectlyright. Instead of bands, I wear ringlets down to my veryshoulders; and Nina tells me there never was such animprovement, as the character of my features requiressoftening. Such quantities of dress as I have got, too! forthere is endless toilette here; and although I am nowgrowing accustomed to it, at first it worried me dreadfully,and left me no time to read. And, a propos of reading, LadyHester has given me such a strange book, 'Mathilde,' it iscalled; very clever, deeply interesting, but not the kind ofreading you would like; at least, neither the scenes nor thecharacters such as you would care for. Of course I take itto be a good picture of life in another sphere from what Ihave seen myself; and if it be, I must say there is morevice in high society than I believed. One trait of manners,however, I cannot help admiring, the extreme care that everyone takes never to give even the slightest offence; not onlythat the wrong thing is never said, but ever even suggested.Such an excessive deference to others' feelings bespeaksgreat refinement, if not a higher and better quality. LadyHester is delightful in this respect. I cannot tell you howthe charm of her manner grows into a fascination. CaptainOnslow I see little of, but he is always good-humored andgay; and as for Sir Stafford, he is like a father in thekindliness and affection of his cordiality. Sydney I missgreatly; she was nearly of my own age, and although so muchsuperior to me in every way, so companionable andsisterlike. We are to write to each other if she does notreturn soon. I intended to have said so much about thegalleries, but Mr. Jekyl does quiz so dreadfully aboutartistic enthusiasm, I am actually ashamed to say a word;besides, to me, Nelly, beautiful pictures impart pleasureless from intrinsic merit than from the choice of subjectand the train of thoughts they originate; and for thisreason I prefer Salvator Rosa to all other painters. Theromantic character of his scenery, the kind of story thatseems to surround his characters, the solemn tranquillity ofhis moonlights, the mellow splendor of his sunsets, actuallyheighten one's enjoyment of the realities in nature. I amashamed to own that Raffaelle is less my favorite thanTitian, whose portraits appear to reveal the whole characterand life of the individual represented. In Velasq'uez thereis another feature--"Here came an interruption, for Nina came with gloves tochoose, and now arose the difficult decision between a fringe of silverfiligree and a deep fall of Valenciennes lace, a question on bothsides of which Mademoiselle Nina had much to say. In all these littlediscussions, the mock importance lent to mere trifles at first amusedKate, and even provoked her laughter; but, by degrees, she learned notonly to listen to them with attention, but even to take her share inthe consultation. Nina's great art lay in her capacity for adapting acostume to the peculiar style and character of the wearer; and, howeverexaggerated were some of her notions on this subject, there was alwaysa sufficiency of shrewd sense and good taste in her remarks to overbearany absurdity in her theory. Kate Dalton, whose whole nature had beensimplicity and frankness itself, was gradually brought to assumea character with every change of toilette; for if she came down tobreakfast in a simple robe of muslin, she changed it for a costumede paysanna to walk in the garden, and this again for a species ofhunting-dress to ride in the Cascini, to appear afterwards at dinner insome new type of a past age; an endless variety of these devices at lastengaging attention, and occupying time, to the utter exclusion of topicsmore important and interesting.The letter was now to be resumed; but the clew was lost, and her mindwas only fettered with topics of dress and toilette. She walked out uponthe terrace to recover her composure; but beneath the window was rollingon that endless tide of people and carriages that swells up the greatflood of a capital city. She turned her steps to another side,and there, in the pleasure-ground, was George Onslow, with a greathorse-sheet round him, accustoming a newly purchased Arabian to theflapping of a riding-skirt. It was a present Sir Stafford had made herthe day before. Everything she saw, everything she heard, recalled butone image, herself! The intoxication of this thought was intense.Life assumed features of delight and pleasure she had never conceivedpossible before. There was an interest imparted to everything, since ineverything she had her share. Oh! most insidious of all poisons is thatof egotism, which lulls the conscience by the soft flattery we whisperto ourselves, making us to believe that we are such as the world affectsto think us. How ready are we to take credit for gifts that havebeen merely lent us by a kind of courtesy, and of which we must makerestitution, when called upon, with what appetite we may.For the time, indeed, the ecstasy of this delusion is boundless. Who hasnot, at some one moment or other of his life, experienced the entrancingdelight of thinking that the world is full of his friends and admirers,that good wishes follow him as he goes, and kind welcomes await hiscoming? Much of our character for good or evil, of our subsequentutility in life, or our utter helplessness, will depend upon how westand the season of trial. Kate Daiton possessed much to encourage thiscredulity; she was not only eminently handsome, but she had that speciesof fascination in her air which a clever French writer defines as thefeminine essence, "plus femme que les autres femmes." If a very criticaleye might have detected in her manner and address certain littleawkwardnesses, a less exacting judgment would have probably beenstruck with them as attractions, recalling the fact of her youth, hersimplicity, and the freshness of her nature. Above all other charms,however, was the radiant happiness that beamed out in every word andlook and gesture; such a thorough sense of enjoyment, so intense apleasure in life, is among the very rarest of all gifts.There was enough of singularity, of the adventurous, in the nature ofher position, to excel all the romance of her nature; there was morethan enough of real splendor around her to give an air of fact andtruth to the highest flights of her imagination. Had she been the soledaughter of the house and name, flatteries and caresses could not havebeen lavished on her more profusely; her will consulted, her wishesinquired, her taste evoked on every occasion. And yet, with all theseseductions about her, she was not yet spoiled not yet! Home and its dearassociations were ever present to her mind; her humble fortune, andthat simple life she used to lead, enforcing lessons of humility not yetdistasteful. She could still recur to the memory of the little windowthat looked over the "Murg," and think the scenery beautiful. Her dear,dear papa was still all she had ever thought him. Nelly was yet thesweet-tempered, gentle, gifted creature she worshipped as a sister; evenHanserl was the kind, quaint emblem of his own dreamy "Vaterland." Asyet no conflict had arisen between the past and the present, between theremembrance of narrow fortune and all its crippling exigencies, and theenjoyment of wealth that seems to expand the generous feelings of theheart. The lustre of her present existence threw, as yet, no sicklylight over the bygone; would it might have been always so!CHAPTER XXIII. A SMALL SUPPER PARTY.THE great ball at the Mazzarini Palace "came off" just as other greatballs have done, and will continue to do, doubtless, for ages hence.There was the usual, perhaps a little more than the usual, splendor ofdress and diamonds; the same glare and crash and glitter and crowdand heat; the same buoyant light-heartedness among the young; the samecorroding ennui of the old; taste in dress was criticised, looks werescanned, flirtations detected, quarrels discovered, fans were mislaid,hearts were lost, flounces were torn, and feelings hurt. There wasthe ordinary measure of what people call enjoyment, mixed up with theordinary proportion of envy, shyness, pretension, sarcasm, coldness, andmalice. It was a grand tournament of human passions in white satin andjewels; and if the wounds exchanged were not as rudely administered,they were to the full as dangerous as in the real lists of combat.Yet, in this mortal conflict, all seemed happy. There was an air ofvoluptuous abandonment over everything; and whatever cares they mighthave carried within, as far as appearance went, the world went well andpleasantly with them. The ball was, however, a splendid one; therewas everything that could make it such. The salons were magnificent indecoration; the lighting a perfect blaze. There was beauty inabundance, diamonds in masses, and a Royal Highness from the Court, aninsignificant little man, it is true, with a star and a stutter, whostared at every one, and spoke to nobody. Still he was the centre ofa glittering group of handsome aides-de-camp, who displayed theirfascinations in every gesture and look.Apart from the great flood-tide of pleasure, down which so many floatbuoyantly, there is ever on these occasions a deeper current that flowsbeneath, of human wile and cunning and strategy, just as, in manya German fairy tale, some curious and recondite philosophy lies hidbeneath the little incidents related to amuse childhood. It would leadus too far from the path of our story were we to seek for this "tinythread amid the woof;" enough for our present purpose if we slightlyadvert to it, by asking our reader to accompany us to the small chamberwhich called Albert Jekyl master, and where now, at midnight, a littletable of three covers was laid for supper. Three flasks of champagnestood in a little ice-pail in one corner, and on a dumbwaiter wasarranged a dessert, which, for the season, displayed every charm ofrarity. A large bouquet of moss-roses and camellias ornamented thecentre of the board, and shed a pleasant odor through the room. Theservant, whose dress and look bespoke him a waiter from a restaurant inthe neighborhood, had just completed all the arrangements of the table,placing chairs around it, and heaped fresh wood upon the hearth, when acarriage drew up at the door. The merry sound of voices and the step offeet were heard on the stairs, and the next moment a lady entered, whosedress of black lace, adorned with bouquets of blue flowers, admirablyset off a figure and complexion of Spanish mould and character. Tothis, a black lace veil fastened to the hair behind, and worn acrossthe shoulders, contributed. There was a lightness and intrepidity in herstep, as she entered the room, that suited the dark, flashing, steadyglance of her full black eyes. It would have, indeed, been difficult totrace in that almost insolent air of conscious beauty the calm, subdued,and almost sorrow-struck girl whom we have seen as Nina in a formerchapter; but, however dissimilar in appearance, they were the sameone individual; and the humble femme de chambre of Kate Dalton was thecelebrated ballet-dancer of the great theatre of Barcelona.The figure which followed was a strange contrast to that light andelegant form. He was an old, short man, of excessive corpulence in body,and whose face was bloated and purple by intemperance. He was dressed inthe habit of a priest, and was in reality a canon of the Dome Cathedral.His unwieldy gait, his short and labored respiration, increased almostto suffocation by the ascent of the stairs and his cumbrous dress,seemed doubly absurd beside the flippant lightness of the "Ballarina."Jekyl came last, mimicking the old canon behind his back, and puttingthe waiter's gravity to a severe test by the bloated expansion of hischeek and the fin-like motion of his hands as he went."Ecco me!" cried he out, with a deep grunt, as he sank into a chair andwiped the big drops from his forehead with the skirt of his gown."You tripped up the stairs like a gazelle, padre," said the girl, as shearranged her hair before the glass, and disposed the folds of her veilwith all the tact of coquetry.A thick snort, like the ejaculation a hippopotamus might have uttered,was the only reply, and Jekyl, having given a glance over the table tosee all was in order, made a sign for Nina to be seated."Accursed be the stairs and he that made them!" muttered the padre. "Ifeel as if my limbs had been torn on the rack. I have been three timesup the steps of the high altar already to-day, and am tired as a dog.""Here is your favorite soup, padre," said Jekyl, as he moved the ladlethrough a smoking compound, whence a rich odor of tomato and garlicascended. "This will make you young again.""And who said I would wish to be young again?" cried the priest,angrily. "I have experience of what youth means every day in theconfessional, and I promise you age has the best of it.""Such a ripe and ruddy age as yours, padre!" said the girl, withaffected simplicity.[Illustration:  274]"Just so, minx," rejoined he; "such ripeness as portends falling fromthe tree! Better even that than to be worm-eaten on the stalk; ay, or awasp's nest within, girl, you understand me.""You will never be good friends for half an hour together," said Jekyl,as he filled their glasses with champagne, and then touching his own toeach, drank off a bumper."These are from Savoy, these truffles, and have no flavor," said thepadre, pushing away his plate. "Let me taste that lobster, for this is ahalf-fast to-day.""They are like the priests," said Nina, laughing; "all black without androtten within!""The ball went off admirably last night," interposed Jekyl, to stop whathe foresaw might prove a sharp altercation."Yes," said Nina, languidly. "The dresses were fresher than the wearers.It was the first time for much of the satin, the same could not be saidfor many of the company.""The Balderoni looked well," said Jekyl."Too fat, caro mio, too fat!" replied Nina."And she has eight penances in the week," grunted out the canon."There 's nothing like wickedness for embonpoint, padre," said Nina,laughing."Angels always are represented as chubby girls," said the priest, whosetemper seemed to improve as he ate on."Midchekoff, I thought, was out of temper all the evening," resumedJekyl; "he went about with his glass in his eye, seeking for flaws inthe lapis lazuli, or retouches in the pictures; and seemed terriblyprovoked at the goodness of the supper.""I forgive him all, for not dancing with 'my Lady,'" said Nina. "Shekept herself disengaged for the prince for half the night, and the onlyreward was his Russian compliment of, 'What a bore is a ball when one ispast the age of dancing!'""Did the Noncio eat much?" asked the padre, who seemed at once curiousand envious about the dignitary."He played whist all night," said Jekyl, "and never changed hispartner!""The old Marchesa Guidotti?""The same. You know of that, then, padre?" asked Jekyl.A grunt and a nod were all the response."What a curious chapter on 'La vie privee' of Florence your revelationsmight be, padre!" said Jekyl, as if reflectingly. "What a deal ofiniquity, great and small, comes to your ears every season!""What a vast amount of it has its origin in that little scheming brainof thine, Signor Jekyli, and in the fertile wits of your fair neighbor.The unhappy marriages thou hast made; the promising unions thou hastbroken; the doubts thou hast scattered here, the dark suspicionsthere; the rightful distrust thou hast lulled, the false confidencesencouraged, youth, youth, thou hast a terrible score to answer for!""When I think of the long catalogue of villany you have been listeningto, padre, not only without an effort, but a wish to check; when everysin recorded has figured in your ledger, with its little price annexed;when you have looked out upon the stormy sea of society, as a wreckerranges his eye over an iron-bound coast in a gale, and thinks of the'waifs' that soon will be his own; when, as I have myself seen you, youhave looked indulgently down on petty transgressions, that must one daybecome big sins, and, like a skilful angler, throw the little fish backinto the stream, in the confidence that when full-grown you can takethem, when you have done all these things and a thousand more, padre,I cannot help muttering to myself, Age, age, what a terrible score thouhast to answer for!""I must say," interposed Nina, "you are both very bad company, and thatnothing can be in worse taste than this interchange of compliments. Youare both right to amuse yourselves in this world as your faculties bestpoint out, but each radically wrong in attributing motives to the other.What, in all that is wonderful, have we to do with motives? I'm sure Ihave no grudges to cherish, no debts of dislike to pay off, anywhere.Any diablerie I take part in, is for pure mischief sake. I do think itrather a hard case, that, with somewhat better features, and I know afar shrewder wit than many others, I should perform second and thirdrate parts in this great comedy of life, while many without higherqualifications are 'cast for the best characters.' This little score Ido try and exact, not from individuals, but the world at large. Mischiefwith me is the child's pleasure in deranging the chessmen when theplayers are most intent on the game.""Now, as to these Onslows, for we must be practical, padre mio," saidJekyl, "let us see what is to be done with them. As regards matrimony,the real prize has left for England, this Dalton girl may or may not bea 'hit;' some aver that she is heiress to a large estate, of which theOnslows have obtained possession, and that they destine her for theyoung Guardsman. This must be inquired into. My Lady has 'excellentdispositions,' and may have become anything or everything.""Let her come to 'the Church,' then," growled out the canon."Gently, padre, gently," said Jekyl, "you are really too covetous, andwould drag the river always from your own net. We have been generous,hugely generous, to you for the last three seasons, and have made allyour converts the pets of society, no matter how small and insignificanttheir pretensions. The vulgar have been adopted in the best circles, theugly dubbed beautiful, the most tiresome of old maids have been reissuedfrom the mint as new coinage. We have petted, flattered, and fawned uponthose 'interesting Christians,' as the 'Tablet' would call them, tillthe girls began to feel that there were no partners for a polka outsidethe Church of Rome, and that all the 'indulgences' of pleasure, likethose of religion, came from the Pope. We cannot give you the Onslows,or, at least, not yet. We have yet to marry the daughter, provide forthe friend, squeeze the sou.""Profligate young villain! Reach me the champagne, Nina; and, Nina, tellyour young mistress that it is scarcely respectful to come on foot tothe mid-day mass; that the clergy of the town like to see the equipagesof the rich before the doors of the cathedral, as a suitable homage tothe Church. The Onslows have carriages in abundance, and their liveriesare gorgeous and splendid!""It was her own choice," said Nina; "she is a singular girl for one thatnever before knew luxury of any kind.""I hate these simple tastes," growled out the padre; "they bespeak thatobstinacy which people call a 'calm temperament.' Her own dress, too,has no indication of her rank, Nina.""That shall be cared for, padre.""Why shouldn't that young soldier come along with her? Tell him thatour choir is magnificent; whisper him that the beautiful Marchesa diGuardoni sits on the very bench beside Miss Dalton."Nina nodded an assent."The young girl herself is lax enough about her duties, Nina; she hasnot been even once to confession.""That comes of these English!" cried Nina; "they make our service aconstant jest. There is always some vulgar quizzing about saint-worship,or relic reverence, or the secrets of the confessional, going on amongstthem.""Does she permit this?" asked the priest, eagerly."She blushes sometimes, occasionally she smiles with a good-humor meantto deprecate these attacks, and now and then, when the sallies have beenpushed too far, I have seen her in tears some hours after.""Oh, if these heretics would but abstain from ridicule!" cried thecanon. "The least lettered amongst them can scoff and gibe and rail.They have their stock subjects of sarcasm, too, handed down from fatherto son, poor, witless little blasphemies, thefts from Voltaire, wholaughed at themselves, and much mischief do they work! Let them begin toread, however, let them commence to 'inquire,' as the phrase has it, andthe game is our own.""I think, padre," said Jekyl, "that more of your English converts aremade upon principles of pure economy. Popery, like truffles, is so cheapabroad!""Away with you! away with you!" cried the padre, rebukingly. "Theycome to us as the children seek their mother's breast. Hand me themaccaroni.""Padre mio," broke in Jekyl, "I wish you would be Catholic enough to beless Popish. We have other plots in hand here, besides increasing thefunds of the 'Holy Carmelites;' and while we are disputing about thespoil, the game may betake themselves to other hunting-grounds. TheseOnslows must not be suffered to go hence.""Albert is right," interposed Nina. "When the 'Midchekoff' condescendsto think himself in love with the Dalton girl, when the Guardsman haslost some thousands more than he can pay, when my Lady has offended onehalf of Florence and bullied the other, then the city will have taken ahold upon their hearts, and you may begin your crusade when you please.Indeed, I am not sure, if the season be a dull one, I would not listento you myself.""As you listened once before to the Abbe D'Esmonde," said the canon,maliciously.The girl's cheek became deep red, and even over neck and shoulders thescarlet flush spread, while her eyes flashed a look of fiery passion."Do you dare are you insolent enough to--"Her indignation had carried her thus far, when, by a sudden change oftemper, she stopped, and clasping her hands over her face, burst intotears.Jekyl motioned the priest to be silent, while, gently leading the otherinto the adjoining room, he drew the curtain, and left her alone."How could you say that?" said he, "you, padre, who know that this ismore than jest?""Spare not the sinner, neither let the stripes be light, 'Non sit levisflagella,' says Origen.""Are the ortolans good, padre?" asked Jekyl, while his eye glitteredwith an intense appreciation of the old canon's hypocrisy."They, are delicious! succulent and tender," said the priest, wiping hislips. "Francesco does them to perfection.""You at least believe in a cook," said Jekyl, but in so low a voice asto escape the other's notice."She is sobbing still," said the canon, in a whisper, and with a gesturetowards the curtained doorway. "I like to hear them gulping down theirsighs. It is like the glug-glug of a rich flask of 'Lagrime.'""But don't you pity them, padre?" asked Jekyl, in mock earnestness."Never! never! First of all, they do not suffer in all these outbursts.It is but decanting their feelings into another vessel, and they love itthemselves! I have had them for hours together thus in the confessional,and they go away after, so relieved in mind and so light of heart, there's no believing it.""But Nina," said Jekyl, seriously, "is not one of these.""She is a woman," rejoined the padre, "and it is only a priest can readthem.""You see human nature as the physician does, padre, always in someaspect of suffering. Of its moods of mirth and levity you know less thanwe do, who pass more butterfly lives!""True in one sense, boy; ours are the stony paths, ours are the wearyroads in life! I like that Burgundy.""It 's very pleasant, padre. It is part of a case I ordered for theOnslows, but their butler shook the bottle when bringing it to table,and they begged me to get rid of it.""These wines are not suited to Italy generally," said the canon; "butFlorence has the merit of possessing all climates within the bounds ofa single day, and even Chambertin is scarcely generous enough when theTramontana is blowing!""Well, have you become better mannered? May I venture to come in?" criedNina, appearing at the doorway."'Venga pure! Venga pure!'" growled out the canon. "I forgive theeeverything. Sit down beside me, and let us pledge a friendship forever.""There, then, let this be a peace-offering," said she, taking the wreathof flowers from her own head and placing it on the brows of the padre."You are now like the old Bacchus in the Boboli.""And thou like--""Like what? Speak it out!" cried she, angrily."Come, come, do, I beseech you, be good friends," interposed Jekyl. "Wehave met for other objects than to exchange reproaches.""These are but the 'iras amantium.' boy," said the priest; "the girlloves me with her whole heart.""How you read my most secret thoughts!" said she, with a coquettishaffectation of sincerity."Lectiones pravissimae would they be!" muttered he, between his teeth."What is that? What is he mumbling there, Albert?" cried she, hastily."It is a benediction, Nina," replied Jekyl; "did you not hear theLatin?"Peace was at last restored, and what between the adroit devices of Jekyland the goodness of his champagne, a feeling of pleasant sociality nowsucceeded to all the bickering in which the festivity was prolonged toa late hour. The graver business which brought them together the Onslowsand their affairs being discussed, they gave way to all the seductionsof their exalted fancies. Jekyl, taking up his guitar, warbled out aFrench love song, in a little treble a bullfinch might have envied;Nina, with the aid of the padre's beads for castanets, stepped themeasure of a bolero; while the old priest himself broke out into a longchant, in which Ovid, Petrarch, Anacreon, and his breviary alternatelyfigured, and under the influence of which he fell fast asleep at last,totally unconscious of the corked moustaches and eyebrows with whichNina ornamented his reverend countenance.The sound of wheels in the silent street at last admonished them ofthe hour, and opening the window, Jekyl saw a brougham belonging to SirStafford just drawing up at the door."Francois is punctual," said Nina, looking at her watch; "I told himfive o'clock.""Had we not better set him down first?" said Jekyl, with a gesturetoward the priest; "he does not live far away.""With all my heart," replied she; "but you're not going to wash hisface?""Of course I am, Nina. The jest might cost us far more than it wasworth." And so saying, Jekyl proceeded to arrange the disordered dressand dishevelled hair of the padre, during the performance of which theold priest recovered sufficient consciousness to permit himself to beled downstairs and deposited in the carriage.An hour later and all was still! Jekyl slumbering peacefully on hislittle French bed, over which the rose-colored mosquito curtains threwa softened half-sunset hue; a gentle smile parted his lips, as in hisdreams the dreams of a happy and contented nature he wove pleasantfancies and devised many a future scheme.In his own dreary little den, behind the "Duomo," the padre also sleptheavily, not a thought, not a single passing idea breaking the stagnantsurface of his deep lethargy.Nina, however, was wakeful, and had no mind for repose. Her brilliantcostume carefully laid aside, she was arranging her dark hair into itshabitually modest braid; her very features composing themselves, as shedid so, into their wonted aspect of gentleness and submission.All the change of dress being little in comparison with the completealteration now observable in her whole air and demeanor, she seemed atotally different being. And she was so, too; for while hypocritesto the world, we completely forget that we share in the deceptionourselves.CHAPTER XXIV. A MIDNIGHT RECEPTIONIT was past midnight, the Opera was just over, and the few privilegedguests who were permitted to pay their visits to Lady Hester Onslowwere assembled in the little drawing-room and boudoir sacred to theseexclusive receptions. Nothing could be in stronger contrast than thegorgeous splendor of the apartment and the half-dressed, careless,lounging ease of the men as they stretched themselves on the ottomans,lounged on the sofas, or puffed their cigars, alike indifferent to theplace and the presence of two ladies who, dressed in the very perfectionof "toilette," did the honors of the reception.Lady Hester, who wore a small embroidered velvet cap, coquettishly seton one side of the head, and a species of velvet jacket, such as iscommon in Greece, lay upon a sofa beneath a canopy of pink silk coveredwith lace; a most splendidly ornamented hooka, the emerald mouthpiece ofwhich she held in her hand, stood on a little cushion beside her; whilegrouped around in every attitude that taste and caprice suggested onchairs, on cushions, squabs, "Prie-Dieu" and other drawing-room devicesof a like nature were some half-dozen men, whose air and bearingpronounced them long habituated to all the usages of society. One stampof feature and style pervaded all; pale, dark-eyed, black-bearded,and weary-looking, they seemed as though they were tired of a life ofdissipation, and yet utterly incapable of engaging in any other.All born to high rank, some to large fortune, they found that no othercareer was open to them except vice in one shape or other. The policyof their rulers had excluded them from every road of honorable ambition;neither as statesmen nor soldiers could they hope to win fame or glory.Their habits of life and the tone of society gave no impulse to thecultivation of science or literature. The topics discussed in theircircle never by chance adverted to a book; and there they were, withheads whose development indicated all that was intellectual, with browsand foreheads that betokened every gift of mental excellence, wearingaway life in the dullest imaginable routine of dissipation, their mindsneglected, their hearts corrupted, enervated in body, and deprived ofall energy of character; they wore, even in youth, the exhausted look ofage, and bore in every lineament of their features the type of lassitudeand discontent.In the adjoining room sat Kate Dalton at a tea-table. She was costumedfor we cannot use any milder word in a species of "moyen-age" dress,whose length of stomacher and deep-hanging sleeves recalled theportraits of Titian's time; a small cap covered the back of her head,through an aperture in which the hair appeared, its rich auburn massesfastened by a short stiletto of gold, whose hilt and handle were studdedwith precious stones; a massive gold chain, with a heavy cross of thesame metal, was the only ornament she wore. Widely different as was thedress from that humble guise in which the reader first knew her, theinternal change was even greater still; no longer the bashful, blushinggirl, beaming with all the delight of a happy nature, credulous,light-hearted, and buoyant, she was now composed in feature, calm, andgentle-mannered; the placid smile that moved her lips, the gracefulmotion of her head, her slightest gestures, her least words, alldisplaying a polished ease and elegance which made even her beauty andattraction secondary to the fascination of her manner. It is true thegenerous frankness of her beaming eyes was gone; she no longer met youwith a look of full and fearless confidence: the cordial warmth, thefresh and buoyant sallies of her ready wit, had departed, and in theirplace was a timid reserve, a cautious, shrinking delicacy, blended witha quiet but watchful spirit of repartee, that flattered by the verydegree of attention it betokened.Perhaps our reader will not feel pleased with us for saying that she wasmore beautiful now than before; that intercourse with the world, dress,manners, the tact of society, the stimulus of admiration, the assuredsense of her own charms, however they may have detracted from the moralpurity of her nature, had yet invested her appearance with higher andmore striking fascinations. Her walk, her courtesy, the passing motionof her hand, her attitude as she sat, were perfect studies of grace.Not a trace was left of her former manner; all was ease, pliancy,and elegance. Two persons were seated near her: one of these, our oldacquaintance, George Onslow; the other was a dark, sallow-visaged man,whose age might have been anything from thirty-five to sixty, for, whilehis features were marked by the hard lines of time, his figure had allthe semblance of youth. By a broad blue ribbon round his neck he worethe decoration of Saint Nicholas, and the breast of his coat was coveredwith stars, crosses, and orders of half the courts of Europe. This wasPrince Midchekoff, whose grandfather, having taken an active part inthe assassination of the Emperor Paul, had never been reconciled tothe Imperial family, and was permitted to reside in a kind of honorablebanishment out of Russia; a punishment which he bore up under, it wassaid, with admirable fortitude. His fortune was reputed to be immense,and there was scarcely a capital of Europe in which he did not possessa residence. The character of his face was peculiar, for while theforehead and eyes were intellectual and candid, the lower jaw and mouthrevealed his Calmuck origin, an expression of intense, unrelentingcruelty being the impression at once conveyed by the thin, straight,compressed lips, and the long, projecting chin, seeming even longerfrom the black-pointed beard he wore. There was nothing vulgar orcommon-place about him; he never could have passed unobserved anywhere,and yet he was equally far from the type of high birth. His mannerswere perfectly well bred; and although he spoke seldom, his quiet andattentive air and his easy smile showed he possessed the still rarerquality of listening well.There was another figure, not exactly of this group, but at a littledistance off, beside a table in a recess, on which a number of printsand drawings were scattered, and in the contemplation of which heaffected to be absorbed; while, from time to time, his dark eyesflashed rapidly across to note all that went forward. He was a tall andsingularly handsome man, in the dress of a priest. His hair, black andwaving, covered a forehead high, massive, and well developed; his eyeswere deep-set, and around the orbits ran lines that told of long andhard study, for the Abbe D'Esmonde was a distinguished scholar; and, asa means of withdrawing him for a season from the overtoil of reading,he had been attached temporarily as a species of Under-secretary tothe Mission of the "Nonce." In this guise he was admitted into all thesociety of the capital, where his polished address and gentle mannersoon made him a general favorite.Equally removed from the flippant levity of the abbe as a class, andthe gross and sensual coarseness of the "old priest," D'Esmonde was aperfect man of the world, so far as taking a lively interest in all thegreat events of politics, watching eagerly the changeful features of thetimes, and studying acutely the characters of the leading men, at whosedictates they were modified. Its pleasures and amusements, too, he waswilling to partake of moderately and unobtrusively; but he held himselffar apart from all those subjects of gossip and small-talk which, in asociety of lax morality, occupy so considerable a space, and in whichthe great dignitaries who wear scarlet and purple stockings are oftenseen to take a lively and animated share. Some ascribed this reserveto principle; others called it hypocrisy; and some, again, perhaps withmore truth, deemed it the settled line of action of one who alreadydestined himself for a high and conspicuous station, and had determinedthat his character should add weight and dignity to his talents.It might have been thought that he was a singular guest to havebeen admitted to receptions like the present; but Jekyl, who managedeverything, had invited him, on the principle, as he said, that agourmand has a decanter of water always beside him at dinner, "not todrink, but because it looks temperate." The abbe's presence had the sameeffect; and, certainly, his calm and dignified demeanor, his polishedaddress, and cultivated tone, were excellent certificates of goodcharacter for the rest.At the tea-table the conversation languished, or only went forward atintervals. Onslow's French was not fluent, and he was silent fromshame. Kate felt that she ought not to take the lead; and the Prince,habitually reserved, spoke very little, and even that in the discursive,unconnected tone of a man who was always accustomed to find that anytopic he started should be instantly adopted by the company.The cold and steady stare with which he surveyed her would, but a shorttime back, have covered her face with a blush; she could not have borneunabashed the glance of searching, almost insolent meaning he bestowedupon her; but now, whatever her heart might have felt, her featureswere calm and passionless; nor did she in the slightest degree show anyconsciousness of a manner that was costing Onslow a struggle whether tolaugh at or resent.In one sense these two men were rivals, but each so impressed withproud contempt for the other, their rivalry was unknown to both. Kate,however, with her woman's tact, saw this, and knew well how her leastsmile or slightest word inclined the balance to this side or to that.The Prince was inveighing against the habit of wintering in Italy as oneof the most capital blunders of the age."We forget," said he, "that, in our present civilization, art is alwaysfirst and nature second, as we see evidenced in all the results ofagriculture. It is not the most fertile soil, but the highest-laboredone which produces the best fruits. So with respect to climate, we neverbear in mind that, where nature does most, man always does least.""According to that rule, Prince, we should winter at St. Petersburg, andspend the dog-days at Calcutta," said Kate, smiling."So we should," replied he; "the appliances to resist heat or cold, ofman's invention, are far better adapted to enjoyment than the accidentalvariations of climate.""In my country," said Onslow, tartly, "men study less how to avoid theinclemencies of weather than to become indifferent to them. Hunting,shooting, and deer-stalking are very sure methods to acquire this."The Prince paid no attention to the remark, but turned the conversationinto another channel, by asking Kate if she had ever read Fourier'sbook. From this he wandered away to the characteristic differencesof national music, thence to the discoveries then making in CentralAmerica, and lastly, engaged her in an animated discussion of thequestion of slavery. On none of these points was he deeply or even wellinformed, but he possessed that fluency and facility which intercoursewith society confers; and as all his knowledge was derived from men,and not from books, it bore a certain stamp of originality about itthat secured attention. Not, indeed, from George Onslow; he was the mostbored of men. None of the topics were his topics. Of Tattersall's, theGuards' Club, the society of London, the odds on the "Derby," he couldhave discoursed well and pleasantly. From what was "wrong" with theSa'nbucca filly to what was not right with Lady Flutterton's niece, hecould have told you everything; but all these other themes were, in hisestimation, but sheer pedantry, and, indeed, they only lacked a littleknowledge a very little would have sufficed to be so."He is gone," said the Prince, with a caustic smile which revealed aplan; "gone at last.""So, then, this was a device of yours, Prince," said she, laughing. "Ireally must call my cousin back and tell him so.""No, no," said he, seriously. "I have won my battle, let me profit bymy victory. Let me speak to you on another subject." He drew his chaira little nearer to the table as he spoke, and laid his arm on it. Kate'sheart beat fast and full; and the color came and went rapidly in hercheek. A vague sense of fear, of shame, and of triumphant pride were allat conflict within her. There was but one theme in the world thatcould have warranted such a commencement, so serious, so grave, sopurpose-like. Was this, then, possible?The glittering stars all a blaze of brilliants that shone beside herseemed an emblem of that high state which was now within her reach; andwhat a torrent of varied emotions rushed through her heart! Of home, ofher father, of Nelly, of Frank; and, lastly, what thoughts of George,poor George, whom she knew loved her, and to whom, without loving, shewas not altogether indifferent. "Do not be agitated, Mademoiselle," saidthe prince, laying the slightest touch of his jewelled fingers on herarm. "I ask a little patience and a little calm consideration for what Iam about to say.""Is that really like an Irish peasant's cottage, Miss Daiton?" said theabbe, as he held before her a drawing of one, in all the details of itsmost striking misery."Yes, perfectly; not exaggerated in the least," said she, hurriedlyblushing alike at the surprise and the interruption."You have no such misery, Monsieur le Prince, in Russia, I believe?"remarked the priest, with a courteous bend of the head."We are well governed, sir; and nothing displays it more palpably thanthat no man forgets his station," said the prince, with an insolenthauteur that made Kate blush over neck and forehead, while D'Esmondestood calm and passionless under the sarcasm."So I have always heard, sir," said he, blandly. "I remember, when atWredna--""You have been at Wredna?" asked the Prince, in an altered voice.But the other, not heeding the interruption, went on:"I remember, when at Wredna, to have heard an anecdote which strikinglyillustrates the rigid obedience yielded to power, and the condition ofpublic opinion at the same time. A manumitted slave, who was raised tohigh rank and wealth by the favor of the Czar, had returned to Wrednain the capacity of governor. A short time after his arrival he wastormented by applications and letters from a woman in great povertywho asserted that she was his mother. Fedeorovna, of course in secret,proved the truth of her assertion; but the only answer she received wasa significant caution to be silent, and not appeal to a relationshipwhich could only prove offensive. Perhaps incredulous of the authenticcharacter of so cruel a reply, perhaps stung to angry indignation by it,she carried the humble basket of fruit and vegetables that she hawkedfor a livelihood before the door of the great mansion where her sonresided; but, instead of advertising her wares, as is customary in theseMuscovite markets, by some picture of a saint or some holy inscription,she carried a little placard, with the inscription, 'The Mother ofAlexovitch,' the name of the Governor. A crowd soon gathered around thissingular booth, heralded by so strange an announcement, and as speedilythe police resorted to the spot, and carried the offender before thejudge. The defence was the simple one that she had merely averred thetruth. I need not weary you with the mockery of investigation thatfollowed; the result is all I need tell. This woman was knouted and sentaway to Siberia. So much for the Governor. As for the governed, theywere enthusiastic in praise of his justice and clemency; for he mighthave ordered her to be beheaded.""Do you tell the story as a fact, sir?" said the Prince, whose darkcheek became almost green in its sallowness as he spoke."I tell it distinctly as a fact. The Papa who received the woman'sconfession repeated the tale on his own deathbed, from whence it reachedme.""Priests can be liars, whether Greek or Roman," said the Prince, in avoice almost suffocated with passion; and then, suddenly checking thecourse of his anger, he turned to Kate with a sickly smile, and said,"Mademoiselle will pardon a rudeness in her presence which nothing shortof so gross a calumny could have elicited.""I will furnish you with all the names to-morrow, Monsieur le Prince,"said D'Esmonde, in a whisper; and sauntered away into the adjoiningroom."You look pale, Miss Dalton," said the Prince."That shocking story--""Which of course you don't believe.""The Abbe D'Esmonde I have always heard to be a person of strictveracity and of extreme caution.""Be careful of him, Miss Dalton. It is not without good reason that Isay this."There was a degree of solemnity in the way he uttered these words thatmade Kate thoughtful and serious. Unaccustomed to see, in society,anything but features of pleasure and amusement, she was suddenlyawakened to the conviction that its calm waters covered rocks andquicksands as perilous as stormier seas. Could people so full ofamiabilities be dangerous acquaintances? Was there poison in thischarmed cup? Was the doubt which sprang to her mind But she had not timefor the inquiry, as the Prince offered her his arm to the supper-room.CHAPTER XXV. A "LEVANTER."IN our penal settlements nothing is more common than to find the placesof honor and distinction filled by men who were once convicts, and whomay date the favorable turn of their fortune to the day of their havingtransgressed the law. So in certain Continental cities are individualsto be found occupying conspicuous stations, and enjoying a large shareof influence, whose misdeeds at home first made them exiles, and who,leaving England in shame, are received abroad with honor. There is thisdifference between the two cases; for while the convict owes all hisfuture advancement to his own efforts at reformation, the absenteeobtains his "brevet" of character by the simple fact of his extradition.He shakes off his rascalities as he does his rheumatism, when he quitsthe foggy climate of England, and emerges spotless and without stainupon the shores of Ostend or Boulogne.To do this, however, he must not bear a plebeian name, nor pertain tothe undistinguishable herd of vulgar folk. He must belong to some familyof mark and note, with peers for his uncles and peeresses for cousins;nor is he always safe if he himself be not a member of an hereditarylegislature. We have been led to these reflections by having tochronicle the arrival in Florence of Lord Norwood; a vague and confusedmurmur of his having done something, people knew not what, in Englandhaving preceded him. Some called him "poor Norwood," and expressedsorrow for him; others said he was a capital fellow, up to everything,and that they were delighted at his coming. A few, of very tender andlanguishing virtue themselves, wondered if they ought to meet him asbefore; but the prevailing impression was charitable. The affairat Graham's might have been exaggerated, the Newmarket business waspossibly a mistake. "Any man might owe money, and not be able topay it," was a sentiment pretty generally repeated and as generallybelieved; and, in fact, if to be tried by one's peers be an Englishprivilege, the noble Viscount here enjoyed it at the hands of a juryunimpeachable on the score of equality.We are far from suggesting that Norwood's character as a "shot" had anyconcern with this mild verdict; but certain it is, his merits in thiscapacity were frequently remembered, and always with honorable mention."No man plays ecarte better," said Haggerstone, while as yet theViscount's arrival was unknown, and as he discussed the rumors upon himbefore a group of listening Englishmen at the door of the "Club". "Noman plays ecarte better, nor with better luck!" added he, with a chucklethat was intended to convey a meaning beyond the mere words."Has he been a large winner, then?" asked one of the bystanders,respectfully, looking to the Colonel for information; for, in a certainset, he was regarded as the most thoroughly conversant man with all thefaults and follies of high life."No man wins invariably, sir, except Brooke Morris, perhaps," repliedhe, always happy at the opportunity to quote the name of a man offashion in a tone of familiarity."That was the Mo-Mo-Morris that ruined Hopeton, was n't it?" broke inPurvis, quite forgetting that the individual he addressed was reportedto have a share in the transaction. Haggerstone, however, did not deigna reply, but puffed his cigar in perfect contempt of his questioner."Who is this coming up here?" said one; "he looks like a new arrival.He is English, certainly; that frock has a London cut there's nomistaking.""By Jove, it's Norwood!" cried Haggerstone, edging away, as hespoke, from the group. Meanwhile, the noble Viscount, a well-dressed,well-whiskered man, of about thirty, came leisurely forward, andtouching his hat familiarly, said,"Ha! you here, Haggerstone! What is Florence doing?""Pretty much as it always did, my Lord. I don't think its morals haveimproved since you knew it a few years ago.""Or you wouldn't be here, Haggy, eh?" said the Viscount, laughing at hisown joke. "Not suit your book if it took a virtuous turn, eh?""I plead guilty, my Lord. I believe I do like to shoot folly as itflies.""Ah, yes! And I've seen you taking a sitting shot at it too, Haggy,"said the other, with a heartier laugh, which, despite of the Colonel'sefforts not to feel, brought a crimson flush to his cheek."Is there any play going on, Haggy?""Nothing that you would call play, my Lord; a little whist for Nappoints, a little ecarte, a little piquet, and, now and then, we have around game at Sabloukoff's.""Poor old fellow! and he 's alive still? And where 's the Jariominski?""Gone back to Russia.""And Maretti?""In Saint Angelo, I believe.""And that little Frenchman what was his name? his father was a Marshalof the Empire.""D'Acosta.""The same. Where is he?""Shot himself this spring.""Pretty girl, his sister. What became of her?""Some one told me that she had become a Soeur de Charite.""What a pity! So they 're all broken up, I see.""Completely so.""Then what have you got in their place?""Nothing fast, my Lord, except, perhaps, your friends the Onslows.""Yes; they 're going it, I hear. Is n't there a rich niece, or cousin,or something of that sort, with them?""They've got a prettyish girl, called Dalton; but as to her being rich,I think it very unlikely, seeing that her family are living in Germanyin a state of the very closest poverty.""And Master George, how does he carry on the war?" said the Viscount,who seemed quite heedless of the other's correction."He plays a little peddling ecarte now and then; but you can see that hehas burned his fingers, and dreads the fire. They say he 's in love withthe Dalton girl.""Of course he is, if they live in the same house; and he 's just thekind of fool to marry her, too. Who 's that little fellow, listening tous?""Purvis, my Lord; don't you remember him? He's one of the Ricketts'sset.""To be sure I do. How are you, Purvis? You look so young and so fresh, Icould not persuade myself it could be my old acquaintance.""I 've taken to homoe-homoe-homoe-homo--" Here he opened his mouth wide,and gasped till he grew black in the face."What's the word? Give it him, Haggy. It's all up with him," said theViscount."Homoeopathy, eh?""Just so. Homeo-hom--""Confound it, man, can't you be satisfied? when you're once over thefence, you need n't go back to leap it. And how is the dear what's hername Agathe? no, Zoe, how is she?""Quite well, my Lord, and would be cha-cha-cha-rmed to see you.""Living in that queer humbug still, eh?""In the Vill-ino, my Lord, you mean?""Egad! she seems the only thing left; like the dog on the wreck, eh,Haggy?""Just so, my Lord," said the other, with a complacent laugh."What a mass of old crockery she must have got together by thistime!" said the Viscount, yawning with a terrible recollection of hertiresomeness."You came out with a yacht, my Lord?" asked Haggerstone."Pretty well, for a man that they call ru-ru-ruined," said Purvis,laughing.Norwood turned a look of angry indignation at him, and then, as ifseeing the unworthiness of the object, merely said,"A yacht is the only real economy nowadays. You get rid at once of alltrains of servants, household, stable people; even the bores of youracquaintance you cut off. By-by, Purvis." And, with a significant winkat Haggerstone, he passed across the street, in time to overtake Onslow,who was just passing."I think I ga-ga-gave it him there," cried Purvis, with an hystericgiggle of delight; who, provided that he was permitted to fire his shot,never cared how severely he was himself riddled by the enemy's fire.Meanwhile, the Viscount and his friend were hastening forward to theMazzarini Palace, as totally forgetful of Purvis as though that valuableindividual had never existed.We may take this opportunity to mention, that when the rumors whichattributed a grand breach of honorable conduct to Lord Norwood hadarrived at Florence, Sir Stafford, who never had any peculiar affectionfor the Viscount, declared himself in the very strongest terms on thesubject of his offending, and took especial pains to show the markeddistinction between occasions of mere wasteful extravagance andinstances of fraudulent and dishonest debt.It was in vain he was told that the rigid rule of English morality isalways relaxed abroad, and that the moral latitude is very different inLondon and Naples. He was old-fashioned enough to believe that honoris the same in all climates; and having received from England a verydetailed and specific history of the noble Lord's misdoings, he firmlyresolved not to receive him.With all George Onslow's affection and respect for his father, he couldnot help feeling that this was a mere prejudice, one of the lingeringremnants of a past age; a sentiment very respectable, perhaps, buttotally inapplicable to present civilization, and quite impracticable insociety. In fact, as he said himself, "Who is to be known, if this rulebe acted on? What man or, further still, what woman of fashionable lifewill stand this scrutiny? To attempt such exclusiveness, one shouldretire to some remote provincial town, some fishing-village ofpatriarchal simplicity; and, even there, what security was there againstignoble offendings? How should, he stand the ridicule of his club andhis acquaintance if he attempted to assume such a standard?" Thesearguments were strengthened by his disbelief, or rather his repugnanceto believe the worst of Norwood; and furthermore, supported by LadyHester's open scorn for all such "hypocritical trumpery," and her avowalthat the Viscount should be received, by her, at least. Exactly as ofold, George Onslow's mind was in a state of oscillation and doubtnow leaning to this side, now inclining to that when the question wasdecided for him, as it so often is in like cases, by a mere accident;for, as he loitered along the street, he suddenly felt an arm introducedwithin his own. He turned hastily round and saw Norwood, who, with, allhis customary coolness, asked after each member of the family, and atonce proposed to pay them a visit.Of all men living, none were less suited than Onslow for assuming anypart, or taking any decisive line, which could possibly be avoided, oreven postponed. He hated, besides, to do an ungracious thing anywhere,or to any one. It might be, thought he, that Norwood's scrape could allbe explained away. Perhaps, after all, the thing is a mere trifle; andif he were to take the decided line of cutting a man without due cause,the consequences might be most injurious. These, and fifty such-likescruples, warred within him, and so engaged his attention that heactually heard not one word of all that "town gossip" which Norwoodwas retailing for his amusement. At last, while following out his ownthoughts, George came to the resolution of finding out at once theprecise position in which Norwood stood, and to this end asked the lastnews from Newmarket.Norwood's coolness never forsook him at a question whose very suddennesswas somewhat awkward."Bad enough," said he, with an easy laugh. "We have all of us been 'hithard.' Knolesby has lost heavily. Burchester, too, has had a smasher;and I myself have not escaped. In fact, George, the 'Legs' have had itall their own way. I suppose you heard something about it out here?""Why, yes; there were reports--""Oh, hang reports, man! Never trust to old women's tales. And thatconfounded fellow, Haggerstone, I 'm certain, has been spreading allkinds of stories. But the facts are simple enough.""I 'm heartily glad you say so; for, to tell you the truth, Norwood, myfather is one of the prejudiced about this affair, and I 'm dying to beable to give him a full explanation of the whole.""Ah, Sir Stafford, too, among the credulous!" said Norwood, slowly. "Icould scarcely have supposed so. No matter; only I did fancy that hewas not exactly the person to form hasty conclusions against any man'scharacter. However, you may tell him for, as for myself, I 'll notcondescend to explain to any one but you the thing is a very simpleone. There was a mare of Hopeton's, a Brockdon filly, entered for theSlingsby, and a number of us agreed to 'go a heavy thing' upon heragainst the field. A bold coup always, George, that backing againstthe field. Never do it, my boy, and particularly when you 've a set ofrascally foreign Legs banded against you, Poles and Hungarian fellows,George; the downiest coves ever you met, and who, in their confoundedjargon, can sell you before your own face. Nothing like John Bull, myboy. Straight, frank, and open John forever! Hit him hard and he 'll hityou again; but no treachery, no stab in the dark. Oh, no, no! The turfin England was another thing before these Continental rascals cameamongst us. I was always against admitting them within the ring. Iblack-balled a dozen of them at the Club. But see what perseverancedoes; they're all in now. There's no John-Bull feeling among ourset, and we 're paying a smart price for it. Never trust those Germanfellows, George. Out of England there is no truth, no honor. But, aboveall, don't back against the field; there are so many dodges against you;so many 'dark horses' come out fair. That 's it, you see; that 'sthe way I got it so heavily; for when Ruxton came and told me that'Help-me-Over' was dead lame, I believed him. A fetlock lameness is notrifle, you know; and there was a swelling as large as my hand aroundthe coronet. The foreign fellows can manage that in the morning, andthe horse will run to win the same day. I saw it myself. Ah, JohnBull forever! No guile, no deceit in him. Mind me, George, I make thisconfession for you alone. I 'll not stoop to repeat it. If any mandare to insinuate anything to my discredit, I 'll never give myself thetrouble of one word of explanation, but nail him to it, twelve paces,and no mistake. I don't think my right hand has forgot its cunning. Havehim out at once, George; parade him on the spot, my boy; that 's theonly plan. What! is this your quarter?" asked he, as they stopped at theentrance of the spacious palace. "I used to know this house well of old.It was the Embassy in Templeton's time. Very snug it used to be. Glad tosee you 've banished all those maimed old deities that used to linethe staircase, and got rid of that tiresome tapestry, too. Prettyvases those; fresh-looking that conservatory, they 're always strong incamellias in Florence. This used to be the billiard-room. I think you'vemade a good alteration; it looks better as a salon. Ah, I like this,excellent taste that chintz furniture; just the thing for Italy, andexactly what nobody thought of before!""I'll see if my Lady be visible," said George, as he threw the "MorningPost" to his friend, and hastily quitted the chamber.Norwood was no sooner left alone than he proceeded to take a leisurelysurvey of the apartment, in the course of which his attention wasarrested by a water-color drawing, representing a young girl leaningover a balcony, and which he had no difficulty in at once guessing to beKate Dalton. There was something in the character of her beauty an airof almost daring haughtiness that seemed to strike his fancy; for, ashe gazed, he drew himself up to his full height, and seemed to assume inhis own features the proud expression of the portrait."With a hundred thousand and that face one might make you a viscountess,and yet not do badly, either," said he to himself; and then, as ifsatisfied that he had given time enough to a mere speculative thought,he turned over the visiting-cards to see the names of the currentacquaintance: "Midchekoff, Estrolenka, Janini, Tiverton, Latrobe, theold set; the Ricketts, too, and Haggerstone. What can have brought themhere? Oh, there must have been a ball, for here are shoals of outsiders,the great Smith-Brown-and-Thompson community; and here, on the verysmallest of pasteboards, in the very meekest of literals, have we ourdear friend 'Albert Jekyl.' He 'll tell me all I want to know,"said Norwood, as he threw himself back on the comfortable depth of awell-cushioned chair, and gave way to a pleasant revery.When George Ouslow had informed Lady Hester of Norwood's arrival, hehastened to Sir Stafford's apartment to tell him how completely theViscount had exonerated himself from any charge that might be made tohis discredit; not, indeed, that George understood one syllable ofthe explanation, nor could trace anything like connection between thedisjointed links of the narrative. He could only affirm his own perfectconviction in Norwood's honor, and hoped an equal degree of faith fromhis father. Fortunately for his powers of persuasiveness, they were notdestined to be so sorely tried; for Sir Stafford had just walked out,and George, too eager to set all right about Norwood, took his hat andfollowed, in the hope of overtaking him.Lady Hester was already dressed, and about to enter the drawing-room,when George told her that Norwood was there; and yet she returned toher room and made some changes in her toilet, slight, and perhaps tooinsignificant to record, but yet of importance enough to occupy sometime, and afford her an interval for thoughts which, whatever theirnature, served to flush her cheek and agitate her deeply.It is an awkward thing, at any time, to meet with the person to whom youonce believed you should have been married; to see, on the terms of merecommon acquaintance, the individual with whose fate and fortune you atone time fancied your own was indissolubly bound up, for weal or woe,for better or for worse. To exchange the vapid commonplaces of theworld; to barter the poor counters of that petty game called society,with her or him with whom you have walked in all the unboundedconfidence of affection, speculating on a golden future, or glorying ina delicious dream of present bliss; to touch with ceremonious respectthat hand you have so often held fast within your own; to behold withrespectful distance that form beside which you have sat for hours, lostin happy fancies; to stand, as it were, and trace out with the eye somepath in life we might have followed, wondering whither it would haveled us, if to some higher pinnacle of gratified ambition, if todisappointments darker than those we have ever known, speculating on afuture which is already become a past, and canvassing within our heartsthe follies that have misled and the faults that have wrecked us! Suchare among the inevitable reminiscences of meeting; and they are full ofa soft and touching sorrow, not all unpleasing, either, as they remindus of our youth and its buoyancy. Far otherwise was the present case.Whatever might have been the bold confidence with which Lady Hesterprotested her belief in Norwood's honor, her own heartfelt knowledge ofthe man refuted the assertion. She knew thoroughly that he was perfectlydevoid of all principle, and merely possessed that conventional degreeof fair dealing indispensable to association with his equals. That hewould do anything short of what would subject him to disgrace shehad long seen; and perhaps the unhappy moment had come when even thisrestraint was no longer a barrier. And yet, with all this depreciatingsense of the man, would it be believed she had once loved him! ay, withas sincere an affection as she was capable of feeling for anything.'T is true, time and its consequences had effaced much of this feeling.His own indifference had done something, her new relations with theworld had done more; and if she ever thought of him now, it was witha degree of half terror that there lived one man who had so thoroughlyread all the secrets of her heart, and knew every sentiment of hernature.Norwood was sitting in a chair as she entered, amusing himself withthe gambols of a little Blenheim spaniel, whose silver collar bore thecoronet of the Russian prince. He never perceived Lady Hester until shewas close beside him, and in an easy, half-indifferent tone, said,"How d' ye do, my Lord?""What, Hester!" said he, starting up, and taking her hand in both hisown.She withdrew it languidly, and seating herself, not upon the sofa towhich he wished to lead her, but in a chair, asked when he had arrived,and by what route."I came out in a yacht; stopping a few days at Gibraltar, and a week atMalta.""Had you pleasant weather?""After we got clear of the Channel, excellent weather.""You came alone, I suppose?""Quite alone.""How do you get on without your dear friend Effingdale, or your'familiar,' Upton?"Norwood colored a little at a question the drift of which he feltthoroughly, but tried with a laugh to evade an answer."Are they in England? I thought I read their names at the Newmarketmeeting?" asked she, after waiting in vain for a reply."Yes; they were both at Newmarket," replied he, shortly."Was it a good meeting?""I can scarcely say so," rejoined he, attempting a laugh. "My bookturned out very unfortunately.""I heard so," was the short reply; and in a tone so dry and significantthat a dead silence followed."Pretty spaniel, that," said Norwood, trying a slight sortie into theenemy's camp. "A present, I suppose, from Midchekoff?""Yes.""It is not clean bred, however, no more than his late master. Have youseen much of the Prince?""He comes here every evening, after the Opera.""What a bore that must be he is a most insufferable proser.""I must say I disagree with you; I reckon him excessively agreeable.""How changed you must be, Hes--Lady Hester.""I believe I am, my Lord.""And yet you look the same the very same as when we sauntered for hoursthrough the old woods at Dipsley." She blushed deeply; less, perhaps, atthe words, than at the look which accompanied them."Is this your newly found niece or cousin?" said Norwood, as he pointedto the portrait of Kate Dal ton."Yes. Is n't she pretty?""The picture is.""She is much handsomer, however, a charming creature in every respect,as you will confess when you see her.""And for what high destiny is she meant? Is she to be a RussianPrincess, a Duchessa of Italy, or the goodwife of an untitledEnglishman?""She may have her choice, I believe, of either of the three--.""Happy girl!" said he half scornfully; "and when may I hope to behold somuch excellence?""To-day, if you like to dine here.""I should like it much but but--""But what?""It's better to be frank at once, Hester," said he, boldly, "and saythat I feel you are grown very cold and distant toward me. This is notyour old manner, this not exactly the reception I looked for. Now, ifyou have any cause for this, would it not be better and fairer to speakit out openly than continue to treat me in this slighting fashion? Youare silent, so there is something; pray let's hear it.""What of Newmarket?" said she, in a low voice, so faint as almost to bea whisper."So that's it," said he, as he folded his arms and looked steadfastly ather.There was something in the cold and steady gaze he bestowed upon herthat abashed, if not actually alarmed, Lady Hester. She had seen thesame look once or twice before, and always as the prelude to someterrible evidence of his temper."Lady Hester," said he, in a low, distinct, and very slow voice, asthough he would not have her lose a word he spoke, "the explanationwhich a man would ask for at the peril of his life ought not, in commonjustice, to be quite costless to a lady. It is perfectly possible thatyou may not care for the price, be it so; only I warn you that if youwish for any information on the subject you allude to, I will inquirewhether--"Here he dropped his voice, and whispered two or three words rapidlyin her ear, after which she lay back, pale, sick, and almost fainting,without strength to speak or even to move."Do not say, or still less feel, that this contest is of my provoking.Never was any man less in the humor to provoke hostilities, andparticularly from old friends. I have just had bad luck, the very worstof bad luck. I have lost everything but my head; and even that, cool andcalculating as it is, may go too if I be pushed too far. Now you have afrank and free confession from me. I have told you more than I would toany other living, more, perhaps, than I ought even to you.""Then what do you intend to do here?" asked she, faintly."Wait wait patiently for awhile. Fix upon anyone that I can discovermutters a syllable to my discredit, and shoot him as I would a dog.""There may be some who, without openly discussing, will shun yoursociety, and avoid your intercourse.""Sir Stafford, for instance," said he, with an insolent laugh. Shenodded slightly, and he went on: "My Lady's influence will, I amcertain, set me right in that quarter.""I may be unequal to the task.""You can at least try, madam.""I have tried, Norwood. I have gone the length of declaring that Idisbelieved every story against you, that I reposed the most implicitfaith in your honor, and that I would certainly receive you and admityour visits as heretofore.""And, of course, you'll keep your word?""If you exact it.""Of course I shall! Hester, this is no time for quibbling. I 've gotinto a mess, the worst of all the bad scrapes which have ever befallenme. A little time and a little management will pull me through but Imust have both; nor is it in such a place, and with such a society asthis, a man need fear investigation. I came here, as formerly one wentto live 'within the rules.' Let me, at least, have the benefit of theprotection for condescending to the locality.""Sir Stafford, my Lady," said a servant, throwing open the door; andthe old Baronet entered hastily, and, without deigning to notice LordNorwood, walked straight up to Lady Hester, and said a few words in alow voice.Affecting to occupy himself with the books upon the table, Norwoodwatched the dialogue with keen but stealthy glances, and then, as theother turned suddenly round, said,"How d' ye do, Sir Stafford? I am glad to see you looking so well.""I thank you, my Lord; I am perfectly well," said he, with a mostrepelling coldness."You are surprised to see me in Florence, for certain," said the other,with a forced laugh."Very much surprised to see you here, my Lord," was the abrupt reply."Ha! ha! ha! I thought so!" cried Norwood, laughing, and pretending notto feel the point of the remark. "But, nowadays, one flits about theworld in slippers and dressing-gown, and travelling inflicts no fatigue.I only left England ten days ago.""The post comes in seven, my Lord," said Sir Stafford. "I have hadletters this morning, written this day week, and which give the lastevents in Town Life up to the very hour.""Indeed! and what's the news, then?" said he, negligently."If your Lordship will favor me with your company for a few minutes,I may be able to enlighten you," said Sir Stafford, moving towards thedoor."With the greatest pleasure. Good-bye, Lady Hester," said he, rising."You said seven o'clock dinner, I think?""Yes," replied she, but in a voice almost inarticulate from shame andterror."Now, Sir Stafford, I 'm at your orders," said the Viscount, gayly,as he left the room, followed by the old man, whose crimson cheek andflashing eye bespoke the passion which was struggling within him.Of the two who now entered Sir Stafford's library, it must be owned thatLord Norwood was, by many degrees, the more calm and collected. No one,to have looked at him, could possibly have supposed that any question ofinterest, not to say of deep moment, awaited him; and as he carriedhis eyes over the well-filled shelves and the hand some fittings ofthe chamber, nothing could be more naturally spoken than the fewcomplimentary expressions on Sir Stafford's good taste and judgment."I shall not ask you to be seated, my Lord," said the old Baronet, whosetremulous lip and shaking cheek showed how deep-felt was his agitation."The few moments of interview I have requested will be, I have no doubt,too painful to either of us, nor could we desire to prolong them. To me,I own, they are very, very painful."These hurried, broken, and unconnected sentences fell from him as hesearched for a letter among a number of others that littered the table.Lord Norwood bowed coldly, and, without making any reply, turned hisback to the fire, and waited in patience."I have, I fear, mislaid the letter," said Sir Stafford, whose nervousanxiety had now so completely mastered him that he threw the letters andpapers on every side without perceiving it.The Viscount made no sign, but suffered the search to proceed withoutremark."It was a letter from Lord Effingdale," continued the Baronet, stillbusied in the pursuit, "a letter written after the Newmarket settling,my Lord; and if I should be unfortunate enough not to find it, I mustonly trust to my memory for its contents."Lord Norwood gave another bow, slighter and colder than the former, asthough to say that he acquiesced perfectly, without knowing in what."Ah! here it is! here it is!" cried Sir Stafford, at last detecting themissing document, which he hastily opened and ran his eyes over. "Thisletter, my Lord," continued he, "announces that, in consequence ofcertain defalcations on your part, the members of the 'Whip Club'have erased your Lordship's name from their list, and declared youincapacitated from either entering a horse, or naming a winner for thestakes in future. There, there, my Lord, is the paragraph, coupled withwhat you will doubtless feel to be a very severe but just comment on thetransaction."Norwood took the letter and read it leisurely, as leisurely and calmlyas though the contents never concerned him, and then, folding it up,laid it on the chimney-piece beside him."Poor Effingdale!" said he, smiling; "he ought to spell better,considering that his mother was a governess. He writes 'naming' with an'e.' Didn't you remark that?"But as Sir Stafford paid no attention to the criticism, he went on:"As to the 'Whip,' I may as well tell you, that I scratched my own namemyself. They are a set of low 'Legs,' and, except poor Effy, and two orthree others of the same brilliant stamp, not a gentleman amongst them.""The defalcation is, however, true?" asked Sir Stafford."If you mean to ask whether a man always wins at Doncaster or Newmarket,the question is of the easiest to answer.""I certainly presume that he always pays what he loses, my Lord,"replied Sir Stafford, coloring at the evasive impertinence of the other."Of course he does, when he has it, Sir Stafford; but that is a mostessential condition, for the 'Turf' is not precisely like a mercantilepursuit."Sir Stafford winced under the flippant insolence with which this wasspoken."There is not exactly a fair way to calculate profit, nor any assuranceagainst accidental loss. A horse, Sir Stafford, is not an Indiaman; abetting man is, therefore, in a position quite exceptional.""If a man risks what he cannot pay, he is dishonorable," said SirStafford, in a short, abrupt tone."I see that you cannot enter into a theme so very different from allyour habits and pursuits. You think there is a kind of bankruptcy whena man gets a little behind with his bets. You don't see that all thesetransactions are on 'honor,' and that if one does 'bolt,' he means to'book up' another time. There was George, your own son--""What of him? what of George?" cried Sir Stafford, with a convulsivegrasp of the chair, while the color fled from his cheek, and he seemedready to faint with emotion."Oh, nothing in the world to cause you uneasiness. A more honorablefellow never breathed than George.""Then, what of him? How comes his name to your lips at such a discussionas this? Tell me, this instant, my Lord. I command I entreat you!"And the old man shook like one in an ague; but Norwood saw hisvantage-ground, and determined to use it unsparingly. He thereforemerely smiled, and said, "Pray be calm, Sir Stafford. I repeat thatthere is nothing worthy of a moment's chagrin. I was only about toobserve that if I had the same taste for scandal-writing as poor Effy,I might have circulated a similar story about your son George. Heleft England, owing me a good round sum, for which, by the way, I wasterribly 'hard up;' and although the money was paid eventually, whatwould you have thought of me what would the world have thought of him ifI had written such an epistle as this?"And as he spoke, his voice and manner warmed into a degree of indignantanger, in which, as if carried away, he snatched the letter from thechimney-piece and threw it into the fire. The act was unseen by SirStafford, who sat with his head deeply buried between his hands, a lowfaint groan alone bespeaking the secret agony of his heart."My son has, then, paid you? He owes nothing, my Lord?" said he, atlast, looking up, with a countenance furrowed by agitation."Like a trump!" said Norwood, assuming the most easy and self-satisfiedmanner. "My life upon George Onslow! Back him to any amount, and againstthe field anywhere! A true John Bull! no humbug, no nonsense about him!straightforward and honorable, always!""Your position is, then, this, my Lord," said Sir Stafford, whoseimpatience would not permit him to listen longer, "you have quittedEngland, leaving for future settlement a number of debts, for which youhave not the remotest prospect of liquidation.""Too fast, you go too fast!" said the Viscount, laughing."Lord Effingdale writes the amount at thirty thousand pounds, and addsthat, as a defaulter--""There's the whole of it," broke in Norwood. "You ring the changesabout that one confounded word, and there is no use in attempting avindication. 'Give a dog a bad name,' as the adage says. Now, I took thetrouble this very morning to go over the whole of this tiresome businesswith George. I explained to him fully, and, I hope, to his entiresatisfaction, that I was simply unfortunate in it, nothing more. A mancannot always 'ride the winner; 'I 'm sure I wish I could. Of course,I don't mean to say that it 's not a confounded 'bore' to come out hereand live in such a place as this, and just at the opening of the season,too, when town is beginning to fill; but 'needs must,' we are told,'when a certain gent sits on the coach-box.'"Sir Stafford stood, during the whole of this speech, with his armsfolded and his eyes fixed upon the floor. He never heard one word ofit, but was deeply intent upon his own thoughts. At length he spoke ina full, collected, and firm voice: "Lord Norwood I am, as you have toldme, perfectly unfitted to pronounce upon transactions so very unlikeevery pursuit in which my life has been passed. I am alike ignorant ofthe feelings of those who engage in them, and of the rules of honor bywhich they are guided; but this I know, that the man whom his equalsdecline to associate with at home is not recognizable abroad; and thathe who leaves his country with shame, cannot reside away from it withcredit.""This would be a very rude speech, Sir Stafford Onslow, even with thepalliative preface of your ignorance, if our relative ages admitted anyequality between us. I am the least bellicose of men, I believe I cansay I may afford to be so. So long, therefore, as you confine suchsentiments to yourself, I will never complain of them; but if the timecomes that you conceive they should be issued for general circulation--""Well, my Lord, what then?""Your son must answer for it, that's all!" said Norwood; and he drewhimself up, and fixed his eye steadily on the distant wall of the room,with a look and gesture that made the old man sick at heart. Norwood sawhow "his shot told," and, turning hastily round, said: "This interview,I conclude, has lasted quite long enough for either of us. If you haveany further explanations to seek for, let them come through a youngerman, and in a more regular form. Good-morning."Sir Stafford bowed, without speaking, as the other passed out.To have seen them both at that moment, few would have guessed aright onwhich side lay all the disgrace, and where the spirit of rectitude andhonor.Sir Stafford, indeed, was most miserable. If the Viscount's mockexplanations did not satisfy a single scruple of his mind, was it notpossible they might have sufficed with others more conversant with suchmatters? Perhaps he is not worse than others of his own class. Whatwould be his feelings if he were to involve George in a quarrel forsuch a cause? This was a consideration that pressed itself in twentydifferent forms, each of them enough to appall him. "But the man isa defaulter; he has fled from England with 'shame,'" was the stubbornconviction which no efforts of his casuistry could banish; and the morehe reflected on this, the less possible seemed anything like evasion orcompromise.CHAPTER XXVI. THE END OF THE FIRST ACTTHE point discussed in our last chapter, if not a momentous one initself, was destined to exercise a very important influence upon thefortunes of the Onslow family. The interview between Sir Stafford andthe Viscount scarcely occupied five minutes; after which the Baronetwrote a note of some length to her Ladyship, to which she as promptlyreplied; a second, and even a third interchange of correspondencefollowed. The dinner-party appointed for that day was put off; a certainominous kind of silence pervaded the house. The few privileged visitorswere denied admission. Mr. Proctor, Sir Stafford's man, wore a look ofmore than common seriousness. Mademoiselle Celestine's glances revealeda haughty sense of triumph. Even the humbler menials appeared to feelthat something had occurred, and betrayed in their anxious faces someresemblance to that vague sense of half-curiosity, half-terror, thepassengers of a steamboat experience when an accident, of whose naturethey know nothing, has occurred to the machinery.Their doubts and suspicions assumed more shape when the order came thatSir Stafford would dine in the library, and her Ladyship in her ownroom, George Onslow alone appearing in the dining-room. There was an airof melancholy over everything, the silence deepening as night came on.Servants went noiselessly to and fro, drew the curtains, and closedthe doors with a half-stealthy gesture, and seemed as though fearful ofawakening some slumbering outbreak of passion.We neither have, nor desire to have, secrets from our readers. We willtherefore proceed to Sir Stafford's dressing-room, where the old Baronetsat moodily over the fire, his anxious features and sorrow-struckexpression showing the ravages even a few hours of suffering hadinflicted. His table was littered with papers, parchments, and otherformidable-looking documents. Some letters lay sealed here, others werehalf-written there; everything about him showed the conflict of doubtand indecision that was going on within his mind; and truly a mostpainful struggle was maintained there.For some time back he had seen with displeasure the course ofextravagance and waste of all his household. He had observed the habitsof reckless expense with which his establishment was maintained; but,possessing a very ample fortune, and feeling that probably some changewould be made with the coming summer, he had forborne to advert toit, and endured with what patience he could a mode of life whose verydisplay was distasteful to him. Now, however, a more serious cause foranxiety presented itself, in the class of intimates admitted by LadyHester to her society. Of the foreigners he knew comparativelylittle; but that little was not to their advantage. Some were wealthyvoluptuaries, glad to propagate their own habits of extravagance amongthose they suspected of fortunes smaller than their own. Others werepenniless adventurers, speculating upon everything that might turn totheir profit. All were men of pleasure, and of that indolent, lounging,purposeless character so peculiarly unpleasing to those who have ledactive lives, and been always immersed in the cares and interests ofbusiness.Such men, he rightly judged, were dangerous associates to his son,the very worst acquaintances for Kate, in whom already he was deeplyinterested; but still no actual stain of dishonor, no palpable flaw,could be detected in their fame, till the arrival of Lord Norwood addedhis name to the list.To receive a man of whose misconduct in England he had acquired everyproof, was a step beyond his endurance. Here or never must he takehis stand; and manfully he did so, at first, by calm argument andremonstrance, and at last by firm resolution and determination. Withoutadverting to what had passed between the Viscount and himself, theletter he addressed to Lady Hester conveyed his unalterable resolve notto know Lord Norwood. Lady Hester's reply was not less peremptory, andscarcely as courteous. The correspondence continued with increasingwarmth on both sides, till Sir Stafford palpably hinted at the possibleconsequences of a spirit of discordance and disagreement so ill-adaptedto conjugal welfare. Her Ladyship caught up the suggestion with avidity,and professed that, whatever scruples his delicacy might feel, to hersthere was none in writing the word, "Separation."If the thought had already familiarized itself to his mind, the word hadnot; and strange it is that the written syllables should have a powerand meaning that the idea itself could never realize.To men who have had little publicity in their lives, and that littlealways of an honorable nature, there is no thought so poignantlymiserable as the dread of a scandalous notoriety. To associate theirnames with anything that ministers to gossip; to make them tea-tabletalk; still worse, to expose them to sneering and impertinentcriticisms, by revealing the secrets of their domesticity, is a tortureto which no mere physical suffering has anything to compare. SirStafford Onslow was a true representative of this class of feeling. Thesight of his name in the list of directors of some great enterprise, asthe patron of a charity, the governor of an hospital, or the donor to aninstitution, was about as much of newspaper notoriety as he could bearwithout a sense of shrinking delicacy; but to become the mark for publicdiscussion in the relations of his private life, to have himself and hisfamily brought up to the bar of that terrible ordeal, where bad tonguesare the eloquent, and evil speakers are the witty, was a speculationtoo terrible to think over; and this was exactly what Lady Hester wassuggesting!Is it not very strange that woman, with whose nature we inseparably andtruly associate all those virtues that take their origin in refinementand modesty, should sometimes be able to brave a degree of publicityto which a man, the very hardiest and least shamefaced, would succumb,crestfallen and abashed; that her timid delicacy, her shrinkingbashfulness, can be so hardened by the world that she can face anotoriety where every look is an indictment, and every whisper acondemnation?Now, if Lady Hester was yet remote from this, she had still journeyedone stage of the road. She had abundant examples around her of thosebest received and best looked on in society, whose chief claim to theworld's esteem seemed to be the contempt with which they treated all itsordinances. There was a dash of heroism in their effrontery that pleasedher. They appeared more gay, more buoyant, more elastic in spirits thanother people; their increased liberty seemed to impart enlarged and moregenerous views, and they were always "good-natured," since, living inthe very glassiest of houses, they never "shied" a pebble.While, then, Sir Stafford sat overwhelmed with shame and sorrow at thebare thought of the public discussion that awaited him, Lady Hester wasspeculating upon condolences here, approbation there, panegyrics uponher high spirit, and congratulations upon her freedom. The little,half-shadowy allusions her friends would throw out from time to timeupon the strange unsuitableness of her marriage with a man so much hersenior, would soon be converted into comments of unrestricted license.Besides and perhaps the greatest charm of all was she would have agrievance; not the worn-out grievance of some imaginary ailment thatnobody believes in but the "doctor," not the mock agonies of a heartcomplaint, that saves the sufferer from eating bad dinners in vulgarcompany, but always allows them a respite for a dejeuner at the court,or a supper after the Opera, with a few chosen convives, but a real,substantial grievance, over which men might be eloquent and ladiespathetic. Such were the different feelings with which two personscontemplated the same event. Sir Stafford's thoughts turned instantlytowards England. What would be said there by all those friends who hadendeavored to dissuade him from this ill-suited union? Their sorrowfulcompassion was even less endurable than the malice of others; andGrounsell, too, what would his old friend think of a catastrophe sosudden? In his heart Sir Stafford was glad that the doctor was absent;much as he needed his counsel and advice, he still more dreaded theterror of his triumphant eye at the accomplishment of his oft-repeatedprediction.From George he met no support whatever. He either believed, or thoughtthat he believed, Norwood's garbled explanation. Intercourse with acertain set of "fast men" had shown him that a man might do a "screwy"thing now and then, and yet not be cut by his acquaintance. Andthe young Guardsman deemed his father's rigid notions nothing butprejudices, very excellent and commendable ones, no doubt, but asinapplicable to our present civilization as would be a coat of mail or aback-piece of chain-armor. George Onslow, therefore, halted between thetwo opinions. Adhering to his father's side from feelings of affectionand respect, he was drawn to Lady Hester's by his convictions; not,indeed, aware how formidable the difference had already become betweenthem, and that, before that very night closed in, they had mutuallyagreed upon a separation, which while occupying the same house, wasessentially to exclude all intercourse.One consideration gave Sir Stafford much painful thought. What was tobecome of Kate Dalton in this new turn of affairs? The position ofa young girl on a visit with a family living in apparent unity andhappiness was very wide apart from her situation as the companion of awoman separated, even thus much, from her husband. It would be equallyunfair to her own family, as unjust to the girl herself, to detain herthen in such a conjuncture. And yet what was to be done? Apart from allthe unpleasantness of proposing an abrupt return to her home, camethe thought of the avowal that must accompany the suggestion, the veryconfession he so dreaded to make. Of course the gossiping of servantswould soon circulate the rumor. But then they might not spread it beyondthe Alps, nor make it the current talk of a German watering-place. Thuswere his selfish feelings at war with higher and purer thoughts. Butthe struggle was not a long one. He sat down and wrote to Lady Hester.Naturally assuming that all the reasons which had such force for himselfwould weigh equally with her, he dwelt less upon the arguments forKate's departure than upon the mode in which it might be proposed andcarried out. He adverted with feeling to the sacrifice the loss wouldinflict upon Lady Hester, but professed his conviction in the beliefthat all merely selfish considerations would give way before higher andmore important duties."As it is," said he, "I fear much that we have done anything but conduceto this dear girl's welfare and happiness. We have shown her glimpses ofa life whose emptiness she cannot appreciate, but by whose glittershe is already attracted. We have exposed her to all the seductions offlattery, pampering a vanity which is perhaps her one only failing. Wehave doubtless suggested to her imagination dreams of a future neverto be realized, and we must now consign her to a home where all theaffections of fond relatives will be unequal to the task of blinding herto its poverty and its obscurity. And yet even this is better than todetain her here. It shall be my care to see in what way I can I wasabout to write 'recompense;' nor would the word be unsuitable recompenseMr. Dalton for the injury we have done him as regards his child; and ifyou have any suggestion to make me on this head, I will gladly acceptit."The note concluded with some hints as to the manner of making thecommunication to Kate, the whole awkwardness of which Sir Stafford, ifneed were, would take upon himself.The whole temper of the letter was feeling and tender. Without even inthe most remote way adverting to what had occurred between Lady Hesterand himself, he spoke of their separation simply in its relation to KateDalton, for whom they were both bound to think and act with caution.As if concentrating every thought upon her, he did not suffer any otherconsideration to interfere. Kate, and Kate only, was all its theme.Lady Hester, however, read the lines in a very different spirit. She hadjust recovered from a mesmeric trance, into which, to calm her nervousexaltation, her physician, Dr. Buccellini, had thrown her. She had beenlying in a state of half-hysterical apathy for some hours, all volition,almost all vitality, suspended, under the influence of an exaggeratedcredulity, when the letter was laid upon the table."What is that your maid has just left out of her hand?" asked thedoctor, in a tone of semi-imperiousness.[Illustration:   318]"A letter, a sealed letter," replied she, mystically waving her handbefore her half-closed eyes.The doctor gave a look of triumph at the bystanders, and went on:"Has the letter come from a distant country, or from a correspondentnear at hand?""Near!" said she, with a shudder."Where is the writer at this moment?" asked he."In the house," said she, with another and more violent shuddering."I now take the letter in my hand," said the doctor, "and what am Ilooking at?""A seal with two griffins supporting a spur."The doctor showed the letter on every side, with a proud and commandinggesture. "There is a name written in the corner of the letter, beneaththe address. Do you know that name?"A heavy, thick sob was the reply."There there be calm, be still," said he, majestically motioningwith both hands towards her; and she immediately became composedand tranquil. "Are the contents of this letter such as will give youpleasure?"A shake of the head was the answer."Are they painful?""Very painful," said she, pressing her hand to her temples."Will these tidings be productive of grand consequences?""Yes, yes!" cried she, eagerly."What will you do, when you read them?""Act!" ejaculated she, solemnly."In compliance with the spirit, or in rejection?""Rejection!""Sleep on, sleep on," said the doctor, with a wave of his hand; and, ashe spoke, her head drooped, her arm fell listlessly down, and herlong and heavy breathing denoted deep slumber. "There are people, MissDalton," said he to Kate, "who affect to see nothing in mesmerism butdeception and trick, whose philosophy teaches them to discredit all thatthey cannot comprehend. I trust you may never be of this number.""It is very wonderful, very strange," said she, thoughtfully."Like all the secrets of nature, its phenomena are above belief; yet, tothose who study them with patience and industry, how compatible do theyseem with the whole order and spirit of creation. The great system ofvitality being a grand scheme of actionary and reactionary influences,the centrifugal being in reality the centripetal, and those impulses wevainly fancy to be our own instincts being the impressions of externalforces do you comprehend me?""Not perfectly; in part, perhaps," said she, diffidently."Even that is something," replied he, with a bland smile. "One whosefuture fortunes will place her in a station to exert influence is anenviable convert to have brought to truth.""I!" said she, blushing with shame and surprise together; "surely youmistake, sir. I am neither born to rank, nor like to attain it.""Both one and the other, young lady," said he, solemnly; "high asyour position will one day be, it will not be above the claims of yourdescent. It is not on fallible evidence that I read the future.""And can you really predict my fortune in life?" asked she, eagerly."More certainly than you would credit it, when told," said he,deliberately."How I should like to hear it; how I should like to know" She stopped,and a deep blush covered her face."And why should you not know that your dreams will be realized?" saidhe, hastily, as if speaking from some irresistible impulse. "What morenatural than to desire a glance, fleeting though it be, into thatblack vista where the bright lightning of prophecy throws its momentarysplendor?""And how know you that I have had dreams?" said she, innocently."I know of them but by their accomplishment. I see you not in thepresent or the past, but in the future. There your image is revealed tome, and surrounded by a splendor I cannot describe. It is gorgeous andbarbaric in magnificence; there is something feudal in the state bywhich you are encompassed that almost speaks of another age.""This is mere dreamland, indeed," said she, laughing."Nay, not so; nor is it all bright and glorious, as you think. There areshadows of many a dark tint moving along the sunlit surface.""But how know you all this?" asked she, half incredulously."As you slept last evening in a mesmeric slumber on that sofa; but Iwill hear no further questioning. Look to our patient here, and ifthat letter agitate her over-much, let me be sent for." And, with thesewords, delivered oracularly, the doctor left the room, while Kate seatedherself beside the sofa where Lady Hester slept.It was late in the night when Lady Hester awoke, and soon rememberingthat a letter had arrived, broke the seal and read it. If the proposalof Sir Stafford was in every way unacceptable, there was something whichcompensated for all in the excitement of spirits an act of oppositionwas sure to produce; nor was it without a sense of triumph that she readlines penned in evident sorrow and depression of spirit. In fact, shemade the not uncommon error of mistaking sorrow for repentance, andthought she perceived in her husband's tone a desire to retrace hissteps. It is difficult to say whether such an amende would havegiven her pleasure; certainly she would not have accepted it withoutsubjecting him to a term of probation of more or less length. In anycase, as regarded Kate, she was decided at once upon a positive refusal;and as, with her, a resolve and a mode of action were usually the workof the same moment, she motioned to Kate to sit down beside her on thesofa, and passing her arm around her, drew her fondly towards her."Kate, dearest," said she, "I 'm sure nothing would induce you to leaveme, I mean, to desert and forsake me."Kate pressed the hand she held in her own to her lips with fervor, butcould not speak for emotion."I say this," said Lady Hester, rapidly, "because the moment has come totest your fidelity. Sir Stafford and I it is needless to state how andby what means have at last discovered, what I fancy the whole world hasseen for many a day, that we were totally unsuited to each other, intaste, age, habit, feeling, mode of life, and thought; that we havenothing in common, neither liking nor detesting the same things,but actually at variance upon every possible subject and person. Ofcourse-all attempt to cover such discrepancies must be a failure. Wemight trump up a hollow truce, child, but it never could be an alliance;and so we have thought, I 'm sure it is well that we have hit upon evenone topic for agreement, we have thought that the best, indeed the only,thing we could do, was to separate."An exclamation, almost like an accent of pain, escaped Kate at thesewords."Yes, dearest," resumed Lady Hester, "it was his own proposal, made inthe very coldest imaginable fashion; for men have constantly thishabit, and always take the tone of dignity when they are about to doan injustice. All this, however, I was prepared for, and could sufferwithout complaint; but he desires to rob me of you, my dear child, todeprive me of the only friend, the only confidante I have in the world.I don't wonder that you grow pale and look shocked at such cruelty,concealed, as it is, under the mask of care for your interests andregard for your welfare; and this to me, dearest, to me, who feel to youas to a sister, a dear, dear sister!" Here Lady Hester drew Kate towardsher, and kissed her twice, affectionately. "There 's his letter, mysweet child. You can read it; or better, indeed, that you should not, ifyou would preserve any memory of your good opinion of him.""And he that was ever so kind, so thoughtful, and so generous!" criedKate."You know nothing of these creatures, my dear," broke in Lady Hester."All those plausibilities that they play off in the world are littleemanations of their own selfish natures. They are eternally cravingadmiration from us women, and that is the true reason of their mockkindness and mock generosity! I 'm sure," added she, sighing, "myexperience has cost me pretty dearly! What a life of trial and privationhas mine been!"Lady Hester sighed heavily as her jewelled fingers pressed to her eyes ahandkerchief worth a hundred guineas, and really believed herself a casefor world-wide sympathy. She actually did shed a tear or two overher sorrows; for it is wonderful on what slight pretension we cancompassionate ourselves. She thought over all the story of her life, andwept. She remembered how she had been obliged to refuse the husband ofher choice; she forgot to be grateful for having escaped a heartlessspendthrift, she remembered her acceptance of one inferior to her inrank, and many years her senior; but forgot his wealth, his generosity,his kindliness of nature, and his high character. She thought of herselfas she was at eighteen, the flattered beauty, daughter of a Peer,courted, sought after, and admired; but she totally forgot what shewas at thirty, with faded attractions, unthought of, and, worse still,unmarried. Of the credit side of her account with Fortune she omittednot an item; the debits she slurred over as unworthy of mention. Thatshe should be able to deceive herself is nothing very new or strange,but that she should succeed in deceiving another is indeed singular; andsuch was the case. Kate listened to her, and believed everything; andwhen her reason failed to convince, her natural softness of dispositionserved to satisfy her that a more patient, long-suffering, unrepiningbeing never existed than Lady Hester Onslow."And now," said she, after a long peroration of woes, "can you leave mehere, alone and friendless? will you desert me?""Oh, never, never!" cried Kate, kissing her hand and pressing her to herheart. "I would willingly lay down my life to avert this sad misfortune;but, if that cannot be, I will share your lot with the devotion of mywhole heart."Lady Hester could scarcely avoid smiling at the poor girl's simplicity,who really fancied that separation included a life of seclusion andsorrow, with restricted means and an obscure position; and it was witha kind of subdued drollery she assured Kate that even in her alteredfortunes a great number of little pleasures and comforts would remainfor them. In fact, by degrees the truth came slowly out, that the greatchange implied little else than unrestrained liberty of action, freedomto go anywhere, know any one, and be questioned by nobody; theequivocal character of the position adding a piquancy to the society,inexpressibly charming to all those who, like the Duchesse d'Abrantes,think it only necessary for a thing to be "wrong" to make it perfectlydelightful.Having made a convert of Kate, Lady Hester briefly replied to SirStafford, that his proposition was alike repugnant to Miss Dalton as toherself, that she regretted the want of consideration on his part, whichcould have led him to desire that she should be friendless at a timewhen the presence of a companion was more than ever needed. This done,she kissed Kate three or four times affectionately, and retired toher room, well satisfied with what the day had brought forth, and onlywishing for the morrow, which should open her new path in life.It often happens in life that we are never sufficiently struck withthe force of our own opinions or their consequences, till, fromsome accident or other, we come to record them. Then it is that thesentiments we have expressed, and the lines of action adopted, suddenlycome forth in all their unvarnished truth. Like the images which thepainter, for the first time, commits to canvas, they stand outto challenge a criticism which, so long as they remained in mereimagination, they had escaped.This was precisely Kate Dalton's case now. Her natural warm-heartedness,and her fervent sense of gratitude, had led her to adopt Lady Hester'scause as her own; generous impulses, carrying reason all before them,attached her to what she fancied to be the weaker side. "The divinitythat doth hedge--" "beauty--" made her believe that so much lovelinesscould do no wrong; nor was it till she came to write of the event toher sister, that even a doubt crossed her mind on the subject. Thedifficulty of explaining a circumstance of which she knew but little,was enhanced by her knowledge of Ellen's rigid and unbending sense ofright. "Poor dear Nelly," said she, "with her innocence of mind, willunderstand nothing of all this, or she will condemn Lady Hester at once.Submission to her husband would, in her opinion, have been the first ofduties. She cannot appreciate motives which actuate society in a rankdifferent from her own. In her ignorance of the world, too, she mightdeem my remaining here unadvisable; she might counsel my return tohome; and thus I should be deserting, forsaking, the dear friend who hasconfided all her sorrows to my heart, and reposes all her trust in myfidelity. This would break Lady Hester's heart and my own together; andyet nothing is more likely than such a course. Better a thousand timesnot expose her friend's cause to such a casualty. A little time and alittle patience may place matters in a position more intelligible andless objectionable; and, after all, the question is purely a familysecret, the divulgence of which, even to a sister, is perhaps notwarrantable."Such were among the plausibilities with which she glanced over herconduct; without, however, satisfying herself that she was in the right.She had only begun the descent of lax morality, and her head wasaddled by the new sensation. Happy are they who even from weak nervesrelinquish the career!Kate's letter home, then, was full of gay revelations. Galleries,churches, gardens; objects of art or historic interest; new picturesof manners, sketches of society, abounded. There were descriptions offetes, too, and brilliant assemblies, with great names of guests andgorgeous displays of splendor. Well and sweetly were they written; aquick observation and a keen insight into character in every line. Thesubtle analysis of people and their pretensions, which comes of mixturewith the world, was preeminent in all she said; while a certain sharpwit pointed many of the remarks, and sparkled in many a brilliantpassage.It was altogether a lively and a pleasant letter. A stranger, readingft, would have pronounced the writer clever and witty; a friend wouldhave regretted the want of personal details, the hundred little traitsof egoism that speak confidence and trust. But to a sister! and sucha sister as Nelly! it was, indeed, barren! No outpouring of warmaffection; no fond memory of home; no reference to that little firesidewhence her own image had never departed, and where her presence was eachnight invoked.Oh! Kate, has Hanserl's dark prophecy thrown its shadow already to yourfeet? Can a young heart be so easily corrupted, and so soon?CHAPTER XXVII. A SMALL DINNER AT THE VILLINO ZOE.AMONG the penalties great folk pay for their ascendancy, there is onemost remarkable, and that is, the intense interest taken in all theiraffairs by hundreds of worthy people who are not of their acquaintance.This feeling, which transcends every other known description ofsympathy, flourishes in small communities. In the capital of which weare now speaking, it was at its very highest pitch of development. TheOnslows furnished all the table-talk of the city; but in no circlewere their merits so frequently and ably discussed as in that littleparliament of gossip which held its meetings at the "Villino Zoe."Mrs. Ricketts, who was no common diplomatist, had done her utmost toestablish relations of amity with her great neighbor. She had expendedall the arts of courtesy and all the devices of politeness to effectthis entente cordiale; but all in vain. Her advances had been met withcoldness, and "something more;" her perfumed little notes, written in astyle of euphuism all her own, had been left unanswered; her presents offruit and flowers unacknowledged, it is but fair to add, that they neverproceeded further than the porter's lodge, even her visiting-cards wereonly replied to by the stiff courtesy of cards, left by Lady Hester's"Chasseur;" so that, in fact, failure had fallen on all her endeavors,and she had not even attained to the barren honor of a recognition asthey passed in the promenade.This was a very serious discomfiture, and might, when it got abroad,have sorely damaged the Ricketts's ascendancy in that large circle, whowere accustomed to regard her as the glass of fashion. Heaven knewwhat amount of insubordination might spring out of it! what rebelliousnotions might gain currency and credit! It was but the winter beforewhen a Duchess, who passed through, on her way to Rome, asked "who Mrs.Ricketts was?" and the shock was felt during the whole season after.The Vandyk for whose authenticity Martha swore, was actually called inquestion. The "Sevres" cup she had herself painted was the subject of aheresy as astounding. We live in an age of movement and convulsion, noman's landmarks are safe now, and Mrs. Ricketts knew this.The Onslows, it was clear, would not know her; it only remained, then,to show why she would not know them. It was a rare thing to find afamily settling down at Florence against whom a "true bill" might noteasily be found of previous misconduct. Few left England without areason that might readily become an allegation. Bankruptcy or divorcewere the light offences; the higher ones we must not speak of. Nowthe Onslows, as it happened, were not in this category. Sir Stafford'scharacter was unimpeachable, her Ladyship's had nothing more graveagainst it than the ordinary levities of her station. George "had gonethe pace," it was true, but nothing disreputable attached to him. Therewas no use, there fore, in "trying back" for a charge, and Mrs. Rickettsperceived that they must be arraigned on the very vaguest of evidence.Many a head has fallen beneath the guillotine for a suspicion, and manya heart been broken on a surmise!A little dinner at the Villino opened the plan of proceedings. It wasa small auto-da-fe of character at which the Onslows were to be thevictims, while the grand inquisitors were worthily represented by thePolish Count, Haggerstone, Purvis, and a certain Mr. Foglass, thenpassing through Florence on his way to England. This gentleman, who wasthe reputed son of a supposed son of George the Fourth, was received as"very good royalty" in certain circles abroad, and, by virtue of a wig,a portly chest, and a most imposing pomposity of manner, taken to beexceedingly like his grandfather, just on the same principle as redcurrant jelly makes middling mutton resemble venison.To get rid of his importunity, a Minister had made him Consul in someremote village of the East, but finding that there were neither fees norperquisites, Foglass had left his post to besiege the doors of DowningStreet once more, and if rejected as a suppliant, to become an admirablegrievance for a Radical Member, and a "very cruel case of oppression"for the morning papers.Foglass was essentially a "humbug;" but, unlike most, if not all otherhumbugs, without the smallest ingredient of any kind of ability.When men are said to live by their wits, their capital is, generallyspeaking, a very sufficient one; and that interesting class of personsknown as adventurers numbers many clever talkers, shrewd observers,subtle tacticians, and admirable billiard-players; with a steady hand ona pistol, but ready to "pocket" either an "insult" or a "ball." if theoccasion require it. None of these gifts pertained to Foglass. Hehad not one of the qualities which either succeed in the world or insociety, and yet, strange to say, this intolerable bore had a kind ofpopularity, that is to say, people gave him a vacant place at theirdinners, and remembered him at picnics.His whole strength lay in his wig, and a certain slow, measuredintonation which he found often attracted attention to what he said,and gave his tiresome anecdotes of John Kemble, Munden, and Mathews thesemblance of a point they never possessed. Latterly, however, he hadgrown deaf, and, like most who suffer under that infirmity, taken tospeaking in a whisper so low as to be inaudible, a piece of politenessfor which even our reader will be grateful, as it will spare him themisery of his twaddle.Haggerstone and he were intimates were it not a profanation of theword, we should say friends. They were, however, always together; andHaggerstone took pains to speak of his companion as a "monstrous cleverfellow, who required to be known to be appreciated." Jekyl probablydiscovered the true secret of the alliance in the fact that they alwaystalked to each other about the nobility, and never gave them theirtitles, an illusory familiarity with Dukes and Earls that appeared torender them supremely happy. Richmond, Beaufort, Cleveland, and Stanleywere in their mouths as "household words."After all, it was a harmless sort of pastime; and if these "ImaginaryConversations" gave them pleasure, why need we grumble?We have scruples about asking our reader even to a description of theRicketts's dinner. It was a true Barmecide feast. There was a very showybouquet of flowers: there was a lavish display of what seemed silver;there was a good deal of queer china and impracticable glass; inshort, much to look at, and very little to eat. Of this fact the Pole'sappreciation was like an instinct, and as the entrees were handed round,all who came after him became soon aware of. Neither the wine nor thedessert were temptations to a long sitting, and the party soon foundthemselves in the drawing-room."Son Excellence is going to England?" said the Pole, addressing Foglass,who had been announced as an Ambassador; "if you do see de CountOjeffskoy, tell him I am living here, as well as a poor exile can, whohave lost palaces, and horses, and diamonds, and all de rest.""Ah! the poor dear Count!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts, while Martha prolongedthe echo."You carry on the war tolerably well, notwithstanding," saidHaggerstone, who knew something of the other's resources in piquet andecarte."Carry on de war!" rejoined he, indignantly; "wid my fader, who work inde mines; and my beautiful sisters, who walk naked about de streets ofCrakow!""What kind of climate have they in Crak-Crak-Crak--" A fit of coughingfinished a question which nobody thought of answering; and Purvis satdown, abashed, in a corner."Arthur, my love," said Mrs. Ricketts, she was great at a diversion,whenever such a tactic was wanted, "do you hear what Colonel Haggerstonehas been saying?""No, dearest," muttered the old General, as he worked away with rule andcompass."He tells me," said the lady, still louder, "that the Onslows haveseparated. Not an open, formal separation, but that they occupy distinctapartments, and hold no intercourse whatever.""Sir Stafford lives on the rez de chaussee" said Haggerstone, who,having already told the story seven times the same morning, was quiteperfect in the recital, "Sir Stafford lives on the rez de chaussee, witha small door into the garden. My Lady retains the entire first floorand the grand conservatory. George has a small garcon apartment off theterrace.""Ho! very distressing!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts, whose woe-worn looksseemed to imply that she had never heard of a similar incident before;"and how unlike us, Arthur!" added she, with a smile of beamingaffection. "He has ever been what you see him, since the day he stole myyoung, unsuspecting heart."The Colonel looked over at the object thus designated, and, by the grinof malice on his features, appeared to infer that the compliment was buta sorry one, after all."'John Anderson my Jo, John,'" muttered he, half aloud."'We've climbed the hill toge-ge-ge-ther,'" chimed in Purvis, with acackle."Gather what, sir? Blackberries, was it?" cried Haggerstone."Don't quote that low-lived creature," said Mrs. Ricketts; "a poet onlyconversant with peasants and their habits. Let us talk of our own order.What of these poor Onslows?""Sir Stafford dines at two, madam. A cutlet, a vegetable, and a cherrytart; two glasses of Gordon's sherry, and a cup of coffee.""Without milk. I had it from Proctor," broke in Purvis, who was burstingwith jealousy at the accuracy of the other's narrative."You mean without sugar, sir," snapped Haggerstone. "Nobody does takemilk-coffee after dinner.""I always do," rejoined Purvis, "when I can't get mara-mara-mara--""I hope you can get maraschino down easier than you pronounce it, sir.""Be quiet, Scroope," said his sister; "you always interrupt.""He do make de devil of misverstandness wit his whatye-call-'em," addedthe Pole, contemptuously.And poor Purvis, rebuked on every side, was obliged to fall back besideMartha and her embroidery."My Lady," resumed Haggerstone, "is served at eleven o'clock. The momentGranzini's solo is over in the ballet, an express is sent off to orderdinner. The table is far more costly than Midchekoff's.""I do believe well," said the Count, who always, for nationality's sake,deemed it proper to abuse the Russian. "De Midchekoff cook tell me hehave but ten paoli how you say par tete by the tete for his dinner; datto include everyting, from the caviar to de sheeze.""That was not the style at the Pavilion formerly," roared outHaggerstone, repeating the remark in Foglass's ear.And the ex-consul smiled blandly towards Mrs. Ricketts, and said he 'dtake anything to England for her "with pleasure.""He 's worse than ever," remarked Haggerstone, irritably. "When peoplehave a natural infirmity, they ought to confine themselves to their ownroom.""Particularly when it is one of the tem-tem-temper," said Purvis, almostchoked with passion."Better a hasty temper than an impracticable tongue, sir." saidHaggerstone."Be quiet, Scroope," added Mrs. Ricketts; and he was still. Then,turning to the Colonel, she went on: "How thankful we ought to be thatwe never knew these people! They brought letters to us, some, indeed,from dear and valued friends. That sweet Diana Comerton, who marriedthe Duke of Ellewater, wrote a most pressing entreaty that I should callupon them.""She did n't marry the Duke; she married his chap-chaplain," chimed inPurvis."Will you be quiet, Scroope?" remarked the lady."I ought to know," rejoined he, grown courageous in the goodness of hiscause. "He was Bob Nutty. Bitter Bob, we always called him at school. Hehad a kind of a poly-poly-poly--""A polyanthus," suggested Haggerstone."No. It was a poly-polypus a polypus, that made him snuffle in hisspeech.""Ach Gott!" sighed the Pole; but whether in sorrow for poor "Bob," or inutter weariness at his historian, was hard to say."Lady Foxington, too," said Mrs. Ricketts, "made a serious request thatwe should be intimate with her friend Lady Hester. She was candid enoughto say that her Ladyship would not suit me. 'She has no soul, Zoe,'wrote she, 'so I need n't say more.'""Dat is ver bad," said the Pole, gravely."Still, I should have made her acquaintance, for the sake of that youngcreature Miss Dalton, I think they call her and whom I rather suspect tobe a distant cousin of ours.""Yes; there were Dawkinses at Exeter a very respectable solicitor,one was, Joe Dawkins," came in Purvis; "and he used to say we wereco-co-co-connections.""This family, sir, is called Dalton, and not even a stutter can makethat Dawkins.""Couldn't your friend Mr. Foglass find out something about these Daltonsfor us, as he goes through Germany?" asked Mrs. Ricketts of the Colonel."No one could execute such a commission better, madam, only you mustgive him his instructions in writing. Foglass," added he, at the top ofhis voice, "let me have your note-book for a moment.""With pleasure," said he, presenting his snuff-box."No; your memorandum-book," screamed the other, louder."It's gone down," whispered the deaf man. "I lost the key on Tuesdaylast.""Not your watch, man. I want to write a line in your note-book;" and hemade a pantomimic of writing."Yes, certainly; if Mrs. R. will permit, I'll write to her withpleasure.""Confound him!" muttered Haggerstone; and, taking up a visiting-card, hewrote on the back of it, "Could you trace the Daltons as you go back byBaden?"The deaf man at once brightened up; a look of shrewd intelligencelighted up his fishy eyes as he said,"Yes, of course; say, what do you want?""Antecedents family fortune," wrote Haggerstone."If dey have de tin," chimed in the Pole."If they be moral and of irreproachable reputation," said Mrs. Ricketts."Are they related to the other Dawkinses?" asked Purvis. "Let him ask iftheir mother was not godfather to no, I mean grandfather to the ReverendJere-Jere-Jere--""Be quiet, Scroope will you be quiet?""There, you have it all, now," said Haggerstone, as he finished writing;"their 'family, fortune, flaws, and frailties' 'what they did, and wherethey did it' observing accuracy as to Christian names, and as manydates as possible.""I'll do it," said Foglass, as he read over the "instruction.""We want it soon, too," said Mrs. Ricketts. "Tell him we shall need theinformation at once.""This with speed," wrote Haggerstone at the foot of the memorandum.Foglass bowed a deep assent."How like his grandfather!" said Mrs. Ricketts, in ecstasy."I never knew he had one," whispered Haggerstone to the Pole. "Hisfather was a coachmaker in Long Acre.""Is he not thought very like them?" asked Mrs. Ricketts, with a sidelongglance of admiration at the auburn peruke."I've heard that the wig is authentic, madam.""He has so much of that regal urbanity in his manner.""If he is not the first gentleman of England," muttered Haggerstone tohimself, "he is the first one in his own family, at least.""By the way," said Mrs. Ricketts, hastily, "let him inquire into thataffair of Lord Norwood.""No necessity, madam. The affair is in 'Bell's Life,' with thesignificant question, 'Where is he?' But he can learn the particulars,at all events." And he made a note in the book."How dreadful all this, and how sad to think Florence should be theresort of such people!""If it were not for rapparees and refugees, madam, house-rent would bevery inexpensive," said the Colonel, in a subdued voice; while,turning to the Pole, he added, "and if respectability is to be alwaysa caricature, I'd as soon have its opposite. I suppose you do not admitthe Viscount, madam?""He has not ventured to present himself," said Mrs. Ricketts, proudly."I hope that there is, at least, one sanctuary where virtue can liveunmolested." And, as she spoke, she looked over at Martha, who wasworking away patiently; but whether happy in the exclusive tariffaforesaid, or somewhat tired of "protection," we are unable to say."What has he do?" asked the Count."He has done the 'ring' all round, I believe," said Haggerstone,chuckling at a joke which he alone could appreciate."Dey do talk of play in England!" said the Pole, contemptuously. "Deynever do play high, wit there leetle how do you call 'em? bets, of tree,four guinea, at ecarte. But in Polen we have two, tree, five tousandcrowns on each card. Dere, crack! you lose a fortune, or I do win one!One evening at Garowidsky's I do lose one estate of seventeen millionflorins, but I no care noting for all dat! I was ver rich, wit mypalaces and de mayorat how you call dat?"Before this question could be answered, the servant threw open thedouble door of the salon, and announced, "Milordo Norwood!" A shellmight have burst in the apartment and not created much more confusion.Mrs. Ricketts gave a look at Martha, as though to assure herself thatshe was in safety. Poor Martha's own fingers trembled as she bent overher frame. Haggerstone buttoned up his coat and arranged his cravat withthe air of a man so consummate a tactician that he could actually rollhimself in pitch and yet never catch the odor; while Purvis, whose dreadof a duel list exceeded his fear of a mad dog, ensconced himself behinda stand of geraniums, where he resolved to live in a state of retirementuntil the terrible Viscount had withdrawn. As for the Count, apreparatory touch at his moustache, and a slight arrangement of hishair, sufficed him to meet anything; and as these were the ordinarydetails of his daily toilet, he performed them with a rapidity quiteinstinctive.To present oneself in a room where one's appearance is unacceptable is,perhaps, no slight test of tact, manner, and effrontery; to be actuallyindifferent to the feelings around is to be insensible to the danger;to see the peril, and yet appear not to notice it, constitutes the trueline of action. Lord Norwood was perfect in this piece of performance,and there was neither exaggerated cordiality nor any semblance ofconstraint in his manner as he advanced to Mrs. Ricketts, and taking herhand, pressed it respectfully to his lips."This salutation," said he, gayly, "is a commission from LordKennycroft, your old and constant admirer. It was his last word as weparted: 'Kiss Mrs. Ricketts's hand for me, and say I am faithful asever.'""Poor dear Lord! General, here is Lord Norwood come to see us.""How good of him how very kind! Just arrived from the East, my Lord?"said he, shaking Foglass by the hand in mistake."No, sir; from Malta." He wouldn't say England, for reasons. "MissRicketts, I am most happy to see you and still occupied with the finearts? Haggy, how d'ye do? Really it seems to me like yesterday since Isat here last in this delightful arm-chair, and looked about me on allthese dear familiar objects. You 've varnished the Correggio, I think?""The Vandyk, my Lord.""To be sure the Vandyk. How stupid I am! Indeed, Lady Foxington saidthat not all your culture would ever make anything of me.""How is Charlotte?" asked Mrs. Ricketts, this being the familiar forLady F."Just as you saw her last. Thinner, perhaps, but looking admirably.""And the dear Duke how is he?""Gouty always gouty but able to be about.""I am so glad to hear it. It is so refreshing to talk of old friends.""They are always talking of you. I'm sure, 'Zoe' forgive me the libertyZoe Ricketts is an authority on every subject of taste and literature.""How did you come here, my Lord?" whispered Haggerstone."The new opera broke down, and there is no house open before twelve,"was the hasty reply."Is Jemima married, my Lord?""No. There 's something or other wrong about the settlements. Who's theforeigner, Haggy?""A Pole. Petrolaffsky.""No, no not a bit of it. I know him," said the other, rapidly; then,turning to Mrs. Ricketts, he grew warmly interested in the private lifeand adventures of the nobility, for all of whom she entertained a mostcatholic affection.It was, indeed, a grand field-day for the peerage; even to the"Pensioners" all were under arms. It was a review such as she rarelyenjoyed, and certainly she "improved the occasion." She scatteredabout her noble personages with the profusion of a child strewingwild-flowers. There were Dukes she had known from their cradles;Marchionesses with whom she had disported in childhood; Earls andViscounts who had been her earliest playmates; not to speak of a moreadvanced stage in her history, when all these distinguished individualswere suppliants and suitors. To listen to her, you would swear that shehad never played shuttlecock with anything under an Earl, nor trundleda hoop with aught below a Lord in Waiting! Norwood fooled her to thetop of her bent. To use his own phrase, "he left her easy hazards, andeverything on the balls." It is needless to state that, in such pleasantconverse, she had no memory for the noble Viscount's own transgressions.He might have robbed the Exchequer, or stolen the Crown jewels, foranything that she could recollect! and when, by a seeming accident, hedid allude to Newmarket, and lament his most "unlucky book," she smiledcomplacently, as though to say that he could afford himself even theluxury of being ruined, and not care for it."Florence is pretty much as it used to be, I suppose," said he; "and onereally needs one's friends to rebut and refute foolish rumors, when theyget abroad. Now, you 'll oblige me by contradicting, if you ever hear,this absurd story. I neither did win forty thousand from the Dukeof Stratton, nor shoot him in a duel for non-payment." Both thesederelictions were invented on the moment. "You 'll hear fifty othersimilar offences laid to my charge; and I trust to you and the Onslowsfor the refutation. In fact, it is the duty of one's own class to defend'their order.'"Mrs. Ricketts smiled blandly, and bowed, bowed as though her gauzeturban had been a coronet, and the tinsel finery jewelled strawberryleaves! To be coupled with the Onslows in the defence of a viscount wasa proud thought. What if it might be made a grand reality?"Apropos of the Onslows, my Lord," said she, insidiously, "you are veryintimate with them. How is it that we have seen so little of each other?Are we not congenial spirits?""Good Heavens! I thought you were like sisters. There never were peopleso made for each other. All your tastes, habits, associations forgiveme, if I say your very, antipathies are alike; for you both areunforgiving enemies of vulgarity. Depend upon it, there has been someunderhand influence at work. Rely on 't, that evil tongues have kept youapart." This he said in a whisper, and with a sidelong glance towardswhere Haggerstone sat at ecarte with the Pole."Do you really think so?" asked she, reddening with anger, as shefollowed the direction of his eyes."I can hit upon no other solution of the mystery," said he,thoughtfully; "but know it I will, and must. You know, of course, thatthey can't endure him?""No, I never heard that.""It is not mere dislike, it is actual detestation. I have striven tomoderate the feeling. I have said, 'True enough, the man is bad ton,but you needn't admit him to anything like intimacy. Let him come and gowith the herd you receive at your large parties, and, above all, neverrepeat anything after him, for he has always the vulgar version of everyincident in high life.'"Mrs. Ricketts raised her arched eyebrows and looked astonished; but itwas a feeling in which acquiescence was beautifully blended, and theViscount marked it well."You must tell me something of this Miss Dalton," said he, drawing hischair closer; "they affect a kind of mystery about her. Who is she? Whatis she?""There are various versions of her story abroad," said Mrs. Ricketts,who now spoke like the Chief Justice delivering a charge. "Some say thatshe is a natural daughter of Sir Stafford's; some aver that she isthe last of a distinguished family whose fortune was embezzled by theOnslows; others assert that she is a half-sister of Lady Hester's own;but who ought to know the truth better than you, my Lord?""I know absolutely nothing. She joined them in Germany; but where, when,and how, I never heard.""I 'll soon be able to inform you, my Lord, on every detail of thematter," said she, proudly. "Our kind friend, yonder, Mr. Foglass, hasundertaken to discover everything. Mr. F., will you touch his arm forme,Martha?" and, the gentleman being aroused to consciousness, now arose,and approached Mrs. Ricketts's chair, "may I be permitted to take aglance at your note-book?" This speech was accompanied by a pantomimicgesture which he quickly understood. "I wish to show you, my Lord," saidshe, addressing the Viscount, "that we proceed most methodically in oursearches after title, as I sometimes call it ha, ha, ha! Now, here isthe precious little volume, and this will explain the degree of accuracysuch an investigation demands. This comes of living abroad, my Lord,"added she, with a smile. "One never can be too cautious, never tooguarded in one's intimacies. The number of dubious people one meetswith, the equivocal characters that somehow obtain a footing in societyhere, I really must ask you to decipher these ingenious hieroglyphicsyourself." And she handed the book to his Lordship.He took it courteously at the spot she opened it; and as his eyes fellupon the page, a slight very slight flush rose to his cheek, whilehe continued to read the lines before him more than once over. "Veryexplicit, certainly!" said he, while a smile of strange meaning curledhis lip; and then, closing the book, he returned it to the lady's hand;not, however, before he had adroitly torn out the page he had beenlooking at, and which contained the following words: "Norwood's affairthe precise story of the N. M. business if cut in England, and scratchedat the 'Whip.'""I cannot sufficiently commend either your caution or your tact, Mrs.Ricketts," said he, bowing urbanely. "Without a little scrutiny of thiskind our salons would be overrun with blacklegs and bad characters!"It was now late, late enough for Lady Hester, and the Viscount roseto take his leave. He was perfectly satisfied with the results of hisvisit. He had secretly enjoyed all the absurdities of his hostess, andeven stored up some of her charming flights for repetition elsewhere.He had damaged Haggerstone, whose evil-speaking he dreaded, and, byimpugning his good breeding, had despoiled him of all credit. He hadseen the Polish Count in a society which, even such as it was, wasmany degrees above his pretensions; and although they met withoutrecognition, a masonic glance of intelligence had passed between them;and, lastly, he had made an ally of the dear Zoe herself, ready toswear to his good character, and vouch for the spotless honor of all hisdealings on turf or card-table."Has he explained the Newmarket affair, madam?" said Haggerstone, as thedoor closed on the Viscount's departure."Perfectly, Colonel; there is not the shadow of a suspicion againsthim.""And so he was not scr-scr-scratched at the 'Whip'?" cried Purvis,emerging from his leafy retreat."Nothing of the kind, Scroope.""A scratch, but not a wound, perhaps," said Haggerstone, with a grin ofmalice."I am ver happy please ver moosh," said the Count, "for de sake of deorder. I am republiquecain, but never forget I 'm de noble blood!""Beautiful sentiment!" exclaimed Mrs. Ricketts, enthusiastically."Martha, did you hear what the Count said? General, I hope you didn'tlose it?""I was alway for de cause of de people," said the Count, throwing backhis hair wildly, and seeming as if ready to do battle at a moment'swarning."For an anti-monarchist, he turns up the king wonderfully often atecarte" said Haggerstone, in a low muttering, only overheard by Martha."I don't think the demo-demo-demo" But before Purvis had finished hispolysyllabic word, the company had time to make their farewell speechesand depart. Indeed, as the servant came to extinguish the lamps, hefound the patient Purvis very red in the face, and with other signs ofexcitement, deeply seated in a chair, and as if struggling against anaccess of suffocation.What the profound sentiment which he desired to enunciate mighttherefore be, is lost to history, and this true narrative is unable torecord.CHAPTER XXVIII. THE VISCOUNT'S VISION.WHEN Lord Norwood arrived at the Mazzarini Palace, he was surprised notto find the usual half-dozen carriages of the habitues drawn up in thecourtyard, and still more so to learn that her Ladyship did not receivethat evening. He ascended to George Onslow's apartment, and discoveredthat he had dined with Prince Midchekoff, and not yet returned. Notknowing how to spend the hours, so much earlier than those of hisusually retiring to rest, he lighted a cigar, and threw himself on asofa before the fire.The reveries of men who live much in the world are seldom veryagreeable. The work of self-examination comes with a double penalty whenit is rarely exercised, and the heavy arrears of time are formidablescores to confront. Lord Norwood was no exception to this theory. Notthat he was one to waste time or temper in self-reproaches. The bygonewas essentially with him the "irrevocable." It might, it is true,occasionally suggest a hint for the future, but it never originated asorrow for the past. His philosophy was a very brief code, and compriseditself in this, "that he did n't think well of himself, but thoughtworse of all others." All that he had seen of life was duplicity,falsehood, selfishness, and treachery. In different stations thesecharacteristics took different forms; and what was artfully cloaked incourtesy by the lord was displayed in all its naked deformity by theplebeian.He might have conducted himself respectably enough had he been rich, atleast he fervently believed so; but he was poor, and therefore driven tostratagems to maintain his position in society. Cheated by his guardiansand neglected by his tutor, he was sent into the world half ruined,and wholly ignorant, to become at first a victim, and afterwards thevictimizer. With no spirit of retributive vengeance, there was nothingof reprisal in his line of conduct, he simply thought that such was thenatural and inevitable course of events, and that every man begins asdupe, and ends as knave. The highest flight of the human mind, in hisesteem, was successful hypocrisy; and although without the plastic witor the actual knowledge of life which are required well to sustain apart, he had contrived to impose upon a very large number of persons wholooked up to his rank; for, strange enough, many who would not have beenduped by a commoner, fell easy victims to the arts of "my Lord."The value of his title he understood perfectly. He knew everything itcould, and everything it could not, do for him. He was aware that thearistocracy of England would stand by one of their order through manyvicissitudes, and that he who is born to a coronet has a charmed life,in circumstances where one less noble must perish ingloriously. He knew,too, how, for very shame's sake, they would screen one of themselves,and by a hundred devices seem to contradict before the world what theylament over behind its back; and, lastly, he knew well that he hadalways a title and a lineage to bestow, and that the peerage was thegreat prize among the daughters of men.Now, latterly, he had been pushing prerogative somewhat too far. Hehad won large sums from young men not out of their teens; he had beenassociated in play transactions with names less than reputable; and,finally, having backed a stable to an immense amount at Newmarket, hadlevanted on the day of his losing. He had done the act deliberately andcalmly. It was a coup which, if successful, replaced him in credit andaffluence; if a failure, it only confirmed the wavering judgment of hisset, and left him to shift for the future in a different sphere; for,while a disgraced viscount is very bad company for viscounts, he isoften a very welcome guest amongst that amiably innocent class who thinkthe privileges of the aristocracy include bad morals with blue ribbons.The Turf could now no longer be a career with him. Ecarte and lansquenetwere almost as much out of the question. Billiards, as Sir Walter saidof literature, "might be a walking-stick, but never a crutch." Therewas, then, nothing left for it but marriage. A rich heiress was his lastcoup; and as, in all likelihood, the thing could not be done twice, itrequired geat circumspection.In England this were easy enough. The manufacturing districts were grownambitious. Cotton lords were desirous of a more recognized nobility,and millowners could be found ready to buy a coronet at the cost of halftheir fortune. But from England late events had banished him, and with amost damaged reputation.Now, carrying nobility to the Continent was like bringing coals toNewcastle, the whole length and breadth of the land being covered withcounts, barons, dukes, and princes; and although English nobility standson a different footing, there was no distinguishing the "real article"amid this mass of counterfeit.Every Frenchman of small fortune was an emigre count. Every German, ofnone, was sure to be a baron. All Poles, unwashed, uncombed, and uncaredfor, were of the very cream of the aristocracy; and as for Italians!it was a nation of princes, with their uncles all cardinals. To be aviscount in such company was, perhaps, like Lord Castlereagh's unstarredcoat, plus distingue, but certainly more modest. The milor, if notassociated with boundless wealth, six carriages, two couriers, threecooks, and a groom of the chambers, the whole of the "Russie," orthe "Black Eagle," means nothing abroad. If not bound up with all theextravagance and all the eccentricities of riches, if not dazzling bydisplay or amazing by oddity, it is a contradiction of terms; and tobe an English noble without waste, profusion, and absurdity, is to denyyour country or be a counterfeit of your class.Lord Norwood knew and felt all these things. They had often occupied hisspeculations and engaged his thoughts; so that, if his mind reverted tothem now, it was to regard them as facts for future theory to build uponas mathematicians make use of the proofs of geometry without going overthe steps which lead to conviction. No; all his present reflections tooka practical form, and might be summed up in the one resolve, "I must gono further. I have done everything that a man dare do,--perhaps a littlemore, and yet keep his footing in the world." That tacit verdict of "notproven," which had been passed upon so many of his actions, might atany moment be reversed now, and a review of his life's career presentedanything but a bright retrospect. Expulsion from a great school atthirteen; three years' private dissipation and secret wickedness in aclergyman's family; a dissolute regiment, from which he was givenleave to sell out at Malta; two years with the Legion or Don Carlos,it mattered not which, in Spain; a year or so in London, with a weakattempt at reformation; a staff appointment in India obtained andsold; exposure partly hushed up; debts; Jews; renewals; the Fleet; theBankruptcy Court; a few disreputable duels; an action for seduction;ending with the last affair at Newmarket, made up the grand outline,the details comprising various little episodes with which we must nottrouble ourselves.One incident, however, would come up prominently before his Lordship'smind, and, however little given to let the past usurp the thoughtswhich should be given to the present, it still insisted upon sharing hisattention. This was no less than a little love affair in Spain with a"ballerina" of the Opera, with whom, by the aid of a young priest thenstudying at Saragossa, he had contracted a mock marriage. The suddenmovement of a corps of the army to which he was attached gave him anopportunity of an easy divorce from his bride, and it is likely he hadnot twice thought of her since the event had happened. Now, however,that an intention of marrying in reality occurred to him, the incidentcame freshly to his mind, and he jocularly wondered if his secondmarriage might prove more fortunate than his first.The hour and the place were favorable to revery. It was past midnight.All was silent and noiseless in the great palace; the sharp ticking ofthe clock on the mantel-piece was the only sound to be heard, save, at along distance off, the dull, subdued flow of the Arno. The room itself,unlighted, except by the flickering wood fire, was in deep shadow; and,lulled by these influences and his mild Manilla, Norwood was free torevel in so much of dreamland as natures like his ever explore.Who can tell whether men of this stamp know what it is to "grieve,"whether chagrin for some momentary disappointment, anger at beingthwarted, is not the nearest approach to sorrow that they ever feel?The whole course of their lives seems opposed to the notion of deepor intense feeling, and the restless activity of their ingenious mindsappears to deny the possibility of regrets. As for Norwood, he wouldhave laughed at the puerility of going over the bygone; therefore, ifhe did recur to a former incident of his life, it was involuntary andprobably induced by the accidental similarity with those which nowengaged his thoughts."If this Dalton girl be rich," thought he, "I might do worse. There areno relatives to make impertinent inquiries, or ask awkward questions.Hester can, and must, if I desire, assist me. Living out of England,the girl herself will have heard nothing of my doings, and in name,appearance, and air she is presentable anywhere." He thought, too, that,as a married man, his character would be in a measure rehabilitated. Itwould be like entering on a new road in life; and if this could be donewith a certain degree of style and outlay, he had great trust in theworld's charity and forgiveness to pardon all the past. "A good houseand a good cook," thought he, "are the best witnesses to call tocharacter I have ever met. Turtle and champagne have proved sovereignremedies for slander in all ages; and the man who can sport Lafitte inthe evening, and split a pencil at twenty paces of a morning, may defyenvy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness."To find out about this girl's fortune was then his first object. Asfor family, his own rank was enough for both. The matter must be donequickly. The London season over, England would be pouring its myriads oftalking, gossiping travellers over the Continent, and then he should bediscussed, probably avoided and shunned too.Even already certain unmistakable signs of coolness announced themselvesamongst the men of his acquaintance.George Onslow avoided play when in his company. Treviliani, one of LadyHester's chief danglers, and the patron of the Turf in Tuscany, wouldn't even allude to a horse before him. Prince Midchekoff went further,and actually, save on rare occasions, omitted him from his dinnerlist. Now, although Norwood averred that he detested petit jeu, hatedspooney talk about racing, and dreaded the tiresome display of a"Tartar feast," these were all threatening indications, and he saw theirmeaning. He would willingly have fastened upon some one man, fixed aquarrel on him, and shot him. He had more than once in life adopted thispolicy with success; but here it would have been inapplicable, and thepublic opinion he sought to bring on his own side would have been onlymore inevitably arrayed against him."In what a mess does the want of money involve a man!" thought he, ashe lay before the half-dying embers of the wood fire. "Had I won my betson 'Chanticleer,' or had I but backed 'Amontillado,' how different hadmy position been to-day! That the simple change of one name for anotherin my betting-book the mere hazard of a choice, of a horse, too shouldinfluence a man's whole life, is a pretty fair instance of what theworld is! Had I 'come right,' I should now be the favored guest of somenoble duke, shooting his grace's pheasants, drinking his Burgundy, andflirting with his daughters. Fortune willed it otherwise, and here Iam, actually plotting a match with a nameless girl to rescue myself fromutter ruin. Three weeks ago I would not have believed that this couldhappen; and who can tell what another three weeks may bring forth?perhaps, already, there is mischief brewing. What if my Lady's refusalto receive this evening may have some signification in it? Haggerstoneis too courteous by half, and Jekyl has never called upon me since myarrival!" He laughed ironically as he said this, and added, "It is abold game, after all, for them to play! Reprisals to two of them, atleast might prove awkward; and as for 'Master Albert,' he lives buton general sufferance. There has been a long run of luck against me;nothing but ill-fortune since the day I might have married Hester, andyet hung back, and that very same year she marries another, and inheritsan immense fortune in India. What a blow to each of us! Such has beenmy lot through life; always backing the loser till the very moment whenluck changes, and his turn comes to win."As these thoughts passed through his mind, weariness, the silence of thehour, the darkened room, induced slumber; and although once or twice hemade a half-effort to arouse himself and go home, the listless feelinggained the mastery, and he dropped off to sleep. The uneasy conscienceshave oftentimes very easy slumbers. Norwood's was of the calmest; not adream, not one flitting fancy disturbed it.It was already nigh day as he lay thus, when the dull roll of wheelsbeneath the window in part awoke him; at least, it so far aroused himthat he remembered where he was, and fancied that it might be GeorgeOnslow, on the return from his dinner-party. He lay for some minutesexpecting to hear his step upon the stair, and see him enter the room;but as all seemed to resume its wonted quiet, he was dozing off again,when he heard the sound of a hand upon the lock of the door.It is one of the strange instincts of half-slumber to be often morealive to the influence of subdued and stealthy sounds than to loudernoises. The slightest whisperings, the low murmurings of a human voice,the creaking of a chair, the cautious drawing back of a curtain will jarupon and arouse the faculties that have been insensible to the rushingflow of a cataract or the dull booming of the sea.Slight as were the sounds now heard, Norwood started as he listened tothem, and, at once arousing himself, he fixed his eyes upon the door, inwhich the handle was seen to turn slowly and cautiously. The impressionthat it was a robber immediately occurred to him, and he determined tolie still and motionless, to watch what might happen. He was notwanting in personal courage, and had full confidence in his strength andactivity.The door at last opened; at first, a very little, and slowly, thengradually more and more, till, by the mysterious half-light to which hiseyes had grown accustomed, Norwood could see the flounces of a femaledress, and the small, neat foot of a woman beneath it. The faint,uncertain flame of the fire showed him thus much, but left the remainderof the figure in deep shadow.Whether from excess of caution, or that she was yet hesitating whatcourse to take, she remained for some seconds motionless; and Norwood,who had subdued his breathing to the utmost, lay in the deep shadow,speculating on the upshot of an adventure from which he promisedhimself, at least, an amusing story. The deep black lace which fell overthe arched instep indicated a degree of rank in the wearer that gave apiquancy to the incident, and imparted a zest to the curiosity of aman who probably knew no higher pleasure in life than in possessing thesecrets of his acquaintance.He had time to run over in his mind a dozen little speculations of whoshe was, ere she stirred; and at last, as if with change of purpose, hesaw, or fancied that he saw, the door beginning slowly to close. Whetherthis was a mere trick of his excited imagination or not, a suddengesture of impatience on his part threw down one of the cushions of thesofa. A slight shriek so slight as to be barely heard broke from thefemale, and she banged the door to. Norwood reached it with a spring;but although, as he wrenched it open, he could yet hear the rustling ofa woman's dress in the passage, the sharp sound of a door hastily shutand locked defied all thought of pursuit, and he stood pondering overwhat had happened, and almost doubtful of its reality."At least, the fair visitor belongs to the family; that much I may relyupon," said he, as he lighted a candle to explore the locality a littlecloser. The corridor, however, abruptly stopped at a small door, whichwas locked on the inside; but to what portion of the house it led hecould not even conjecture. He was not a very unlikely man to trace theclew of such an adventure as this seemed to be. It was one ofthose incidents with which his course of life had made him somewhatconversant; and few were better able to fill up from conjecture everyblank of such a history. Nor was he one to shrink from any suspicion,no matter how repugnant to every thought of honor, nor how improbable toevery mind less imbued with vice than his own.For a moment or two, however, he almost doubted whether the whole mightnot have been a dream, so sudden, so brief, so trackless did it allappear. This doubt, was, however, quickly resolved, as his eyes fellupon the floor, where a small fragment of a lace dress lay, as it wascaught and torn off in the closing door. Norwood took it up, and satdown to examine it with attention."Point d'Alencon," said he, "bespeaks no vulgar wearer; and such isthis! Who could have thought of George Onslow playing Lothario! But thiscomes of Italy. And now to find her out." He ran over to himself half adozen names, in which were nearly as many nationalities, but some doubtaccompanied each. "No matter," thought he, "the secret will keep."He suddenly remembered, at the instant, that he had promised anacquaintance to pass some days with him in the Maremma, shooting; and,not sorry to have so good a reason for a few days' absence, he aroseand set out towards his hotel, having first carefully placed withinhis pocketbook the little fragment of lace, a clew to a mystery he wasresolved to explore hereafter.CHAPTER XXIX. FRANK'S JOURNEY.Our readers may, ere this, have surmised that Frank Dalton's career asa soldier was neither very adventurous nor exciting, since otherwisewe should scarcely have so nearly forgotten him. When he parted withHanserl to pursue his journey, his heart was full of warring andconflicting emotions, love of home and hope of future distinctionalternately swaying him; so that while his affections drew him everbackwards, his ambitious urged him to go on."I could have been so happy to have lived with them," thought he, "evenas a peasant lives, a life of daily toil. I would have asked for nohigher fortune than that peaceful home we had made for ourselves byour own affections, the happy fireside, that sufficed us for allthe blandishments of wealth and riches. Still there would have beensomething ignoble in this humility, something that would ill becomemy blood as a Dalton. It was not thus my ancestors understood theirstation, it was not with such lowly ambitions their hearts were stirred.Count Stephen himself might at this hour have been in obscurity andpoverty as great, perhaps, as our own had he been thus minded; and nowhe is a field-marshal, with a 'Maria Teresa' cross on his breast! andthis without one friend to counsel or to aid him! What a noble serviceis that where merit can win its way self-sustained and independent,where, without the indignity of a patron, the path of honorableenterprise lies free and open to all! What generous promptings, whatbold aspirations such a career engenders! He shall not be ashamed ofme, he shall not have to blush for the Dalton blood," said the boy,enthusiastically; and he revelled in a dream of the old Count's ecstasyon finding a nephew so worthy of their name, and in his fancy he sawpictures of future scenes in which he figured. All of these had thesame rose tint; for while in some he imagined himself winning thehigh rewards of great achievements, in others he was the caressed andflattered guest of rank and beauty. "To think that I should once havebeen thus!" cried he, laughing at the conceit, "trudging alongthe high-road with a knapsack on my shoulder, like a Bursch in his'Wander-jahre;'" and then he vowed to himself that "he would have apicture taken of his humble guise as first he started in life, to hangup at some future day beside the decorated soldier he was yet to be."Selfishness can wear many a mask. Sometimes it can array itself infeatures almost noble, more often its traits are of the very meanest.Frank's egotism was of the former kind. He wanted to attain distinctionby an honorable path, he would not have stooped to any other. He wasready to do or dare all for greatness. No peril could deter, no dangercould daunt him; but yet was he totally deficient in that greatestelement of success, that patient discipline of the mind which, madeup of humility and confidence, can wait and bide its time, earning theprizes of life before it claim them. His pride of family, however, washis greatest blemish, since it suggested a false notion of distinction,a pretension so groundless that, like a forged banknote, it was sure toinvolve even the bearer in disgrace.So full was he of himself and his own future, that he took but littlenote of the way as he went. Avoiding, from a sense of pride, toassociate with the "Travelling Youths," as they are called, he walkedalong from early morning to late evening, alone and companionless. Itwas mostly a dreary and uninteresting road, either leading through darkand gloomy pine forests or over great plains of swampy surface, wherethe stubble of the tall maize, or the stunted vines, were the onlytraces of vegetation. As he drew near the Tyrol, however, the greatmountains came in sight, while the continual ascent told that he wasgradually reaching the land of glaciers and snow-peaks. Day by day hefound the road less and less frequented: these lonely districts werelittle resorted to by the wandering apprentices, so that frequentlyFrank did not meet a single traveller from day-dawn till night. Perhapshe felt little regret at this, leaving him, as it did, more time forthose daydreams in which he loved to revel. Now and then some giantmountain glittering in the sun, or some dark gorge thousands of feetbelow him, would chase away his revery, and leave him for a time ina half-bewildered and wondering astonishment; but his thoughts soonresumed their old track, and he would plod along, staff in hand, asbefore.Walking from before daybreak to a late hour of the evening, Frankfrequently accomplished in his day's journey as many miles as thetraveller who, by post, only spent the few hours of mid-day on the road;in fact, he might have thus measured his speed, had he been less wrappedup in his own fancies, since, for several days, a caleche, drawn bythree post-horses, had regularly passed him on the road, and alwaysabout the same hour.Frank saw nothing of this; and when on a bright and frosty day he beganthe ascent of the Arlberg, he little knew that the carriage, about halfa mile in front, had been his travelling companion for the past week.Disdaining to follow the winding high-road, Frank ascended by thosefoot-tracks which gain upon the zig-zags, and thus soon was miles inadvance of the caleche. At last he reached the half-way point of ascent,and was glad to rest himself for a few minutes on one of the bencheswhich German thoughtfulness for the wayfarer never neglects to placein suitable spots. A low parapet of a couple of feet separated the roadfrom a deep and almost perpendicular precipice, at the foot of which,above two thousand feet beneath, stood the village of Stuben. There wasthe little chapel in which he had his morning's mass, there thelittle Platz, where he had seen the post-horses getting ready for thetravellers; there, too, the little fountain, covered with a shed ofstraw, and glistening with many an icicle in the bright sun. The veryvoices of the people reached him where he sat; and the sounds of astreet-organ floated upwards through the still atmosphere. It was ascene of peaceful isolation such as would have pleased Nelly's fancy. Itwas like one of those "Dorf s" she herself had often carved to amuse awinter's evening, and Frank's eyes filled up as he thought of her and ofhome.The sound of feet upon the snow suddenly roused him, and, on lookinground, Frank saw a traveller slowly coming up the pass. His dress atonce proclaimed that he was not a pedestrian, save from choice, and wasmerely sauntering along in advance of his carriage. In the mere cursoryglance Frank bestowed upon him he could see that he was a young andhandsome man, with a certain soldierlike bearing in his air that wellsuited his bold but somewhat stern features."You journey well, young fellow," said he, addressing Frank familiarly."This is the fifth day we have been fellow-travellers; and although Ihave post-horses, you have always kept up with me on your feet."Frank touched his cap with a somewhat stiff courtesy at thisunceremonious address; and, without deigning a reply, employed himselfin arranging the straps of his knapsack."Are you a soldier?" asked the stranger."A cadet!" replied Frank as bluntly."In what regiment, may I ask?""The Franz Carl.""Ah! my own old corps," said the other, gayly. "I served four years withthem in the Banat. From what part of the Empire are you you have n't theaccent of an Austrian?""I am an Irishman.""Oh! that explains it. And your name?""Dalton. And now, sir, what may be yours, for I don't see why thiscuriosity is to be one-sided," said Frank, with an air even moreinsolent than the words."I am Count Ernest of Walstein," said the other, without a touch ofirritation.[Illustration:  356]"What rank do you hold in the service?" asked Frank, boldly."That of lieutenant-colonel, boy.""And your age may be about thirty?" said Frank, half in question andhalf in sarcasm."I was twenty-eight last August," was the calm reply."By Jove! that is a service!" exclaimed Frank, "where a man scarcely tenyears my senior may command a regiment!"The other laughed, and after a brief pause, said, "People are in thehabit of calling me fortunate, so that you must not suppose my case tobe the rule.""Be it so: even as an exception, the example is a bright one. Anothermay do what you have done.""If you mean that I have earned my rank by services, boy," said theCount, smiling, "you would make a grave mistake. My promotion hadanother source."Frank looked as though he were curious to hear the explanation, but theother gave none."How do you call yourself?" asked he of Frank, after a pause."Dalton," replied the boy, more respectfully than before."We have a field-marshal of that name in the service, a most gallant oldsoldier, too.""My grand-uncle!" cried Frank, with enthusiasm."Indeed! So you are a grand-nephew to the Graf von Auersberg," said theCount, taking a more deliberate view than he had yet bestowed upon him."Then how comes it you are travelling in this fashion, and on foot?""I have not asked you why you journey in a caleche with three horses,"said Frank, insolently."It's my habit to do so.""This, then, may be mine, sir," said Frank, throwing his knapsack on hisshoulder, and preparing to depart."Is not the Franz Carl at Vienna?" said the Count, not seeming to noticethe irritation of his manner."I believe so.""Well, then, as I am going thither, perhaps you will accept of a seat inmy caleche?"There was a frankness in the way this offer was made that suddenlyrouted the ill-temper Frank had fallen into. No one was less disposedthan himself to accept of a favor from a perfect stranger; but the toneand manner of the proffer had, somehow, disarmed it of all appearance ofsuch; and as he stood uncertain what answer to make, the Count added:"I 'm always lucky. I was just wishing for a travelling companion, andfortune has thrown us into acquaintanceship.""I don't know I can scarcely tell," said Frank, hesitating, "how or whatto answer.""You forget that we are comrades, Dalton or shall be, at least, inanother day or two," said the Count, familiarly; "so step in, and nomore about it."The caleche had drawn up as he spoke, and the courier stood, cap inhand, beside the door, so that Frank had no time for any but an abruptrefusal, and that he could not give; he therefore bowed his head, andsprang in. The door was slammed sharply to, and the next moment thehorses were rattling along over the snow, the merry bells of the harnessjingling pleasantly as they went.Probably no two beings could present a much stronger contrast than thetwo who now journeyed along side by side. The one, rich, highly placed,and distinguished with every gift of fortune at his command, and yetpleasure-sick, weary, and discontented; the other, poor, and almostfriendless, full of hope, and ardent with all the buoyancy of youth. TheCount was as jaded and tired of life as the cadet was eager to enjoy it.Notwithstanding perhaps we should rather say in virtue of these strongcontrarieties, they made admirable travelling companions, and the roadslipped away unconsciously to each.At Innspruck they halted for a day or two, and Frank accompanied his newfriend to the cafes and theatres, mingling in the throng of those whoselife is a round of easy dissipation. It is true that, to conform bydress and demeanor with these, Frank was obliged to spend the goldencoins of Nelly's purse; louis after louis went in some one extravaganceor another, sacrifices that cost him many a pang, but which, from pride,he bore up against with seeming indifference. Walstein presented himeverywhere as the nephew of the old field-marshal Von Auersberg; and asnothing was more common than to see a young cadet dispensing themost lavish sums, with equipages, liveries, and servants, none seemedsurprised that the youth should indulge in these habits and tastes ofextravagance. His very enjoyment seemed like an earnest of being longhabituated to these modes of life, for whether he played or drank, or inwhatever excesses he mingled, there was ever the same joyous spirit; andFrank Dalton had all the outward signs of a youth rich in every accidentof fortune. At first, thoughts of his humble home and of those by whosesacrifices he was enabled to indulge in such costly pleasures wouldcross his mind, and, what between shame and sorrow, he felt degraded anddebased before himself; but, by degrees, the levity of action induced,as it ever will do, the levity of thinking; and he suffered himself tobelieve that "he was no worse than others." A more fatal philosophy thanthis, youth never adopted, and he who seeks a low standard rarely stopstill he falls beneath even that. Frank's pride of family made him vain,and his vanity made him credulous; he therefore implicitly believedall that his new companions told him, the familiar "thee and thou" ofcamaraderie giving an air of friendship to all the flatteries."Were I a nephew of a field-marshal like thee, I'd not serve in aninfantry corps. I 'd be in the Lichtenstein Hussars or the Lancers ofthe Kaiser," said one."So he will," cried another. "Dalton only joined the Franz Carl to gethis promotion quickly. Once at Vienna, he will be an officer, and readyto exchange his regiment.""Old Auersberg can make thee what he will, lad," said a third. "He mighthave been Minister of War himself, if he had liked it. The Emperor Franzloved him as a brother.""And he is rich, too, no one knows how rich," broke in a fourth. "Hecommanded for many years on the Turkish frontier, in those good dayswhen our Grenzers used to make forays upon the villages, and everyPashalic paid its blackmail for peace' sake.""Thou are a lucky dog, Dalton, to find thy promotion and an inheritancethus secured to thee.""When thou has a regiment, lad, don't forget us poor devils here, thathave no uncles in the 'Maria Teresa' category.""I 'll lay my life on't, that he is a colonel before I becomeRittmeister," said a young lieutenant of dragoons, "and I have had fiveyears' hard service in Galicia and Servia.""And why not?" broke in Count Walstein, who sat silently up tothis smoking his meerschaum in a corner. "Has the empire lost itsaristocratic character? Are not birth and blood to have their claims, asof old?"This speech met a ready acceptance, for the company consisted of thosewho either were, or affected to be, of noble extraction."How our fathers deceive themselves in trying to deceive us!" said ayoung Hungarian cadet. "I, too, was sent off to join my regiment onfoot. Just fancy to walk from Arad to Presburg! I, that never wenttwenty miles in my life save on the saddle. They fitted me with myknapsack, just such a thing as Dalton's. I suppose about as many florinsjingled in my purse as in his. They gave me their blessing and a map ofthe road, with each day's journey marked out upon it. And how far didI go afoot, think'st thou? Two miles and a half. There I took an 'EilBauer,' with four good horses and a wicker caleche, and we drove oursixty, sometimes seventy miles a day. Each night we put up at some goodcountry house or other Honyadi's Ctzyscheny's Palfi's; all lay on theroad, and I found out about fifty cousins I never knew of before, andmade a capital acquaintance, too, the Prince Paul of Ettlingen, who,owning a regiment of Light Dragoons, took me into his corps, and, whenI joined them at Leutmeritz, I was already an officer. What stuff itis they preach about economy and thrift! Are we the sons of peasantsor petty shopkeepers? It comes well, too, from them in their princelychateaux to tell us that we must live like common soldiers. So that,while yesterday, as it were, I sat at a table covered with silver, anddrank my Tokay from a Venetian glass, tomorrow I must put up with sourMelniker, or, mayhap, Bavarian beer, with black bread, and a sausageto help it down! Our worthy progenitors knew better in their own youngdays, or we should not have so many debts and mortgages on our estateseh, Walstein?""I suppose the world is pretty much alike, in every age," said theCount, laughing. "It now and then takes a virtuous fit, and affectsto be better than it used to be; but I shrewdly suspect that the onlydifference is in the hypocritical pretension. When I entered the serviceand it is not so many years ago that I cannot recollect it the cant was,to resemble that rough school of the days of old Frederick and MariaTeresa. Trenck's 'Pandours,' with their scarlet breeches stuffed intotheir wide boot-tops, were the mode; and to wear your moustache to yourshoulders to cry 'Bey'm Henker!' and 'Alle Blitzen!' every moment, werethe veritable types of the soldier. Now we have changed all that.We have the Anglomania of English grooms and equipages, top-boots,curricles, hurdle-races, champagne suppers. Dalton will be the ton inhis regiment, and any extravagance he likes to launch into certain tohave its followers."The youth blushed deeply; partly in conscious pride at the flattery,partly in the heartfelt shame at its inappropriateness to himself; andeven the sincerity with which his comrades drank his health, could notdrown the self-reproaches he was suffering under."Thou art an only son, too, Dalton!" said another. "What favors fortunewill shower upon one happy fellow! Here I am, one of seven; and althoughmy father is a count of the empire, four of us have to take service inthe infantry.""What of that?" said a dark-complexioned fellow, whose high cheek-bonesand sharp under-jaw bespoke a Pole. "I am a second lieutenant in theregiment that my grandfather raised and equipped at his own cost; andif I were to lose a thousand florins at lansquenet to-morrow, I 'd bebroke, like the meanest 'bursch' in the corps.""It's better to be a rich Englander," cried one."And with a field-marshal for a grand-uncle!" chimed in another."And a 'Maria Teresa' to ask for thy grade as officer," said a third."It's a jolly service to all of us," said a young Bohemian, who,although but a cadet, was a prince, with a princely fortune. "I ask fornothing but a war to make it the best life going.""A war with whom?" cried several together."What care I with whom or where? With Prussia, if you will, to fight outour old scores about Frauconia; with Russia, if you like better, for theDanubian provinces, and her Servian supremacy; with France she 'salways ready, with a cause or without one; with Italy to round off ourfrontier, and push our limits to the Apennines; I'd say with England,only Dalton might n't like it.""And where would you pick your quarrel with England?" said Frank,laughing."Easily enough, through our ambassador at the Porte, or some outlyingstation, where Russia is her rival.""Hang your politics!" broke in a Hungarian. "Let us fight when the timecomes, but not bother our heads about the cause. I 'd rather takemy chance of a sabre-cut any day than addle my brains with too muchthought. Here 's to you, Dalton, mayst soon be a Rittmeister of Hussars,lad; a prouder thing thou needst not ask for.""Thou shalt give us a jolly supper at the 'Schwan,' Dalton, when we meetat Vienna," said another."And we'll pledge those fair sisters of thine and they 're bothhandsome, I 'll be sworn in the best Tokay Palfi's vineyard can yield.""My regiment will be in garrison, in the Leopoldstadt, next month, andI'll remind thee of this pledge.""And we shall be at Lintz," broke in another; "and thou mayst reckon onme, if I have to suffer an arrest for it afterwards.""So it is agreed, Dalton, we are thy guests. For what day shall it be?""Ay, let us name the day," cried several together."When he is named an officer," said Walstein, "that will be timeenough.""Nay, nay the day month after he arrives at Vienna," cried the Bohemian."I have given three breakfasts and five suppers on the occasion of mypromotion, and the promotion has never come yet.""The day month after I arrive, then, be it," said Dalton. "We meet atwhere is it?""The 'Schwan,' lad, the first restaurant of Europe. Let men talk as theywill of the Cadran Bleu and the Trois Freres, I'd back Hetziuger's cookagainst the world; and as for wine, he has Steinkammer at thirty florinsthe flask! And we'll drink it, too, eh, Dalton? and we'll give a 'HochLebe' to that old grandfather or grand-uncle of thine. We'll add tenyears to his life.""A poor service to Dalton," said another; "but here comes Walstein'shorses, and now for the last glass together before we part."The parting seemed, indeed, to be "sweet sorrow," for each leave-takingled to one flask more, friendship itself appearing to make wondrousprogress as the bottle went round. The third call of the postilion'sbugle a summons that even German loyalty could scarcely have courageto resist at last cut short the festivities, and Frank once more foundhimself in the caleche, where at least a dozen hands contested for thelast shake of his, and a shower of good wishes mingled with the soundsof the crashing wheels."Glorious fellows!" cried Dalton, in an ecstasy of delight; "suchcomrades are like brothers."Walstein smiled at the boy's enthusiasm, and lighted his meerschaum insilence; and thus they journeyed, each too full of his own thoughts tocare for converse. It was not at such a moment that Dalton could giveway to dark or serious reflections; the blandishments and caresses ofhis new friends were too powerful to admit of any rivalry in his mind;and even when he did revert to thoughts of home, it was to pictureto himself his father's pride at seeing him in the society of thesehigh-born youths; of Kate's delight at the degree of notice heattracted; and even Nelly poor Nelly! he fancied yielding a gentle,half-reluctant assent to a companionship which, if costly and expensive,was sure to be honorable and high-minded."What would Hanserl say, too," thought he, "if he saw me seated at thetable with those whose high-sounding names are the pride of Austrianchivalry, the Thuns, the Lichtensteins, the Schwartenschilds, and theWalsteins, families old as the Hapsburgs themselves? Little Hanserl, towhom these glorious families were the great lights of history, oh, if hecould have set eyes on me this last evening! when, with arms around myneck, they called me comrade!" From this he wandered on to thoughtsof his uncle, investing the old field-marshal with every noble andsoldierlike attribute, and, above all, fancying him as overflowing withaffection and kindness. What hosts of questions did he ask about hisfather and his sisters; how often had he to repeat their names andpaint their resemblances, going over the most minute details of familyhistory, and recounting the simplest incidents of their daily life, for"Uncle Stephen would know all."In such pleasant fancies he fell fast asleep, even in his dreams tocarry out those imaginings that, waking, had no control of reason.Frank Dalton was awaked from a sound sleep and a pleasant dream of homeby the hoarse voice of a mounted dragoon, ordering the postilion tohalt; and, on looking out, he saw that they were drawn up close besidethe angle of the great wooden bridge that crosses the Danube, under thewalls of Vienna. The whole scene was one of wonderment and surprise tohim. At his feet, as it were, rolled the stream of the rapid Danube; itsimpetuous flood splashing and foaming amid the fragments of ice floateddown from the mountain regions, and which every moment were shiveredagainst the stone breakwaters with the crash of thunder. Beyond theriver rose the fortified walls of the city, covered with a densemultitude of people, eager spectators of a grand military display,which, with all the pomp of war, poured forth beneath the dark archwayof the entrance-gate, and, winding over the "glacis," crossed thebridge, and held on its course towards the Prater.It was a clear, bright day of winter; the blue sky almost cloudless, andthe sharp outline of every object stood out, crisp and well defined, inthe thin atmosphere. Nothing could be more favorable for the effect ofsuch a spectacle. The bright weapons glanced and glittered like silver,the gay trappings and brilliant uniforms showed in all their splendor,the scarlet Lancers, the blue-clad Hussars, the Cuirassiers, with theirtowering helmets, vied with each other in soldierlike bearing; while thedense mass of infantry moved along with a surging, waving motion, likea vast sea heaving with a ground-swell. It was an army complete in everydetail; for, even to the "ambulances" for the wounded, everything wasthere."A review by the Emperor!" said Walstein; "and see, there comes hisstaff." And he pointed to a group of horsemen, whose waving plumes andfloating dolmans were seen at a little distance off in the plain."Oh, let us follow them!" cried Frank, enthusiastically. "Such aglorious sight as this I never even imagined.""You 'll see enough, perhaps too many such," said the Count, languidly."It's a favorite pastime of our old General's to drag us out of quartersin the very depth of winter, and spend a day in the snow of the Prater.""Who could have a thought for weather or hardship when engaged in such ascene?" said Frank."So, evidently, think those worthy field-marshals and generals ofdivision, who, well mounted, and swathed in furs, canter down to theground, an hour after we have reached it, and ride back again when theyhave 'taken the salute,' leaving us to plod wearily home, through wetroads and sloppy streets, to our cold barracks. But just the reverseis the opinion of those poor fellows yonder, with blue faces andfrostbitten knuckles, and who have neither pride in this display, norsympathy with the success of what is called 'a fine manoeuvre.'"Frank shook his head distrustfully. He wished not to credit the opinion,but knew not how to refute it, and was silent."That is the 'Franz Carl,' Dalton," said Walstein, pointing to a columnof infantry, who, in their dark gray overcoats, seemed a sad-looking,gloomy mass. "They've got the best band and the most savage colonel inthe service."Frank gazed at the regiment with a strange sensation of awe and fear."There lies my destiny!" thought he. "Who knows what friendships orenmities await me yonder? What hearts in that dark mass will beatresponsively with my own; what sources of sorrow or affliction may Imeet with amongst them!""I wish thou hadst a better regiment, Dalton," said Walstein."How a better? Is it not a brave and distinguished corps?""Brave enough," said the other, laughing; "and as for distinction, anArchduke owns and commands it. But that is not what I mean. The regimentis a poor one; the officers are from Upper Austria, with little orno fortune, fellows who dine for a zwanziger, play dominos for twokreutzers, waltz at the wine-gardens, and fight duels with sabres."Frank laughed at the description; but his laugh had more of gloomthan mirth about it, for he felt at every moment the false positionbe occupied, and how inextricably complicated his circumstances werebecoming. Every allusion to others showed him in what light he washimself regarded. "Was his deception honorable? was it possible tocontinue it?" were the questions that would obtrude upon him, and forwhich no ingenuity could find answer."There 's the corps for you, Dalton," said Walstein, drawing hisattention to the "Hungarian Guard," all glittering with gold embroidery,and mounted upon the most beautiful white chargers, at once the mostperfect riders and the best mounted cavalry in Europe. "In that regimentyou are certain of being quartered either here or in Prague. Those lacedjackets are too costly wear to send down to the Banat, or among thewilds of Wallachia. Besides, the Empress likes to see these gaudyfellows on their 'schimmels' beneath the Palace windows. Your unclewill, of course, grumble a little about the cost. Perhaps your father,too, will look a little grave when he hears of six thousand florins fora 'dolman,' and four for a 'schabrach;' while ten or twelve horses thevery least you could keep would scarcely sound like a moderate stable.Still, depend upon it, the corps is as good for service as it is costly,and Creptowitz, their Colonel, is a true hussar."For a moment Dalton hesitated whether he should not make the honestavowal of his narrow fortune, and tell that he had no pretension to suchhabits of cost and expense; but shame was too powerful to permit theacknowledgment. He had already gone too far to retract, and he feltthat any candor now would be the confession of a cheat. If these wereharassing and torturing reflections, one flickering ray of hope stillglimmered through the gloom; and this was, what he might expect from hisuncle. "If he be really rich, as they say," thought Frank, "if his favorbe so great with the Emperor, even such a career as this may not beabove my prospects." As he revolved these thoughts, he sat with his headburied between his hands, forgetful of where he was and all around him."You 're losing everything, Dalton," said Walstein. "See, there gothe 'Kaiser Jagers,' with their bugles, the finest in the service; andyonder are the Lichtenstein 'Light Horse,' mounted on thorough-bredcattle; and there, to the left, those savage-looking fellows with longbeards, they are the 'Croat Grenadiers.' But here comes the Emperor!"And, as he spoke, one deafening cheer burst forth along the line, andwas echoed back from the walls of Vienna; while every band struck upthe national hymn of Austria, and the proud notes of "God preserve theEmperor!" floated through the air.A brilliant staff of generals of every arm of the service accompanied"the Kaiser;" and Walstein ran quickly over the names of these, many ofwhom were among the first nobility of the Empire. Some were the war-wornveterans of the great campaigns; some the young hopes of Austrianchivalry; but, conspicuous above all, was a figure whose stature, aswell as the singularity of his uniform, attracted Frank's notice. He wasa very tall old man, dressed in a uniform of purple velvet slashed withgold, and actually covered with the crosses and decorations of variousorders. His cap was a tall chako of red-brown fur, from which a long,straight scarlet plume floated, and beneath which his gray hair wasfastened in a queue, that hung half-way down his back. Yellow buskinsornamented with massive gold spurs completed a costume which seemedalmost a compromise between the present and some bygone age.The figure of the wearer, too, suited well this impression. There wasa stern rigidity of look as he sat still and motionless in his saddle,which relaxed into the polished urbanity of an old courtier as often asthe Emperor addressed him. When bowing to the mane of his charger, heseemed the very type of courtesy; while, as he retired his horse, therewas all the address and ease of a practised rider."There, to the left of Walmoden, on the powerful black horse, do you seethat handsome old man in the purple tunic?" said Waldstein."I have been watching him for several minutes back," replied Frank."What a singular uniform!""Yes. It was the dress of the Artillery of the Imperial Guard in thedays of Wagram and Lobau; and he is permitted to retain it, by a specialleave of the Emperor, a favor he only avails himself of on occasionslike the present.""What a mass of orders he wears!""He has all that the Empire can bestow, from the 'Iron Cross' to the'Maria Teresa.' He has the 'Legion of Honor,' too, sent him by Napoleonhimself! It was that officer who at Elchingen rode up to the head of aFrench column, and told them that the wagons they were pursuing were the'ammunition of the rear-guard!' 'If you advance,' said he, 'we 'll firethem, and blow you and ourselves to atoms!' The coolness and heroism ofthe daring were well acknowledged by a brave enemy. The French halted,and our train proceeded on its way. Mayhap you have heard the anecdotebefore?""Never," said Frank, still gazing with admiration at the old soldier."Then I may as well tell you that he is the Count Dalton von Auersberg,"said Walstein, lying back to enjoy the youth's amazement."What! Uncle Stephen? Is that our uncle?" burst out Frank, in delight."I wish I could call him 'ours,' with all my heart," said Walstein,laughing. "Any man might well be proud of such a relative."But Frank never heard or heeded the remark; his whole soul was wrappedup in the contemplation of the old field marshal, on whom he gazed as adevotee might have done upon his saint."He 's like my father," muttered Frank, half aloud; "buthaughtier-looking, and older. A true Dalton in every feature! How I longto speak to him, to tell him who I am.""Not here, though, not here!" said Walstein, laying his hand on theyouth's arm; for he almost feared lest he should give way to the suddenimpulse. "Were you even the Colonel of your regiment, you could notapproach him now."Frank stared with some surprise at a remark which seemed to treat soslightingly the ties of blood and kindred; while Walstein, by no meanseasy on the score of his companion's prudence, gave the word to thepostilion to drive on; and they entered the city of Vienna.CHAPTER XXX. THE THREAT OP "A SLIGHT EMBARRASSMENT."The Mazzarini Palace was now a proverb for all that was dissipated andextravagant throughout Florence, and in proportion as the society whichfrequented it was select and few in number, the more absurd were therumors that went abroad of its dissipations and excesses. In defaultof a real, good, tangible scandal the world invented a thousand shadowylittle slanders, that, if not as deadly to reputation at once, were justas certain to kill character in the long run.Sir Stafford's gout, of which he was confined to his bed or a sofa, waspronounced the lingering agonies of a broken heart. "My Lady's" latedinners were orgies where every licentiousness held sway. George wasa reckless gambler, who had already jeopardized all the wealth ofhis family; and, as for Kate, she was at the mercy of that amiabletemperament of the human mind which always believes the worst, and asconstantly draws the darkest inference from its belief.Now, Sir Stafford was very gouty, very irritable, and very unhappy toboot, about a number of matters, which, however deeply interesting tohimself, should have had no concern for the world. My Lady did dine ateleven o'clock at night, and the company was assuredly not that fromwhich a discriminating public would have selected archbishops, or evenminor canons, consisting for the most part of that class of which wehave already made mention in a former chapter, with now and then somepasser-through of rank, or some stray diplomate on his way to or fromhis post. George Onslow was a large loser at play, but without havingrecourse to those stratagems for payment which were so generallyascribed to him. While Kate poor Kate was neither better nor worse thanthe reader has hitherto known her.We do not in this admission seek to conceal the fact that she was verydifferent from what first we saw her. Society had taught her tact,grace, and elegance of deportment. Admiration had rendered her yes,--wesay it advisedly admiration had rendered her very attractive, drawingforth a thousand resources of fascination, and a thousand arts ofpleasing, that often wither and die in the cold chill of neglect. Themost fastidious critic could not have detected a fault in her manner;an ill-natured one might have objected to what seemed an excess ofgracefulness; but even this was relieved by a youthful freshness andbuoyancy of temperament, the last the very last remnant of her formerself.She was the belle of Florence. Her sovereignty admitted of nothing likea rival. Whether she drove, or rode, or danced, or walked, the sameadmiring throng surrounded her; some sincere in all their admiration,others but following the lead which fashion took, and others, again,watchful observers of a manner in which they fancied they could tracethe settled plan of a daring and ambitious character. Vanity had beenthe foible of her childish years; it was now the vice of her womanhood.Lady Hester ministered to this failing in a hundred ways. Liking Kateas well as it was possible for her to like anything, she took an intensepleasure in all the admiration she met with.As an actor is said to "create the part" which is written for him, whenhe impresses the personation with traits peculiarly his own, so didshe fancy that Kate was but a reflected image of all her own graces andfascinations; and probably the proudest days of her own triumphs neveryielded more enjoyment than she now felt in the flattering praisesbestowed upon Kate Dalton.There were good-natured people who said that Lady Hester's admirationhad another source, and that, as a somewhat passee beauty, she knew thefull value of a younger and handsomer woman in attracting to her circleand society all that was distinguished by rank or station. We are notprepared to deny some force to this argument, but, assuredly, it hadless weight than other reasons. Lady Hester's own claims, besides, werehigher than these detractors admitted. She was, although not very young,still very handsome, her rank and wealth both considerable, and hermanner the perfection of that school to which she belonged. If heraffection for Kate was only another form of selfishness, it was not theless strong on that account. She was the confidante of her sorrows, byno means a sinecure office; the chief counsellor in all her plans;she was the lay-figure on which she experimented a hundred devicesin costume and toilet; and lastly, greatest charm of all, she was adependant. Not, indeed, that Kate herself so understood her position;pride of family, the Dalton heritage, was too powerful in her to admitof this. Deeply, sincerely grateful she was for all Lady Hester'skindness; her affection she returned tenfold, but no sense ofinferiority mingled with this feeling, save that which arose from herown devoted admiration of her friend.The homage amid which she passed her life, the unceasing flow offlatteries around her, were not very likely to undeceive her on thispoint. A more respectful devotion could not have waited on a princess ofthe royal house. The great Midchekoff gave balls in her honor. The Arabhorses of Treviliani were all placed at her disposal. The various visitsto objects of curiosity or taste were arranged for her pleasure, andnothing omitted that could tend to stimulate her vanity and heighten herself-esteem.The utmost we can say for her all this while is, that if she was carriedaway by the excitement of this adulation, yet, in her heart, she wasas little corrupted as was well possible. She could not be otherthan enamored of a life so unchanging in its happiness, nor couldshe disconnect the enjoyments around her from the possession of greatwealth. She thought of what she had been a few months back: the "sameKate Dalton," braving the snows of a dark German winter, with threadbarecloak and peasant "sabots," an object of admiration to none except poorHanserl, perhaps! And yet now, unchanged, unaltered, save in what goldcan change, how different was her position! It had been well if her loveof splendor had stopped here. It went further, however, and inspired aperfect dread of humble fortune.Over and over again did she hear disparaging remarks bestowed upon thestriving efforts of "respectable poverty," its contrivances derided, itslittle straits held up to ridicule. In dress, equipage, or household,whatever it did was certain to be absurd; and yet all of these people,so laughed at and scorned, were in the enjoyment of means far above herown father's!What a false position was this! How full of deceit must she become tosustain it! She invoked all her sophistry to assure herself that theircondition was a mere passing state; that at some future perhaps not evena remote one they should have "their own again;" and that as in familyand descent they were the equals of any, so they were not inferior inall the just claims to consideration and respect. She tried to think ofher father and Nelly moving in the circles she now lived in; but, evenalone, and in the secrecy of her own thoughts, her cheek became scarletwith shame, and she actually shuddered at the very notion. And evenFrank, her once ideal of all that was graceful and noble-looking,how would he pass muster beside these essenced "fashionables" who nowsurrounded her! She endeavored to console herself by thinking that herfather would have despised the lounging, unmanly lives they led, thatEllen would have retired in bashful modesty from a society whose toneof freedom and license would have shocked her, and that Frank wouldhave found no companionship in a class whose pleasures lay only indissipation; and yet all her casuistry could not reassure her. Thefascinations amid which she lived were stronger than her reason.She became first aware of the great change in herself on recognizinghow differently a letter from home affected her to what it had done somemonths before. At first she would have hastened to her room, and lockedthe door, in an ecstasy of delight to be alone with dearest Nelly, tocommune with her own sweet sister in secret, to hang on every line,every word, with delight, fancying herself once more with arms claspedaround her, or bending down beside her cheek as she leaned over herwork-table. How every little detail would move her; how every allusionwould bring up home before her, the snug little chamber of an evening,as the bright fire glowed on the hearth, and Nelly brought out her toolsfor modelling, while Hanserl was searching for some passage, a line, ora description that Nelly wanted; and then the little discussions thatwould ensue as to the shape of some weapon, or the fashion of somecostume of a past age, so often broken in upon by her father, whosedrolleries would set them laughing!With what interest, too, she would follow each trifling occurrence oftheir daily life; the progress Nelly was making in her last group; itsdifficulties how would she ponder over, and wonder how to meet them!With what eager curiosity would she read the commonest details of thehousehold, the dreary burden of a winter's tale! and how her heartbounded to hear of Frank the soldier although all the tidings were thathe was with his regiment, but "spoke little of himself or the service."Now, however, the glow of delight which a letter used to bring up waschanged for a deep blush of anxiety and shame, anxiety, she knew notwherefore or how; of shame, because Nelly's writing on the address wasquaint and old-fashioned; while the paper and the seal bespoke the verylowliest acquaintance with epistolary elegance. The letter she usedto grasp at with a high-beating heart she now clutched with greatereagerness, but in terror lest others should see and mark its vulgarexterior!How differently, too, did the contents affect her! So long as theyreferred to herself, in her own latest narrative of her life, sheread with avidity and pleasure. Nelly's innocent wonderment was a verydelightful sensation; her affectionate participation in her happinesswas all grateful; even her gentle warnings against the seductions ofsuch a career were not unpleasing; but the subject changed to home, andwhat an alteration came over her spirit! How dark and dismal became thepicture, how poverty-stricken each incident and event, what littleness inevery detail, how insignificant the occupations that interested them!How great the surprise she felt at their interest in such trifles; howastonished that their hopes and fears, their wishes or their dreads,could take so mean a form! This came with peculiar force before her,from a paragraph that closed Nelly's last letter, and which ran thus:"Think of our happiness, dearest Kate! We have just seen one who sawyou lately, one of your Florence acquaintances; and I believe I might gofurther and say friends, for the terms in which he spoke of you evincedsincere and true regard. It was so kind of him to find us out, just tocome and tell us about you; indeed, he remained a day here for no otherpurpose, since his diplomatic duties were urging him to England withspeed."When Kate had read thus far, she stopped, her face and neck crimson withshame, and her heart beating almost audibly. With lightning rapidity sheran over to herself three or four names of ministers and envoys whohad lately left Florence, trembling to think it might be the gorgeousRussian, Naradskoi, the princely Neapolitan, Carnporese, or the haughtySpaniard, Don Hernandez Orloes, who had visited their humble interior.What a humiliation for her, if she were ever to see them again! Home,at that instant, presented itself before her but as the witness of hershame: how sordid and miserable did its poverty appear, and with whatvulgarity associated! Her poor old father, around whose neck but amoment before she would have hung with rapture, she shrank from withvery terror: his dress, his look, his accent every word he spoke, everyallusion he made, were tortures to her; and Nelly even Nelly how sheblushed to fancy her humble guise and poor exterior; the little dress ofcolored wool, from the pockets of which her carving-tools appeared; andthen how the scene rose before her! her father producing Nelly's lastwork, some little group in clay or wood. She pictured to herself hispride, her sister's bashfulness, the stranger's pretended admiration!Till now, these emotions had never seen a counterfeit. Oh, how sheshuddered as her thoughts took more and more the colors of reality, andthe room itself, and its poverty-struck furniture, rose before her! Atlast she read on:"His visit was of course a great honor, and probably, had he come on anyother errand but to speak of you, we should have been half overwhelmedwith the condescension; but in very truth, Kate, I quite forgot allhis greatness and his grandeur, and lost sight of his ever holding anyhigher mission than to bring news of my dearest sister. Papa, of course,asked him to dinner. I believe he would have invited the Czar himselfunder like circumstances; but, fortunately for us, for him, and perhapsfor you too, he was too deaf to hear the request, and politely answeredthat he would send my letter to you with pleasure, under his owndiplomatic seal; and so we parted. I ought to add that Mr. Foglassintends speedily to return to Florence."Three or four times did Kate read this name over before she couldpersuade herself that she had it aright. Foglass! she had never evenheard of him. The name was remarkable enough to remember, as belongingto a person of diplomatic rank, and yet it was quite new to her. Sheturned to Lady Hester's invitation book, but no such name was there.What form her doubts might have taken there is no knowing, when Mr.Albert Jekyl was seen to cross the courtyard, and enter the house.Knowing that if any could, he would be the person to resolve thedifficulty, she hastened downstairs to meet him."Mr. Jekyl," cried she, hurriedly, "is there such a man as Mr. Foglassin this breathing world of ours?""Of course there is, Miss Dalton," said he, smiling at her eagerness."A minister or an envoy at some court?""Not that I have ever heard," repeated he, with a more dubious smile."Well, a secretary of embassy, perhaps? something of that kind? Who ishe? what is he? where does he belong to?""You mean Bob, Miss Dalton," said he, at once puffing out his cheeksand running his hand through his hair, till it became a very goodresemblance of the ex-Consul's wig, while, by a slight adjustment ofhis waistcoat, he imitated the pretentious presence of the mock royalty."'You mean Bob, madam,'" said he, mimicking his measured intonation andpompous tone, "'Old Fogey, as Mathews always called me. Mathews andI and Townsend were always together, dined at Greenwich every Sundayregularly. What nights they were! Flows of reason, and feasts of eh?yes, that's what they were.'""I must remind you that I never saw him," said she, laughing; "thoughI'm certain, if I should hereafter, it will not be very hard torecognize him. Now, who is he?""He himself says, a grandson of George the Fourth. Less interestedbiographers call him a son of Foglass and Crattles, who, I believe, werenot even coachmakers to royalty. He was a consul at Ezmeroum, or somesuch place. At least, they showed him the name on a map, and bade himfind it out; but he found out something more, it seems, that there wasneither pay nor perquisites, neither passports nor peculation; and hehas brought back his wisdom once again to besiege the Foreign Office.But how do you happen to ask about him?""Some of my friends met him in Germany," said she, hesitatingly. Shemight have blushed, had Jekyl looked at her; but he knew better, andtook pains to bestow his glances in another direction."It would be kind to tell them that the man is a most prying,inquisitive sort of creature, who, if he only had the sense of hearing,would be as mischievous as Purvis.""I fancy they will see but little of him," said she, with a saucy tossof the head. "He made their acquaintance by affecting to know me. I 'msure I 've no recollection of having ever seen him.""Of course you never knew him, Miss Dalton!" replied he, with a subduedhorror in his voice as he spoke."A letter for you, Mademoiselle," said the servant to Kate; "and the manwaits for an answer."Kate broke the seal with some trepidation. She had no correspondentsnearer than her home, and wondered what this might mean. It was in astrange commotion of spirit that she read the following lines:"Mrs. Montague Ricketts presents her respectful compliments to MissDalton, and begs to know at what hour to-day Mrs. M. R. may wait uponMiss D., to present a letter which has been committed to Mrs. R.'s handsfor personal delivery. It may secure an earlier hour of audience if Mrs.R. mentions that the precious document is from Miss D.'s father."What could this possibly mean? It was but that very same day the postbrought her a letter from Nelly. Why had not her father said what hewished to say, in that? What need of this roundabout, mysterious mode ofcommunicating?The sight of the servant still in waiting for the answer recalled herfrom these cross-questionings, and she hurried away to consult LadyHester about the reply."It's very shocking, my dear child," said she, as she listened to theexplanation. "The Ricketts, they tell me, is something too dreadful; andwe have escaped her hitherto. You could n't be ill, could you?""But the letter?" said Kate, half smiling, half provoked."Oh, to be sure the letter! But Buccellini, you know, might take theletter, and leave it, with unbroken seal, near you; you could readit just as well. I 'm sure I read everything Sir Stafford said in hiswithout ever opening it. You saw that yourself, Kate, or, withyour scepticism, I suppose, you 'd not believe it, for you are verysceptical; it is your fault of faults, my dear. D'Esmonde almost shedtears about it, the other day. He told me that you actually refused tobelieve in the Madonna della Torre, although he showed you the phialwith the tears in it!""I only said that I had not seen the Virgin shed them," said Kate."True, child! but you saw the tears; and you heard D'Esmonde remark,that when you saw the garden of a morning, all soaked with wet, thetrees and flowers dripping, you never doubted that it had rained duringthe night, although you might not have been awake to hear or see it."Kate was silent; not that she was unprepared with an answer, but dreadedto prolong a discussion so remote from the object of her visit."Now, Protestant that I am," said Lady Hester, with the triumphant toneof one who rose above all the slavery of prejudice, "Protestant that Iam, I believe in the 'Torre.' The real distinction to make is, betweenwhat is above, and what is contrary to, reason, Kate. Do you understandme, child?""I'm sure Mrs. Ricketts's visit must be both," Kate said, adroitlybringing back the original theme."Very true; and I was forgetting the dear woman altogether. I supposeyou must receive her, Kate; there 's no help for it! Say three o'clock,and I'll sit in the small drawing-room, and, with the gallery and thelibrary between us, I shall not hear her dreadful voice.""Has she such?" asked Kate, innocently."I'm sure I don't know," said Lady Hester, pettishly; "but of courseshe has! Those dreadful people always have! Make the visit as brief aspossible, Kate. Let it not be a pretext for anything after. Use youreyeglass on every occasion, so that you can be short-sighted enoughnever to know her again. I have seen you very supercilious at times,child, it is precisely the manner for this interview. It was really verywrong of your papa to write in this fashion; or your sister, or whoeverit was. Nobody thinks of anything but the post, nowadays. Pray tell themso; say it makes me quite nervous; you see I am nervous to-day! There,there! I don't want to fret you, child but everything has gone wrongto-day. Midchekoff has given away his box, and I have promised mine tothe Lucchesini; and that blond flounce is much too narrow, so Celestinetells me; but I 'm sure she has cut a piece off it to make a 'berthe'for herself. And then the flowers are positively odious. They arecrimson, instead of cherry-color, although I told Jekyl twice over theyought to be the very tint of Lady Melgund's nose! There, now; goodbye.Remember all I've been saying, and don't forget that this is a 'giornoinfelice,' and everything one does will prove unlucky. I hope D'Esmondewill not come today. I 'm really not equal to controversy this morning.I should like to see Buccellini, however, and have a globule of theElysian essence. Bye-bye; do think better about the 'Madonna dellaTorre,' and get rid of that odious Ricketts affair as speedily as maybe."With these injunctions, Kate withdrew to indite her reply to Mrs.Ricketts, appointing three o 'clock on that same afternoon for a visit,which she assuredly looked forward to with more of curiosity thanpleasure.CHAPTER XXXI. A CONVIVIAL EVENINGIT is not necessary that the reader should participate in Kate Dalton'smystification regarding her father's letter, that document being simplya piece of Ricketts strategy, and obtained to secure an admission tothe Mazzarini Palace, which, notwithstanding Lord Norwood's assurances,still regained an impregnable fortress to all her assaults.Foglass was then commissioned to induce Mr. Dalton to write something,anything, to his daughter, to be transmitted under the Embassy seal,a magnificent mode of conveyance, which was reason enough to call intoexercise those powers of penmanship which, since he had ceased to issuepromissory notes, had lain in the very rustiest state of disuse. Thecommand to obtain this credential reached Foglass just as he was aboutto start from Baden; but being desirous, for various little socialreasons, to conciliate the Ricketts's esteem, he at once altered hisarrangements, and feigning a sudden attack of gout, a right royal maladyhe took himself to bed, and sent a few lines to Dalton, detailing hismisfortune, and entreating a visit.Never backward in the cause of good-nature, poor Dalton sallied forth atnight, and notwithstanding the cutting blasts of a north wind, andthe sharp driftings of the half-frozen snow, held on his way to the"Russie," where, in a very humble chamber for so distinguished a guest,lay Mr. Foglass in the mock agonies of gout."How devilish kind of you, how very considerate!" said Foglass, as hegave one finger of his hand to shake. "So like poor Townsend this, LordTom, we used to call him. Not wet, though, I hope?""And if I was, it would n't be the first time. But how are you yourself,where is the pain?""You must speak louder; there 's a kind of damper on the voice in thisroom.""Where 's the pain?" screamed Dalton."There there no need to roar," whispered the other. "The pain is hereover the stomach, round the ribs, the back everywhere.""Ah, I know it well," said Dalton, with a wry contortion of the face."It's the devil entirely when it gets under the short ribs! It beginslike a rat nibbling you, as it might be, biting away little bits, withnow and then a big slice that makes you sing out; and then the teethbegin to get hot, and he bites quicker, and tears you besides, sure Iknow it, this many a year."To this description, of which Foglass heard nothing, he bowed blandly,and made a sign to Dalton to be seated near him."You'd like a little wine-and-water, I'm sure," said he, with the air ofa man who rarely figured as a host, and liked it more rarely still."Spirits-and-water--boiling water with sugar and a squeeze of lemon, iswhat I 'll take; and see now, you 'd not be worse of the same yourself.I 've an elegant receipt for the gout, but whether it 's sulphur orsaltpetre 's in it, I don't well remember; but I know you mix it withtreacle, ash-bark, and earthworms, the yolk of four eggs, and a littlerosemary. But as you might n't like the taste of it at first, we 'lljust begin with a jug of punch."The waiter had by this time made his appearance, and the order beingcommunicated by a most expressive pantomime of drinking, and a fewsolitary words of German Dalton possessed, the room assumed a look ofsociality, to which Dalton's presence very mainly contributed.In the confidence such a moment of secrecy suggested, Foglass producedan ear-trumpet, a mark of the most unbounded good faith on his part, andwhich, had Dalton known him better, he would have construed into a proofof implicit reliance on his honor."I've been many years at Constantinople," said he, adjusting theinstrument, "and the confounded muezzin has made me a little deaf. It'san everlasting calling to prayers, day and night, there.""How they ever expect to get to heaven by tormentin', and teasin', ismore than I know," said Dalton."They 're Mahomedans!" said Foglass, with the air of a man uttering aprofound sentiment."Ay, to be sure," observed Dalton; "it's not like Christians. Now, is ittrue, they tell me they never eat salt meat!""Never!""Think of that! Not a bit of corned beef, nor as much as a leg of pork--""Would n't hear of it," interrupted Foglass. "Wine, too, is forbidden.""And punch?""Of course, punch also. A pipe, a cup of coffee, the bath, and a littleopium are the luxuries of Turkish existence.""To the devil I fling them all four," cried Dalton, impatiently. "How aman is to be social beside a coffeepot, or up to his neck in hot water,beats me entirely. Faix! I don't envy the Turks!" And he sipped hisglass as he spoke, like one who had fallen upon a happier destiny."If you 'll mix me a very small glass of that punch, I'd like to proposea toast," said Foglass."There, now, that's spoke like a sensible man; pleasant company andsocial enjoyment are the greatest enemies to the gout. Make your mindeasy, and keep your heart light, and the devil a fear but your kneeswill get limber, and the swellin' will leave your ankles; but weak punchand tiresome people would undermine the best constitution in the world.Taste that."To judge from Mr. Foglass's face, Dalton had at least provided oneelement of health for his companion."It is very strong very strong, indeed!" said he, puckering up his eyes."It's the fault of the water hereabouts," said Dalton. "It doesn't mixright with the spirits; so that one half the first, generally of yourliquor tastes stiff, but the bottom is mild as milk."[Illustration:  384]The explanation gave such encouragement to Foglass, that he drank awayfreely, and it was only when he had finished that he remembered hisintention of giving a toast."Now, Mr. Dalton," said he, as he sat up with a replenished glass in hishand, "I am going to redeem my pledge, and about to give you the healthof the most beautiful girl in Italy, one whose attractions are the themeof every tongue, and whose ambitions may realize any height, or attainany eminence, that she pleases.""Here 's to you, Kate Dalton," broke in the father, "my own sweet child;and if you only come back to me as you went away, the sorrow better Iask, or grander.""She will be a duchess; she may be a princess if she likes.""Who knows who knows?" said Dalton, as he hung down his head, andhammered away with his spoon at the sugar in his glass."Every one knows, every one sees it, Mr. Dalton," said Foglass,authoritatively. "From the Archduke Ernest of Austria to the very pagesof the court, all are her worshippers and admirers. She'll come back toyou with a proud name and a high coronet, Mr. Dalton.""The devil a better than Dalton ever 'twill be! that I can tell you.'T is n't yesterday we took it, the same name; there 's stones in thechurchyard of Ballyhack can show who we are; and if she married the--theGod forgive me, I was going to say the Pope, but I meant the Grand Turkshe would n't be better than she is now, as Kate Dalton.""Not better, certainly, but in a more exalted rank, in a position ofmore recognized distinction," said Foglass, blandly."No; nor that neither," cried Dalton, angrily. "The Daltons goes backto the ancient times of all. There 's one of our name in the Bible. I 'mnot sure where, but I believe it 's in the Book of Kings, or maybe thePsalms; but wherever it is, he was a real gentleman, living on his ownestate, with his livery-servants, and his horses, and everything ingood style about him; high on the grand jury, maybe the sheriff of thecounty."Foglass, who had followed this description but imperfectly, could onlybow in a deep acknowledgment of what he did not understand."The man that marries Kate Dalton isn't doing a piece of condescension,anyhow! that I can tell him. The dirty acres may slip away from us, butour good blood won't.""No man has a higher veneration for blood, sir," said Foglass, proudly;"few men have better reason for the feeling.""Is Fogles an old stock?" asked Dalton, eagerly."Foglass, like Fitzroy, sir, may mean more than loyalty would dare toavow. My father, Mr. Dalton But this is a very sad theme with me, letus change it; let us drink to a better feeling in our native land, whenthat abominable statute may be erased from our code, when that offspringof suspicion and distrust shall no longer be the offence and opprobriumof Englishmen. Here 's to its speedy and everlasting repeal!"The word was talismanic to Dalton, connected, as it was, in his mindwith but one subject. He arose at once, and holding up his goblet in theair, cried out,"Hip! hip! hurrah! three cheers and success to it! Repeal forever!"Foglass echoed the sentiment with equal enthusiasm, and draining hisglass to the bottom, exclaimed,"Thank you, Dalton! thank you; the heartiness of that cheer tells me weare friends; and although you know not what my feelings are indeed nonecan you can execrate with honest indignation those hateful unions!""Bad luck to it!" exclaimed Dalton, with energy. "We never had grace norluck since we saw it!""Those petty German sovereigns, with their territories the size of HydePark!" said Foglass, with intense contempt."Just so. The Hessians!" chimed in Dalton, who had a faint consciousnessthat the other was alluding to the troops of the Electorate, oncequartered in Ireland."Let us change the topic, Dalton," said Foglass, pathetically, as hewiped his brow like a man dispelling a dark train of thought. "Here'sto that charming young lady I saw last evening, a worthy sister of thebeautiful Miss Dalton.""A better child never breathed," said Dalton, drinking off his glass."My own poor Nelly," muttered he, below his breath, "'t is better thanhandsome ye are, true-hearted, and fond of your old father.""She has accomplishments, sir, that would realize a fortune; that is,"said he, perceiving the dark cloud that passed over Dalton's features,"that is, if she were in a rank of life to need it.""Yes very true just so," stammered out Dalton, not quite sure how toaccept the speech. "'Tis a fine thing to be able to make money, notthat it was ever the gift of the Daltons. We were real gentlemen tothe backbone; and there was n't one of the name for five generations,barring Stephen, that could earn sixpence if he was starving.""But Stephen, what could he do?" inquired Foglass, curious to hear ofthis singular exception to the family rule."He took to soldiering in the Austrian army, and he 's a field-marshal,and I don't know what more beside, this minute. My son Frank 's therenow.""And likes it?""Troth, he does n't say a great deal about that. His letter is mightyshort, and tells very little more than where he 's quartered, howhard-worked he is, and that he never gets a minute to himself, poorfellow!""Miss Kate, then, has drawn the prize in the lottery of life?" saidFoglass, who was anxious to bring the subject back to her."Faix, that's as it may be," said the other, thoughtfully. "Her lettersis full of high life and great people, grand dances and balls, and therest of it; but sure, if she 's to come back here again and live athome, won't it come mighty strange to her?""But in Ireland, when you return there, the society, I conclude, is verygood?" asked Foglass, gradually drawing him on to revelations of hisfuture intentions and plans."Who knows if I'll ever see it again? The estate has left us. 'T is themOnslows has it now. It might be in worse hands, no doubt; but they 'veno more right to it than you have.""No right to it, how do you mean?""I mean what I say, that if every one had their own, sorrow an acre ofthat property would be theirs. 'T is a long story, but if you like tohear it, you 're welcome. It 's more pleasure than pain to me to tellit, though many a man in my situation would n't have the heart to goover it."Foglass pronounced his willingness at once; and, a fresh jorum ofpunch being concocted, Dalton commenced that narrative of his marriage,widowhood, and loss of fortune, of which the reader already knows thechief particulars, and with whose details we need not twice inflict him.The narrative was a very long one; nor was it rendered more succinct bythe manner of the narrator, nor the frequent interruptions to which, forexplanation's sake, Foglass subjected him. Shall we own, too, that thepunch had some share in the intricacy, Dalton's memory and Foglass'sperceptions growing gradually more and more nebulous as the evening woreon. Without at all wishing to impugn Dalton's good faith, it mustbe owned that, what between his occasional reflections, his doubts,guesses, surmises, and suspicions, his speculations as to the reasonof this and the cause of that, it was very difficult for a man so deeplyversed in punch as Foglass to carry away anything like a clear notionof the eventful occurrences related. The strength of the potation, thehour, the length of the story, the parenthetical interruptions, which,although only bypaths, often looked exactly like the high-road,and probably, too, certain inaccuracies in the adjustment ofthe ear-trumpet, which grew to be very difficult at last, allcontributed,--more or less, to a mystification which finally resemblednothing so much as a very confused dream.Had the worthy ex-Consul then been put on his oath, he could n't havesaid whether or not Sir Stafford had murdered the late Mr. Godfrey, orif that crime should be attributed to Dalton's late wife. Between SirGilbert Stafford and Sir Stafford Onslow, he had a vague suspicion ofsome Siamese bond of union, but that they were cut asunder late in life,and were now drifting in different currents, he also surmised. But whichof them "got the fortune," and which had not, who held the estate atpresent, and how Dalton came to be there at that moment relating thestory, were Chinese puzzles to him.Murder, matrimony, debts, difficulties, and Chancery suits danced aninfernal reel through his brain; and, what with the scattered fragmentsof Irish life thrown in incidentally, of locking dinner-parties in, andbarring the sheriff out, of being chased by bailiffs, or huntingthem, all these divertissements ending in a residence abroad, with itsmanifold discomforts and incongruities, poor Foglass was in a statewhich, were it only to be permanent, would have presented a spectacle ofvery lamentable insanity.The nearest approach to a fact that he could come to was that Daltonought to be enormously rich, and that now he hadn't a sixpence; that thewealthy banker was somehow the cause, Count Stephen being not altogetherblameless; and that Kate was living a life of extravagance and waste,while her father and sister were waging a hard fight with the very"grimmest" of poverty."L'homme propose," &c., says the adage; and the poet tells us aninstance, that "those who came to scoff remained to pray." So in thepresent case, Mr. Foglass, whose mission was to pump Peter Dalton outof every family secret and circumstance, had opened such an unexpectedstream of intelligence upon himself that he was actually carried away inthe flood."You've been badly used, Dalton," said he, at last. "I may say,infamously treated! Not only your fortune taken away, but your childrentorn from you!""Ay, just so." Dalton liked sympathy too well to cavil about his titleto it. "True for you, a harder case than mine you 'll not hear of in asummer's day. My elegant fine place, my beautiful domain, the seat ofmy ancestors, or, if they were n't, they were my wife's, and that 'sall the same; and to be sitting here, in a foreign country r hundredsof miles away from home. Oh dear, oh dear! but that's a change!" For aninstant the thought overwhelmed him, and he was silent; then, fixinghis eyes on Foglass, he added, in a dreamy soliloquy, "Hundreds of milesaway from home, drinking bad brandy, with a deaf chap in a red wig forcompany.""I call yours a case of downright oppression, Dalton," resumed theother, who fortunately overheard nothing of the last remark. "If you hadbeen residing in Persia or the Caucasus even in the Danubian Provinceswe 'd have made you a case for the Foreign Office. You 'd have had yourcompensation, sir. Ay, faith! you 'd have had a good round sum for themurder of your father, old what 's his name? You 'd have had your claim,sir, for the loss of that fine boy the Austrians have taken from you,Mrs. Dalton's wardrobe, and all that sort of thing. I must repeat myconviction, you 've been grossly infamously treated!""And just to think of my own flesh and blood, Stephen, my uncle!""I can't think of him, sir! I can't bear to think of him!" criedFoglass, with enthusiasm."A count of the Empire!" resumed Dalton; "a field-marshal, and asomething else, with his Maria Teresa!""At his age he might give up those habits," said Foglass, who hadconverted the Cross of the Empress into a very different relationship."And now, there 's Kate," said Dalton, who never heard his comment,"there 's Kate, my own favorite of them all! thinks no more about usthan if we did n't belong to her!""Living in splendor!" mumbled Foglass. "Boundless extravagance!""Just so! Wasting hundreds flinging the money about like chaff!""I saw a ball dress of hers myself, at Madame Fanchone's, that was tocost three thousand francs!""Three thousand francs! How am I to bear it all?" exclaimed Dalton,fiercely. "Will any man tell me how an Irish gentleman, with anembarrassed estate, and in the present times, can meet such extravaganceas that? Three thousand francs! and, maybe, for a flimsy rag thatwouldn't stand a shower of rain! Oh, Fogles, you don't know the man that's sitting before you, hale and stout and hearty as he looks, thetrials he has gone through, and the troubles he has faced, just for hischildren. Denying himself every enjoyment in life!" (here he sipped hisglass), "giving up every little comfort he was used to!" (anothersip), "all for his family! Look at my coat; feel the wool of it. Seemy breeches; 'tis like the hide of a bear they are. Take notice of myshoes; and there's my purse, with two florins and eight kreutzers in it;and, may I never see glory, if I don't owe a little bill in every shopthat will trust me! And for what? answer me that, for what?"Although the savage energy with which this question was put would haveextorted an answer from the least willing witness, Foglass was unable toreply, and only stared in mute astonishment."I'll tell you for what, Fogles," resumed Dalton, with a stroke of hisclenched fist on the table, "I'll tell you for what! To have a son inthe Hussars, and a daughter in all the height of fashion and fine life!That 's it, Fogles. My boy keeping company with all the first people inAustria, hand and glove with what 's his name? something like 'Misty,'or 'Hazy' I forget it now dining, driving, and shooting with them. Andmy girl, Kate. But sure you know better than myself what style she 'skeeping! That 's the reason I 'm what you see me here, pining away insolitude and small means! All for my children's sake!""It is highly meritorious. It does you honor, Dalton," said the other,emphatically."Well, I hope it does," said he, with a sigh. "But how few know it,after all!""And has this same Sir Stafford never taken any steps towardsrecompensing you? Has there been nothing like an amende for the greatlosses you 've sustained?""Oh, indeed, to do him justice, he made me a kind of an offer once; butyou see it was hampered with so many conditions and restrictions, andthe like, that I rejected it with contempt. 'No!' says I, ''t is n'tpoverty will ever make me demean the old family! The Daltons won'tsuffer disgrace from me!'""He could have assisted you without such an alternative, Dalton.""Maybe he could, indeed!" sighed the other."I know it well; the man is one of the richest in England; the head of agreat bank, besides, making thousands every week.""I often thought of that," said Dalton. "Sure it would cost him littlejust to discount a small thing for me at three months. I'd take care tomeet it, of course; and he'd never lose a sixpence by me. Indeed, he'dbe gaining; for he 'd have the commission, and the discount, and theinterest, and the devil knows what besides of law expenses--"Here he stopped abruptly, for he had unwittingly strayed into anotherand very different hypothesis regarding the fate of his bill. However,he pulled up short, tossed off his punch, and said, "I only wish he 'ddo it!""Why not try him, then? you ought, at least, to give yourself thechance.""And, if he refused me, I'd have to call him out," said Dalton, gravely;"and just see all the confusion that would lead to. My daughter on avisit there, myself here, and, maybe, obliged to go hundreds of miles tomeet him, and no end to the expense, taking a friend with me, too. No,no! that would be too selfish entirely.""What if you were to throw out a hint, when you write to your daughter,allude to present pressure for money; speak of tenants in arrear;remittances not arrived?""Oh, faith! there's no need prompting me about these things," saidDalton, with a bitter laugh. "I know them too well already.""Write a few lines, then; you'll find paper and pens on that table.I 've told you that I will send it under my own seal, with thedespatches."Dalton was very little given to letter-writing at any period; but toencounter the labor at night by candle-light, and after a few hours'carouse, seemed to him quite out of the question. Still, the Embassyseal, whatever that might be, was no common temptation. Perhaps hefancied it to be like one of those portentous appendages which are seenattached to royal grants! Who can tell what amount of wax and ribbon hisimagination bestowed upon it! Besides this, there was another motive,never again, perhaps, should he be able to write without Nelly'sknowledge. This consideration decided the question at once. Accordingly,he put on his spectacles, and seated himself gravely to the work, whichproceeded thus:DEAR KATE, I 'm spending the evening with your friend theAmbassador of I forget where--Fogles is his name and aspleasant a man as I ever met; and he sends his regards toyou and all the family, and transmits this under his ownseal. Things is going on bad enough here. Not a shilling outof Crognoborraghan. Healey ran away with the November rentand the crops, and Sweeney 's got into the place, and won'tgive it up to any one with out he gets forty pound! I 'dgive him forty of my teeth as soon, if I had them! Ryanshot Mr. Johnson coming home from work, and will be hangedon Saturday; and that 's in our favor, as he was a life inHonan's lease. There 's no money in Ireland, Kellet tellsme, and there 's none here. Where the blazes is it all goneto? Maybe, like the potatoes 't is dying out!Frank 's well sick of soldiering; they chained him up likea dog, with his hand to his leg, the other night for goingto the play; and if he was n't a born gentleman, he says,they 'd have given him "four-and-twenty," as he calls it,with a stick for impudence. Stephen 's no more good to himthan an old umbrella, never gave him bit nor sup! Bad luckto the old Neygur I can't speak of him.Nelly goes on carving and cutting away as before. There 'snot a saint in the calendar she did n't make out of rottenwood this winter, and little Hans buys them all, at a fairprice, she says; but I call a Holy Family cheap at tenflorins, and 't is giving the Virgin away to sell her for aPrussian dollar. 'T is a nice way for one of the Daltons tobe living by her own industry!I often wish for you back here; but I 'd be sorry, afterall, ye 'd come, for the place is poorer than ever, and you're in good quarters, and snug where you are.Tell me how they treat you if they're as kind as before andhow is the old man, and is the gout bad with him still? Isend you in this a little bill Martin Cox, of Drumsnagh,enclosed me for sixty-two ten-and-eight. Could you get theold Baronet to put his name on it for me? Tell him 't is asgood as the bank paper, that Cox is as respectable a man asany in Leitrim, and an estated gentleman, like myself, andof course that we'll take care to have the cash ready for itwhen due. This will be a great convenience to me, and Foglessays it will be a pleasure to Sir Stafford, besidesextending his connection among Irish gentlemen. If he seemsto like the notion, say that your father is well known inIreland, and can help him to a very lively business in thesame way. Indeed, I 'd have been a fortune to him myselfalone, if he 'd had the discounting of me for the lastfifteen years!Never mind this, however, for bragging is not genteel; butget me his name, and send me the "bit of stiff" by return ofpost.If he wants to be civil, maybe he 'll put it into the bankhimself, and send me the money; and if so, let the order beon Haller and Oelcher, for I 'ne a long account with Kochand Elz, and maybe they 'd keep a grip of the cash, and I 'djust be where I was before.If I can get out of this next spring--it would be a greateconomy, for I owe something to everybody, and a new placealways gives courage.I 'm hesitating whether I 'll go to Genoa or New York, butcheapness will decide me, for I only live now for my family.With all my affection,Believe me your fond father,PETER DALTON.P. S. If Sir S. would rather have my own acceptance, let himdraw for a hundred, at three months, and I 'm ready; butdon't disappoint me, one way or other. Wood is fifteenflorins a "klafter" here, now, and I 've nobody to cut itwhen it comes home, as Andy took a slice out of his shin onFriday last with the hatchet, and is in bed ever since.Vegetables, too, is dear; and since Frank went, we neversee a bit of game.2nd P. S. If you had such a thing as a warm winter cloakthat you did n't want, you might send it to Nelly. She goesout in a thing like a bit of brown paper, and the woodenshoes is mighty unhandy with her lameness.Mind the bill."You are writing a rather lengthy despatch, Dalton," said Foglass, whohad twice dozed off to sleep, and woke again, only to see him stilloccupied with his epistle."It's done now," said Dalton, with a sigh; for, without well knowingwhy, he was not quite satisfied with the performance."I wish you 'd just add a line, to say that Mrs. Ricketts, Mrs.Major-General Ricketts, who resides at Florence, is so desirous toknow her. You can mention that she is one of the first people, butso exclusive about acquaintance, that it is almost impossible to getpresented to her; but that this coming winter the Embassy will, in alllikelihood, open a door to so desirable an object.""Lady Hester will know her, of course?" said Dalton, whose sense ofproprieties was usually clear enough when selfishness did not interfere,"and I don't see that my daughter should extend her acquaintance throughany other channel.""Oh, very true; it's of no consequence. I only meant it as an attentionto Miss Dalton; but your observation is very just," said Foglass, whosuddenly felt that he was on dangerous ground."Depend upon 't, Fogles, my daughter is in the best society of theplace, whatever it is. It 's not a Dalton would be left out."Foglass repeated his most implicit conviction in this belief, and didall in his power to efface the memory of the suggestion, but withoutsuccess. Family pride was a kind of birdlime with old Dalton, and if hebut touched, he could not leave it. The consequences, however, went nofurther than a long and intricate dissertation on the Dalton blood forseveral centuries back, through which Foglass slept just as soundly asthe respected individuals there recorded, and was only awoke at lastby Dalton rising to take leave, an event at last suggested by the emptydecanter."And now, Fogles," said he, summing up, "you'll not wonder, that if we're poor we 're proud. I suppose you never heard of a better stock thanthat since you were born?""Never, by Jove! Guelphs, Ghibellines, and Hapsburgs are nothing tothem. Good-night, good-night! I 'll take care of your letter. It shallgo to-morrow in the Embassy bag."CHAPTER XXXII. AN INVASION.To afford the reader the explanation contained in the preceding chapter,we have been obliged to leave Kate Dalton waiting, in mingled anxietyand suspense, for the hour of Mrs. Ricketts's visit. Although her mindprincipally dwelt upon the letter which had been announced as comingfrom her father, an event so strange as naturally to cause astonishment,she also occasionally recurred to the awkwardness of receiving personswhom Lady Hester had so scrupulously avoided, and being involved in anacquaintanceship so unequivocally pronounced vulgar. A few short monthsbefore, and the incident would have worn a very different aspect toher eyes. She would have dwelt alone on the kindness of one, an utterstranger, addressing her in terms of respectful civility, and profferingthe attention of a visit. She would have been grateful for thegoodnature that took charge of a communication for her. She would haveviewed the whole as a sort of flattering notice, and never dreamed ofthat long catalogue of "inconveniences" and annoyances so prolificallyassociated with the event as it at present stood. She was greatlychanged in many respects. She had been daily accustomed to hear themost outrageous moral derelictions lightly treated, or, at least, butslightly censured. For every fault and failing there was a skilfulexcuse or a charitable explanation. The errors of the fashionable worldwere shown to be few, insignificant, and venial; and the code showed noexception to the rule that "well-bred people can do no wrong." Vulgarityalone was criminal; and the sins of the underbred admitted of nopalliation. Her sense of justice might have revolted against suchjudgments, had reason been ever appealed to; but such was not thecase. Ridicule alone was the arbiter; whatever could be scoffed at wasdetestable, and a solecism in dress, accent, or demeanor was a highercrime than many a grave transgression or glaring iniquity.The little mimicries of Albert Jekyl, as he described Mrs. Ricketts,the few depreciatory remarks of Lady Hester concerning her, would haveoutweighed her worth had her character been a cornucopia of goodness.It was, then, in no pleasant flurry of spirits, that, just as the clockstruck three, Kate heard the heavy door of the palace flung wide, andthe sound of wheels echo beneath the vaulted entrance. The next momenta small one-horse phaeton, driven by a very meagre servant in a tawdrylivery, passed into the courtyard, having deposited its company in thehall.There had been a time, and that not so very far back either, when thesight of that humble equipage, with visitors, would have made her heartbeat to the full as strong, albeit with very different emotions. Now,however, she actually glanced at the windows to see if it had attractednotice, with a kind of terror at the ridicule it would excite. Never didshe think an old gray horse could be so ugly; never did wheels make sointolerable a noise before! Why would people dress up their servantslike harlequins? What was the meaning of that leopard-skin rug for thefeet? It was an odious little vehicle, altogether. There was a tawdry,smirking, self-satisfied pretension about its poverty that made one wishfor a break-down on looking at it."Mrs. Montague Ricketts and Miss Ricketts," said a very demure-lookinggroom of the chambers; and although his features were immaculate intheir expressions of respect, Kate felt offended at what she thought wasa flippancy in the man's manner.Although the announcement was thus made, the high and mighty personageswere still three rooms off, and visible only in the dim distance, comingslowly forward.Leaning on her sister's arm, and with a step at once graceful andcommanding, Mrs. Ricketts came on. At least, so Kate judged an enormouspyramid of crimson velvet and ermine to be, from the summit of whichwaved a sufficiency of plumes for a moderate hearse. The size anddignity of this imposing figure almost entirely eclipsed poor Martha,and completely shut out the slender proportions of Mr. Scroope Purvis,who, from being loaded like a sumpter-mule with various articles for theroad, was passed over by the groom of the chambers, and believed to be aservant. Slow as was the order of march, Purvis made it still slower bymomentarily dropping some of the articles with which he was charged;and as they comprised a footstool, a poodle, two parasols, an album,a smelling-bottle, a lorgnette, with various cushions, shawls, and aportable tire-screen, his difficulties may be rather compassionated thancensured."Scroope, how can you? Martha, do speak to him. It's down again! He'llsmash my lorgnette he'll smother Fidele. How very awkward how absurd weshall look!" Such were the sotto voce accompaniments that filled up theintervals till they arrived at the great drawing-room, where Kate Daltonsat.If the reader has ever watched a great tragedy queen emerging fromthe flats, when, after a lively dialogue with the prompter, and theutterance of a pleasant jest, she issues forth upon the open stage, tovent the sorrows or the wrongs of injured womanhood, he may form somefaint idea of the rapid transformation that Mrs. Ricketts underwentas she passed the door-sill. Her first movement was a sudden boundforwards, or, at least, such an approach to a spring as a body soimposing could accomplish, and then, throwing her arms wide, she seemedas if about to enclose Miss Dalton in a fast embrace; and so, doubtless,had she done, if Kate had responded to the sign. A deep and very formalcourtesy was, however, her only acknowledgment of this spontaneous burstof feeling; and Mrs. Ricketts, like a skilful general, at oncechanging her plan of attack, converted her ardor into astonishment, andexclaimed,"Did you ever see such a resemblance? Could you believe it possible,Martha? A thousand apologies, my dear Miss Dalton, for this rudeness;but you are so wonderfully like our dear, dear friend Lady CarolineMontressor, that I actually forgot myself. Pray forgive me, and let mepresent my sister, Miss Ricketts. My brother, Mr. Scroope Purvis, MissDalton."The ceremonial of introduction over, and Mrs. Ricketts being at lastseated, a very tedious operation, in which the arrangement of cushions,pillows, and footstools played a conspicuous part, that bland ladybegan, in her very softest of voices,"This, indeed, repays me, amply, fully repays me! eh, Martha?""Quite so, sister," responded Martha, in a meek whisper."A poor invalid as I am, rarely rising from a sofa except to snatch theperfumed odors of a violet in spring, or to listen to the murmurs of arippling fountain; denied all the excitements of society by a nervoustemperament so finely strung as to be jarred by contact, even theremotest, with inferior souls think of what ecstasy a moment like thisaffords me!"As Kate was profoundly ignorant to what happy combination ofcircumstances this blissful state could be attributed, she could onlysmile courteously, and mutter some vague expressions of her pleasure,satisfaction, and so forth."Eve in her own paradise!" exclaimed Mrs. Ricketts, as she turned hereyes from Kate to the gorgeous chamber in which they were seated. "May Iask if the taste of these decorations be yours, Miss Dalton?""Lady Hester Onslow's, madam," said Kate, quietly."I declare, I like these hangings better than 'Gobelins' they arelighter and more graceful. You remember, Martha, I told the dear Queenof Saxony that blue velvet would go so well with her small pictures. Wediscussed the point every morning at breakfast for a week, and the poordear King at last called us the 'blue devils; 'very happy, wasn't it,Miss Dalton? But he speaks English just like one of ourselves.""These are all Dutch pictures, I perceive," said Purvis, who, withhis poodle under his arm, was making a tour of the room, peering intoeverything, opening books, prying into china jars, and spying intowork-boxes, as though in search of some missing article."I 'm tired of Wou-Wou-Wou--" Here the poodle barked, doubtless inthe belief that he was responding to an invitation. "Down, Fidele!Wou-ver-mans," gulped out Purvis. "He 's always the same.""But those dear white palfreys, how I love them! I always have a whitehorse, out of regard for Wouvermans."Kate thought of the poor gray in the courtyard, and said nothing."And there is something so touching so exquisitely touching inthose Flemish interiors, where the goodwife is seated reading, and astraggling sunbeam comes slanting in upon the tiled floor. Little peepsof life, as it were, in a class of which we know nothing; for, really,Miss Dalton, iu our order, sympathies are too much fettered; and I oftenthink it would be better that we knew more of the middle classes. When Isay this, of course I do not mean as associates, far less as intimates,but as ingredients in the grand scheme of universal nature.""'The no-no-noblest study of man-mankind is' what is it, sister?""'Man,' Scroope; but the poet intended to refer to the great aims andobjects of our being. Don't you think so, Miss Dalton? It was not man inthe little cares of everyday life, in his social relations, but man inhis destinies, in his vast future, when he goes beyond 'that bourne'--""From which nobody ever got out again," cackled Purvis, in an ecstasy atthe readiness of his quotation."'From which no traveller returns,' Scroope, is, I believe, the morecorrect version.""Then it don't mean pur-pur-pur-purgatory," gulped Scroope, who, as soonas the word was uttered, became shocked at what he said. "I forgot youwere a Ro-Ro-Roman, Miss Dalton," said he, blushing."You are in error, Scroope," said Mrs. Ricketts. "Miss Dalton is one ofourselves. All the distinguished Irish are of the Reformed faith.""I am a Catholic, madam," said Kate, not knowing whether to be moreamused than annoyed at the turn the conversation had taken."I knew it," cried Purvis, in delight. "I tracked your carriage to theD-D-Duomo, and I went in after you, and saw you at the co-co-co-co--""Corner," whispered Martha, who, from his agonies, grew afraid of a fit."No, not the corner, but the co-co-co-coufessional-confessional, whereyou stayed for an hour and forty minutes by my own watch; and I couldn'thelp thinking that your pec-pec-pec-peccadilloes were a good long score,by the time it took to to to tell them.""Thanks, sir," said Kate, bowing, and with difficulty restraining herlaughter; "thanks for the very kind interest you seem to have taken inmy spiritual welfare.""Would that I might be suffered a participation in that charge, MissDalton," cried Mrs. Ricketts, with enthusiasm, "and allowed to hold someconverse with you on doctrinal questions!""Try her with the posers, sister," whispered Purvis. "Hush, Scroope!Mere opportunities of friendly discussion, nothing more I ask for, MissDalton.""Give her the posers," whispered Purvis, louder."Be quiet, Scroope. I have been fortunate enough to resolve the doubtsof more than one ere this. That dear angel, the Princess Ethelinda ofCobourgh, I believe I may say, owes her present enlightenment to oursweet evenings together.""Begin with the posers.""Hush! I say, Scroope.""May I ask," said Kate, "what is the suggestion Mr. Purvis has been goodenough to repeat?""That I should give you this little tract, Miss Dalton," said Mrs.Ricketts as she drew out a miscellaneous assemblage of articles from adeep pocket, and selected from the mass a small blue-covered pamphlet,bearing the title, "Three Posers for Papists, by M. R.""Montague Ricketts," said Purvis, proudly; "she wrote it herself, andthe Pope won't let us into Rome in consequence. It 's very droll, too;and the part about the the Vir-gin--""You will, I 'm sure, excuse me, madam," said Kate, "if I beg that thissubject be suffered to drop. My thanks for the interest this gentlemanand yourself have vouchsafed me will only be more lasting by leaving theimpression of them unassociated with anything unpleasing. You were goodenough to say that you had a letter for me?""A letter from your father, that dear, fond father, who dotes sodistractingly upon you, and who really seems to live but to enjoy yourtriumphs. Martha, where is the letter?""I gave it to Scroope, sister.""No, you didn't. I never saw--""Yes, Scroope, I gave it to you, at the drawing-room fire--""Yes, to be sure, and I put it into the ca-ca-ca--""Not the candle, I hope," cried Kate, in terror."No, into the card-rack; and there it is now.""How provoking!" cried Miss Ricketts; "but you shall have it to-morrow,Miss Dalton. I 'll leave it here myself.""Shall I appear impatient, madam, if I send for it this evening?""Of course not, my dear Miss Dalton; but shall I commit the preciouscharge to a menial's hand?""You may do so with safety, madam," said Kate, not without a slightirritation of manner as she spoke."Mr. Foglass, the late minister and envoy at--"Here a tremendous crash, followed by a terrific yelping noise, broke inupon the colloquy; for it was Fidele had thrown down a Sevres jar, andlay, half-buried and howling, under the ruins. There was, of course, ageneral rising of the company, some to rescue the struggling poodle, andothers in vain solicitude to gather up the broken fragments of the oncebeautiful vase. It was a favorite object with Lady Hester; of singularrarity, both for form and design; and Kate stood speechless, and almostsick with shame and sorrow, at the sight, not heeding one syllableof the excuses and apologies poured in upon her, nor of the equallyvalueless assurances that it could be easily mended; that Martha was aperfect proficient in such arts; and that, if Scroope would only collectthe pieces carefully, the most difficult connoisseur would not be ableto detect a flaw in it."I've got a head here; but the no-nose is off," cried Purvis."Here it is, Scroope. I 've found it.""No, that's a toe," said he; "there 's a nail to it.""I am getting ill I shall faint," said Mrs. Ricketts, retiring upon awell-cushioned sofa from the calamity.Martha now flew to the bell-rope and pulled it violently, while Purvisthrew open the window, and with such rash haste as to upset a stand ofcamellias, thereby scattering plants, buds, earth, and crockery over thefloor, while poor Kate, thunderstruck at the avalanche of ruin aroundher, leaned against the wall for support, unable to stir or even speak.As Martha continued to tug away at the bell, the alarm, suggesting theidea of fire, brought three or four servants to the door together."Madeira! quick, Madeira!" cried Martha, as she unloosed variousarticles of dress from her sister's throat, and prepared a plan ofoperations for resuscitation that showed at least an experienced hand."Bring wine," said Kate, faintly, to the astonished butler, who, notnoticing Miss Ricketts's order, seemed to await hers."Madeira! it must be Madeira!" cried Martha, wildly."She don't dislike Mar-Mar-Marco-brunner," whispered Purvis to theservant, "and I'll take a glass too."Had the irruption been one of veritable housebreakers, had the occasionbeen what newspapers stereotype as a "Daring Burglary," Kate Daltonmight, in all likelihood, have distinguished herself as a heroine. Shewould, it is more than probable, have evinced no deficiency either ofcourage or presence of mind, but in the actual contingency nothing couldbe more utterly helpless than she proved; and, as she glided into achair, her pale face and trembling features betrayed more decisive signsof suffering than the massive countenance which Martha was now delugingwith eau-de-Cologne and lavender.The wine soon made its appearance; a very imposing array of restorativesthe ambulatory pharmacopeia of the Ricketts family was all displayedupon a table. Martha, divested of shawl, bonnet, and gloves, stood readyfor action; and thus, everything being in readiness, Mrs. Ricketts,whose consideration never suffered her to take people unawares, nowbegan her nervous attack in all form.If ague hysterics recovery from drowning tic-doloureux, and an extensiveburn had all sent representatives of their peculiar agonies, withinjunctions to struggle for a mastery of expression, the symptoms couldscarcely have equalled those now exhibited. There was not a contortionnor convulsion that her countenance did not undergo, while thedevil's tattoo, kept up by her heels upon the floor, and her knucklesoccasionally on the table, and now and then on Scroope's head, addedfearfully to the effect of her screams, which varied from the deep groanof the melodrame to the wildest shrieks of tragedy."There's no danger, Miss Dalton," whispered Martha, whose functions ofhand-rubbing, temple-bathing, wine-giving, and so forth, were performedwith a most jog-trot regularity."When she sc-sc-screams, she's all right," added Purvis; and, certainly,the most anxious friend might have been comforted on the presentoccasion."Shall I not send for a physician?" asked Kate, eagerly."On no account, Miss Dalton. We are quite accustomed to these seizures.My dear sister's nerves are so susceptible.""Yes," said Scroope, who, be it remarked, had already half finished abottle of hock, "poor Zoe is all sensibility the scabbard too sharp forthe sword. Won't you have a glass of wine, Miss Dalton?""Thanks, sir, I take none. I trust she is better now she looks easier.""She is better; but this is a difficult moment," whispered Martha. "Anyshock any sudden impression now might prove fatal.""What is to be done, then?" said Kate, in terror."She must be put to bed at once, the room darkened, and the strictestsilence preserved. Can you spare your room?""Oh, of course, anything everything at such a moment," cried theterrified girl, whose reason was now completely mastered by her fears.[Illustration:   408]"She must be carried. Will you give orders, Miss Dalton? and, Scroope,step down to the carriage, and bring up--" Here Miss Ricketts's voicedegenerated into an inaudible whisper; but Scroope left the room to obeythe command.Her sympathy for suffering had so thoroughly occupied Kate, that allthe train of unpleasant consequences that were to follow this unhappyincident had never once occurred to her; nor did a thought of LadyHester cross her mind, till, suddenly, the whole flashed upon her, bythe appearance of her maid Nina in the drawing-room."To your own room, Mademoiselle?" asked she, with a look that said farmore than any words."Yes, Nina," whispered she. "What can I do? She is so ill! They tell meit may be dangerous at any moment, and--""Hush, my dear Miss Dalton!" said Martha; "one word may wake her.""I'd be a butterfly!" warbled the sick lady, in a low weak treble; whilea smile of angelic beatitude beamed on her features."Hush! be still!" said Martha, motioning the surrounders to silence."What shall I do, Nina? Shall I go and speak to my Lady?" asked Kate.A significant shrug of the shoulders, more negative than affirmative,was the only answer."I'd be a gossamer, and you'd be the King of Thebes," said Mrs.Ricketts, addressing a tall footman, who stood ready to assist incarrying her."Yes, madam," said he, respectfully."She's worse," whispered Martha, gravely."And we'll walk on the wall of China by moonlight, with Cleopatra andMr. Cobden?""Certainly, madam," said the man, who felt the question too direct forevasion."Has she been working slippers for the planet Ju-Ju-Jupiter yet?" askedPurvis, eagerly, as he entered the room, heated, and flushed from theweight of a portentous bag of colored wool."No; not yet," whispered Martha. "You may lift her now, gently verygently, and not a word."And in strict obedience, the servants raised their fair burden, andbore her from the room, after Nina, who led the way with an air thatbetokened a more than common indifference to human suffering."When she gets at Ju-Jupiter," said Purvis to Kate, as they closedthe procession, "it's a bad symptom; or when she fancies she 'sHec-Hec-Hec-Hec--""Hecate?""No; not Hec-Hecate, but Hecuba--Hecuba; then it's a month at leastbefore she comes round.""How dreadful!" said Kate. And certainly there was not a grain ofhypocrisy in the fervor with which she uttered it."I don't think she 'll go beyond the San-Sandwich Islands this time,however," added he, consolingly,"Hush, Scroope!" cried Martha. And now they entered the small andexquisitely furnished dressing-room which was appropriated to Kate'suse; within which, and opening upon a small orangery, stood her bedroom.Nina, who scrupulously obeyed every order of her young mistress,continued the while to exhibit a hundred petty signs of mute rebellion."Lady Hester wishes to see Miss Dalton," said a servant at the outerdoor."Can you permit me for a moment?" asked Kate, in a tremor."Oh, of course, my dear Miss Dalton; let there be no ceremony with us,"said Martha. "Your kindness makes us feel like old friends already.""I feel-myself quite at home," cried Scroope, whose head was not proofagainst so much wine; and then, turning to one of the servants, he addeda mild request for the two bottles that were left on the drawing-roomtable.Martha happily, however, overheard and revoked the order. And now thevarious attendants withdrew, leaving the family to themselves.It was ill no pleasant mood that Kate took her way towards Lady Hester'sapartment. The drawing-room, as she passed through it, still exhibitedsome of the signs of its recent ruin, and the servants were busiedin collecting fragments of porcelain and flower-pots. Their murmuredcomments, hushed as she went by, told her how the occurrence was alreadythe gossip of the household. It was impossible for her not to connectherself with the whole misfortune. "But for her" But she could notendure the thought, and it was with deep humiliation and trembling inevery limb that she entered Lady Hester's chamber."Leave me, Celadon; I want to speak to Miss Dalton," said Lady Hesterto the hairdresser, who had just completed one half of her Ladyship'schevelure, leaving the other side pinned and rolled up in those variouspreparatory stages which have more of promise than picturesque aboutthem. Her cheek was flushed, and her eyes sparkled with an animationthat betrayed more passion than pleasure."What is this dreadful story I 've heard, child, and that the house isfull of? Is it possible there can be any truth in it? Have these odiouspeople actually dared to establish themselves here? Tell me, childspeak!""Mrs. Ricketts became suddenly ill," said Kate, trembling; "her dogthrew down a china jar.""Not my Sevres jar? not the large green one, with the figures?""I grieve to say it was!""Go on. What then?" said Lady Hester, dryly."Shocked at the incident, and alarmed, besides, by the fall of aflower-stand, she fainted away, and subsequently was seized with whatI supposed to be a convulsive attack, but to which her friends seemedperfectly accustomed, and pronounced not dangerous. In this dilemma theyasked me if they might occupy my room. Of course I could not refuse, andyet felt, the while, that I had no right to extend the hospitality ofthis house. I saw the indelicacy of what I was doing. I was shocked andashamed, and yet--""Go on," said Lady Hester once more, and with a stern quietude of mannerthat Kate felt more acutely than even an angry burst of temper."I have little more to say; in fact, I know not what I am saying," criedshe, gulping to repress the torrent of suffering that was strugglingwithin her."Miss Dalton--" began Lady Hester."Oh! why not Kate?" broke she, with a choking utterance."Miss Dalton," resumed Lady Hester, and as if not hearing the entreaty,"very little knowledge of that world you have lived in for the pastthree or four months might have taught you some slight self-possessionin difficulty. Still less acquaintance with it might have suggested therecollection that these people are no intimates of mine; so that, evenwere tact wanting, feeling, at least, should have dictated a line ofaction to you.""I know I have done wrong. I knew it at the time, and yet, in myinexperience, I could not decide on anything. My memory, too, helped tomislead me, for I bethought me that although these persons were not ofyour own rank and station, yet you had stooped lower than to them whenyou came to visit Nelly and myself.""Humph!" ejaculated Lady Hester, with a gesture that very unequivocallyseemed to say that her having done so was a grievous error. Kate sawit quickly, and as suddenly the blood rushed to her cheek, coloring herthroat and neck with the deep crimson of shame. A burst of pride theold Dalton pride seemed to have given way within her; and as she drewherself up to her full height, her look and attitude wore every sign ofhaughty indignation.Lady Hester looked at her for a few seconds with a glance of searchingimport. Perhaps for a moment the possibility of a deception struck her,and that this might only be feigned; but as suddenly did she recognizethe unerring traits of truth, and said,"What! child, are you angry with me?""Oh no, no!" said Kate, bursting into tears, and kissing the hand thatwas now extended towards her, "oh no, no! but I could hate myself forwhat seems so like ingratitude.""Come, sit down here at my feet on this stool, and tell me all about it;for, after all, I could forgive them the jar and the camellias, if they'd only have gone away afterwards. And of course the lesson will not bethrown away upon you, not to be easily deceived again.""How, deceived?" exclaimed Kate. "She was very ill. I saw it myself.""Nonsense, child. The trick is the very stalest piece of roguery going.Since Toe Morris, as they call him the man that treads upon people, andby his apologies scrapes acquaintance with them there is nothing lessoriginal. Why, just before we left England, there was old Bankhead gotinto Slingsby House, merely because the newspapers might announcehis death at the Earl of Grindleton's 'on the eighth, of a few days'illness, deeply regretted by the noble lord, with whom he was on avisit.' Now, that dear Ricketts woman would almost consent to take leaveof the world for a similar paragraph. I 'm sure I should know nothing ofsuch people but that Sir Stafford's relations have somewhat enlightenedme. He has a nest of cousins down in Shropshire, not a whit better thanyour I was going to call them 'your friends,' the Rickettses.""It is almost incredible to suppose this could be artifice.""Why so, child? There is no strategy too deep for people who are alwaysaspiring to some society above them. Besides, after all, I was in ameasure prepared for this.""Prepared for it!""Yes; Jekyl told me that if they once got in, it would be next toimpossible to keep them out afterwards. A compromise, he said, was thebest thing; to let them have so many days each year, with certain smallprivileges about showing the house to strangers, cutting bouquets, andso on; or, if we preferred it, let them carry away a Teniers or a GerardDow to copy, and take care never to ask for it. He inclined to thelatter as the better plan, because, after a certain lapse of time, itcan end in a cut.""But this is inconceivable!" exclaimed Kate."And yet half the absurd and incongruous intimacies one sees in theworld have had some such origin, and habit will reconcile one toacquaintance that at first inspired feelings of abhorrence anddetestation. I 'm sure I don 't know one good house in town where thereare not certain intimates that have not the slightest pretension, eitherfrom rank, wealth, distinction, or social qualities, to be there. Andyet, there they are; not merely as supernumeraries, either, but veryprominent and foreground figures, giving advice and offering counselon questions of family policy, and writing their vulgar names on everywill, codicil, marriage-settlement, and trust-deed, till they seem tobe part of the genealogical tree, to which, after all, they are onlyattached like fungi. You look very unhappy, my poor Kate, at all this;but, believe me, the system will outlive both of us. And so, now to yourroom, and dress for dinner. But I forgot; you have n't got a room; soCelestine must give you hers, and you will be close beside me, and weshall be the better able to concert measures about these Ricketts folk,who really resemble those amiable peasants your father told me of,on his Irish property, and whom he designated as 'squatters.' I amdelighted that I have n't forgot the word."And thus, chatting on, Lady Hester restored Kate's wonted happiness ofnature, sadly shaken as it had been by the contrarieties of the morning.Nothing, too, was easier than to make her forget a source of irritation.Ever better satisfied to look on the bright side of life, herinclinations needed but little aid from conviction to turn her fromgloomy themes to pleasant ones; and already some of the absurditiesof the morning were recurring to her mind, and little traits of Mrs.Ricketts and her brother were involuntarily coming up through all thewhirlpool of annoyance and confusion in whicli th y had been submerged.The coming dinner, too, engrossed some share of her thoughts; for itwas a grand entertainment, to which all Lady Hester's most distinguishedfriends were invited. An Archduke and a Cardinal were to make part ofthe company, and Kate looked forward to meeting these great personageswith no common interest. It was less the vulgar curiosity of observingthe manners and bearing of distinguished characters, than the delightshe felt in following out some child-invented narrative of her futurelife, some fancied story of her own career, wherein Princes and Prelateswere to figure, and scenes of splendor and enjoyment to follow eachother in rapid succession.CHAPTER XXXIII. THE CONCLUSION OF A "GRAND DINNER."LADY HESTER'S dinner of that day was a "grand one," that is to say, itwas one of those great displays which, from time to time, are offered upas sacrifices to the opinion of the world. Few of her own peculiar setwere present. Some she omitted herself; others had begged off of theirown accord. Midchekoff, however, was there; for, however accustomed tothe tone and habits of a life of mere dissipation, he possessed everyrequirement for mixing with general society. It was true he was not fondof meeting "Royal Highnesses," before whom his own equivocal ranksank into insignificance; nor did he love "Cardinals," whose haughtypretensions always over-topped every other nobility. To oblige LadyHester, however, he did come, and condescended, for "the nonce," toassume his most amiable of moods. The Marchesa Guardoni, an old coquetteof the days of the French Empire, but now a rigid devotee, and a mostexclusive moralist; a few elderly diplomates, of a quiet and cat-likesmoothness of manner, with certain notabilities of the Court, made upthe party. There were no English whatever; Jekyl, who made out thelist, well knowing that Florence offered none of a rank sufficientlydistinguished, except Norwood, whose temporary absence from the citywas rather a boon than the reverse; for the noble Viscount, when not"slang," was usually silent, and, by long intercourse with the Turf andits followers, had ceased to feel any interest in topics which could notend in a wager.The entertainment was very splendid. Nothing was wanting which luxury ortaste could contribute. The wines were delicious; the cookery perfect.The guests were courteous and pleasing; but all was of the quietest,none of the witty sallies, the piquant anecdotes, the brilliantrepartees, which usually pattered like hail around that board.Still less were heard those little histories of private life wheredelinquencies furnish all the interest. The royal guest imposed areserve which the presence of the Cardinal deepened. The conversation,like the cuisine, was flavored for fine palates; both were light,suggestive, and of easy digestion. Events were discussed rather than theactors in them. All was ease and simplicity; but it was a stately kindof simplicity, which served to chill those that were unaccustomed to it.So Kate Dalton felt it; and however sad the confession, we must own thatshe greatly preferred the free and easy tone of Lady Hester's midnightreceptions to the colder solemnity of these distinguished guests.Even to the Cardinal's whist-table, everything wore a look of state andsolemnity. The players laid down their cards with a measured gravity,and scored their honors with the air of men discharging a high andimportant function. As for the Archduke, he sat upon a sofa besideLady Hester, suffering himself to be amused by the resources of hersmall-talk, bowing blandly at times, occasionally condescending to asmile, but rarely uttering even a monosyllable. Even that little socialwarmth that was kindled by the dinner-table seemed to have been chilledby the drawing-room, where the conversation was maintained in a low,soft tone, that never rose above a murmur. It may be, perhaps, somesort of consolation to little folk to think that Princes are generallysad-looking. The impassable barrier of reserve around them, if itprotect from all the rubs and frictions of life, equally excludes frommuch of its genial enjoyment; and all those little pleasantries whichgrow out of intimacy are denied those who have no equals.It was in some such meditation as this Kate Dalton sat, rousedoccasionally to bestow a smile or a passing word of acknowledgment inreturn for some of those little morsels of compliment and flattery whichold courtiers pay as their rightful tribute to a young and handsomewoman. She was sufficiently accustomed to this kind of homage to acceptit without losing, even for an instant, any train of thought her mindwas pursuing. Nor did the entrance of any new guest, a number of whomhad been invited for the evening, distract her from her half revery.The salons, without being crowded, now showed a numerous company, all ofwhom exhibited in their demeanor that respectful reserve the presence ofroyalty ever inspires. It seemed, indeed, as though all the conversationthat went forward was like a mere "aside" to that more importantdialogue which was maintained beside the Prince.A slow but measured tide of persons passed before him, bowing withrespectful deference as they went. With some he deigned to speak a fewwords, others had a smile or a little nod of recognition, and someagain one of those cold and vacant stares with which great people areoccasionally wont to regard little ones. His Royal Highness was not oneof those accomplished princes whose pride it is to know the name, thefamily, the pursuits, and predilections of each new presentee. On thecontrary, he was absent, and forgetful to a degree scarcely credible;his want of memory betraying him into innumerable mistakes, from which,even had he known, no adroitness of his own could have extricatedhim. On this evening he had not been peculiarly fortunate; he hadcomplimented a minister who had just received his recall in disgrace; hehad felicitated a young lady on her approaching marriage, which hadbeen broken off; while the burden of his talk to Lady Hester was indisparagement of those foreigners who brought a scandal upon hiscourt by habits and manners which would not be tolerated in their owncountries. Divorce, or even separation, met his heavy reprobation;and while his code of morality, on the whole, exhibited very mercifuldispositions, he bestowed unmitigated severity upon all that could shockthe world's opinion.To this Lady Hester had to listen as best she might, a task not theless trying and difficult from the ill-suppressed looks of malice andenjoyment she saw on every side. From all these causes put together,the occasion, however flattering to her vanity, was far from beingpleasurable to her feelings, and she longed for it to be over. ThePrince looked wearied enough, but somehow there is nothing like royaltyfor endurance; their whole lives would seem to teach the lesson, andso he sat on, saying a stray word, bowing with half-closed lids, andlooking as though very little more would set him fast asleep.It was the very culminating point of the whole evening's austerity; oneof those little pauses which now and then occur had succeeded to themurmur of conversation. The whist party had been broken up, and theCardinal was slowly advancing up the room, the company, even to theladies, rising respectfully as he passed, when the folding-doors werethrown wide, and a servant announced Mr. Scroope Purvis.If the name was unknown to the assembled guests, there was one thereat least who heard it with a sensation of actual terror, and poor KateDalton sank back into her chair with a kind of instinctive effort atconcealment. By this time the door had closed behind him, leaving Mr.Purvis standing with an expression of no small bewilderment at thegorgeous assembly into which he had intruded.Lady Hester's quick ear had caught the name, even from the furthest endof the room; but while she attributed it to the mispronunciations ofwhich foreign servants are so liberal, looked out with some curiosityfor him who owned it.Nor had she to look long, for, his first moment of surprise over, Purvisput up his double eye-glass and commenced a tour of the rooms, in thatpeculiarly scrutinizing way for which he was distinguished. The factthat all the faces were unknown to him seemed to impart additionalcourage to his investigations, for he stared about with as littleconcern as he might have done in a theatre.Most men in his situation would have been egoist enough to have thoughtonly of themselves and the awkwardness of their own position. Purvis,on the contrary, had an eye for everything; from the chandeliers on thewalls to the crosses on the dress-coats, from the decorations of thesalons to the diamonds, he missed nothing; and with such impartialfairness did he bestow his glances, that the Cardinal's cheeks grew redas his own stockings as Scroope surveyed him. 'At last he reached theend of the great drawing-room, and found himself standing in front ofthe canopied seat where the Archduke sat with Lady Hester. Not heeding,if he even remarked, the little circle which etiquette had drawn infront of the Prince, Purvis advanced within the charmed precincts andstared steadily at the Duke.[Illustration:  420]"I perceive that one of your friends is most anxious to pay his respectsto you, Lady Hester," said the Prince, with a very peculiar smile."I beg to assure you, sir, that the gentleman is unknown to me; hispresence here is an honor for which I am totally unprepared.""My name is Purvis, madam, Sc-Sc-Scroope Purvis. Miss Dalton knows me;and my sister is Mrs. Ricketts.""You will find Miss Dalton yonder, sir," said Lady Hester, all whoseefforts were barely sufficient to restrain her temper."I see her!" cried Purvis, putting his glass up; "but she 's trying toescape me. She 's got a man with a re-re-red beard before her, but itwon't do, I'm too sh-sh-sharp for that."The Archduke laughed, and heartily, too, at this sally; and Purvis,emboldened by the complaisance, edged more closely towards him to pointout the lady in question. "She has a droll kind of sc-sc-scarf in herhair. There! don't you see her now? Have you ever seen the pictures inthe Pitti Palace?"The question was a little startling, as the personage to whom it wasaddressed had his residence there. The Archduke, however, merely bowedin acquiescence, and Purvis went on: "My sister Zoe copied one and Ilike it better than the Ti-Tit-Titian itself. We smoked it, too, andmade it look so brown, you'd never guess it to be mo-mo-mo-modern."To judge from the bewildered look of the Duke, the whole of this speechwas pure Chaldee to him; and when he turned to Lady Hester for anexplanation, he discovered that she had left her seat. Whether mistakingthe motion as an invitation to be seated, or merely acting by his ownimpulses, Scroope crossed over and sat down on the sofa with a degree ofself-satisfaction that lighted up all his features."You 're not one of the fa-family, are you?" asked he."I have not that honor," said the Prince, with a bow."I thought not. I suspected that there was a tw-tw-twang in your Englishthat looked foreign, but I know your face quite well."The Duke bowed again."Pretty rooms, these," said Purvis, with his glass to his eye; "whata d-d-deal of money they must have cost! They 're going it fast, theseOnslows.""Indeed!" said the Prince, who only half understood the remark."I know it," said Scroope, with a confidential wink. "Their butcherse-se-serves us, and he won't give anything till they have sent theirorders; and as for wine, they drink Bordeaux in the servants' hall.I don't know what you have, but a d-d-deuced sight better than ever Iget.""Good wine, however, can be had here, I hope," said the Duke, blandly."Yes, if you sm-sm-smuggle it," said Scroope, with a knowing cackle;while, to add poignancy to the remark, he nudged the Prince with hiselbow. "That's the only way to have it. The st-stupid Government seesnothing.""Is that the case, sir?" asked the Prince, with a degree of interest hehad not manifested before."To be sure it is. My sister Zoe never pays duty on anything; and ifyou like your c-c-cigars cheap, just t-t-tell me, that 's all. TheG-G-Grand-Duke never got a sixpence of my money yet, and if I kn-knowmyself, he never shall.""Do you bear him any grudge, sir, that you say this so emphatically?""No; not at all. They tell me that he's good-hearted, although somewhatwe-weak in the a-a-attic story," and here Scroope tapped his foreheadsignificantly, "but that 's in the family. My sister Zoe could tell yousuch st-stories about them you 'd die of laughing; and then there's Jekyl takes them off so well! It's c-c-capital fun. He gives adia-dia-dialogue between the Grand-Duke and the Pope's Nuncio that'sbetter than a farce."How far Mr. Purvis might have been carried in his zeal to be agreeablethere is no saying, when Lady Hester came up, with Kate leaning on herarm."This gentleman claims acquaintance with you, Miss Dalton," said she,haughtily."Oh, to be sure, she knows me; and I have a letter from her herfa-father," said Purvis, drawing forth a packet like a postman's."Miss Dalton would prefer being seated, sir," said Lady Hester, whileshe motioned towards another part of the room."Yes, yes, of course; we'll find out a snug co-corner somewhere for achat. Just take my arm, will you? Let us get away from all these great'Dons,' with their stars and crosses." And, without waiting for Kate'sreply, he drew her arm within his own, and set out in that littleshuffling trot which he always assumed when he fancied he had businesson hand.The ridicule of being associated with such a companion would at anyother moment have overwhelmed Kate Dalton with shame; but now, whetherfrom the few words which Lady Hester had whispered in her ear, whetherthe fact of his unauthorized appearance, or whether it were the dread ofsome greater disgrace to follow, she actually felt a sense of relief inthe continuous flow of twaddle which he kept up as they passed down theroom."Who was that smiled as we passed?" asked he."Prince Midchekoff.""Oh, that was he, was it? You must introduce me.""Not now, pray, not now; at any other time," cried she, in perfectterror."Well, but don't forget it. Zoe would never forgive me if I told herthat I lost the op-op-opportunity; she wants to know him so very much.""Of course, at another time," said Kate, hurrying him along withincreasing speed."Who's he?" asked Purvis, as a tall and stately personage bowed blandlyto Kate."The Austrian Minister.""Not the fellow that st-st-strangled the Emperor? Oh, I forgot; he was aRussian, wasn't he? They got him down and ch-ch-choked him, ha, ha, ha!There 's a man with a red moustache, so like the fellow who sells theboubou-bouquets at the Casciui.""A Hungarian magnate," whispered Kate."Is he, though? Then let's have another look at him. He has as many goldchains about him as a shop on the Ponte Vecchio. Zoe would like him, he's so odd."At last, but not without great efforts, Kate succeeded in reaching asmall chamber, where two others already were seated, and whose figureswere undistinguishable in the obscurity of a studiously shaded lamp."Isn't it strange, she never asked for Zoe?" said Purvis, as he tookhis seat on a sofa; "not to inquire for a person sick under her ownr-r-roof?""Lady Hester is not acquainted with Mrs. Ricketts.""Well, but sh-sh-she ought to be. Zoe made a party for her, a d-d-d-inerparty, and had Hagg-Haggerstone and Foglass, and the rest of them. Andafter all, you know, they are only b-bankers, these Onslows, and needn't give themselves airs.""You have a letter for me, Mr. Purvis? Will you pardon my impatience--""Yes, to be sure. I 've a letter, and an enclosure in it, too; at least,it feels crisp like a note, a bank-note; that 's the reason you 'reimpatient. Perhaps the re-reremittance was long a-coming, eh?"Kate made no reply to this speech, but her cheek grew scarlet as sheheard it.Purvis, meanwhile, spread his packet of papers before him, and began hissearch for Dalton's letter."No, that ain't it; that's from Foglass, all about Norwood, and hisN-N-Newmarket affair. That 's a letter from Lord Gullston's valet, withsuch a droll ac-account of the whole family. Zoe recom-mended him; andthe poor fellow 's very grateful, for he writes about all that goes onin the house. Lady G., it seems, has the temper of a f-f-fiend. Well,don't be im-impatient; I'll find your father's letter in a minute. Hewrites such a cr-cr-cramp old hand, one should detect it at once. Ita-take it that he 's a bit of a character, the old gen-gentleman. I 'msure he is; but what have I done with his letter? Oh, here it is! hereit is! and 'with haste' written on the corner, too."Kate caught the letter impatiently, and, without any thought for Purvisor the place, tore it open at once. In doing so, the enclosure fell tothe ground without her perceiving it; and, stranger still, it escapedthe attention of Purvis; but that worthy man, not exactly venturingto read over her shoulder, had established himself directly in front,where, with his double eye-glass, he scanned every change in herfeatures during the perusal."All well at home, I hope, eh? How she changes color," muttered he tohimself. "Nobody ill; nobody dead, eh?" asked he, louder. "It must besomething serious, though; she 's trembling like ague. Let me give youa chair, that is, if I can f-find one in this little den; they 've gotnothing but d-divans all round it." And he hurried forth into the largersalon in search of a seat.It was not without considerable trouble to himself and inconvenience tovarious others that he at last succeeded, and returned to the boudoirwith a massive arm-chair in his hands. But what was his dismay to findthat Miss Dalton had made her escape in the mean while? In vain didhe seek her through the salons, which now were rapidly thinning; thedistinguished guests having already departed.A stray group lingered here and there, conversing in a low tone; andaround the fires were gathered little knots of ladies muffled andcloaked, and only waiting for the carriages. It was like a stage, whenthe performance was over. Scarcely deigning to notice the little man,who, with palpable keenness of scrutiny, pursued his search in everyquarter, they gradually moved off, leaving Purvis alone to tread the"banquet-hall deserted." The servants, as they extinguished thelights, passed and repassed him without remark; so that, defeated anddisappointed, he was obliged at last to retire, sorrowfully confessingto his own heart how little success had attended his bold enterprise.As he passed along the galleries and descended the stairs, he madevarious little efforts to open a conversation with some one or other ofthe servants; but these dignified officials responded to his questionsin the dryest and shortest manner; and it was only as he reached thegreat gate of the palace that he chanced upon one courteous enough tohear him to the end in his oft-repeated question of "Who was th-th-thatwith the large st-st-star on his breast, and a wh-wh-white beard?"The porter stared at the speaker, and said respectfully, "The signorprobably means the Archduke?""Not the Archduke Fr-Fr-Fr--""Yes, sir," said the man; and closed the heavy door after him, leavingPurvis in a state of astonishment, and as much shame as his naturepermitted him to feel. Neither upon himself nor his sensations have weany intention to dwell; and leaving him to pursue his way homeward, webeg to return once more within those walls from which he had just takenhis departure.If Lady Hester's grand company had gone, the business of the eveningwas by no means over; on the contrary, it was the hour of her nightreceptions, and now the accustomed guests of those favored precinctscame dropping in from theatres, and operas, and late dinners. These menof pleasure looked jaded and tired, as usual; and, except the littletinkling sounds of Jekyl's small treble, no other voice sounded as theywalked along the corridors.[Illustration:   426]When they entered Lady Hester's boudoir, they found that lady recountingto Midchekoff the whole circumstances of the morning's adventure, arecital which she continued without other interruption than a smile ora nod, or a little gesture of the hand to each of the new arrivals ashe came in. If the lady's manner was devoid of all ceremony, that of thegentlemen was less ceremonious still; for they stretched themselves ondivans, rested their legs upon chairs, and stood back to the fire, witha degree of careless ease that bespoke them thoroughly at home, Jekyl,perhaps, the only one present who mingled with this freedom a certaincourteous respect that no familiarity made him ever forget."And they are still here?" asked the Prince. "Actually in the house atthis moment?""At this very moment!" responded she, emphatically."The whole thing passes belief," exclaimed he.And now the listless loungers drew their chairs closer to hear thestory, and laugh, as men do, who are seldom moved to mirth save whenridicule or malice are the provocatives."But you haven't heard the worst yet," said Midchekoff. "Pray tell themof your visitor of this evening."And Lady Hester narrated the appearance of Mr. Purvis, who, havingsecured his entrance by a visit to his sister, had so unceremoniouslypresented himself in the drawing-room."Heaven knows what he said to his Royal Highness when I was away. Tojudge from his face, it must have been something atrocious; and the lastthing he said on leaving was, 'I must try and not forget your agreeablefriend's name.'""You might as well have invited me as have had your 'friend' Purvis,after all," said a young Italian noble, whose political opinions foundno favor at court."But what do you mean to do, my Lady?" asked Midchekoff. "Is the enemyto hold undisputed possession of the fortress?""It is precisely on that point I want advice. Prince.""What if we form ourselves into a council of state?" said an Austriangeneral."By all means," said the others, who now formed a semicircle in front ofLady Hester's sofa."The youngest officer always speaks first," said the Austrian."Then that duty is mine," said a little man of about eighty-two orthree, and who had represented France at half the courts of Europe."I should advise a protocol in the form of a protest. It is a palpableinvasion of territory, but, followed by an ample apology and a speedyevacuation, may be forgiven. There are historical warrants for suchtransgressions being accepted as acts almost of compulsion.""The case of Anspach, for instance," said the Austrian, with a malicioussmile."Precisely, General, precisely a case in point," rejoined the olddiplomate, with a bow and a smile that almost seemed grateful. "Theshortest road to victory is ever the best.""Let's try a fever, or a fire. By Jove! the sacrifice of a few chairsand window-curtains would be a cheap alternative," said George Onslow."Why not essay a compromise, my Lady?" interposed a young Germansecretary of legation; "a mixed garrison, like that of Rastadt?""Lady Hester's troops to mount guard alternately with the Rickettses'.Downright treason, base treason!" exclaimed another."What would you think of a special mission, my Lady?" simpered Jekyl."It would at least serve to enlighten us as to the views of the enemy.The discussion of the past often throws much light on the future.""Jekyl wants to earn a decoration," said another, laughing. "He intendsto be the envoy himself.""I'll wager that I know Midchekoff's policy," said a young Sicilian,who always spoke with a frank fearlessness that is most rare with otherItalians."Well, let us hear it," said the Prince, gravely."You would counsel the national expedient of retiring before the enemy,and making the country too cold to hold them?""How absurd!" said Lady Hester, half angrily; "give up one's house toa set of people who have had the impertinence to intrude themselvesunasked?""And yet Giasconi is right," said the Prince. "It is the best suggestionwe have heard yet. Hostilities imply, to a certain extent, equality;negotiation is an acknowledgment of acquaintanceship; a dignifiedretreat, however, avoids either difficulty.""In that case, let 's starve them out," said George. "Suffer nosupplies to be thrown into the place, and exact the most humble terms ofsubmission.""Then, where to go? that 's another question," said Lady Hester."His Eminence expects to see you in Rome," whispered the Abbe, who hadwaited for an opportunity for the suggestion. "I believe he relies on apromise.""Very true; but not just yet. Besides, the season is almost over," saidLady Hester, with a slight degree of confusion."Don't be frightened, Abbe," whispered Jekyl in D'Esmonde's ear. "HerLadyship is assuredly 'going to Rome' later on."The priest smiled, with an expression that told how fully hecomprehended the phrase."There 's a little villa of mine, on the Lake of Como, very much at yourservice," said Midchekoff, with the easy indifference of one suggestingsomething perfectly indifferent to him."Do you mean La Rocca, Prince?" added the Sicilian."Yes. They tell me it is prettily situated, but I 've never seen it.The Empress passed a few weeks there last year, and liked it," saidMidchekoff, languidly."Really, Prince, if I don't know how to accept, I am still more at aloss for power to refuse your offer.""When will you go?" said he, dryly, and taking out his memorandum-bookto write."What says Mr. Jekyl?" said Lady Hester, turning to that blandpersonage, who, without apparently attending to what went forward, hadheard every syllable of it."This is Tuesday," said Jekyl. "There 's not much to be done; the villawants for nothing: I know it perfectly.""Ah, it's comfortable, then?" said the Prince, with a slight degree ofanimation."La Rocca is all that Contarete's taste could make it," replied Jekyl."Poor Contarete! he was an excellent maitre d'hotel," said Midchekoff."He's still with me, somewhere; I rather believe in Tartary, just now.""Your Ladyship may leave this on Thursday," said Jekyl, who well knewthat he was paying the most flattering compliment to Midchekoff innaming the shortest possible time for preparation."Will this be inconvenient, Prince?" asked Lady Hester."No; not in the least. If Jekyl will precede you by a couple of hours, Itrust all will be ready.""With your permission, then, we will say Thursday," said she, who, withher habitual delight in novelty, was already wild with pleasure at thewhole scheme."Perhaps I'll come and visit you," said Midchekoff. "I shall have to goto Vienna soon."Lady Hester bowed and smiled her acknowledgments for this notover-gracious speech."May we follow you, too, Lady Hester?" asked the Sicilian."We expect that much from your loyalty, gentlemen. Our exile will testyour fidelity.""There 's something or other inconvenient about the stables," saidMidchekoff, "but I forget what it is; they are up a mountain, or downin a valley. I don't remember it, but the Emperor said it was wrong, andshould be changed.""They are on the opposite side of the lake, Prince," interposed Jekyl,"and you must cross over to your carriage by boat.""Oh, delightful, quite delightful!" exclaimed Lady Hester, with childishjoy, at the novelty."La Rocca is on a little promontory," said Jekyl, "only approachablefrom the water, for the mountain is quite inaccessible.""You shall have a road made, if you wish it," said the Prince,languidly."On no account. I would n't for the world destroy the isolation of thespot.""Do you happen to remember, Mr. Jekyl, if there be any pictures there?""There are some perfect gems, by Greuze.""Oh! that's where they are, is it? I could never call to mind where theywere left."The conversation now became general, in discussing Lady Hester's changeof abode, the life they should all lead when on the lake, and theinnumerable stories that would be circulated to account for her suddendeparture. This same mystery was not the least agreeable feature of thewhole, and Lady Hester never wearied in talking of all the speculationsher new step was certain to originate; and although some of the companyregretted the approaching closure of a house which formed the resourceof every evening, others were not sorry at the prospect of anythingwhich offered a change to the monotony of their lives."You'll come to breakfast to-morrow, Mr. Jekyl," said Lady Hester, as hefollowed the departing guests. "I shall want you the whole day."He bowed with his hand to his heart, and never did features of likemould evince a deeper aspect of devotion.CHAPTER XXXIV. JEKYL'S COUNSELSONE of the most striking characteristics of our present age is thesingular mixture of frivolity and seriousness, the almost absurdcontrast between grave inquiry and reckless dissipation, which pervadesthe well-to-do classes. Never was there a period when merely sensualgratification was more highly prized and paid for; and never, perhaps, atime when every rank in life was more eager in the pursuit of knowledge.To produce this state of things a certain compromise was necessary;and while the mere man of pleasure affected a taste for literatureand politics, the really active-minded either sought his relaxation,or extended his influence, by mingling in scenes of frivolity andamusement.The age which made dandies philosophers made lord chancellors droll, andbishops eccentric. A paradoxical spirit was abroad, and it seemed to bea matter of pride with every one to do something out of his station. Thewhole temper of society and the tone of conversation exhibited this newtaste.Lady Hester Onslow was not a bad specimen of the prevailing mania. Therewas by nature a certain fidgety, capricious volatility about her thatdefied everything like a regular pursuit or a continued purpose. With areasonably quick apprehension and no judgment, in being everything,she became nothing. Always mistaking sympathies for convictions, it wasquite sufficient to interest her imagination to secure her adhesion,not, indeed, that it was worth much when obtained, seeing that she wasbut a feeble ally at the best. Her employment of the day was a typeof herself. The mornings were passed in mesmeric experiences with herdoctor, or what she fancied were theological discussions with the AbbeD'Esmonde.It would be difficult to say in which the imaginative exaltation morepredominated. All the authentic and incredible phenomena of the one, allthe miraculous pretensions of the other, were too little for a credulitythat stopped at nothing. Of second sight, remote sympathy, and saintlymiracles she never could hear enough. "Give me facts," she would say;by which she meant narratives. "I will have no theories, doctor." "Don'tbear me down with arguments, Monsieur l'Abbe." "Facts, and facts alone,have any influence with me."Now, such facts as she asked for were easily obtainable, and thegreatest miser need not have grudged her an ample meal of them. Manyof the facts, too, possessed the pleasing feature of being personal intheir interest. One day it was a charming young patient of the doctor,who, having touched a tress of Lady Hester's hair, made the mostastonishing revelations of her Ladyship's disposition; telling facts ofher feelings, her nature, and even her affections, that "she knew wereonly confided to her own heart." Various little incidents of her dailylife were foretold, even to such minute matters as the purchase ofarticles of jewelry, which she had not even seen at the time, and onlymet her eyes by accident afterwards. The Abbe, with equal success,assured her of the intense interest taken in her by the Church.Beautifully bound and richly illustrated books were offered to her, withthe flattering addition that prayers were then being uttered at manya shrine for her enlightenment in their perusal. Less asked to conformherself to a new belief than to reconcile the faith to her own notions,she was given the very widest latitude to her opinions. If she grewimpatient at argument, a subtle illustration, an apt metaphor, orsometimes a happy mot settled the question. The Abbe was a clevertalker, and varied his subjects with all the skill of a master. Heknew how to invoke to his aid all that poetry, art, and romance couldcontribute. The theme was a grand one when the imagination was to beinterested, and really deserved a better listener; for save when themiraculous interposition of saints or the gaudy ceremonials of theChurch were spoken of, she heard the subject with indifference, if notapathy. The consideration of self could, however, always bring her back;and it was ever a successful flattery to assure her how fervently sucha cardinal prayed for her "right-mindedness," and how eagerly evenhis Holiness looked forward to the moment of counting her among hischildren.Her very tastes those same tastes that ascetic Protestantism was alwayscavilling at were beautifully Roman. The Church liked display. Witnessher magnificence and splendor, her glorious cathedrals, the pomp andgrandeur of her ceremonial! As to music, the choir of the "Duomo" wasseraphic, and needed not the association of the dim vaulted aisles, thedistant altar, and the checkered rays of stained-glass windows to wrapthe soul in a fervor of enthusiasm. Even beauty was cherished by theChurch, and the fair Madonnas were types of an admiring love that wasbeautifully catholic in its worship.With all this, the work of conversion was a Penelope's web, that musteach day be begun anew, for, as the hour of the Cascini drew nigh, LadyHester's carriage drew up, and mesmerism, miracles, and all gave way tothe fresher interests of courtly loungers, chit-chat, and "bouquets ofcamellias."For the next hour or so, her mind was occupied with the gossipingstories of Florentine life, its surface details all recounted by thesimpering dandies who gathered around her carriage; its deeper notunfrequently darker histories being the province of Mr. Albert Jekyl.Then home to luncheon, for, as Haggerstone related, she dined alwaysafter the Opera, and it was then, somewhere verging on midnight, thatshe really began to live. Then, in all the blaze of dress and jewels,with beauty little impaired by years, and a manner the perfection ofthat peculiar school to which she attached herself, she was indeed amost attractive person.Kate Dalton's life was, of course, precisely the same. Except the fewhours given to controversial topics, and which she passed in reading,and the occasional change from driving to riding in the Cascini, Kate'sday was exactly that of her friend. Not, however, with the same results;for while one was wearied with the same routine of unvarying pleasure,tired of the monotonous circle of amusement, the other became each daymore and more enamored of a life so unchanging in its happiness. Whatwas uniformity to Lady Hester, imparted a sense of security to Kate. Itwas not alone the splendor that surrounded her, the thousand objects oftaste and elegance that seemed to multiply around them, that captivatedher so much, it was the absence of all care, the freedom from everythought that this state was a mere passing one. This Kate felt to be thevery highest of enjoyments, and when at night she whispered to herself,"To-morrow will be like to-day," she had said everything that couldbrighten anticipation.Her father's letter was the first shock to this delightful illusion. Herown false position of splendor, in contrast to his poverty, now came uppalpably before her, and in place of those blissful reveries in whichshe often passed hours, there rose to her mind the bitter self-accusingsof a penitent spirit. She never slept through the night; the greaterpart of it she spent in tears. Her absence from home, brief as it was,was quite enough to make her forget much of its daily life. She could,it is true, recall the penury and the privation, but not the feelingsthat grew out of them. "How changed must he have become to stoop tothis!" was the exclamation that she uttered again and again. "Where wasall that Dalton pride they used to boast of? What become of that familydignity which once was their bulwark against every blow of Fortune?"To these thoughts succeeded the sadder one, of what course remained forher to adopt? a difficulty the greater since she but half understoodwhat was required of her. He spoke of a bill, and yet the lettercontained none: before she broke the seal, it felt as though there wasan enclosure, yet she found none; and if there were, of what use wouldit be? It was perfectly impossible that she could approach Sir Staffordwith such a request; every sense of shame, delicacy, and self-respectrevolted at the very thought. Still less could she apply to Lady Hester,whose extravagant and wasteful habits always placed her in want ofmoney; and yet to refuse her father on grounds which he would deempurely selfish was equally out of the question. She well knew that ina moment of anger and impatience stung by what he would call theingratitude of his children he would probably himself write to SirStafford, narrating every circumstance that drove him to the step. Oh,that she had never left him, never ceased to live the life of want andhardship to which time had accustomed her! all the poverty she had everknown brought no such humiliation as this! Poor Nelly's lot now was ahundredfold superior to hers. She saw, too, that reserve once broken onsuch a theme, her father would not scruple to renew the applicationas often as he needed money. It was clear enough that he saw noembarrassment, nor any difficulty for her in the matter; that it neithercould offend her feelings nor compromise her position. Could she descendto an evasive or equivocal reply, his temper would as certainlyboil over, and an insulting letter would at once be addressed to SirStafford. Were she to make the request and fail, he would order herhome, and under what circumstances should she leave the house of herbenefactors! And yet all this was better than success.In such harassing reflections warring and jarring in her mind, the longhours of the night were passed. She wept, too: the bitterest tears arethose that are wrung from shame and sorrow mingled. Many a generousresolve, many a thought of self-devotion and sacrifice rose to her mind;at moments she would have submitted herself to any wound to self-esteemto have obtained her father's kind word, and at others all the indignityof a false position overwhelmed her, and she cried as if her very heartwere bursting.Wearied and fevered, she arose and went into the garden. It was one ofthe brilliant mornings which for a week or ten days in Italy representthe whole season of spring. Although still early, the sun was hot, andthe flowers and shrubs, refreshed by the heavy dew, were bursting outinto renewed luxuriance in the warm glow. The fountains sparkled, andthe birds were singing, and all seemed animated by that joyous spiritwhich seems the very breath of early morning, all save poor Kate, who,with bent-down head and slow step, loitered along the walks, lost in hergloomiest thoughts.To return home again was the only issue she could see to herdifficulties, to share the humble fortunes of her father and sister,away from a world in which she had no pretension to live! And this, too,just when that same world had cast its fascinations round her, just whenits blandishments had gained possession of her heart, and made her feelthat all without its pale was ignoble and unworthy. No other courseseemed, however, to offer itself, and she had just determined on itsadoption, when the short, quick step of some one following her made herturn her head. As she did so, her name was pronounced, and Mr. AlbertJekyl, with his hat courteously removed, advanced towards her."I see with what care Miss Dalton protects the roses of her cheeks,"said he, smiling; "and yet how few there are that know this simplesecret.""You give me a credit I have no claim to, Mr. Jekyl. I have almostforgotten the sight of a rising sun, but this morning I did not feelquite well a headache a sleepless night--""Perhaps caused by anxiety," interposed he, quietly. "I wish I haddiscovered your loss in time, but I only detected that it must be yourswhen I reached home.""I don't comprehend you," said she, with some hesitation."Is not this yours, Miss Dalton?" said he, producing the bill, which hadfallen unseen from her father's letter. "I found it on the floor of thesmall boudoir, and not paying much attention to it at the time, didnot perceive the signature, which would at once have betrayed theownership.""It must have dropped from a letter I was reading," said Kate, whosecheek was now scarlet, for she knew Jekyl well enough to be certain thather whole secret was by that time in his hands. Slighter materials thanthis would have sufficed for his intelligence to construct a theoryupon. Nothing in his manner, however, evinced this knowledge, for hehanded her the paper with an air of most impassive quietude; while,as if to turn her thoughts from any unpleasantness of the incident, hesaid,"You haven't yet heard, I suppose, of Lady Hester's sudden resolve toquit Florence?""Leave Florence! and for where?" asked she, hurriedly."For Midchekoff's villa at Como. We discussed it all last night afteryou left, and in twenty-four hours we are to be on the road.""What is the reason of this hurried departure?""The Ricketts invasion gives the pretext; but of course you knowbetter than I do what a share the novelty of the scheme lends to itsattractions.""And we are to leave this to-morrow?" said Kate, rather to herself thanfor her companion.Jekyl marked well the tone and the expression of the speaker, but saidnot a word.Kate stood for a few seconds lost in thought. Her difficulties werethickening around her, and not a gleam of light shone through the gloomyfuture before her. At last, as it were overpowered by the torturinganxieties of her situation, she covered her face with her hands to hidethe tears that would gush forth in spite of her."Miss Dalton will forgive me," said Jekyl, speaking in a low and mostrespectful voice, "if I step for once from the humble path I havetracked for myself in life, and offer my poor services as her adviser."Nothing could be more deferential than the speech, or the way in whichit was uttered, and yet Kate heard it with a sense of pain. She feltthat her personal independence was already in peril, and that the meekand bashful Mr. Jekyl had gained a mastery over her. He saw all this, heread each struggle of her mind, and, were retreat practicable, hewould have retreated; but, the step once taken, the only course was"forwards.""Miss Dalton may reject my counsels, but she will not despise thedevotion in which they are proffered. A mere accident" here he glancedat the paper which she still held in her fingers "a mere accident hasshown me that you have a difficulty; one for which neither your habitsnor knowledge of life can suggest the solution." He paused, and a veryslight nod from Kate emboldened him to proceed. "Were it not so,Miss Dalton were the case one for which your own exquisite tact couldsuffice, I never would have ventured on the liberty. I, who have watchedyou with wondering admiration, directing and guiding your course amidshoals and reefs and quicksands, where the most skilful might have foundshipwreck, it would have been hardihood indeed for me to have offered mypilotage. But here, if I err not greatly, here is a new and unknown sea,and here I may be of service to you.""Is it so plain, then, what all this means?" said Kate, holding out thebill towards Jekyl."Alas! Miss Dalton," said he, with a faint smile, "these are no enigmasto us who mix in all the worries and cares of life.""Then how do you read the riddle?" said she, almost laughing at the easyflippancy of his tone."Mr. Dalton being an Irish gentleman of a kind disposition and faciletemper, suffers his tenantry to run most grievously into arrear. Theywon't pay, and he won't make them; his own creditors having no sympathywith such proceedings, become pressing and importunate. Mr. Dalton growsangry, and they grow irritable; he makes his agent write to them, they'instruct' their attorney to write to him. Mr. D. is puzzled, and wereit not that But, may I go on?""Of course; proceed," said she, smiling."You'll not be offended, though?" said he, "because, if I have not theprivilege of being frank, I shall be worthless to you.""There is no serious offence without intention.""Very true; but I do not wish there should be even a trivialtransgression.""I 'm not afraid. Go on," said she, nodding her head."Where was I, then? Oh! I remember. I said that Mr. Dalton, seeingdifficulties thickening and troubles gathering, suddenly bethinks himthat he has a daughter, a young lady of such attractions that, in asociety where wealth and splendor and rank hold highest place, herbeauty has already established a dominion which nothing, save hergentleness, prevents being a despotism.""Mr. Jekyl mistakes the part of a friend when he becomes flatterer.""There is no flattery in a plain unadorned truth," said he, hastily."And were it all as you say," rejoined she, speaking with a heightenedcolor and a flashing eye, "how could such circumstances be linked withthose you spoke of?""Easily enough, if I did but dare to tell it," was his reply."It is too late for reserve; go on freely," said she, with a faint sigh.Jekyl resumed,"Mr. Dalton knows there are thousands could have told him so that hisdaughter may be a princess to-morrow if she wishes it. She has but tochoose her rank and her nationality, and there is not a land in Europein whose peerage she may not inscribe her name. It is too late forreserve," said he, quickly, "and consequently too late for resentment.You must not be angry with me now; I am but speaking in your presencewhat all the world says behind your back. Hearing this, and believingit, as all believe it, what is there more natural than that he shouldaddress himself to her at whose disposal lie all that wealth cancompass? The sun bestows many a gleam of warmth and brightness before hereaches the zenith. Do not mistake me. This request was scarcely fair;it was ill-advised. Your freedom should never have been jeopardizedfor such a mere trifle. Had your father but seen with his own eyes yourposition here, he would never have done this; but, being done, there isno harm in it.""But what am I to do?" said Kate, trembling with embarrassment andvexation together."Send the money, of course," said he, coolly."But how from what source?""Your own benevolence, none other," said he, as calmly."There is no question of a favor, no stooping to an obligationnecessary. You will simply give your promise to repay it at some futureday, not specifying when; and I will find a banker but too happy totreat with you.""But what prospect have I of such ability to pay? what resources can Ireckon upon?""You will be angry if I repeat myself," said Jekyl, with deep humility."I am already angry with myself that I should have listened to yourproposal so indulgently; my troubles must, indeed, have affected medeeply when I so far forgot myself."Jekyl dropped his head forward on his breast, and looked a picture ofsorrow; after a while he said,"Sir Stafford Onslow would, I well know, but be honored by your askinghim the slight favor; but I could not counsel you to do so. Yourfeelings would have to pay too severe a sacrifice, and hence I advisemaking it a mere business matter; depositing some ornament a necklaceyou were tired of, a bracelet, anything in fact, a nothing and thusthere is neither a difficulty nor a disclosure.""I have scarcely anything," said Kate; "and what I have, have been allpresents from Lady Hester.""Morlache would be quite content with your word," said Jekyl, blandly."And if I should be unable to acquit the debt, will these few things Ipossess be sufficient to do it?""I should say double the amount, as a mere guess.""Can I dare I take your counsel?" cried she, in an accent of intenseanxiety."Can you reject it, when refusal will be so bitter?"Kate gave a slight shudder, as though that pang was greater than all therest."There is fortunately no difficulty in the matter whatever," said Jekyl,speaking rapidly. "You will, of course, have many things to purchasebefore you leave this. Well; take the carriage and your maid, and driveto the Ponte Vecchio. The last shop on the right-hand side of the bridgeis 'Morlache's.' It is unpromising enough outside, but there is wealthwithin to subsidize a kingdom. I will be in waiting to receive you,and in a few minutes the whole will be concluded; and if you have yourletter ready, you can enclose the sum, and post it at once."If there were many things in this arrangement which shocked Kate, andrevolted against her sense of delicacy and propriety, there was onecounterpoise more than enough to outweigh them all: she should beenabled to serve her father, she, who alone of all his children hadnever contributed, save by affection, to his comfort, should nowmaterially assist him. She knew too well the sufferings and anxietieshis straitened fortune cost him, she witnessed but too often thehalf-desperation in which he would pass days, borne down and almostbroken-hearted! and she had witnessed that outbreak of joy he wouldindulge in when an unexpected help had suddenly lifted him from thedepth of his poverty. To be the messenger of such good tidings to beassociated in his mind with this assistance, to win his fervent "Godbless you!" she would have put life itself in peril; and when Jekylplaced so palpably before her the promptitude with which the act couldbe accomplished, all hesitation ceased, and she promised to be punctualat the appointed place by three o'clock that same afternoon."It is too early to expect to see Lady Hester," said Jekyl; "and indeed,my real business here this morning was with yourself, so that now Ishall drive out to Midchekoff's and make all the arrangements about thevilla. Till three, then, good-bye!""Good-bye," said Kate, for the first time disposed to feel warmly to thelittle man, and half reproach herself with some of the prejudices sheused to entertain regarding him.Jekyl now took his way to the stables, and ordering a brougham to be gotready for him, sauntered into the house, and took his coffee while hewaited.CHAPTER XXXV. RACCA MORLACHE.There is something of mediaeval look and air about the Ponte Vecchioin Florence, which gives it a peculiar interest to the traveller. Thequaint little low shops on either side, all glittering with gold andgems; the gorgeous tiaras of diamonds; the richly enamelled cups andvases aside of the grotesque ornaments of peasant costume; the cumbrousear-rings of stamped gold; the old-fashioned clasps and buckles ofmassive make; the chains fashioned after long-forgotten models; thestrings of Oriental pearls, costly and rare enough for queens to wear,are all thrown about in a rich profusion, curiously in contrast to thehumble sheds for they are little more that hold them.The incessant roll of equipages,--the crowd and movement of a greatcity; the lingering peasant, gazing with rapturous eyes at theglittering wares; the dark Israelitish face that peers from within;the ever-flowing tide of population of every rank and age and country,giving a bustle and animation to the scene, so beautifully relieved bythe view that opens on the centre of the bridge, and where, in a vacantspace, the Arno is seen wending peacefully along, and scattering itscircling eddies beneath the graceful arches of the "Santa Trinita," thatlittle glimpse of hill and vineyard and river, the cypress-clad heightsof San Miniato, and the distant mountain of Vallombrosa, more beautifulfar than all the gold Pactolus ever rolled, or all the gems that everglittered on crown or coronet.There was one stall at the end of the bridge so humble-looking and soscantily provided that no stranger was seen to linger beside it. A fewcoral ornaments for peasant wear, some stamped medals for pious use,and some of those little silver tokens hung up by some devout hands asvotive offerings at a holy shrine, were all that appeared; while, asif to confirm the impression of the scanty traffic that went on, themassive door was barred and bolted like the portal of a prison. Analmost erased inscription, unrenewed for nigh half a century, told thatthis was the shop of "Racca Morlache."There may have been much of exaggeration in the stories that went ofthe Jew's enormous wealth; doubtless many of the accounts were purelyfabulous; but one fact is certain, that from that lowly roof went forthsums sufficient to maintain the credit of many a tottering state, orsupport the cost of warlike struggles to replace a dynasty. To him camethe heads of despotic governments, the leaders of rebellious democracy,the Russian and the Circassian, the Carlist and the Cristino. To theproud champion of divine right, or the fearless promulgator of equality,to all he was accessible. Solvency and his profit were requirements hecould not dispense with; but, for the rest, in what channel of futuregood and evil his wealth was to flow, whether to maintain a throne orsap its foundation, to uphold a faith or to desecrate its altars, toliberate a people or to bind their fetters more closely, were cares thatsat lightly on his heart.He might, with his vast means, have supported a style like royaltyitself. There was no splendor nor magnificence he need have deniedhimself; nor, as the world goes, any society from which he should bedebarred, gold is the picklock to the doors of palaces as of prisons;but he preferred this small and miserable habitation, which for abovetwo centuries had never borne any other name than the "Casa Morlache."Various reasons were given out for a choice so singular; among others,it was said that the Grand-Duke was accustomed to visit the Jew by meansof a secret passage from the "Pitti;" while some alleged that the secretfrequenters of Morlache's abode all came by water, and that in the darknight many a boat skimmed the Arno, and directed its course to the lastarch of the Ponte Vecchio. With these rumors we have no concern, norwith Morlache himself have we more than a passing business.When Kate Dalton had driven up to the door, she had all but determinedto abandon her intention. The arguments which in the morning had takenher by surprise seemed now weak and futile, and she was shocked withherself for even the momentary yielding to Jekyl's counsels. Her onlydoubt was whether to drive on without further halt, or leave some shortmessage, to the effect that she had called but could not delay there.This seemed the better and more courteous proceeding; and while she wasyet speaking to the dark-eyed, hook-nosed boy who appeared at the door,Jekyl came up."Be quick, Miss Dalton! Don't lose an instant," said he. "Morlache isgoing to the palace, and we shall miss him.""But I have changed my mind. I have resolved not to accept thisassistance. It is better far better that I should not.""It is too late to think of that now," said he, interrupting, andspeaking with some slight degree of irritation."How too late? What do you mean?""That I have already told Morlache the whole story, and obtained hispromise for the loan.""Oh, sir! why have you done this?" cried she, in a voice of anguish."I had your free permission for it, Miss Dalton. When we parted thismorning, the matter was fully agreed on between us; but still, ifyou desire to retract, your secret is in safe keeping. Morlache neverbetrays a confidence.""And he has heard my name!" cried she, in a broken, sobbing tone."Not for the first time, be assured. Even Croesus looked up from hisingots to ask if it were 'la belle Dalton;' and when I said 'Yes,''That's enough,' replied he; 'would that all my moneys had so safeinvestment!' But stay; there is Purvis yonder. He is pretending toexamine an eye-glass in that shop opposite, but I see well that he isthere only en vedette.""What shall I do?" exclaimed the poor girl, now torn by impulses andemotions the most opposite."One thing you must do at once," said Jekyl; "get out of the carriageand visit two or three of the shops, as if in quest of some article ofjewelry. His anxiety to learn the precise object of your search willsoon draw him from his 'lair.'"The decision of this counsel, almost like a command, so far imposed uponKate that she at once descended, and took Jekyl's arm along the bridge.They had not gone many yards when the short, little, shuffling step ofPurvis was heard behind them. Lingering to gaze at some of the splendidobjects exposed for sale, they at last reached a very splendid stall,where diamonds, pearls, and rubies lay in heaps of gorgeous profusion.And now Purvis had stationed himself exactly behind them, with his headmost artistically adjusted to hear everything that passed between them.Jekyl seemed to feel his presence as if by an instinct, and withouteven turning his eye from the glass case, said, in a voice of somedisparagement,"All modern settings! very lustrous very brilliant, but not at all whatwe are looking for."Kate made no reply; for, while she had scruples about abetting a merescheme, she was not the less eager to be free of the presence of the"Great Inquisitor.""That, perhaps," said Jekyl, pointing to a magnificent cross ofbrilliants, "would not go ill with the necklace, although the stones aresmaller. Say something, anything," added he, in a lower tone; "the spellis working.""That is very handsome," said Kate, pointing at a venture to an objectbefore her."So it is," said Jekyl, quickly. "Let us see what value they place uponit. Oh, here is Mr. Purvis; how fortunate! Perhaps in all Florence thereis not one so conversant with all that concerns taste and elegance, and,as an old resident, happily exempt from all the arts and wiles playedoff upon our countrymen.""How d'ye do d'ye do?" cried Purvis, shaking hands with both. "You heardof the bl-bl-blunder I made last night about the Ar-Archduke?""Not a word of it," replied Jekyl."I told him he was a-a-a fool," cried Purvis, with a scream and a cacklethat very constantly followed any confession of an impertinence."Meno male!" exclaimed Jekyl. "Even princes ought to hear truthsometimes; but you can help us here. Mr. Purvis, do you see thatchatelaine yonder, with a large emerald pendant; could you ascertain theprice of it for Miss Dalton? They'll not attempt to be extortionate uponyou, which they would, assuredly, if she entered the shop.""To be sure; I'll do it with pl-pleasure. Who is it for?""That 's a secret, Mr. Purvis; but you shall hear it afterwards.""I guess al-ready," said Scroope, with a cunning leer. "You 're going tobe m-m-m-married, ain't you?""Mr. Purvis, Mr. Purvis, I must call you to order," said Jekyl, who sawthat very little more would make the scene unendurable to Kate."I hope it 's not an It-It-Italian fellow; for they 're all as poor asLaza-Laza-Laza--""Yes, yes, of course; we know that. Your discretion is invaluable," saidJekyl; "but pray step in, and ask this question for us.""I'll tell who'll do better," said Purvis, who, once full of atheme, never paid any attention to what was said by others."Midche-Midche-Midche-k-k-off; he owns half of--""Never mind what he owns, but remember that Miss Dalton is waitingall this time," said Jekyl, who very rarely so far lost command of histemper; and at last Purvis yielded, and entered the shop."Come now," said Jekyl to his companion; "it will take him full fiveminutes to say 'chatelaine,' and before that we shall be safely housed."And with these words he hurried her along, laughing, in spite of all heranxieties, at the absurdity of the adventure. "He 'll see the carriagewhen he comes out," added he, "and so I 'll tell the coachman to driveslowly on towards the Pitti." And thus, without asking her consent, heassumed the full guidance at once; and, ere she well knew how or why,she found herself within the dark and dusty precincts of Morlache'sshop.Jekyl never gave Kate much time for hesitation, but hurried her alongthrough a narrow passage, from which a winding flight of stone stepsled downwards to a considerable distance, and at last opened upon aneat little chamber on the level of the Arno, the window opening on thestream, and only separated from it by a little terrace, covered withgeraniums in full flower. There was a strange undulating motion thatseemed communicated from the stream to the apartment, which Jekyl atonce explained to his companion as a contrivance for elevating anddepressing the chamber with the changes in the current of the river;otherwise the room must have been under water for a considerable portionof the year. While he descanted on the ingenuity of the mechanism,and pointed attention to the portraits along the walls, the Kings andKaisers with whom Morlache had held moneyed relations, the minutesslipped on, and Jekyl' s powers as a talker were called upon to speakagainst time, the figety nervousness of his manner, and the frequentglances he bestowed at the timepiece, showing how impatiently he longedfor the Jew's arrival. To all Kate's scruples he opposed some plausiblepretext, assuring her that, if she desired it, no mention should be madeof the loan; that the visit might be as one of mere curiosity, tosee some of those wonderful gems which had once graced the crowns ofroyalty; and that, in any case, the brief delay would disembarrass themon the score of Purvis, whose spirit of inquiry would have called himoff in some other direction. At last, when now upwards of half an hourhad elapsed, and no sound nor sight bore token of the Jew's coming,Jekyl resolved to go in search of him; and requesting Kate to waitpatiently for a few minutes, he left the room.At first, when she found herself alone, every noise startled andterrified her; the minutes, as she watched the clock, seemed drawn outto hours. She listened with an aching anxiety for Jekyl's return, while,with a sorrowing heart, she reproached herself for ever having comethere. To this state of almost feverish excitement succeeded a lowand melancholy depression, in which the time passed without herconsciousness; the half-dulled sounds of the city, the monotonous plashof the stream as it flowed past, the distant cries of the boatmenas they guided their swift barks down the strong current, aiding andincreasing a feeling that was almost lethargic. Already the sun had sunkbelow the hills, and the tall palaces were throwing their giant shadowsacross the river, the presage of approaching night, and still she satthere all alone. Jekyl had never returned, nor had any one descended thestairs since his departure. Twice had she shaken off the dreamy stuporthat was over her, and tried to find the door of the chamber, but,concealed in the wainscoting, it defied her efforts; and now, worn outwith anxiety and disappointed, she sat down beside the window, gazinglistlessly at the water, and wondering when and how her captivity was toend.The lamps were now being lighted on the quays, and long columns of lightstreaked the dark river. Across these a black object was seen to glide,and as it passed, Kate could perceive it was a boat that advanced slowlyagainst the current, and headed up the stream. As she watched, it camenearer and nearer; and now she could hear distinctly the sound of voicestalking in French. What, however, was her surprise when, instead ofmaking for the centre arches of the bridge, the boat was vigorouslyimpelled across the river, and its course directed towards the veryplace where she sat?However painful her situation before, now it became downright agony.It was clear there were persons coming; in another moment she wouldbe discovered, unable to explain by what course of events she had comethere, and thus exposed to every surmise and suspicion that chanceor calumny might originate. In that brief but terrible moment whatself-accusings, what reproaches of Jekyl crossed her mind; and yet allthese were as nothing to the misery which coming events seemed full of.For a second or two she stood irresolute, and then with something likean instinct of escape, she stepped out upon the little terrace thatsupported the flowers, and, trembling with fear, took her stand beneaththe shadow of one of the great buttresses of the bridge. The frail andhalf-rotten timbers creaked and bent beneath her weight, and close underher feet rolled along the dark river, with a low and sullen sound likemoaning. Meanwhile the boat came nearer, and slowly gliding along, wasat last brought up at the window. Two figures passed into the chamber,and the boatmen, as if performing a long-accustomed task, rowed out afew lengths into the stream to wait.From the window, which still remained open, a stream of light nowissued, and Kate's quick hearing could detect the rustling sound ofpapers on the table."There they are," said a voice, the first accents of which she knew tobelong to the Abbe D'Esmonde. "There they are, Signor Morlache. We haveno concealments nor reserve with you. Examine them for yourself. Youwill find reports from nearly every part of the kingdom; some more, someless favorable in their bearings, but all agreeing in the main fact,that the cause is a great one, and the success all but certain.""I have told you before," said the Jew, speaking in a thick, gutturalutterance, "that my sympathies never lead me into expense. Every solventcause is good, every bankrupt one the reverse, in my estimation.""Even upon that ground I am ready to meet you. The committee--""Ay, who are the committee?" interrupted the Jew, hastily."The committee contains some of the first Catholic names of Ireland, menof landed fortune and great territorial influence, together with severalof the higher clergy.""The bishops?""The bishops, almost to a man, are with us in heart; but their peculiarposition requires the most careful and delicate conduct. No turn offortune must implicate them, or our cause is lost forever.""If your cause be all you say it is, if the nationality be so strong,and the energies so powerful as you describe, why not try the issue, asthe Italians and the Hungarians are about to do?" said Morlache. "Ican understand a loan for a defined and real object, the purchase ofmilitary stores and equipment, to provide arms and ammunition, and I canunderstand how the lender, too, could calculate his risk of profit orloss on the issue of the struggle; but here you want half a millionsterling, and for what?""To win a kingdom!" cried D'Esmonde, enthusiastically. "To bring backto the fold of the Church the long-lost sheep; and make Ireland, as sheonce was, the centre of holy zeal and piety!""I am not a pope, nor a cardinal, not even a monsignore," said Morlache,with a bitter laugh. "You must try other arguments with me; and oncemore I say, why not join that party who already are willing to risktheir lives in the venture?""Have I not told you what and who they are who form this party?" saidD'Esmonde, passionately. "Read those papers before you. Study the secretreports sent from nearly every parish in the kingdom. In some you willfind the sworn depositions of men on their death-beds, the last wordstheir lips have uttered on earth, all concurring to show that Irelandhas no hope save in the Church. The men who now stir up the land torevolt are not devoid of courage or capacity. They are bold, and theyare able, but they are infidel. They would call upon their countrymenin the name of past associations, the wrongs of bygone centuries; theywould move the heart by appeals, touching enough, Heaven knows, to thegalling sores of serfdom, but they will not light one fire upon thealtar; they will not carry the only banner that should float in the vanof an Irish army. Their bold denouncings may warn some; their poetrywill, perhaps, move others; but their prose and verse, like themselves,will be forgotten in a few years, and, save a few grassy mounds in avillage churchyard, or a prisoner's plaint sent over the sea from a landof banishment, nothing will remain of Ireland's patriots.""England is too powerful for such assailants," said the Jew."Very true; but remember that the stout three-decker that never struckto an enemy has crumbled to ruin beneath the dry rot," said D'Esmonde,with a savage energy of manner. "Such is the case now. All is rot andcorruption within her; pauperism at home, rebellion abroad. Thenobles, more tolerant as the commonalty grows more ambitious; resourcesdiminishing as taxation increases; disaffection everywhere, in the townswhere they read, in the rural districts where they brood over theirpoverty; and lastly, but greatest of all, schism in the Church, a mutinyin that disorderly mass that was never yet disciplined to obedience. Arethese the evidences of strength, or are they sure signs of coming ruin?Mark me," said he, hurriedly, "I do not mean from all this that suchpuny revolt as we are now to see can shake powers like that of England.These men will have the same fate as Tone and Emmet, without thesympathy that followed them. They will fail, and fail egregiously; butit is exactly upon this failure that our hopes of success are based. Nota priest will join them. On the contrary, their scheme will be denouncedfrom our altars; our flocks warned to stand aloof from their evilinfluence. Our bishops will be in close communication with the heads ofthe Government; all the little coquetries of confidence and franknesswill be played off; and our loyalty, that's the phrase, our loyaltystand high in public esteem. The very jeers and insults of our enemieswill give fresh lustre to our bright example, and our calm and dignifieddemeanor form the contrast to that rampant intolerance that assails us.""But for all this classic dignity," said Morlache, sneeringly, "youneed no money; such nobility of soul is, after all, the cheapest ofluxuries.""You are mistaken, mistaken egregiously," broke in D'Esmonde. "It isprecisely at that moment that we shall require a strong friend behindus. The 'Press' is all-powerful in England. If it does not actuallyguide, it is the embodiment of public opinion, without which men wouldnever clothe their sentiments in fitting phrase, or invest them withthose short and pithy apothegms that form the watchwords of party.Happily, if it be great, it is venal; and although the price be aprincely ransom, the bargain is worth the money. Fifty or a hundredthousand pounds, at that nick, would gain our cause. We shall need manyadvocates; some, in assumed self-gratulation over their own prescience,in supporting our claims in time past, and reiterating the wornassertion of our attachment to the throne and the constitution; others,to contrast our bearing with the obtrusive loyalty of Orangeism; andothers, again, going further than either, to proclaim that, but forus, Ireland would have been lost to England; and had not our allegiancestood in the breach, the cause of rebellion would have triumphed.""And is this character for loyalty worth so much money?" said the Jew,slowly."Not as a mere empty name, not as a vain boast," replied D'Esmonde,quickly; "but if the tree be stunted, its fruits are above price. Ourmartyrdom will not go unrewarded. The moment of peril over, the seasonof concessions will begin. How I once hated the word! how I used todespise those who were satisfied with these crumbs from the table of therich man, not knowing that the time would come when we should sit at theboard ourselves. Concession! the vocabulary has no one word I 'dchange for it; it is conquest, dominion, sovereignty, all together. Byconcession, we may be all we strive for, but never could wrest by force.Now, my good Signor Morlache, these slow and sententious English area most impulsive people, and are often betrayed into the strangestexcesses of forgiveness and forgetfulness; insomuch that I feel assuredthat nothing will be refused us, if we but play our game prudently.""And what is the game?" said the Jew, with impatience; "for it seems tome that you are not about to strike for freedom, like the Hungarians orthe Lombards. What, then, is the prize you strive for?""The Catholicism of Ireland, and then of England, the subjugation of thehaughtiest rebel to the Faith, the only one whose disaffection menacesour Holy Church; for the Lutheranism of the German is scarce worth thename of enemy. England once Catholic, the world is our own!"The enthusiasm of his manner, and the excited tones of his round, fullvoice seemed to check the Jew, whose cold, sarcastic features wereturned towards the priest with an expression of wonderment."Let us come back from all this speculation to matter of plain fact,"said Morlache, after a long pause. "What securities are offered for therepayment of this sum? for, although the theme be full of interest toyou, to me it has but the character of a commercial enterprise.""But it ought not," said D'Esmonde, passionately. "The downfall of thetyranny of England is your cause as much as ours. What Genoa and Venicewere in times past, they may become again. The supremacy of the seasonce wrested from that haughty power, the long-slumbering energies ofSouthern Europe will awaken, the great trading communities of the Levantwill resume their ancient place, and the rich argosies of the East oncemore will float over the waters of the tideless sea.""Not in our time, Abbe, not in our time," said the Jew, smiling."But are we only to build for ourselves?" said D'Esmonde. "Was it thusyour own great forefathers raised the glorious Temple?"The allusion called up but a cold sneer on the Israelite's darkcountenance, and D'Esmonde knew better than to repeat a blow whichshowed itself to be powerless.A tap at the door here broke in upon the colloquy, and Jekyl's voice washeard on the outside."Say you are engaged, that you cannot admit him," whispered D'Esmonde."I do not wish that he should see me here.""A thousand pardons, Morlache," said Jekyl, from without; "but whenI followed you to the 'Pitti,' I left a young lady here, has she goneaway, or is she still here?""I never saw her," said Morlache. "She must have left before Ireturned.""Thanks, good-bye," said Jekyl; and his quick foot was heard ascendingthe stairs again."The night air grows chilly," said the Abbe, as he arose and shut thewindow; and the boatmen, mistaking the sound for a summons to approach,pulled up to the spot.With a sudden spring Kate bounded into the boat, while yet some distanceoff, and hurriedly said, "To the stairs beside the Santa Trinita."The clink of money, as she took out her purse, made the brief commandintelligible, and they shot down the stream with speed."Do not speak of me," said she, covering her face with her kerchief asshe stepped from the boat; and a gold Napoleon enforced the caution.It was now night, the lamps were all lighted, and the streets crowded bythat bustling throng of population whose hours of business or pleasurecommence when day has closed. A thin drizzling rain was falling, andthe footway was wet and muddy. Dressed in the height of fashion, all herattire suited to a carriage, Kate set out to walk homeward, with aheart sinking from terror. Many a time in her condition of poverty,with patched and threadbare cloak, had she travelled the dark road fromLichtenthal to Baden after nightfall, fearless and undismayed, no dreadof danger nor of insult occurring to her happy spirit, the "Gute nacht"of some homeward-bound peasant the only sound that saluted her. But now,she was no longer in the secluded valley of the great Vaterland; herway led through the crowded thoroughfares of a great city, with all itscrash and noise and movement.If, in her wild confusion, she had no thought for each incident of themorning, her mind was full of "self-accusings." How explain to LadyHester her long absence, and her return alone and on foot? Her verymaid, Nina, might arraign her conduct, and regard her with distrust andsuspicion. How should she appear in Jekyl's eyes, who already knew hersecret? and, lastly, what answer return to her poor father's letter,that letter which was the cause of all her misfortunes?"I will tell him everything," said she to herself, as she went along. "Iwill detail the whole events of this morning, and he shall see that myfailure has not come of lukewarmness. I will also strive to show him thenature of my position, and let him know the full extent of the sacrificehe would exact from me. If he persist, what then? Is it better to goback and share the poverty I cannot alleviate?"But what alternative have I? Jekyl's flatteries are but fictions. WouldI wish them to be otherwise? Alas, I cannot tell; I do not even know myown heart now. Oh for one true-hearted friend to guide and counsel me!"She thought of George Onslow, rash, impetuous, and ardent; she thoughtof the priest, D'Esmonde, but the last scene in which he figured madeher shrink with terror from the man of dark intrigues and secret wiles.She even thought of poor Hanserl, who, in all the simplicity of hisnature, she wished to have that moment beside her. "But he would say,'Go back; return to the humble home you quitted; put away all theglittering gauds that are clinging to and clasping your very heart.Take, once more, your lowly place at hearth and board, and forget thebright dream of pleasure you have passed through.' But how forget it?Has it not become my hope, my very existence? How easy for those whohave not tasted the intoxicating cup, to say, 'Be cool of heart andhead!' Nor am I what I was. How then go back to be that which I haveceased to be? Would that I had never left it! Would that I could liveagain in the dreamland of the poets that we loved so well, and wanderwith dearest Nelly through those forest glades, peopled with thecreations of Uhland, Tieck, and Chammisso! What a glorious world istheirs, and how unlike the real one!"Thus, lost in thoughts conflicting and jarring with each other, minglingthe long past with the distant future, hoping and fearing, now seekingself-persuasion here, now controverting her own opinions there, shewalked hurriedly on, unconscious of the time, the place, and even therude glances bestowed upon her by many who gazed at her with an insolentadmiration. What an armor is innocence! how proof against the venomeddart of malice? Kate never knew the ordeal through which she waspassing. She neither saw the looks nor heard the comments of thosethat passed. If her mind ever turned from the throng of thoughts thatoppressed it, it was when some momentary difficulty of the way recalledher to herself; for, as she escaped from the smaller streets, the crowdand crash increased, and she found herself borne along as in a strongcurrent."Does this lead to the Piazza Annunziata?" asked she of a woman at afruit-stall."Tell her, Giacomo," said the woman to a youth, who, with a water-melonin his hand, lay at full length on the pavement."Per Baccho! but she 's handsome!" said he, holding up the paper lanternto gaze at her. And Kate hurried on in terror.CHAPTER XXXVI. A STREET RENCONTRELADY HESTER ONSLOW had passed a day of martyrdom. There was scarcelya single contrariety in the long catalogue of annoyances which had notfallen to her share. Her servants, habitually disciplined to perfection,had admitted every bore of her acquaintance, while, to the few shereally wished to see, admittance had been denied. The rumor of anapproaching departure had got wind through the servants, and thehall and the courtyard were crowded with creditors, duns, and beggingimpostors of every age and class and country. It seemed as if everyone with a petition or a bill, an unsatisfied complaint or an unsettledbalance, had given each other a general rendezvous that morning at theMazzarini Palace.It is well known how the most obsequious tradespeople grow peremptorywhen passports are signed and posthorses are harnessed. The blandcourteousness with which they receive "your Ladyship's orders" undergoesa terrible change. Departure is the next thing to death. Another countrysounds like another world. The deferential bashfulness that could nothint at the mention of money, now talks boldly of his debt. The solventcreditor, who said always "at your convenience," has suddenly a mostpressing call "to make up a large sum by Saturday."All the little cajoleries and coquetries, all the little seductions andtemptations of trade, are given up. The invitations to buy are convertedinto suggestions for "cash payment." It is very provoking and verydisenchanting! From a liberal and generous patron, you suddenly discoveryourself transformed into a dubious debtor. All the halo that hassurrounded your taste is changed for a chill atmosphere of suspicionand distrust. The tradesfolk, whose respectful voices never rose abovea whisper in the hall, now grew clamorous in the antechamber; and morethan once did they actually obtrude themselves in person within thosecharmed precincts inhabited by Lady Hester.What had become of Miss Dalton? where could she be all this while? Hadnot Mr. Jekyl called? what was he about that he had not "arranged" withall these "tiresome creatures"? Was there no one who knew what to do?Was not Captain Onslow, even, to be found? It was quite impossible thatthese people could be telling the truth; the greater number, if not allof them, must have been paid already, for she had spent a world ofmoney latterly "somehow." Ce'lestine was charged with a message to thiseffect, which had a result the very opposite to what it was intended;and now the noisy tongues and angry accents grew bolder and louder.Still none came to her rescue; and she was left alone to listen to therebellious threatenings that murmured in the courtyard, or to readthe ill-spelled impertinences of such as preferred to epistolize theircomplaints.The visitors who found their way to the drawing-room had to pass throughthis motley and clamorous host; and, at each opening of the door, thesounds swelled loudly out.More than once she bethought her of Sir Stafford; but shame opposed theresolution. His liberality, indeed, was boundless; and therein laythe whole difficulty. Were the matter one for discussion or angryremonstrance, she could have adventured it without a dread. She couldeasily have brought herself to confront a struggle, but was quiteunequal to an act of submission. Among the numerous visitors who nowthronged the salons, Lord Norwood, who had just returned from hisshooting excursion in the Maremma, was the only one with whom she hadanything like intimacy."I am but a poor counsellor in such a case," said he, laughing. "I wasnever dunned in my life, personally, I mean, for I always take care notto be found; and as to written applications, I know a creditor's sealand superscription as well as though I had seen him affix them. The verypostmark is peculiar.""This levity is very unfeeling at such a moment," said Lady Hester,angrily; "and when you see me so utterly deserted, too!""But where 's Jekyl? He ought to know how to manage this!""He has never been here since morning. His conduct is inexcusable!""And George?""Out the whole day!""And the 'Dalton'? for she has rather a good head, if I don't mistakeher.""She took the carriage into town, and has not returned.""By Jove! I'd write a line to Sir Stafford; I 'd tell him that I wasgoing for change of ah--, and all that sort of thing, to Como for a weekor two, and that these people were so pestering and pressing, and allthat; that, in fact, you were worried to death about it; and findingthat your means were so very limited--""But he has been most liberal. His generosity has been without bounds.""So much the better; he'll come down all the readier now.""I feel shame at such a course," said she, in a weak, faint voice."As I don't precisely know what that sensation is, I can't adviseagainst it; but it must needs be a very powerful emotion, if it preventyou accepting money.""Can you think of nothing else, Norwood?""To be sure I can--there are twenty ways to do the thing. Close theshutters, and send for Buccellini; be ill dangerously ill and leave thisto-morrow, at daybreak; or give a ball, like Dashwood, and start whenthe company are at supper. You lose the spoons and forks, to be sure;but that can't be helped. You might try and bully them, too thoughperhaps it 's late for that; and lastly and, I believe, best of allraise a few hundreds, and pay them each something.""But how or where raise the money?""Leave that to me, if it must be done. The great benefactor of mankindwas the fellow that invented bills. The glorious philanthropist thatfirst devised the bright expedient of living by paper, when bullionfailed, was a grand and original genius. How many a poor fellow mighthave been rescued from the Serpentine by a few words scrawled over afive-shilling stamp! What a turn to a man's whole earthly career hasbeen often given, as his pen glided over the imaginative phrase'I promise to pay'!"Lady Hester paid no attention to the Viscount's moralizings. Shameindignant shame monopolized all her feelings."Well," said she, at last, "I believe it must be so. I cannot endurethis any longer. Jekyl has behaved shamefully; and George I 'll neverforgive. They ought to have taken care of all this. And now, Norwood, toprocure the money what is to be done?""Here 's the patent treasury for pocket use the 'Young Man's BestCompanion,'" said he, taking out of a black morocco case three or fourblank bill-stamps, together with a mass of acceptances of various kinds,the proceeds of various play debts, the majority of which he well knewto be valueless. "What amount will be sufficient, how much shall we drawfor?" said he, seating himself, pen in hand, at the table."I cannot even guess," said she, trembling with embarrassment andconfusion. "There are all these people's accounts and letters. I supposethey are all horrid cheats. I 'm sure I never got half the things, andthat the rest are already paid for. But no matter now; let us have donewith them at any cost.""'Morlandi, coachmaker' pretty well for Signer Morlandi!" said Norwood"eleven hundred scudi for repairs to carriages for destroying yourpatent axles, and replacing English varnish by the lacquer of a tea-traysomething less than two hundred and fifty pounds!""He is an obliging creature," said Lady Hester, "and always punctual.""In that case we 'll deal generously with him. He shall have half hismoney, if he gives a receipt in full.""'Legendre, coiffeur; eight thousand francs.' Pas mal, MonsieurLegendre! kid gloves and perfumes, Madonna bands and Macassar oil, arecostly things to deal in.""That is really iniquitous," said Lady Hester. "I see every bouquet isput down at a hundred francs!""A conservatory, at that rate, is better property than a coal-mine.Shall we say one thousand francs for this honest coiffeur?""Impossible! He would scorn such an offer.""Pardon me. I know these people somewhat better and longer than you do;and so far even from suffering in his estimation if that were a matterof any consequence you will rise in his good opinion. An Italian alwaysdespises a dupe, but entertains a sincere respect for all who detectknavery. I 'll set him down for one thousand, to be increased to fifteenhundred if he'll tell me how to cut down his neighbor, Guercini.""What of Guercini? How much is his claim?""A trifle under five thousand crowns.""Nearly one thousand pounds!" exclaimed she. "Say, rather, elevenhundred and upwards," said Norwood."It is incredible how little I've had from him: a few trifling rings andbrooches; some insignificant alterations and new settings; one or twolittle presents to Kate; and, I really believe, nothing more.""We are getting deeper and deeper," said Norwood, turning over thebills. "Contardo, the wine-merchant, and Frisani, table-decker, are bothlarge claimants. If pine-apples were the daily food of the servants'hall, they could scarcely cut a more formidable figure in the reckoning,indeed, if the whole establishment did nothing but munch them during alltheir leisure hours, the score need not be greater. Do you know, Hester,that the rogueries of the Continent are a far heavier infliction thanthe income-tax, and that the boasted economy of a foreign residence issensibly diminished by the unfortunate fact that one honest tradesmanis not to be found from Naples to the North Pole? They are Spartans indeceit, and only disgraced whenever the rascality is detected. Now, itis quite absurd to read such an item as this: 'Bonbons and dried fruits,three hundred and seventy crowns!' Why, if your guests were stuffed withmarrons glaces, this would be an exaggeration.""You are very tiresome, Norwood," said she, peevishly. "I don't want tobe told that these people are all knaves; their character for honesty isno affair of mine; if it were, Buccellini could easily mesmerize any oneof them and learn all his secrets. I only wish to get rid of them, it's very distressing to hear their dreadful voices, and see their moredreadful selves in the court beneath.""The task is somewhat more difficult than I bargained for," saidNorwood, thoughtfully. "I fancied a few 'hundreds' would suffice, but wemust read 'thousands' instead. In any case, I 'll hold a conference withthem, and see what can be done.""Do so, then, and lose no time, for I see Midchekoff s chasseur below,and I 'm sure the Prince is coming."Norwood gave her a look which made her suddenly become scarlet, and thenleft the room without speaking.If he had not been himself a debtor with the greater number of those whowaited below, few could have acquitted themselves more adroitly in sucha mission. He was an adept in that clever game by which duns are foiledand tradesmen mollified; he knew every little menace and every flatteryto apply to them, when to soothe and when to snub them. All thesearts he was both ready and willing to exercise, were it not for theunpleasant difficulty that his own embarrassments rendered him asomewhat dubious ambassador. In fact, as he himself phrased it, "it wasplaying advocate with one leg in the dock."He lingered a little, therefore, as he went; he stopped on the landingof the stairs to peep out on the tumultuous assemblage beneath, likea general surveying the enemy's line before the engagement; nor was heover-pleased to remark that little Purvis was bustling about amongthe crowd, note-book and pencil in hand, palpably taking evidence andstoring up facts for future mention. As he was still looking, thegreat gate was thrown open with a crash, and a caleche, dirty andtravel-stained, was whirled into the court by three steaming and pantingposters. After a brief delay, a short, thick-set figure, enveloped intravelling-gear, descended, and putting, as it seemed, a few questionsas to the meaning of the assembled throng, entered the house.Curious to learn who, what, and whence the new arrival came, Norwoodhurried downstairs; but all that he could learn from the postilion wasthat the stranger had posted from Genoa, using the greatest speed allthe way, and never halting, save a few minutes for refreshment. Thetraveller was not accompanied by a servant, and his luggage bore neithername nor crest to give any clew as to his identity. That he was English,and that he had gone direct to Sir Stafford's apartments, was the wholesum of the Viscount's knowledge; but even this seemed so worthy ofremark that he hastened back with the tidings to Lady Hester, instead ofproceeding on his errand.She treated the announcement with less interest. It might be Proctor,Sir Stafford's man. Was he tall and black-whiskered? No, he was short;and, so far as Norwood saw, he thought him fair-haired. "She knew ofnobody to bear that description. It might be an English physician fromGenoa, there was one there, or in Nice, she forgot exactly which, whowas celebrated for treating gout, or sore eyes, she could not rememberprecisely, but it was certainly one or the other. On recollection,however, it was probably gout, because he had attended Lord Hugmore, whowas blind.""In that case," said Norwood, "Onslow would seem to be worse.""Yes, poor man, much worse. George sat up with him the night beforelast, and said he suffered terribly. His mind used to wander atintervals, too, and he spoke as if he was very unhappy.""Unhappy, a man with upwards of thirty thousand a year unhappy!" saidNorwood, clasping his hands over his head as he spoke."You forget, my Lord, that there are other considerations than moneyedones which weigh at least with some persons; and if Onslow's fortunebe a princely one, he may still feel compunctious regrets for hisdetestable conduct to me!""Oh, I forgot that!" said Norwood, with a most laudable air ofseriousness."It was very kind of you, my Lord, very considerate and very kind,indeed, to forget it. Yet I should have fancied it was the verysentiment uppermost in the mind of any one entering this chamber,witnessing the solitary seclusion of my daily life, beholding theresources by which the weary hours are beguiled, not to speak of theravages which sorrow has left upon these features.""On that score, at least, I can contradict you, Hester," said he, with asmile of flattering meaning. "It is now above eight years since first--""How can you be so tiresome?" said she, pettishly."Prince Midchekoff, my Lady, presents his compliments," said a servant,"and wishes to know if your Ladyship will receive him at dinner to-day,and at what hour?""How provoking! Yes, say, 'Yes, at eight o'clock,'" said she, walking upand down the room with impatience. "You 'll stay and meet him, Norwood.I know you 're not great friends; but no matter, George is so uncertain.He left us t' other day to entertain the Prince alone, Kate andmyself, only fancy; and as he takes half-hour fits of silence, and Kateoccasionally won't speak for a whole evening together, my part was apleasant one.""How Florence wrongs you both!" said Norwood. "They say that no one ismore agreeable to your Ladyship than the Midchekoff," said he, slowlyand pointedly."As Miss Dalton's admirer, I hope rumor adds that," said she, hastily."What? are you really serious? Has the Dalton pretensions?""Perhaps not; but the Prince has," interrupted Lady Hester. "But youare forgetting these people all the while. Do pray do something anythingwith them; and don't forget us at eight o'clock." And with this LadyHester hurried from the room, as if admonished by her watch of thelateness of the hour, but really anxious to escape further interrogatoryfrom the Viscount.When Norwood reached the court, he was surprised to find it empty; notone of the eager creditors remained, but all was still and silent."What has become of these good people?" asked he of the porter."The stranger who arrived in the caleche awhile ago spoke a few words tothem, and they went."This was all that he knew, and being a porter, one of that privilegedcaste whose prerogative it is never to reveal what takes place beforetheir eyes, his present communication was remarkable."Would that the good genius had remembered me in his moment of generousabandonment!" muttered Norwood, as he took his road homeward to dressfor dinner.Little scrupulous about the means of getting out of a difficulty,provided it were only successful, Norwood scarcely bestowed anotherthought upon the whole matter, and lounged along the streets, asforgetful of the late scene as though it had passed twenty years before.As the Viscount strolled along towards his lodgings, Kate Dalton, withtrembling limbs and palpitating heart, threaded her way through thethronged streets, now wet and slippery from a thin rain thatwas falling. So long as her road lay through the less-frequentedthoroughfares, her appearance excited little or no attention in thepassers-by; but when she entered the Piazza Santa Trinita, all ablazewith gas-lamps and the reflected lights from brilliant shops, manystopped, turned, and gazed at the strange sight of a young and beautifulgirl, attired in the very height of fashion, being alone and afoot atsuch an hour. Unaccountable even to mystery, as it seemed, there wassomething in her gait and carriage that at once repelled the possibilityof a disparaging impression, and many touched or removed their hatsrespectfully as they made way for her to pass. To avoid the carriages,which whirled past in every direction and at tremendous speed, shepassed close along by the houses; and, in doing so, came within thatbrilliant glare of light that poured from the glass doors of the greatCafe of the Piazza. It was exactly the hour when the idle loungers ofFlorence society that listless class who form the staple of our clublife in England were swarming to talk of the plans of the evening, whatresources of pleasure were available, and what receptions were open.The drizzling rain, and the cold, raw feeling of the air prevented theirbeing seated, as their custom was, before the doors, where in everyattitude of graceful languor they habitually smoked their cigars anddiscussed the passersby, in all the plenitude of recreative indolence.The group consisted of men of every age and country.There were princes and blacklegs and adventurers; some with real rankand fortune, others as destitute of character as of means. Many ownednames great and renowned in history; others bore designations onlychronicled in the records of criminal jurisprudence. All were welldressed, and, so far as cursory notice could detect, possessed the easeand bearing of men familiar with the habits of good society. Althoughmixing in very distinct circles, here, at least, they met every day onterms of familiar equality, discussing the politics of the hour and theevents of the world with seeming frankness and candor.From a small chamber at the back of the cafe, a little tide of loungersseemed to ebb and flow; while the sharp rattling sound of a dice-boxindicated the nature of the occupation that went forward there. Thesmall apartment was thronged with spectators of the game; and evenaround the door several were standing, content to hear the tidings of acontest they could not witness."To sit upon the Ponte Carraja, and chuck rouleaux of gold into theArno, would be to the full as amusing, and not a more costly pastime,"said a sharp, ringing voice, which, once heard, there was no difficultyin recognizing as Haggerstone's."But Onslow plays well," said another."When he's in luck, sir," said the Colonel. "Let him always have thewinning horse to ride, and I don't say he 'll lose the saddle; butMaraffi would win on a donkey.""Is he a Russian?" asked one."No, sir, he 's worse; he 's a Greek. I know everything about him. Hismother was a Finlander, and the father a Cephalonian. I don't thinkSatan himself would ask a better parentage.""What luck! By Jove! I never saw such luck!" said a voice from withinthe door. "Onslow has no chance with him.""Nor will you, sir, if you persist in expressing your opinion inEnglish," said Haggerstone. "Maraffi speaks every language, plays everygame, and knows the use of every weapon, from a jereed to a Joe Manton.""I 'll not test his abilities at any of them," said the other, laughing."Per Baccho! there goes something new," said a young Italian, from thewindow that looked into the street. "Who's she?""Diantre!" said the old Duc de Parivaux. "That is something veryexquisite, indeed. She was splashed by that carriage that passed, and Ijust saw her foot.""She's the prima donna from Milan.""She 's the Cipriani. I know her figure perfectly.""She 's very like the Princesse de Raoule.""Taller, and younger.""And fifty times handsomer. What eyes! By Jove! I wish the drosky wouldnever move on! She is regularly imprisoned there.""You are very ungallant, gentlemen, I must say," said the young Countde Guilmard, the French secretary of legation, who, having finished hiscoffee and liquor, coolly arranged his curls beneath his hat before theglass, "very ungallant, indeed, not to offer an arm to an unprotectedprincess. We Frenchmen understand our devoirs differently." And, sosaying, he passed out into the street, while the rest pressed up closerto the window to observe his proceedings."Cleverly done, Guilmard!" cried one. "See how he affects to haveprotected her from the pole of that carriage.""She 'll not notice him." "She will." "She has." "She has n't." "She ismoving his way!" "Not at all.""She 's speaking!" "There, I told you he 'd succeed.""But he hasn't, though." Amid all these phrases, which rattled on morerapidly than we can write them, Onslow joined the party, one heavyventure on a single card having involved him in a tremendous loss."Is that a countrywoman of yours, Onslow?" asked a young Russian noble."If so, the entente cordiale with France seems scarcely so secure asstatesmen tell us."Onslow gave one glance through the window, and dashed into the streetwith a bound like the spring of a wild animal. He threw himself betweenGuilmard and Kate. The Frenchman lifted his cane, and the same instanthe fell backwards upon the pavement, rather hurled than struck downby the strong arm of the young Guardsman. Before the lookers-on couldhasten out, George had hailed a carriage, and, assisting Kate in, tookhis seat beside her, and drove off.So sudden was the whole incident, and so engrossing the terror ofpoor Kate's mind, that she saw nothing of what passed, and was merelyconscious that by George's opportune coming she was rescued from theinsolent attentions of the stranger."Did he speak to you? Did he dare to address you?" asked Onslow, in avoice which boiling passion rendered almost unintelligible."If he did, I know not," said she, as she covered her face with shame,and struggled against the emotion that almost choked her."He took your arm; he certainly laid hold of your hand!""It was all so rapid that I can tell nothing," said she, sobbing; "andalthough my courage never failed me till you came, then I thought Ishould have fainted.""But how came you alone, and on foot, and at such an hour, too? Wherehad you been?"These questions he put with a sort of stern resolution that showed noevasive answer would rescue her."Did you leave home without a carriage, or even a servant?" asked heagain, as no answer was returned to his former question."I did take a carriage in the morning; and and--""Sent it away again," continued George, impetuously. "And where did youdrive to, where pass the day?"Kate hung her head in silence, while her heart felt as if it would burstfrom very agony."This is no idle curiosity of mine, Miss Dalton," said he, speaking witha slow and measured utterance. "The society you have mixed with here isnot above any reproach nor beneath any suspicion. I insist upon knowingwhere you have been, and with whom? So, then, you refuse to speak, youwill not tell. If it be Lady Hester's secret--""No, no! The secret is mine, and mine only. I swear to you, by all weboth believe in, that it has no concern with any one save myself."[Illustration:  470]"And can you not confide it to me? Have I no right to ask for theconfidence, Kate?" said he, with tenderness."Know you any one more deeply and sincerely your friend than I am, moreready to aid, protect, or counsel you?""But this I cannot--must not tell you," said she, in accents broken bysobbing."Let me know, at least, enough to refute the insolence of an imputationupon your conduct. I cannot tamely sit by and hear the slanderousstories that to-morrow or next day will gain currency through the town.""I cannot, I cannot," was all that she could utter."If not me, then, choose some other defender. Unprotected and undefendedyou must not be.""I need none, sir; none will asperse me!" said she, haughtily."What! you say this? while scarce five minutes since I saw you outraged,insulted in the open street?"A burst of tears, long repressed, here broke from Kate; and for someminutes her sobs alone were heard in the silence."I will ask but one question more, Miss Dalton," said George, slowly,as the carriage passed under the arched gateway of the Palace, "and thenthis incident is sealed to me forever. Is this secret whatever it be inyour own sole keeping; or is your confidence shared in by another?""It is," murmured Kate, below her breath."You mean that it is shared?" asked he, eagerly."Yes, Mr. Jekyl at least knows--""Jekyl!" cried George, passionately; "and is Alfred Jekyl your adviserand your confidant? Enough; you have told me quite enough," said he,dashing open the door of the carriage as it drew up to the house. Hegave his hand to Kate to alight, and then, turning away, left her,without even a "good-bye," while Kate hurried to her room, her heartalmost breaking with agony."I shall be late, Nina," said she, affecting an air and voice ofunconcern, as she entered her room; "you must dress me rapidly.""Mademoiselle must have been too pleasantly engaged to remember thehour," said the other, with an easy pertness quite different from herordinary manner.More struck by the tone than by the words themselves, Kate turned a lookof surprise on the speaker."It is so easy to forget one's self at Morlache's, they say," added thegirl, with a saucy smile; and although stung by the impertinence, Katetook no notice of the speech. "Mademoiselle will of course never wearthat dress again," said Nina, as she contemptuously threw from her themud-stained and rain-spotted dress she had worn that morning. "We havea Basque proverb, Mademoiselle, about those who go out in a carriage andcome back on foot.""Nina, what do you mean by these strange words and this still morestrange manner?" asked Kate, with a haughtiness she had never beforeassumed towards the girl."I do not pretend to say that Mademoiselle has not the right to chooseher confidantes, but the Principessa de San Martello and the Duchessa diRivoli did not think me beneath their notice.""Nina, you are more unintelligible than ever," cried Kate, who still,through all the dark mystery of her words, saw the lowering storm ofcoming peril."I may speak too plainly, too bluntly, Mademoiselle, but I can scarcelybe reproached with equivocating; and I repeat that my former mistresseshonored me with their secret confidence; and they did wisely, too, for Ishould have discovered everything of myself, and my discretion would nothave been fettered by a compact.""But if I have no secrets," said Kate, drawing herself up with a prouddisdain, "and if I have no need either of the counsels or the discretionof my waiting-woman?""In that case," said Nina, quietly, "Mademoiselle has only perilledherself for nothing. The young lady who leaves her carriage and her maidto pass three hours at Morlache's, and returns thence, on foot, afternightfall, may truly say she has no secrets, at least, so far as thecity of Florence is concerned.""This is insolence that you never permitted yourself before," said Kate,passionately."And yet, if I were Mademoiselle's friend instead of her servant, Ishould counsel her to bear it.""But I will not," cried Kate, indignantly. "Lady Hester shall know ofyour conduct this very instant.""One moment, Mademoiselle, just one moment," said Nina, interposingherself between Kate and the door. "My tongue is oftentimes too ready,and I say things for which I am deeply sorry afterwards. Forgive me, Ibeg and beseech you, if I have offended; reject my counsels, disdain myassistance, if you will, but do not endanger yourself in an instant ofanger. If you have but little control over your temper, I have even lessover mine; pass out of that door as my enemy, and I am yours to the lasthour of my life."There was a strange and almost incongruous mixture of feeling in the wayshe uttered these words; at one moment abject in submission, and at thenext hurling a defiance as haughty as though she were an injured equal.The conflict of the girl's passion, which first flushed, now left herpale as death, and trembling in every limb. Her emotion bespoke the mostintense feeling, and Kate stood like one spellbound, before her. Heranger had already passed away, and she looked with almost a sense ofcompassion at the excited features and heaving bosom of the Spanishgirl."You wrong yourself and me too, Nina," said Kate Dalton, at last. "Ihave every trust in your fidelity, but I have no occasion to test it.""Be it so, Mademoiselle," replied the other, with a courtesy."Then all is forgotten," said Kate, affecting a gayety she could notfeel; "and now let me hasten downstairs, for I am already late.""The Prince will have thought it an hour, Mademoiselle," said the girl;the quiet demureness of her manner depriving the words of any semblanceof impertinence. If Kate looked gravely, perhaps some little secretsource of pleasure lay hid within her heart; and in the glance she gaveat her glass, there was an air of conscious triumph that did not escapethe lynx-eyed Nina."My Lady is waiting dinner, Miss Dalton," said a servant, as he tappedat the door; and Kate, with many a trouble warring in her breast,hastened downstairs, in all the pride of a loveliness that never wasmore conspicuous.CHAPTER XXXVII. PROPOSALS.KATE found Lady Hester, the Prince, and Mr. Jekyl awaiting her as sheentered the drawing-room, all looking even more bored and out of sortsthan people usually do who have been kept waiting for their dinner."Everybody has sworn to be as tiresome and disagreeable as possibleto-day," said Lady Hester. "George said he'd dine here, and isnot coming; Lord Norwood promised, and now writes me word that anunavoidable delay detains him; and here comes Miss Dalton, the mirrorof punctuality when all else are late, a full half-hour after the time.There, dear, no excuses nor explanations about all you have been doing,the thousand calls you 've made, and shops you 've ransacked. I 'mcertain you 've had a miserable day of it."Kate blushed deeply, and dreaded to meet Jekyl' s eye; but when shedid, that little glassy orb was as blandly meaningless as any that everrattled in the head of a Dutch doll. Even as he gave his arm to leadher in to dine, nothing in his manner or look betrayed anything like asecret understanding between them. A bystander might have deemed him anew acquaintance."Petits diners" have, generally, the prerogative of agreeability; theyare the chosen reunions of a few intimates, who would not dilute theirpleasantry even by a single bore. They are also the bright occasions forthose little culinary triumphs which never can be attempted in a widersphere. Epigrams, whether of lamb or language, require a select andspecial jury to try them; but just in the same proportion as the successof such small parties is greater, so is their utter failure, when by anymischance there happens a breakdown in the good spirits or good humor ofthe company.We have said enough to show that the ladies, at least, might be excusedfor not displaying those thousand attractions of conversation which allcentre on the one great quality, ease of mind. The Prince was more thanusual out of sorts, a number of irritating circumstances having occurredto him during the morning. A great sovereign, on whom he had lavishedthe most profuse attentions, had written him a letter of thanks, throughhis private secretary, enclosing a snuff-box, instead of sending himan autograph, and the first class of the national order. His glover, inParis, had forgotten to make his right hand larger than the left, and ahuge packet that had just arrived was consequently useless. His chefhad eked out a salmi of ortolans by a thrush; and it was exactly thatunlucky morsel the Cardinal had helped himself to at breakfast, andimmediately sent his plate away in disappointment. Rubion, too, hisninth secretary, had flatly refused to marry a little danseuse that hadjust come out in the ballet, a piece of insolence and rebellion onhis part not to be tolerated; and when we add to these griefs anuncomfortable neckcloth, and the tidings of an insurrection in aRussian province where he owned immense property in mines, his state ofirritability may be leniently considered.Jekyl, if truth were told, had as many troubles of his own to confrontas any of the rest. If the ocean he sailed in was not a great Atlantic,his bark was still but a cockleshell; his course in life requiredconsummate skill and cleverness, and yet never could be safe evenwith that. Notwithstanding all this, he alone was easy, natural, andagreeable, not as many an inferior artist would have been agreeable, byany over-effort to compensate for the lack of co-operation in others,and thus make their silence and constraint but more palpable, hispleasantry was tinged with the tone of the company, and all his littlesmartnesses were rather insinuated than spoken. Quite satisfied if thePrince listened, or Lady Hester smiled, more than rewarded when theyonce both laughed at one of his sallies, he rattled on about the Courtand the town talk, the little scandals of daily history, and the pettydefections of those dear friends they nightly invited to their houses.While thus, as it were, devoting himself to the amusement of the others,his real occupation was an intense study of their thoughts, what wasuppermost in their minds, and in what train their speculations werefollowing. He had long suspected the Prince of being attracted by KateDalton; now he was certain of it. Accustomed almost from childhood tobe flattered on every hand, and to receive the blandest smiles of beautyeverywhere, Midchekoff's native distrust armed him strongly againstsuch seductions; and had Kate followed the path of others, and exertedherself to please him, her failure would have been certain. It was heractual indifference her perfect carelessness on the subject was thecharm to his eyes, and he felt it quite a new and agreeable sensationnot to be made love to.Too proud of her own Dalton blood to feel any elevation by the markednotice of the great Russian, she merely accorded him so much of herfavor as his personal agreeability seemed to warrant; perhaps nodesigned flattery could have been so successful. Another feeling, also,enhanced his admiration of her. It was a part of that barbaric instinctwhich seemed to sway all his actions, to desire the possession ofwhatever was unique in life. Those forms or fancies of which naturestamps but one, and breaks the die, these were a passion with him. Topossess a bluer turquoise than any king or kaiser, to own an arab ofsome color never seen before, to have a picture by some artist who neverpainted but one; but whether it were a gem, a vase, a weapon, a diamond,or a dog, its value had but one test, that it had none its exact equal.Now, Kate Dalton realized these conditions more than any one he hadever met. Her very beauty was peculiar; combining, with much of femininesoftness and delicacy, a degree of determination and vigor of characterthat to Midchekoff smacked of queenly domination. There was a species offierte about her that distinguished her among other women. All that hehad seen done by an illustrious title and a diamond tiara, she seemedcapable of effecting in the simplest costume and without an effort. Allthese were wonderful attractions to his eyes; and if he did not fall inlove, it was simply because he did not know how. He, however, did whatto him served as substitute for the passion; he coveted an object whichshould form one of the greatest rarities of his collection, and thepossession of which would give him another title to that envy, the mostdelicious tribute the world could render him.There were some drawbacks to his admiration; her birth was notsufficiently illustrious. His own origin was too recent to make analliance of this kind desirable, and he wished that she had been aprincess; even de la main, gauche of some royal house. Jekyl had donehis best, by sundry allusions to Irish greatness, and the blood ofvarious monarchs of Munster and Conuaught, in times past; but the Princewas incredulous as to Hibernian greatness; probably the remembrance ofan Irish diamond once offered him for sale had tinged his mind with thissense of disparagement as to all Irish magnificence. Still Kate roseabove every detracting influence, and he thought of the pride in whichhe should parade her through Europe as his own.Had she been a barb or a bracelet, an antique cup or a Sevres jar, henever would have hesitated about the acquisition. Marriage, however, wasa more solemn engagement; and he did not quite fancy any purchase thatcost more than mere money. Nothing but the possibility of losing heraltogether could have overcome this cautious scruple; and Jekyl hadartfully insinuated such a conjuncture. "George Onslow's attentionswere," he said, "quite palpable; and although up to this Miss Daltondid not seem to give encouragement, who could tell what time and dailyintercourse might effect? There was Norwood, too, with the rank ofpeeress in his gift; there was no saying how an ambitious girl mightbe tainted by that bait." In fact, the Prince had no time to lose; and,although nothing less accorded with his tastes than what imposed haste,he was obliged to bestir himself on this occasion.If we have dwelt thus long upon the secret thoughts of the company,it is because their conversation was too broken and unconnected forrecording. They talked little, and that little was discursive. Anoccasional allusion to some social topic, a chance mention of theirapproaching departure from Florence, some reference to Como and itsscenery, formed the whole; and then, in spite of Jekyl, whose functionsof "fly-wheel" could not keep the machine a-moving, long pauses wouldintervene, and each lapse into a silence apparently more congenial thanconversation. All this while Jekyl seemed to be reading the complexscheme of doubt, irresolution, and determination that filledMidchekoff's mind. The stealthy glances of the Russian's eyes towardsKate, the almost painful anxiety of his manner, to see if she noticedhim while speaking, his watchful observance of her in her every accentand gesture, told Jekyl the struggle that was then passing within him.He had seen each of these symptoms before, though in a less degree,when the coveted object was a horse or a picture; and he well knew hownothing but the dread of a competition for the prize would rouse himfrom this state of doubt and uncertainty.The evening dragged slowly over, and it was now late, when Lord Norwoodmade his appearance. With a brief apology for not coming to dinner, hedrew Jekyl to one side, and, slipping an arm within his, led him into anadjoining room."I say, Jekyl," whispered he, as they retired out of earshot of theothers, "here's a pretty mess Onslow's got in. There has been a fracasin the street about Miss Dalton. How she came there at such a time, andalone, is another matter; and George has struck Guilmard, knocked himdown, by Jove! and no mistake; and they're to meet tomorrow morning. Ofcourse, there was nothing else for it; a blow has but one reparation,George will have to stand the fire of the first shot in Europe."Jekyl hated a duel. Had he been a member of the Peace Congress, he couldnot have detested the arbitrament of arms more heartily. 'It involvedpartisanship, it severed intimacies, it barred general intercourse, andoften closed up for a whole season the pleasantest houses of a town. Theannouncement of a strict blockade never struck a mercantile communitywith more terror. To Norwood the prospect was directly the opposite. Notonly an adept in all the etiquette and ceremonial of such meetings, heliked to see his name circulated in these affairs as a kind of guaranteeof his readiness to seek a similar reparation for injury. He had trustedfor many a year on his dexterity at twelve paces, and he never missed anopportunity of sustaining the prestige of a "dead shot."It was, then, with an ardor of amateurship that he narrated the variouslittle preliminary steps which had already been taken. Merkheim, theAustrian secretary, had called on him, on the part of Guilmard; and as,in a case so clear, there was little to arrange, the only difficulty layin the choice of weapons."The Frenchman claims the sword," said Norwood; "and it is alwaysawkward to decline that proposition for a soldier. But I suppose Georgehas about as much chance with one weapon as the other.""You think he 'll kill him, my Lord?""I think so. If the offence had been less flagrant or less public,possibly not. But a blow! to be struck down in the open street! I don'tsee how he can do less.""What a break-up it will cause here!" said Jekyl, with a nod of hishead in the direction of the drawing-room."It will send them all back to England, I suppose.""I suppose it will," added Jekyl, mournfully."What a bore! It's particularly unpleasant for me, for I hold somehalf-dozen of George's acceptances, not due yet; and, of course, thegovernor will never think of acquitting them.""I conclude it is inevitable the meeting, I mean?" said Jekyl."To be sure it is. Onslow took care of that! By the way, Jekyl, how cameshe there at such an hour, and alone, too?""She had been shopping, I fancy, and missed the carriage. There was someblunder, I have heard, about the coachman drawing up at the wrong door.""No go, Master Jekyl. Don't try it on with me, old fellow. You know allabout it, if you like to tell.""I assure you, my Lord, you give me a credit I don't deserve.""You know the whole story from beginning to end, Jekyl. I 'd back youagainst the field, my boy."The other shook his head with an air of supreme innocence."Then George knows it?" added Norwood, half asserting, half asking thequestion."He may, my Lord, for aught I can tell.""If so, he's treating me unfairly," said Norwood, rising and pacingthe room. "As his friend in this affair, there should be no reserve orconcealment with me. You can surely say that much, Jekyl, eh? What aclose fellow you are!""It is so easy not to blab when one has nothing to tell," said Jekyl,smiling."Come, there is something you can tell me. Where does that smallcorridor behind George's apartment lead to? There is a door at the endof it, and, I fancy, a stair beyond it.""That, if I mistake not, leads up to Lady Hester. No, I remember now; itleads to Miss Dalton's room.""Just so; I could have sworn it.""Why so, my Lord?" asked Jekyl, whose curiosity was now excited to theutmost."That 's my secret, Master Jekyl.""But the door is always locked and bolted from within," said Jekyl, "andthere is no keyhole on the outside.""I'll not stand pumping, Jekyl. If you had been frank with me, perhaps Ishould have been as open with you."For an instant Jekyl hesitated what course to follow. It might be thatNorwood really knew something of great importance. It might be that hisdiscovery was valueless. And yet, if it concerned Kate in any way, theinformation would be all-important, his great game being to make her aprincess, and yet preserve such an ascendancy over her as would renderher his own slave."She's a strange girl, that Dalton," said Norwood. "I wish she had aboutforty thousand pounds.""She may have more than that yet, my Lord," said Jekyl, dryly."How do you mean, Jekyl? Is there any truth in that story about theIrish property? Has she really a claim on the estate? Tell me all youknow, old fellow, and I 'll be on the square with you throughout."Jekyl, who in his remark had darkly alluded to the prospect of Kate'smarriage with Midchekoff, now saw that Norwood had totally misconceivedhis meaning, and like a shrewd tactician, determined to profit by theblunder."Come, Jekyl, be frank and aboveboard. What are her prospects?""Better than I have told you, my Lord," replied he, coolly. "If Icannot--for I am not at liberty to explain why--I am quite ready topledge my word of honor to the truth of what I say, or, what yourLordship will think more of, to back my opinion by a bet.""By Jove! that is news!" said the Viscount, leaning his head on thechimney to reflect. "You are such a slippery dog, Master Jekyl, you haveso many turnings and windings in you, one is never quite sure with you;but supposing now, for argument's sake, that one thought of making thisfair damsel a peeress, is there no hitch in the affair no screw loosethat one ought to look to?""In her birth, my Lord?""No; d--n her birth! I mean about the tin.""I believe, my Lord, that I can save you all speculation on the subjectwhen I say that pursuit would be hopeless there. The Midchekoff hasgained the start, and must win in a canter.""That Tartar fellow! nonsense, man; I know better than that. He 'llnever marry anything under royalty; the fellow's mother was a serf, andhe must wash that spot out of his blood whenever he can.""You are mistaken, my Lord. He only waits to be certain of beingaccepted, to offer himself.""Refuse him!" said Norwood, laughing, "there's not that girl in Europewould refuse him. If every decoration he wore on his breast were astripe of the knout upon his back, his wealth would cover all.""The Prince would give half his fortune to be assured of all you say, myLord," said Jekyl, gravely."By Jove! one might make a good thing of it, even that way," saidNorwood, half aloud. "I say, Jekyl," added he, louder, "how much are youto have? nay, nay, man, there 's no impertinence in the question, we areboth too much men of the world for that. It 's quite clear that this isyour scheme. Now, what 's the damage?""My Lord, you are as flattering to my abilities as unjust to mycharacter.""We 'll suppose all that said," broke in Norwood, impatiently; "and nowwe come back to the original question, whether I cannot afford to beas liberal as the Russian. Only be explicit, and let us understand eachother.""My Lord, I will not insult myself by believing I comprehend you;" saidJekyl, calmly.And before Norwood could detain him he left the room."Jekyl, come back, man! just hear me out you've mistaken me! Confoundthe cur," muttered the Viscount, "with his hypocritical affectation asif I did not know his metier as well as I know my bootmaker's."Norwood walked noiselessly to the door of the salon and peeped in.Lady Hester, the Prince, and Jekyl were in earnest conversation inone quarter; while Kate sat apart, apparently engaged with herembroidery-frame, but in reality too deeply sunk in thought to noticethe bright tints before her. Norwood entered listlessly, and strollingacross the room, took a place beside her. She moved slightly as he drewforward his chair, and, then, as she drew back her flounce, Norwoodsaw that it was of deep black lace. He coolly took out his pocket-bookwherein he had deposited the torn fragment, and, regarding it withattention, saw that it perfectly corresponded with the dress. Soleisurely and with such circumspection did he proceed that severalminutes elapsed before he looked up."You are meditative, my Lord, to-night," said Kate, at last, makingan effort to relieve an awkward situation; "what are you thinking of,pray?""Admiring your dress, Miss Dalton, which strikes me as singularlybeautiful and becoming.""Great praise this, from such an acknowledged judge as Lord Norwood,"said she, smiling."I prefer it to antique lace, which in general is too heavy and cumbrousfor my taste; I like these fine and delicate tissues, so frail andgossamer-like, not but their frailty, like all other frailty, incursoccasionally a heavy penalty; as here, for instance, you see this hasbeen torn.""So it has," said Kate, with confusion, "and I never noticed it. What aquick eye you must have, my Lord!""And a sharp ear, too, Miss Dalton," said he, significantly; "in fact,I am one of those people whose every-day faculties do duty for what inothers goes by the name of cleverness. It 's a great pity," said he,looking down at the dress; "you see, Miss Dalton, what a false step cando.""And yet I cannot remember when this occurred," said she, assuming tomisunderstand his equivocal expression."Not recall it, not a clew to the mishap?" asked he, shrewdly."None," said she, blushing at the pertinacity with which he clung to thetheme; "but it's of no consequence.""Would Miss Dalton think it very singular if I should be able to assisther memory? Would she accept the service as kindly as it was proffered,too?""Really, my Lord, you begin to speak in riddles," said she, more thanever piqued at his persistence."And yet," said he, following out the thread of his own thoughts, "I amassuredly as safe a counsellor as Albert Jekyl."Kate grew deadly pale, but never replied to this speech."And certainly," resumed he, "the man who speaks in his own name shouldever take precedence of an envoy.""My Lord," said she, firmly, "the very little which I can understand ofyour words implies a pretension to knowledge and influence over me whichI disdain to accept; but still I cannot believe that you seriously meanto insult me.""Of course not," said he; "I have come on a very different errand. If Idid passingly allude to bygones, it was to show you that you can affordto be candid when I am frank. We two, united, would walk over thecourse, and no mistake, that 's what I was coming to. I don't mean tosay that the Russian is not richer egad! there 's no disputing that,still, as to rank, a peer of Great Britain, I take it, is the equal ofany man. Not to remind you of the old adage about 'a bird in the hand' Ispeak frankly, because you are your own mistress.""Kate, if Lord Norwood will excuse you, come to me for one instant,"cried Lady Hester."Just say yes, before you go, or, if not yes, tell me that I have groundfor hope," whispered Norwood. But she arose without speaking.[Illustration:  484]"I'll not stand a 'hedge,' by Jove!" said Norwood, sulkily; "play orpay, nothing else for me.""Allow me to pass you, my Lord," said Kate, courteously."One word, off or on, Miss Dalton," said he, rising, and affecting tomake way, while he still barred the passage. A proud, disdainful smilewas all the reply she vouchsafed."All right," said he, insolently; "only remember how we stand, MissDalton, and whenever you want to repair the mischance of your laceflounce, don't forget the piece is in my keeping;" and he opened thepocket-book as he spoke, and exhibited the fragment before her. Sickwith a terror she could neither explain nor realize, she lay back againin her chair, unable to move, while Norwood glided quietly away and leftthe room."Dear Kate, have you forgotten me all this time?" said Lady Hester, whomKate now perceived was alone on the sofa, Midchekoff and Jekyl havingretired into an adjoining gallery, where they walked slowly along, sideby side, deep in conversation."You shouldn't have suffered Norwood to engross your attention in thatmanner, my dear. The Prince has been quite put out by it, and at such amoment, too, and how flushed you are! What has he been saying?""I can scarcely remember," said Kate, confusedly."Well, it's of no consequence, dear, because I have got something totell you that would speedily make you forget it. You know, Kate, howI always prophesied wonderful things for you, just as I did before forpoor Georgina Elderton, and she married a Rajah afterwards, and diedBegum of something ending in 'Bad.' Indeed, I might say it ended in badfor herself, poor dear, for I believe she was poisoned. But, to comeback, I always said that you also would have astonishing luck. I toldSir Stafford so. The first day I saw you, 'She 'll be like Georgina,' Isaid. 'You 'll see that girl in a wonderful position one of these days.'It is not that men care for their wives more than formerly, I ratherfancy the reverse, but they have got a most intense passion just now forbeauty. Wealth and good blood were once the only requisites, but theyare both disregarded now, in comparison with good looks. I suppose thefashion won't last, it would be very absurd if it should, but while itis the mode one ought to profit by it. Just as I am wearing all thosehorrid old brocades of my great-grand-aunt's, with odious flowers ofcrimson and yellow, now that the taste in dress is 'rococo,' but ofcourse in a year or two people will recover their senses again, andpretty girls without portions be left for sub-alterns in the line, asProvidence intended they should. Don't you think so, dear?"The brief question at the end of this long rambling speech wouldpossibly have puzzled Kate to reply to, had not Lady Hester been far toomuch occupied in her own speculations to care for a rejoinder."You'll hear people talk a deal of nonsense about unequal marriages,and they'll quote Heaven knows what instances of girls, generally Irishones, picking up princes and royal dukes, and all ending unhappily.Don't believe a word of it, dearest; there 's never misery where there's large fortune. The people who cry in velvet always shed rose-watertears, that don't hurt the skin or spoil the complexion. Not that I cansay so of myself," added she, with a deep sigh; "but I am a creatureapart. I fervently trust nature does not often form similar ones.Buccellini told me that I had a fifth pair of nerves, I assure you hedid. It was a very shocking thing, and probably he ought never to havementioned it to me; but it perfectly explains the excessive sensibilityof my whole nature, does n't it, dear?"Kate smiled assent, and Lady Hester went on:"Then, as to religion, my dear, I'm afraid, indeed, we all think toolittle about it. I 'm sure I 'm quite shocked at what I see in society.It was only the other night Lady Grace Morton kept her seat when theCardinal was speaking to her. I apologized to him for it afterwards, andhe said, with such a sweet smile, 'If these Protestants would only giveus back our churches, we 'd forgive their keeping their chairs.' The motwas very pretty, in French, and well turned was n't it? Of course, then,you 'll make no obstacle about the Greek Church, which I believe isexactly like your own, only that the priest has a beard, which I thinkmore becoming. It looks affectionate, too; it always gives one the ideaof devotion, a girl changing her faith for her husband; and really, inthis tiresome age we live in, a new religion is the only new thing oneever hears of. Your excellent family that sweet sister and the dear oldpapa will probably make a fuss about it; but you know, after all, howabsurd that is, and if you were to marry a Chinese, there 's no sayingwhat strange creatures you 'd have to pray to. You 'll have to go toRussia, but only for presentation; that over, the Prince will obtain arenewal of his permission to reside abroad; still, if you have to passa winter at St. Petersburg, it will be far from disagreeable. The womenare too fond of caviare and high play; but they dress just as well asin Paris, and wear better diamonds. Midchekoff's jewels are unequalled;and, now that I think of it, there 's one thing I 've set my heart on,and you must positively promise to give me, a little stiletto with anemerald hilt and handle. I have pined for it there 's no other wordthese three years. He wore it in London, and I have never had it out ofmy thoughts since. You can afford to be very generous, dearest. How Ienvy you that pleasure! and the delight you 'll feel in providing forpoor papa and Mary no, Elizabeth, I mean how absurd! I should say Ellen.It was something about that tale of Elizabeth, the Exile of Siberia,was running in my mind. The Prince will do whatever you suggest, and,indeed, he has already hinted about your brother Frank joining theRussian service. He 'll have him named an officer in the Emperor'sGuard. You must insist, too, upon La Rocca being your own settled uponyourself. They tell me it 's the sweetest spot in the world; and I'll always live there when you don't want it. I mention this about thesettlement, because there 's no saying how men will behave. I 'm sure Inever could have anticipated such a return as I have met with from SirStafford. And then, you know, with a Russian, one cannot be too guarded.Don't you agree with me? Well, never mind, you 'll perhaps come round tomy opinion later. But here comes the Prince, and it will be as well youshould retire, dearest. I'll see you in your dressing-room, and tell youeverything."And with this assurance Kate retired, with a head and heart as full asever young lady's felt.Kate was hastening to her room, when a short, quick step behind her madeher turn round, and she saw Purvis endeavoring to overtake her."Oh! I have you at last," said he, puffing for breath; "and what ach-chase I 've had for it! I 've been in five rooms already, and nearlyhad a f-f-fight with that Frenchwoman of Lady Hester's. She 's a regularT-T-Tartar, she is, and almost boxed my ears for looking into a smallcase where my Lady's r-ringlets are kept ha! ha! ha! I saw them, though,two long and two short, and a pl-pl-plait for the back of the head. Howshe m-m-makes up at night!""I must say that you have the strangest mode of requiting hospitality,"said Kate, haughtily."It 's all very well to talk of hospi-hospi-hospi--" Here a fit of gapingbrought on coughing, which, after a violent struggle, ended in theforced utterance of the last syllable of the word, but with such fatigueand exhaustion that he seemed scarcely able to continue; at last,however, he did resume. "It's all very well to talk of that, but we gotin here by our own cl-cl-cleverness; at least by Zoe's.""Less good-natured persons would find another word for it, Mr. Purvis.""So they would. Haggerstone called it a Ricketty stratagem. Nomatter; we 're in ha! ha! ha! and he 's out. The pr-pr-proof of thepu-pu-pudding--""Will you excuse me, sir, if I say I must leave you?""Don't go, don't go; I've something very important to to tell you.And first, Zoe my sister Zoe wants to see you. The cook has beenmost im-im-impertinent to her. She says it was ginger she put in themaca-maca-roni, instead of P-P--Parmesan; all his truffles are onlyPiedmontese. That is n't all: don't be in such a h-hurry. They 'vechanged the wine, too. We had Ch-Ch-Chambertin yesterday, and they 'vegiven us P-Pomard to-day. How is that to be borne?""I really see but one remedy for it, sir," said Kate, scornfully."So Zoe said; that 's exactly her opinion. They must be sent away. Zoeknows a very ti-ti-tidy cook. He 's not a a top-sawyer, you know, but hecan r-roast a bit of beef, and make a c-capital rice-pudding, and he 'llcome for six dollars a month. Wouldn't that be a sa-saving? Zoe told himto c-call to-day, and speak to La-Lady Hester.""He will find that difficult, sir," said Kate, dryly."And as for the b-butler, such a j-j-jackanapes I never saw; and Zoewould advise you to take little Pierrette, the fellow you see everyday at the Pergola; he sells the tickets outside the door. He looksr-r-ragged enough now, but when he 's dressed--""You must see, sir," interposed Kate, "that these are all details inwhich it would be both indelicate and impertinent for me to intrude anopinion about.""Not when you li-live in the house; not when you'redome-dome-domesticated with the family. We 're all in the same bo-boatnow; and Zoe says somebody must steer it. Now Lizetta, Zoe's maid, wouldkeep the k-keys herself.""Pray remember, sir, this is Lady Hester Onslow's house.""Egad! it w-won't be long so, if she goes on as she's d-doing. Marthasaw the meat-cart come in this morning, and I had a p-p-peep into theservants' hall when the fl-flunkeys were feeding, and such w-w-waste,such re-reckless--""Good-evening, Mr. Purvis; I cannot stay longer," said Kate. And, beforehe could interpose a word, she hastened from the spot, and, passingrapidly up the stairs, gained her own room, leaving Purvis to bethinkhim over the mass of things he had not touched upon, and on which he hadmainly intended to debate.CHAPTER XXXVIII. AN ARRIVAL.LET us go back a few hours in our history, and follow the short andburly figure which, emerging from the travelling-carriage in thecourtyard of the palace, pushed his way through the noisy throng ofduns, and entered the house."How are you, Proctor how is your master?" said he, as he threw off hisgreat-coat, and unrolled a capacious muffler from his throat. "How isSir Stafford?""Oh, Dr. Grounsell, glad you've come, sir. It will be a real pleasure tomy master to see you again, sir.""How is he, man, how 's the gout?""Poorly, very poorly, sir. Things have gone badly here, doctor, sinceyou left us," said he, with a sigh."Yes, yes; I know it all; I have heard all about that. But his healthtell me of his health.""Greatly broken, sir. No sleep o' nights without opium, and no real resteven with that.""And his spirits?""Broken too, sir. He's not what you remember him, sir, nor anything likeit. No pleasant joke, sir, when anything goes amiss, as it used to be;no turning it off with a merry laugh! He 's fretful and impatient aboutthe merest trifles, and he that never wanted attendance is now alwayscomplaining that he 's neglected, and deserted and forsaken by all theworld.""Does the Captain come often to see and sit with him?""Every day, sir; but these visits do rather harm than good. Sir Staffordis vexed at what goes on in the house; and Master George, I don't knowhow it is, but he don't calm him down, and they have oftentimes angrywords together; not but my master is frequently in the wrong, andtaxes the young gentleman with what he can't help; for you see, sir, myLady--""D--n! I mean, tell me about Sir Stafford; it is of him I want to hear.Does he read?""He makes me read to him every day, sir, all about the money-marketand railroad shares; sometimes twice over, indeed; and when I ask if hewould n't like to hear about what goes on in politics, he always says,'No, Proctor, let's have the City article again.'""And his letters does n't he read them?""The Captain reads them for him, sir; and now and then writes theanswers, for he can't hold a pen himself! Oh, you 'll not know him whenyou see him! He that was so large and fine a man, I lift him in and outof bed as if he were a baby.""Has he no acquaintance here?""None, sir.""Are there no inquiries after his health?""Yes, sir; there's plenty of people he used to give money to when he wasup and about poor actors, and painters, and the like they come everyday to know how he is. Some of them leave begging letters, which I nevergive him; but most go away without a word.""And his countrymen here are there none who ask after him?""No, sir. The only English we ever see visit my Lady, and never come tothis side of the house at all.""Does Miss Dalton come to inquire for him?""Every morning and every night too, sir. I suppose it must be withoutmy Lady's orders, or even knowledge; for once, when Sir Stafford wassitting up in his dressing-room, and I asked her if she would n't liketo come in and sit a few minutes with him, she turned away withoutspeaking; and I saw, from her manner, that she was crying.""What are all these people outside, who are they?""My Lady's tradespeople, sir. They've heard she's going for a fewweeks to Como, and they 've come with all their bills, as if she was arunaway.""Go and tell them to leave this, send them away, Proctor. It would doyour master great injury were he to overhear them. Say that everythingshall be paid in a day or two; that Sir Stafford remains here, and isresponsible for all."Proctor hastened out on his errand, and the doctor sat down and coveredhis face with his hands."Poor Stafford! is all your trustful affection come to this? Is it thusthat your unbounded generosity, your noble hospitality, are requited?"When Proctor returned, he proceeded to detail, for the doctor'sinformation, the various events which had occurred during his absence.With most, Grounsell was already acquainted, and listened to theparticulars without surprise or emotion."So it is, so it is," muttered he to himself; "there may be more cantof virtue, a greater share of hypocrisy in our English morals, but,assuredly, these things do not happen with us as we see them here. Therewould seem a something enervating in the very air of the land, that aman like him should have sunk down into this besotted apathy! When can Isee him, Proctor?""He 's dozing just now, sir; but about midnight he wakes up and asks forhis draught. If that won't be too late for you--""Too late for me! Why, what else have I travelled for, night and day,without intermission? Be cautious, however, about how you announce me.Perhaps it would be better I should see the Captain first.""You 'll scarcely find him at home, sir, at this hour; he generallycomes in between three and four.""Show me to his room. I 'll write a few lines for him in case we don'tmeet."Proctor accompanied the doctor across the courtyard, and, guiding him upa small stair, reached the terrace off which George Onslow's apartmentopened. The window-shutters of the room were not closed, nor thecurtains drawn; and in the bright light of several candles that shonewithin, Grounsell saw two figures seated at a table, and busily engagedin examining the details of a case of pistols which lay before them."That will do, Proctor," said Grounsell; "you may leave me now. I'll bewith you at twelve." And thus saying, he gently pushed him towards thedoor of the terrace, which he closed and bolted after him, and thennoiselessly returned to his former place.There were few things less congenial to Grounsell's nature than playingthe spy. It was a part he thoroughly detested, nor did he think that itadmitted of defence or palliation; still, the whole habit of his mindthrough life had impressed him with a disparaging opinion of himself.The limited sphere of his duties, the humble routine of his daily walk,and the very few friendships he had inspired, all tended to increasethis impression, till at last he looked upon himself as one who couldonly be useful by the sacrifice of personal feeling and the abnegationof all self-esteem; and thus he would have declined to know anotherman for what he deemed of no consequence in himself. His fault was notthinking too well of others, but thinking too meanly of himself.The scene before him now was enough to suggest deep anxiety. Notes andletters littered the floor and the table; the embers of a large fire ofpapers lay on the hearth; open drawers and boxes stood on everyside; all betokening preparation, the object of which the pistol-casesufficiently indicated. As they sat with their backs to the window,Grounsell could not recognize the figures; but the voice of oneproclaimed him to be George Onslow."And where is this place on the way to Arezzo?" asked he."No; on the opposite side of the city, off the high-road to Bologna. Itis a little park, surrounding a summer palace of the Grand Duke, theycall Pratolino," said the other. "They all agree that it is the bestspot to be found; no molestation, nor interference of any kind; and acapital breakfast of fresh trout to be had at the inn.""An interesting consideration for such as have good appetites," saidOnslow, laughing."I never saw a Frenchman who had not, on such an occasion," rejoined theother, snapping the pistol as he spoke. "I like these straight stocks;you are almost always certain of your man, with a stiff arm and a lowaim.""I don't know that I 've forgotten anything, Norwood," said Onslow,rising and pacing the room with folded arms."You 've written to the governor?""Yes; and mentioned those acceptances," said Onslow, with a sneeringseverity that the other never seemed to notice. "You're quite safe,whatever happens.""Hang it, man, I wasn't thinking of that; curse the money, it neverentered my thoughts.""My father will pay it," said George, dryly, and continued his walk."As you have alluded to it, I hope you spoke of it as a loan, anythinglike a play transaction suggests a mess of scandal and stories.""I have called it a debt, and that is quite sufficient.""All right whatever you like. And now about this girl. Do you intendto let this mystery continue, or do you think that, under thecircumstances, Lady Hester should still retain her as a friend andcompanion?""I know of nothing to her disparagement, nor have I yet met one whodoes. That there are circumstances which she does not deem fitting toentrust to my keeping is no just cause of allegation against her.""You are very honorable to say so, George; but I must confess it is morethan she deserves at your hands.""How do you mean?""That she means to take the Russian, that's all.""Well, and why not? Would not such a match be a brilliant one for a girlof much higher rank and pretension?""What's the use of all this fencing, man?" said Norwood, half angrily,"I know better how matters stand. Do you remember the night you lost soheavily at Macao? Well, I was lying stretched on the sofa, yonder, bythe light of the fire only, when the door opened, and she stepped gentlyin.""What, Kate Dalton?""Yes, Kate Dalton. Oh! impossible, if you like deny it as much as youplease, but she has not equal hardihood, that I can tell you; and if shehad, here is the proof that could condemn her, this fragment of her laceflounce was caught in the door as she banged it in her escape; and thisvery evening I compared it with the dress in question; ay, and showedher the rent from which it came."Twice did George compel Norwood to repeat over this story; and then satdown, overwhelmed with sorrow and shame."You swear to me, then, Onslow, that you never saw her here, never knewof her coming?" said he, after a long silence between them."Never, I swear!" said the other, solemnly."Then, some other is the fortunate man, that's all. How good if itshould turn out to be Jekyl!" And he laughed heartily at the absurdityof the conceit."No more of this," said Onslow, passionately. "The tone of the societywe live in here would seem to warrant any or every imputation, even onthose whose lives are spotless; and I know of no greater degradationthan the facility of our belief in them. In this instance, however, myconscience is at ease; and I reject, with contempt, the possibility of astain upon that girl's honor.""The sentiment does more credit to your chivalry than your shrewdness,George," said the Viscount, sarcastically."But as you are about to stake your life on the issue, I cannot impugnyour sincerity."A hasty movement of George towards the window here alarmed Grounsell,and he noiselessly withdrew, and descended the stairs again."A precious mess of trouble do I find ready for me," muttered he, as hepassed across the courtyard. "Debt, duelling, and sickness, such arethe pleasures that welcome me; and these not the worst, perhaps, if thecauses of them were to be made known!""My Lady has just heard of your arrival, doctor, and begs you will havethe kindness to step up to her room," said Proctor, coming to meet him."I 'm tired, I 'm fatigued. Say I 'm in bed," said Grounsell, angrily."Her maid has just seen you, sir," suggested Proctor, mildly."No matter; give the answer I tell you; or stay perhaps it would bebetter to see her. Yes, Proctor, show me the way." And muttering tohimself, "The meeting will not be a whit pleasanter for her than me," hefollowed the servant up the stairs.Well habituated to Lady Hester's extravagant and costly tastes,Grounsell was yet unprepared for the gorgeous decorations and splendidornaments of the chambers through which he passed, and he stoppedfrom time to time in amazement to contemplate a magnificence which wasprobably rather heightened than diminished by the uncertain light of thecandles the servant carried. He peered at the china vases; he passed hishand across the malachite and jasper tables; he narrowly inspected therich mosaics, as though doubtful of their being genuine; and then, witha deep sigh, almost deep enough to be a groan, he moved on in sadness.A bust of Kate Dalton the work of a great sculptor, and an admirablelikeness caught his eye, and he gazed at it with signs of strongemotion. There was much beauty in it, and of a character all her own;but still the cold marble had caught up, in traits sterner than those oflife, the ambitious bearing of the head and the proud elevation of thebrow."And she has become this already!" said he, half aloud. "Oh, howunlike poor Nelly's model! how different from the simple and beauteousinnocence of those saint-like features!""My Lady will see you, sir," said Celestine, breaking in upon hismusings. And he followed her into the chamber, where, seated in a deeplycushioned chair, Lady Hester reclined, dressed in all the perfection ofan elegant deshabille.Grounsell was, assuredly, not the man to be most taken by suchattractions, yet he could not remain entirely insensible to them; and hefelt a most awkward sense of admiration as he surveyed her. With alla woman's quickness, her Ladyship saw the effect she had produced, andlanguidly extending her hand, she vouchsafed the nearest approach to asmile with which she had ever favored him. As if suddenly recalling allhis old antipathies and prejudices, Grounsell was himself in a moment,and, scarcely touching the taper and jewelled fingers, he bowedceremoniously and took his seat at a little distance off."This is a very unexpected pleasure indeed," sighed Lady Hester; "youonly arrived to-night?""Half an hour ago, madam; and but for your Ladyship's summons I shouldhave been in bed.""How do you find Sir Stafford looking poorly, I fear?""I haven't yet seen him, madam, but I am prepared for a great change.""I fear so," sighed she, plaintively; "George says, quite a break up;and Buccellini calls it 'Gotta Affievolita,' and says it is very fatalwith elderly people.""The vulgar phrase of a 'broken heart' is more expressive, madam, andperhaps quite as pathological."Lady Hester drew proudly up, and seemed preparing herself for a comingencounter. They were old antagonists, and well knew each other's modeof attack. On the present occasion, however, Grounsell did not seek acontest, and was satisfied by a single shot at the enemy, as if tryingthe range of his gun."You will probably advise a change of air and scene, Dr. Grounsell,"said she, calmly, and as though inviting pacific intercourse."It is precisely what I have come for, madam," answered he, in a short,dry voice. "Sir Stafford's affairs require his immediate return toEngland. The vicissitudes that attend on great commercial enterprisesthreaten him with large very large losses."Lady Hester fell back in her chair, and this time, at least, her palecheek and her powerless attitude were not feigned nor counterfeited; butGrounsell merely handed her a smelling-bottle from the table, and wenton:"The exact extent of his liabilities cannot be ascertained at once, butthey must be considerable. He will be fortunate if there remain to himone fourth of his property."Lady Hester's head fell heavily back, and she fainted away.The doctor rose, and sprinkled her forehead with water, and thenpatiently sat down with his finger on her wrist to watch the returningtide of circulation. Assured at length of her restored consciousness, hewent on:"A small establishment, strict economy, a watchful supervision of everydomestic arrangement, together with the proceeds of the sale of all theuseless trumpery by which he is at present surrounded, will do much;but he must be seconded, madam, seconded and aided, not thwarted andopposed. George can exchange into a regiment in India; the proper stepshave been already taken for that purpose.""Have you been thoughtful enough, sir, in your general care of thisfamily, to engage a small house for us at Brighton?""I have seen one at Ramsgate, madam," replied he, dryly; "but the rentis more than we ought to give.""Are we so very poor as that, sir?" said she, sarcastically, layingemphasis on the pronoun."Many excellent and worthy persons, madam, contrive to live respectablyon less.""Is Miss Onslow to go out as a governess, doctor? I am afraid you haveforgotten her share in these transactions?""I have a letter from her in my pocket, madam, which would show that sheherself is not guilty of this forgetfulness, wherein she makes the veryproposition you allude to.""And me? Have you no sphere of self-denial and duty have you nodegrading station, nor menial servitude, adapted to my habits?""I know of none, madam," said Grounsell, sternly. "Varnish will nomore make a picture than fine manners prove a substitute for skill orindustry.""This is really too much, sir," said she, rising, her face now crimsonwith anger; "and even if all you have said prove true, reverse offortune can bring no heavier infliction than the prospect of yourintimacy and obtrusive counsels.""You may not need them, madam. In adversity," said Grounsell, witha smile, "healthy stomachs get on very well without bitters." And sosaying, he bowed and left the room.For a few moments Lady Hester sat overwhelmed by the tidings she hadjust heard, and then, suddenly rising, she rang the bell for her maid."Send Miss Dalton to me, Celestine; say I wish to speak to herimmediately," said she. "This may be the last time we shall speak toeach other ere we invert our positions," muttered she to herself. Andin the working of her features might be read all the agony of thereflection.CHAPTER XXXIX. PRATOLINO.How like the great world is every little section of it! How full ofall its passions and interests, its warring jealousies and its selfishstruggles! Within the Mazzarini Palace that night were at work everyemotion and sentiment which sway the wide communities of men; and hopeand fear, the yearnings of ambition, and the gloomy forebodings ofdespair, sat beside the pillows of those who, in vain, sought sleep andforgetfulness.Before that long night ended, Sir Stafford had learned his ruin, for itwas little less. Kate had yielded, to the pressing entreaties of LadyHester, her consent to accept Midchekoff; and, just as day was breaking,George Onslow stole to his father's bedside to see him once more,perhaps for the last time. It would be difficult to say in which ofthose three hearts the darkest sorrow brooded. With noiseless step andcautious gesture, George crossed the little sitting-room, and enteredhis father's chamber; and, without awaking the servant, who kept watchhabitually without, but now had dropped off to sleep, he gained thebedside, and sat down.The terrible tidings he had just heard were evidently working on SirStafford's brain, and, despite all the influence of his opiate, stillengaged his faculties; for his lips continued to move rapidly, and shortbroken sentences fell from him incessantly. "Poor George! poor George!"he muttered from time to time, and the tears rolled down the young man'scheek as he heard them."How unworthy of him have I been!" thought he; "how shamefully unworthyand forgetful! Here should have been my place, for those hours whichI have spent in noisy dissipation and debauch; and now I come for thefirst time, and probably the last! Oh, my poor father! How will you bearup against the shock that is preparing for you? for, with all my faults,I know how you have loved me!" A heavy tear dropped from him on the oldman's cheek as he said this; and gently brushing it off with his hand,Sir Stafford opened his eyes and awoke. A mild and gentle smile brokeover his features as he saw his son beside him, and he drew him towardshim, and kissed him."Have you been long here, George?" said he, affectionately."But a few minutes. I am so sorry to have disturbed you," muttered theother, in confusion,"Have you seen Grounsell yet? Has he told you?" asked Sir Stafford."Grounsell? no, sir. I did not even hear of his arrival. What are histidings?""The saddest, perhaps, one friend can bring another," sighed Onslow,as he covered his eyes with his hand. "Nay, nay, I am wrong," said he,rapidly. "So long as Sydney and yourself are spared to me I have noright to say this; still, George, it is a terrible blow that strikes aman down from affluence to poverty, and, in place of wealth and power,leaves him nothing but insignificance and ruin!""Good heavens, father! is your brain wandering? What fancies are thesethat are flitting across your mind?""Sad and stern truths, my poor boy," replied the old man, grasping hisson's hand in his fevered palm. "A few weeks more will see the greathouse of Onslow bankrupt. These things cannot be told too briefly,George," said he, speaking with a tremulous and eager rapidity. "Oneshould hear misfortune early, to gain more time for future measures. Agreat crash has fallen upon the moneyed interest of England. The vastspeculations in railways have overreached themselves; failures of greathouses abroad have added to the difficulty. The correspondents whosesolvency we never doubted are tottering to ruin. Every post bringstidings of some new failure; and from Odessa, from Hamburg, and fromthe ports of the Baltic to the distant shores of the New World, there isnothing but bankruptcy.""But you have large estates, sir; you possess property of various kindsbeyond the reach of these casualties.""I own nothing to which my creditors have not a just right; nor, if Idid, could I exercise the privilege of retaining it, George," said theold man. "From what Grounsell tells me, there will be sufficient to meetevery claim, but no more. There will remain nothing after. Lady Hester'ssettlement will, of course, secure to her a moderate competence; andwe--you and I must look about, and see how we can face this same worldwe have been feasting so long. My time in it will needs be brief; butyou, who may look forward with hope to long years of life, must bethinkyou at once of the new path before you. Arouse yourself, then, to thetask, and I do not know but I may be prouder of you yet, buffetingthe wild waves of adversity, and fighting the manful part of a bold,courageous spirit, than I have ever been in seeing you in the brilliantcircle of all your high and titled acquaintances. Ay, George, theEnglish merchant never died out in my heart, for all the aristocraticleaven which accident mixed up with my fortunes. I never ceased to gloryin the pride of wealth accumulated by generous enterprises and honorabletoil. I loved the life of labor that disciplined the faculties,and exercised not alone intelligence, but turned to use the gentlercharities of life, linking man to man, as brethren journeying the sameroad, with different burdens, perhaps, but with the same goal. Formyself, therefore, I have few cares. It remains with you to make themeven fewer.""Tell me what you propose for me, sir," said George, in a low, weakvoice."First of all, George, you ought to leave the army. Grounsell, I musttell you, is not of this opinion; he advises an exchange into a regimentin India, but I think differently. To repair, if it be possible, theshattered wreck of our fortunes, you must address yourself to businesslife and habits. You 'll have to visit the West Indies, and, probably,the East. We still possess property in Ceylon, of value; and our coffeeplantations there, as yet only in their infancy, need nothing but goodmanagement to ensure success. Grounsell laughed at my suggesting you forsuch duties, but I know you better, George, far better, than he does.The English pluck that storms a breach or heads a charge is the verysame quality that sustains a man on the long dark road of adversefortune. I have often told Grounsell that the stuff was in you, George."The young man squeezed his father's hand, but was obliged to turn awayhis head to hide the tears which filled his eyes; for what a terribledeception was he practising at that very moment, and what duplicity wasthere even in the silence with which he heard him!For a few seconds Sir Stafford seemed to revel in all the bright visionsof a warm fancy. The prospect his imagination had conjured up appearedto have momentarily lifted him above the reach of sorrow. He thought ofhis son engaged in the active business of life, and displaying in thisnew career the energies and resources of a bold and courageous spirit.He imagined the high-principled youth becoming the British merchant, andmaking the name of "Onslow" great and respected in the old arena of alltheir victories, the city of London. Could this but come to pass, werethis dream to be realized, and he would bless the hour that wrecked hisfortune, and thus made his poverty the foundation of future greatness."I confess, George," said he, "that I have a pride in thinking that Iknew you better than others did, and that I read in the very waywardcaprices of your disposition the impatience of an active mind, and notthe ennui of an indolent one." From this the old man branched off intohis plans for the future; and, as if the emergency had suggested energy,talked well and clearly of all that was to be done. They were to startfor England at once. Sir Stafford felt as if he was able to set outthat very day. Some weeks would elapse before the crash came, and in theinterval every preparation might be taken. "I hope," said he, feelingly,"that I have few enemies; I am not sanguine enough to say, none; but,such as they are, they will not seek to humiliate me, I trust, by anyunnecessary publicity." The theme was a very painful one, and for a fewseconds he could not go on. At last he resumed: "The extravagance ofthis household, George, will give much and just offence. It must beretrenched, and from this very day, from this very hour. You willlook to this. It must not be said of us that, with ruin before us, wecontinued these habits of wasteful excess. Let these troops of idleservants be discharged at once. Except Lady Hester's carriage, selloff all equipage. Take no heed of what will be the town talk; such adownfall as ours can never be kept a secret. Let us only take care thatwe fall with dignity. Grounsell will remain here after us to settleeverything, and our departure ought to be as speedy as may be. But youare not listening, George; do you hear me?"It was quite true George heeded little of what his father spoke; for,with bent-down head, he was trying to catch the sounds of what seemeda long, low whistle from the court without. As he listened, the whistlewas repeated; he knew now that it was Norwood's signal, and that "histime was up.""I must leave you, my dear father," said he, assuming all that he couldof calmness. "I have an appointment this morning, and one that I cannotwell shake off. Norwood and I have promised to meet some friends atPratolino.""It was of that same Norwood I wished to speak to you, George. Thesophistry of thinking him 'no worse than his set' will serve no longer.Such men are not fitting acquaintances for one whose character must beabove reproach. Norwood is a most unworthy friend for you.""I scarcely ever thought of him in that light. We are intimate, it istrue; but such intimacy is not friendship.""The greater the pollution of such acquaintanceship, then," said the oldman, gravely. "To see the dark side of such a nature, and yet liveunder its baneful shadow, is infinitely worse, George, than all theself-deception of a rash confidence. Keep your promise to-day, but Ibeseech you, let it be for the last time in such company."Again the whistle was heard, and with the sharp crack of a whip,denoting impatience; and fearful that some accident might betray hissecret, George clasped the old man's hand fervidly within his own, andhurried away without a word."Is that George?" cried Norwood, as he stood beside a calessino readyharnessed, and with lamps lighted, for the morning was still dark, "isthat George? Why, where have you been loitering this half-hour, man?Our time is six sharp, and it is now considerably past five, and the waylies all up hill.""I have often done the distance in half an hour," said George, angrily."Perhaps the errand was a pleasanter one," rejoined Norwood, laughing;"but jump in, for I feel certain the others are before us."George Onslow was in no mood for talking as he took his seat beside hiscompanion. The late scene with his father and the approaching event wereenough to occupy him, even had his feeling for Norwood been differentfrom what it was; but in reality never had he experienced thesame dislike for the Viscount. All the flippant ease, all the coolindifference he displayed, were only so many offences to one whosethoughts were traversing the whole current of his life, from earliestboyhood down to that very moment. A few hours hence he might be no more!And thence arose to his mind the judgments men would pass upon him, thefew who would speak charitably, the still fewer who would regret him."What a career!" thought he. "What use to have made of fortune, station,health, and vigor; to have lived in dissipation, and die for a streetbrawl! And poor Kate! to what unfeeling scandal will this unhappymeeting expose you! how impossible to expect that truth will everpenetrate through that dark atmosphere of mystery and malevolence theworld will throw over the event!"Norwood was provoked at the silence, and tried in various ways to breakit. He spoke of the road, the weather, the horse's trotting action,the scenery, over which the breaking day now threw fitful and uncertainlights, but all in vain; and at last, piqued by non-success, hespitefully pointed attention to a little valley beside the road, andsaid, "Do you see that spot yonder, near the pine-trees? that 's whereHarry Mathews was shot. Malzahn sent the bullet through the brainat forty paces. They were both first-rate pistol-shots, and the onlyquestion was who should fire first. Harry determined to reserve hisshot, and he carried the privilege into the other world with him.Malzahn knew he might trust his skill, and fired the very instant hetook his ground. The moral of which is, always try and have first firewith a foreigner.""I heard the sound of wheels behind us; who are they?" said George, notheeding either the story or the counsel."The doctor, I suspect. I ordered a calessino to wait for him at thedoor of the palace, and bring him up as fast as possible.""If Guilmard be equal to his reputation, we shall not want hisservices," said Onslow, with a faint smile."Who can tell? We 'll put you up at a short distance; and there 'snothing shakes the nerves of your practised pistol-shot more than ten ortwelve paces."The road here became so steep that they were obliged to get down andwalk for some distance, while the horse toiled slowly up behind them. Asthey went, Norwood continued to talk on incessantly of this, that, andt' other, as though bound to occupy the attention of his companion;while George, with half-closed eyes, strolled onward, deep in his ownthoughts."We 're not far off the place now, George," said Norwood, at last, "andI wish you 'd throw off that look of care and abstraction. These foreignfellows will be quite ready to misinterpret it. Seem at your ease, man,and take the thing as I have seen you take it before, as rather good funthan otherwise.""But that is precisely what I do not feel it," said George, smilingquietly. "Twenty-four hours ago, when life had every possible advantageto bestow on me, with the prospect of an ample fortune before me, I wasperfectly ready to turn out with any man who had the right to ask me;and now that I am ruined--""Ruined!" broke in Norwood; "what do you mean? You have not lost to thatGreek fellow so largely as that?""Now that my father is on the verge of utter ruin," repeated George,slowly, "the news came last night, I never felt the desire of life sostrong within me. A few days or weeks more will make it public gossip,so I may tell you that we have not escaped the torrent that is sweepingaway so many of the richest houses in Europe; and what between ourimmense liabilities and my father's scrupulous sense of honor, thechances are we shall be utterly beggared.""The devil!" exclaimed Norwood, whose thoughts at once reverted to hisown claims on George, and the unpaid acceptances he still held of his."That's what I feel so strange," said George, now speaking with a degreeof warmth and interest, "that it should be exactly when life ceasesto give promise that I should care for it; and I own to you, I 'd giveanything that this meeting was not before me."Norwood started, and turned his keen eyes on the other, but in the calm,unmoved features he saw no traces of fear or even agitation; and it wasin his habitually calm voice Onslow resumed,"Yes, I wish the Count's hand would shake a little, Norwood. I 'd bemost grateful to the bullet that would take to the right or the left ofme.""Come, come, George, no more of this. We are alone here, it's true; butif you talk this way now, you may chance to look like it by and by.""And if I do not, my looks will strangely belie my sentiments, that Ican tell you," said Onslow, with a quiet laugh. "I don't care how youread the confession, Norwood, but I tell you frankly, that if the insultin this instance admitted of an apology, if there were any way to comeoff consistent with honor, I 'd take it, and not fight this Frenchman.""Have you forgotten his reputation as a shot?" asked Norwood, hastily."I was not thinking of it. My mind was dwelling merely on myself and myown interests, how far my life, if preserved, could be rendered usefulto others, and in what way my death might occasion detriment andinjury.""A most mercantile estimate of profit and loss, by Jove!" said Norwood,laughing; "and perhaps it is fortunate for you there is no amendepossible, for if Guilmard should miss you--""As to these acceptances," said George, not paying attention to what theother said, "I 'd prefer that they should not be presented to my fatherunder our actual circumstances. My horses and carriages, and some othertrumpery of mine, when sold, will more than meet them, and I have givenorders to that end.""Come, old fellow, it's not gone that far yet," said Norwood, affectinga tone of friendship, suggested by the self-satisfaction the promise ofpayment afforded him. "But, hush! There they are, all together. Let ustalk no more of these matters; and now, George, for Heaven's sake, becool."Norwood drew the other's arm within his own as he said this, andadvanced to where a group of some half-dozen persons were standing,beside a low balcony, overlooking the Val d'Arno and the graceful valleyin which Florence stands. Norwood quitted his friend's arm as he cameforward and saluted the company. Nothing could possibly be more easy andunconstrained than the tone of their conversation, as they chatted awayabout the prospect beneath, and over which, like a gauzy veil, the grayshadow of dawn was hanging. With the exception of an Italian or two,they were all French, the young fashionables who were the loungers ofthe salons and cafes of the city."Have you breakfasted, my Lord?" said one. "If not, let me recommendsome excellent cutlets, which are not too cold, even yet.""And the best chocolate I ever tasted out of Paris," cried another."Thanks," said Norwood. "We 'll profit by the good counsel." And, takinga cigar from his case, he lighted it from Guilmard's, as, with hands inhis paletot, he sat negligently on the wall, surveying the scene belowhim."Come, George, let's have something," whispered Norwood, eagerly;for the vacant and unoccupied stare of Onslow continued to cause theViscount the most intense anxiety. "These fellows are affecting to bedevilish cool. Let us not be behindhand." And, rather by force than merepersuasion, he dragged Onslow along, and entered the little parlor ofthe inn.A large table, covered with the remains of an ample breakfast, stoodin the middle of the room, and a dish of cutlets was placed to keep hotbefore the stove. Several loose sheets of paper lay scattered about thetable, on which were scrawled absurd and ill-drawn caricatures of duels,in which attitudes of extravagant fear and terror predominated. Norwoodglanced at them for a moment, and then contemptuously threw them intothe fire."Sit down, George," said he, placing a chair for the other; "and, ifyou cannot eat, at least take a 'nip' of brandy. Jekyl will be up, Isuppose, in a few minutes. I told him to come with the doctor.""I never felt an appetite at this early hour," said Onslow; "and perhapsthe present is not the time to suggest one.""Did you remark Guilmard?" said Norwood, as he helped himself to acutlet, and prepared his plate most artistically for a savory meal. "Didyou observe him, George?""No; I never looked that way.""By Jove! he has got a tremendous scar on his cheek; the whole length,from the eye to the corner of his mouth. English knuckles do notcertainly improve French physiognomy. A left-hander, eh?""I remember nothing about it," said Onslow, carelessly."Well, you 've left him a memorandum of the transaction, any way,"said the Viscount, as he ate on. "And you were talking about an apologyawhile ago?""I was wishing that the case admitted of one," said Onslow, calmly.Norwood gave a sidelong glance at the speaker, and, although he saidnothing, a gesture of angry impatience revealed what was passing withinhim."Do try that brandy. Well, then, take a glass of curacoa," said he,pushing the bottle towards him."Something! anything, in fact, you would say, Norwood, that might serveto make my courage 'carry the bead;' but you are altogether mistaken ininc. It is not of myself I am thinking; my anxieties are. But what couldyou care, or even understand, about my motives? Finish your breakfast,and let us make an end of this affair.""In one minute more I'm your man; but if I have a weakness, it is for aplain roast truffle, with butter. It was a first love of mine, and,as the adage says, 'only revient toujours.' Were I in your shoes thismorning, George, I 'd not leave one on the dish.""On what principle, pray?" asked Onslow, smiling."On that of the old Cardinal, who, when his doctors pronounced his casehopeless, immediately ordered a supper of ortolans with olives. It wasa grand opportunity to indulge without the terror of an indigestion; anda propos to such themes, where can our worthy doctor be all this time?The calessino was close up with us all the way."Leaving Norwood to continue his meal, George strolled out in questof the surgeon, but none had seen nor knew anything of him. An emptycalessino was standing on the roadside, but the driver only knew thatthe gentleman who came with him had got out there, and entered the park."Then we shall find him near the little lake," said Norwood, coolly, asGeorge returned, disappointed. "But it's strange, too, that he shouldbe alone. Jekyl was to have been with him. These foreigners ever insistupon two seconds on either side. Like the gambler that always is callingfor fresh cards, it looks very like a suspicion of foul play. Go back,George, and see if the fellow knows nothing of Jekyl. You 've only toname him, for every cab, cad, and barcaruolo of Florence is acquaintedwith Master Albert."George returned to the spot, but without any success. The man statedthat he took his stand, as he was desired, at the gate of the palace,and that a little man, apparently somewhat elderly, came out and askedwhich way the others had gone, and how long before they had started."See that you pick them up then," said he, "but don't pass them. Hetalked incessantly," added the man, "the whole way, but in such badItalian that I could make nothing of it, and so I answered at random.If I were tired of him, I fancy he was sick of me; and when he got outyonder, and passed into the park, it was a relief to us both."George was just turning away, when his eye caught a glimpse of theglorious landscape beneath, on which a freshly risen sun was sheddingall its splendor. There are few scenes, even in Italy, more strikingthan the Val d'Arno around Florence. The beautiful city itself, cappedwith many a dome and tower, the gigantic castle of the Bargello, thegraceful arch of the Baptistery, the massive facade of the Pitti, all,even to the lone tower on the hill where Galileo watched, rich intheir storied memories; while on the gentle slope of the mountain stoodhundreds of beauteous villas, whose very names are like spells to theimagination, and the Dante, the Alfieri, the Boccaccio, vie in interestwith the sterner realities of the Medici, the Pazzi, the Salviati, andthe Strozzi. What a flood of memory pours over the mind, to think howevery orange-grove and terrace, how each clump of olives, or eachalley of cedars, have witnessed the most intense passions, or the mostglorious triumphs of man's intellect or ambition, and that every spot wesee has its own claim to immortality!Not in such mood as this, however, did Onslow survey the scene. It wasin the rapt admiration of its picturesque beauty. The glittering river,now seen and lost again, the waving tree-tops, the parterres of brightflowers, the stately palaces, whose terraces were shadowed by themagnolia, the oleander, and the fig, all made up a picture of rich andbeautiful effect, and he longed to throw himself on the deep grass andgaze on it for hours. As he stood thus, unable to tear himself away, heheard the sharp cracking of a postilion's whip immediately beneath him,and, on looking down, saw two heavily laden travelling-carriages, whichall the power of eight horses to each could barely drag along againstthe steep ascent. A mounted courier in advance proclaimed that thetravellers were persons of condition, and everything about the equipagesthemselves indicated wealth and station. As Onslow knew all who movedin a certain class in society, he was curious to see who was journeyingnorthward so early in the year, and, stepping into a little copse besidethe road, he waited for the carriages to pass.They came slowly forward, now halting to "breathe" the weary horses, nowstruggling for a brief space against the hill, and at last, turning asharp angle of the way, the first carriage drew short up, directly infront of where he stood. The panels bore the flaunting and pretentiousarms of Prince Midchekoff, with many an armorial emblem, which, howevertolerated in the rest of Europe, the Czar would not suffer within hisown dominions. As George glanced at these, he started, for a well-knownvoice caught his ear, and, forgetting his desire of concealment, heleaned forward to listen. It was Kate was speaking; he could not hearthe words, but the accents were her own. "Oh for one look at her,for the last time!" thought he; and dashed headlong through the copsetowards where, by another bend, the road made a rapid turn upwards.Already the horses had regained their wind, and were away at a brisktrot, as George tore onward through the closely interwoven branches andthick underwood of the grove. There was no path, nor, once out of sightor sound of the road, anything to guide him; but he dashed on, in thedirection he supposed the carriage must take. At every step the way grewmore intricate and difficult; the pits the peasants dig for chestnutleaves, the little heaps collected for firewood, intercepted him ateach moment. With torn clothes and bleeding hands he still rushed madly,resolutely bent upon his object; and, with many a bruise and many ascar, at last gained the open country just in time to see the secondcarriage crowning the peak of the mountain above his head, while hecould hear the sharp, clanking sound of the drag as they fastened it tothe leading carriage. Any attempt to overtake them on the hill mustnow be hopeless. He well knew the pace at which a continental postiliondescends a mountain, and how the steepest galleries of Alps andApennines are often galloped down at speed. For miles below him he couldsee the winding zigzags of the road, and at each turning he fanciedhow he might catch sight of her. The mountain itself was terraced withvineyards from base to summit; but, from the steepness of its side,these terraces were but narrow strips of ground, barely sufficient forthe vine-dresser to pass when tending his plants, or gathering in theirproduce. To look down on this giant stair, for such it seemed, was agiddy sensation, and few could have surveyed the precipitous descentwithout a sense of danger. Onslow's thoughts, however, had but oneobject, to see Kate once, and for the last time. By a straight descentof the mountain, leaping from terrace to terrace, it was possible forhim to reach the bottom before the carriages could traverse the windingcourse of the road; and no sooner was the thought conceived than heproceeded to execute it. It is difficult to convey to those who havenever seen these terraced flights of earth a true notion of the peril ofsuch an undertaking; but they who have beheld them will acknowledgethat little short of utter recklessness could dare it. Less leaping thandropping from height to height, the slightest impulse will carry thefootsteps beyond the edge of the terrace, and then all self-control islost, and destruction, to every appearance, inevitable.The youth whose nerves have been trained by the sports of fox-huntingand deer-stalking, however, is seldom unprepared for sudden danger; andGeorge never hesitated when once the undertaking seemed practicable. Bysidelong leaps he descended the first three or four terraces well andsafely. Impressed with the risk of the exploit, he never turned his eyesfrom the spot whereon he meant to alight, and measured every bound withaccuracy. Suddenly, however, his attention was caught by the postilion'sbugle sounding, several hundred feet below him, and, in a bend of theroad, he saw the dust left by the fast-descending carriage. Forgetful ofsafety, of everything, save his object, he leaped at random, and with atremendous bound cleared one terrace completely, and alighted on the onebeneath it. The impulse drove him forwards, and ere he could recover, hewas on the very verge of the cliff. Even yet his presence of mind mighthave rescued him, when the loose masonry gave way, and carried himdown with it. He fell forwards, and headlong; the force of the descentcarried him on, and now, half falling, half-struggling, he bounded fromheight to height, till, shattered, maimed, and bleeding, he rolled, anunconscious heap of clay, in the long grass of the valley.Not fifty yards from where he lay, the carriages passed, and Kate evenleaned from the window to gaze upon the winding glen, little thinkinghow terrible an interest that quiet scene was filled with. And so theequipages held their speed, and pressed onward; while, with a faintbreathing, poor George lay, sleeping that dreamless slumber that seems acounterfeit of death.CHAPTER I. A MORNING OF MISADVENTURES.
"Well, my Lord, are we to pass the day here," said Count Trouville,
the second of the opposite party, as Norwood returned from a fruitless
search of George Onslow, "or are we to understand that this is the
English mode of settling such matters?"
"I am perfectly ready, Monsieur le Comte, to prove the contrary, so far
as my own poor abilities extend," said Norwood, calmly.
"But your friend has disappeared, sir. You are left alone here."
"Which is, perhaps, the reason of your having dared to insult me,"
rejoined the other; "that being, perhaps, the French custom in such
affairs."
"Come, come, gentlemen," interposed an old cavalry officer, who acted
as second friend to Guilmard, "you must both see that all discussion of
this kind is irregular and unseemly. We have come here this morning for
one specific purpose,----to obtain reparation for a great injury. The
gentleman who should have offered us the amende has suddenly withdrawn
himself. I offer no opinion on the fact that he came out accompanied by
only one friend; we might, perhaps, have devised means to obviate this
difficulty. For his own absence we have no remedy. I would therefore ask
what you have to propose to us in this emergency?"
"A little patience,--nothing more. My friend must have lost his way;
some accident or other has detained him, and I expect to see him here
every instant."
"Shall we say half an hour longer, my Lord?" rejoined the other, taking
out his watch. "That will bring us to eight o'clock."
"Which, considering that our time was named 'sharp six,'" interposed
Trouville, "is a very reasonable 'grace.'"
"Your expression is an impertinence, Monsieur," said Norwood, fiercely.
"And yet I don't intend to apologize for it," said the other, smiling.
"I 'm glad of it, sir. It's the only thing you have said to-day with
either good sense or spirit."
"Enough, quite enough, my Lord," replied the Frenchman, gayly. "'Dans la
bonne socit, on ne dit jamais de trop.' Where shall it be, and when?"
"Here, and now," said Norwood, "if I can only find any one who will act
for me."
"Pray, my Lord, don't go in search of him," said Trouville, "or we shall
despair of seeing you here again."
"I will give a bail for my reappearance, sir, that you cannot doubt of,"
cried Norwood, advancing towards the other with his cane elevated.
A perfect burst of horror broke from the Frenchmen at this threat,
and three or four immediately threw themselves between the contending
parties.
"But for this, my Lord," said the old officer, "I should have offered
you my services."
"And I should have declined them, sir," said Norwood, promptly. "The
first peasant I meet with will suffice;" and, so saying, he hurried
from the spot, his heart almost bursting with passion. With many a
malediction of George--with curses deep and cutting on every one whose
misconduct had served to place him in his present position--he took his
way towards the high-road.
"What could have happened?" muttered he; "what confounded fit of
poltroonery has seized him? a fellow that never wanted pluck in his
life! Is it possible that he can have failed now? And this to occur at
the very moment they are beggared! Had they been rich, as they were a
few months back, I'd have made the thing pay. Ay, by Jove! I 'd have
'coined my blood,' as the fellow says in the play, and written a
swingeing check with red ink! And now I have had a bad quarrel, and
nothing to come of it! And so to walk the high-roads in search of some
one who can load a pistol."
A stray peasant or two, jogging along to Florence, a postilion with
return horses, a shabbily dressed curate, or a friar with a sack behind
him, were all that he saw for miles of distance, and he returned
once more to interrogate the calessino driver as to the stranger who
accompanied him from the city.
Any one whose misfortune it may have been to make inquiries from
an Italian vetturino of any fact, no matter how insignificant or
unimportant, will sympathize with Norwood's impatience at the evasive
and distrustful replies that now met his questions. Although the fact
could have no possible concern or interest for him, he prevaricated and
contradicted himself half-a-dozen times over, as to the stranger's age,
country, and appearance, so that, utterly baffled and provoked, the
Viscount turned away and entered the park.
"I, too, shall be reported missing, I suppose," said he, bitterly, as he
walked along a little path that skirted a piece of ornamental water. "By
Jupiter! this is a pleasant morning's work, and must have its reparation
one day or other."
A hearty sneeze suddenly startled him as he spoke; he turned hastily
about, but could see no one, and yet his hearing was not to be deceived!
He searched the spot eagerly; he examined the little boat-shed, the
copse, the underwood,--everything, in fact,--but not a trace of living
being was to be seen; at last a slight rustling sound seemed to issue
from a piece of rustic shell-work, representing a river god reclining
on his urn, and, on approaching, he distinctly detected the glitter of a
pair of eyes within the sockets of the figure.
"Here goes for a brace of balls into him," cried Norwood, adjusting a
cap on his pistol. "A piece of stonework that sneezes is far too like a
man to be trusted."
Scarcely was the threat uttered, when a tremulous scream issued from
within, and a voice, broken with terror, called out,----
"D-don't fire, my Lord. You'll m-m-murder me. I'm Purvis--Sc-Sc-Scroope
Purvis."
"How did you come to be there, then?" asked Norwood, half angrily.
"I 'll tell you when I g-get out!" was the answer; and he disappeared
from the loophole at which he carried on the conversation for some
seconds. Norwood began to fancy that the whole was some mystification of
his brain, for no trace of him was to be had; when he emerged from
the boat-house with his hat stripped of the brim, and his clothes in
tatters, his scratched face and hands attesting that his transit had not
been of the easiest. "It's like a r-r-rat-hole," cried he, puffing for
breath.
"And what the devil brought you there?" asked Norwood, rudely.
"I ca-came out to see the fight!" cried he; "and when you're inside
there you have a view of the whole park, and are quite safe, too."
"Then it was you who drove out in the calessino meant for the doctor?"
said Norwood, with the air of a man who would not brook an equivocation.
"Yes; that was a d-d-dodge of mine to get out here," said he, chuckling.
"Well, Master Purvis," said Norwood, drawing his arm within his own, "if
you can't be the 'doctor,' you shall at least be the 'second.' This is a
dodge of mine; so come along, and no more about it."
"But I ca-can't; I never was--I never could be a se-se-second."
"You shall begin to-day, then, or my name's not Norwood. You've been the
cause of a whole series of mishaps and misfortunes; and, by Jove! if the
penalty were a heavier one, you should pay it."
"I tell you, I n-never saw a duel; I--I never f-fought one; I never will
fight one; I don't even know how they g-go about it."
"You shall learn, sir, that 's all," said Norwood, as he hastened along,
dragging the miserable Purvis at his side.
"But for you, sir," continued he, in a voice thick with passion,--"but
for you, sir, and your inveterate taste for prying into what does not
concern you, we should have experienced no delay nor disappointment this
morning. The consequences are, that I shall have to stand where another
ought to have stood, and take to myself a quarrel in which I have had no
share."
[Illustration: 022]
"H-how is that? Do----do----do tell me all about it!" cried Purvis,
eagerly.
"I 'll tell you nothing, sir, not a syllable. Your personal adventures
on this morning must be the subject of your revelations when you get
back to Florence, if ever you do get back."
"Why, I--I'm----I'm not going to fight anybody," exclaimed he, in
terror.
"No, sir, but I am; and in the event of any disastrous incident,
your position may be unpleasant. If Trouville falls, you 'll have to
make for Lombardy, and cross over into Switzerland; if he shoots me,
you can take my passport; it is vis for the Tyrol. As they know me
at Innsprck, you 'd better keep to the southward,--some of the smaller
places about Botzen, or Brixen."
"But I don't know Bo-Bo-Botzen on the map! and I don't see why I 'm to
sk-sk-skulk about the Continent like a refu-refu-refugee Pole!"
"Take your own time, then; and, perhaps, ten years in a fortress may
make you wiser. It's no affair of mine, you know; and I merely gave you
the advice, as I 'm a little more up to these things than you are."
"But, supposing that I 'll have no-nothing to do with the matter, that I
'll not be present, that I refuse to see--"
"You shall and you must, sir; and if I hear another word of objection
out of your mouth, or if you expose me, by any show of your own
poltroonery, to the ribald insolence of these Frenchmen, by Heaven! I
'll hold your hand in my own when I fire at Count Trouville."
"And I may be mu-mu-murdered!" screamed Purvis. "An innocent man's
bl-blood shed, all for nothing!"
"Bluebeard treated his wives to the same penalty for the same crime,
Master Purvis. And now listen to me, sir, and mark well my words. With
the causes which have led to this affair you have no concern whatever;
your only business here is in the capacity of my second. Be present when
the pistols are loaded; stand by as they step the ground; and, if you
can do no more, try, at least, to look as if you were not going to be
shot at." Neither the counsel nor the tone it was delivered in were very
reassuring; and Purvis went along with his head down and his hands in
his pockets, reflecting on all the "accidents by firearms" he had read
of in the newspapers, together with the more terrible paragraphs about
fatal duels, and criminal proceedings against all concerned in them.
The Frenchmen were seated in the garden, at a table, and smoking their
cigars, as Norwood came up, and, in a few words, explained that a
countryman of his own, whom he had met by chance, would undertake the
duties of his friend.
"I have only to say, gentlemen," he added, "that he has never even
witnessed an affair of this kind; and I have but to address myself to
the loyal good faith of Frenchmen to supply any deficiencies in his
knowledge. Mr. Purvis, Messieurs."
The old Colonel, having courteously saluted him, took him to a short
distance aside, and spoke eagerly for a few minutes; while Norwood,
burning with anxiety and uneasiness, tried to smoke his cigar with every
semblance of unconcern.
"I 'm sure, if you think so," cried Scroope, aloud, "I'm not the m-man
to gainsay the opinion. A miss is as g-g-good as a m-mile; and as he did
n't strike him--"
"Tonnerre de Dieu! sir--strike him!" screamed the old soldier. "Did you
say strike him?"
"No, I didn't--I couldn't have meant that," broke in Purvis. "I meant to
remark that, as there was no mischief done--"
"And who will venture to say that, sir?" interposed the other. "Is it
nothing that a Frenchman should have been menaced?"
"That's a gr-great deal,----a tremendous deal. It's as much as beating
another man; I know that," muttered poor Purvis, deprecatingly.
"Is this a sneer, sir?" asked the Colonel, drawing himself up to his
full height.
"No, no, it ain't; no, upon my soul, I 'm quite serious. I never was less
disposed for a jest in my life."
"You could never have selected a less opportune moment for one, sir,"
rejoined the other, gravely. "Am I to conclude, sir," resumed he, after
a second's interval, "that we have no difference of opinion on this
affair?"
"None whatever. I agree with you in everything you have s-said, and
everything you in-intend to say."
"Your friend will then apologize?" resumed the Colonel.
"He shall,--he must."
"Simply expressing his regret that an unguarded action should have
occasioned a misconception, and that in lifting his arm he neither
intended the gesture as a menace nor an insult. Is n't that your
meaning?"
"Just so; and that if he had struck he would n't have hurt him."
"Feu d'enfer! sir, what are you saying? or do you mean this for a
mockery of us?" screamed the Colonel, in a fit of passion.
"You terrify me so," cried Purvis; "You are so impeimpe-impetuous,
I don't know what I 'm saying."
The Frenchman measured him with a glance of strange meaning. It was
evident that such a character was somewhat new to him, and it required
all his skill and acuteness to comprehend it "Very well, sir," said
he, at last, "I leave the details entirely to yourself; speak to your
friend, arrange the matter between you, and let us finish the affair as
speedily as may be."
"What is all this delay about?" muttered Norwood, angrily, as the
other joined him; "is there any difficulty in stepping twelve or twenty
paces?"
"None; but we've hit upon a b-better plan, and you've only to say that
you 're sorry for it all, that you did n't m-mean anything, and that you
never did b-b-beat a Frenchman, nor will you ever do so in future."
"Why, what do you mean?" asked Norwood, in astonishment.
"That we 'll all go back and lunch at the 'Luna;' for there's no-nothing
to fight about."
Norwood pushed by him contemptuously, and with hurried steps walked up
to where the old Colonel stood. "You are a French officer, sir," said
he, "and I rely upon your honor that, whether from the ignorance or
inaptitude of that gentleman, no blame may attach itself to me in this
business. I have no apology to offer, nor any amende save one."
"Very well, sir, we are ready," said the Colonel. "I will ask one of my
countrymen to act for you, for I see you are in very indifferent hands."
And now, like men who were well accustomed to the task, they set about
the details of the duel; while Purvis, being at full liberty, slipped
from the spot, and retired into the wood.
"You 've won the first fire, my Lord," said a young Frenchman to
Norwood. "The conditions are twelve paces--back to back--to torn at the
word, and fire."
Norwood bowed, and, without speaking, followed the other to the spot
where he was to stand. As he waited thus, pistol in hand, he was
directly opposite to the place wherein Purvis had taken refuge, and who,
seeing Norwood in front of him, with a cocked pistol, and his finger on
the trigger, uttered a scream of terror, and fell flat on the ground.
Before the rest could discover the cause of the outcry, a shout from
outside of "The Police!" "The Gendarmes!" was heard, and Dr. Grounsell
rushed into the garden, followed by several dismounted dragoons. In
an instant all were away. Norwood sprang over a low balcony into a
vineyard; while in various directions the others scampered off, leaving
Purvis alone upon the field.
But too happy to have fallen into the safe keeping of the authorities,
Purvis accepted his captivity with a most placid contentment.
"Where's Captain Onslow? Have you seen him, sir?" whispered Grounsell to
him.
"I have seen everybody, but I don't re-remember anything. It's all a
dr-dr-dream to me."
"There was no duel? They hadn't fought?" asked Grounsell.
"I--I--I think not; pro-pro-probably not," said Purvis, whose faculties
were still very cloudy.
Grounsell turned away from him in disdain, and entered the house. To
all his inquiries from the waiters of the inn the answers were vague and
insufficient, nor could the doctor discover either what had occurred,
or the reasons of the long delay on the ground. Meanwhile the
Carabinieri, stimulated by liberal promises of reward, were searching
the park in every quarter, and scouring the country around to arrest the
fugitives; and the peasantry, enlisted in the pursuit, hastened hither
and thither to aid them. Whether really unable to come up with them,
or, as is more probable, concurring in the escape through bribery, the
dragoons returned to the inn after about an hour's absence, without the
capture of a single prisoner.
Grounsell cursed their Italian indolence, and reviled every institution
of their lazy land. How he raved about foreign falsehood and rascality,
and wished for a London detective and a magistrate of Bow Street! Never
did Lord Palmerston so thirst to implant British institutions in a
foreign soil, as did he to teach these "macaroni rascals what a good
police meant." What honest indignation did he not vent upon English
residents abroad, who, for sake of a mild climate and lax morality,
could exchange their native country for the Continent; and at last,
fairly worn out with his denunciations, he sat down on a bench, tired
and exhausted.
"Will you t-t-tell them to let me go?" cried Purvis. "I've done
nothing. I never do anything. My name is Purvis,--Sc-Sc-Scroope
Purvis,--bro-brother to Mrs. Ricketts, of the Villino Zoe."
"Matters which have no possible interest for me, sir," growled out
Grounsell; "nor am I a corporal of gendarmes, to give orders for your
liberation."
"But they 'll take me to--to prison!" cried Purvis.
"With all my heart, sir, so that I be not your fellow captive," rejoined
the doctor, angrily, and left the spot; while the police, taking as many
precautions for securing Purvis as though he had been a murderer or a
house-breaker, assisted him into a calche, and, seated one on either
side of him, with their carbines unslung, set out for Florence.
"They'll take me for Fr-Fr-Fra Diavolo, if I enter the city in this
fashion," cried Purvis; but certainly his rueful expression might have
belied the imputation.
Grounsell sat down upon a grassy bench beside the road, overcome with
fatigue and disappointment. From the hour of his arrival in Florence, he
had not enjoyed one moment of rest. On leaving Lady Hester's chamber he
had betaken himself to Sir Stafford's apartment; and there, till nigh
daybreak, he sat, breaking the sad tidings of ruin to his old friend,
and recounting the terrible story of disasters which were to crush him
into poverty. Thence he hastened to George Onslow's room; but he was
already gone. A few minutes before he had started with Norwood for
Pratolino, and all that remained for Grounsell was to inform the police
of the intended meeting, while he himself, wisely suspecting that
nothing could go forward in Florence unknown to Jekyl, repaired to that
gentleman's residence at once.
Without the ceremony of announcement, Grounsell mounted the stairs, and
opened the door of Jekyl's apartment, just as its owner had commenced
the preparations for his breakfast. There was an almost Spartan
simplicity in the arrangements, which might have made less composed
spirits somewhat abashed and ill at ease. The little wooden platter of
macaroni, the small coffee-pot of discolored hue and dinged proportions,
the bread of Ethiopian complexion, and the bunch of shrivelled grapes
offered a meal irreproachable on the score of either costliness or
epicurism. But Jekyl, far from feeling disconcerted at their exposure to
a stranger's eyes, seemed to behold them with sincere satisfaction, and
with a most courteous smile welcomed the doctor to Florence, and thanked
him for the very polite attention of so early a visit.
"I believe I ought to apologize for the unseasonable hour, sir,"
blundered out Grounsell, who was completely thrown off his balance by
this excessive urbanity; "but the cause must plead for me."
"Any cause which has conferred the honor on me is sure of being
satisfactory. Pray come nearer the table. You 'll find that macaroni
eat better than it looks. The old Duke de Montmartre always recommended
macaroni to be served on wood. His maxim was, 'Keep the "plat d'argent"
for a mayonnaise or a galantine.'"
"Excuse me if I cannot join you, sir. Nothing but a matter of extreme
importance could warrant my present intrusion. I only reached this city
a few hours back, and I find everything at the Mazzarini Palace in
a state of discord and confusion. Some are questions for time and
consideration; others are more immediately pressing. One of these is
this affair of George Onslow's. Who is he about to meet, and for what?"
"His antagonist is a very agreeable young man; quite a gentleman, I
assure you, attached to the French mission here, and related to the
'Morignys,' whom you must have met at 'Madame Parivaux's' formerly."
"Never heard of one of them, sir. But what's the quarrel?"
"It originated, I believe, in some form of disputation,--an
altercation," simpered Jekyl, as he sweetened and sipped his coffee.
"A play transaction,--a gambling affair, eh?"
"I fancy not; Count Guilmard does not play."
"So far, so good," said Grounsell. "Now, sir, how is it to be
arranged?--what settlement can be effected? I speak to you frankly,
perhaps bluntly, Mr. Jekyl, for my nature has few sympathies with
courteous ambiguities. Can this business be accommodated without a
meeting?"
Jekyl shook his head, and gave a soft, plaintive little sigh.
"Is friendly interference out of the question, sir?"
Another shake of the head, and a sigh.
"Is there any law in the country? Can the police do nothing?"
"The frontiers are always easily accessible," simpered Jekyl, as he
stole a look at his watch.
"Ay, to be sure," broke in Grounsell, indignantly; "the very geography
of the Continent assists this profligacy, and five paces over an
imaginary boundary gives immunity in a case of murder! Well, sir, come
along with me to the place of meeting. It is just possible that we may
be of some service even yet."
"Nothing could be more agreeable to me than the opportunity of
cultivating your acquaintance, Dr. Grounsell; but I have already
sent off a few lines to Lord Norwood, to apologize for my absence,--a
previous engagement."
"What! at this hour of the morning, sir!" burst out Grounsell.
"Even at this early hour, doctor, our cares commence," said Jekyl,
blandly.
"Upon this occasion they must give way to duties, then," said Grounsell,
sternly. "The word may sound strangely in your ears, sir, but I use it
advisedly you have been well received and hospitably entertained by
this family. They have shown you many marks of kindness and attention.
Now is the opportunity to make some sort of requital. Come, then, and
see if this young man cannot be rescued from peril."
"You touch my feelings in the very tenderest spot," said Jekyl, softly.
"When gratitude is mentioned, I am a child,--a mere child."
"Be a man, then, for once, sir; put on your hat and accompany me," cried
Grounsell.
"Would you have me break an appointment, doctor?"
"Ay, to be sure I would, sir,--at least, such an appointment as I
suspect yours to be. This may be a case of life or death."
"How very dreadful!" said Jekyl, settling his curls at the glass.
"Pascal compares men to thin glass phials, with an explosive powder
within them, and really one sees the force of the similitude every day;
but Jean Paul improves upon it by saying that we are all burning-glasses
of various degrees of density, so that our passions ignite at different
grades of heat."
"Mine are not very far from the focal distance at this moment," said
Grounsell, with savage energy; "so fetch your hat, sir, at once, or--"
"Unless I prefer a cap, you were going to add," interposed Jekyl, with a
sweet smile.
"We must use speed, sir, or we shall be too late," rejoined the doctor.
"I flatter myself few men understand a rapid toilet better," said Jekyl,
rising from the table; "so if you'll amuse yourself with 'Bell's Life,'
'Punch,' or Jules Janin, for five minutes, I 'm your man."
"I can be company for myself for that space, sir," said the other,
gruffly, and turned to the window; while Jekyl, disappearing behind the
drapery that filled the doorway, was heard humming an opera air from
within.
Grounsell was in no superlative mood of good temper with the world, nor
would he have extended to the section of it he best knew the well-known
eulogy on the "Bayards." "Swindlers," "Rakes," and "Vagabonds" were
about the mildest terms of the vocabulary he kept muttering to himself,
while a grumbling thunder-growl of malediction followed each. The very
aspect of the little chamber seemed to offer food for his anger; the
pretentious style of its decoration jarred and irritated him, and he
felt a wish to smash bronzes and brackets and statues into one common
ruin.
The very visiting-cards which lay scattered over a Svres dish offended
him; the names of all that were most distinguished in rank and station,
with here and there some little civility inscribed on the corner,
----"Thanks," "Come, if possible," or "Of course we expect
you,"--showing the social request in which Jekyl stood.
"Ay," muttered he to himself, "here is one that can neither give dinners
nor balls, get places nor pensions nor orders, lend money nor lose
it, and yet the world wants him, and cannot get on without him. The
indolence of profligacy seeks the aid of his stimulating activity, and
the palled appetite of sensualism has to borrow the relish from vice
that gives all its piquancy. Without him as the fly-wheel, the whole
machinery of mischief would stand still. His boast is, that, without a
sou, no millionnaire is richer than he, and that every boon of fortune
is at his beck. He might add, that in his comprehensive view of
wickedness he realizes within himself all the vice of this good capital.
I 'd send such a fellow to the treadmill; I 'd transport him for life;
I 'd sentence him to hunt kangaroos for the rest of his days; I'd--" He
stopped short in his violent tirade; for he suddenly bethought him how
he himself was at that very moment seeking aid and assistance at his
hands; and somewhat abashed by the recollection, he called out, "Mr.
Jekyl, are you ready yet?"
No answer was returned to this question, and Grounsell repeated it in a
louder voice. All was silent, and not even the dulcet sounds of the
air from "Lucia" broke the stillness; and now the doctor, losing all
patience, drew aside the curtain and looked in. The chamber was empty,
and Jekyl was gone! His little portmanteau, and his still
smaller carpet-bag, his hat-case, his canes--every article of his
personnel--were away; and while Grounsell stood cursing the "little
rascal," he himself was pleasantly seated opposite Lady Hester and Kate
in the travelling-carriage, and convulsing them with laughter at his
admirable imitation of the poor doctor.
Great as was Grounsel's anger at this trickery, it was still greater
when he discovered that he had been locked in. He quite forgot the
course of time passed in his meditations, and could not believe it
possible that there was sufficient interval to have effected all these
arrangements so speedily.
Too indignant to brook delay, he dashed his foot through the door, and
passed out The noise at once summoned the people of the house to the
spot, and, to Grounsell's surprise, the police officer amongst them,
who, in all the pomp of office, now barred the passage with a drawn
sword.
[Illustration: 032]
"What is it?--what's this?" cried he, in astonishment.
"Effraction by force in case of debt is punishable by the 127th
section of the 'Code,'" said a dirty little man, who, with the air of a
shoeblack, was still a leading member of the Florence "Bar."
"I owe nothing here,----not a farthing, sir; let me pass," cried
Grounsell.
"'Fathers for sons of nonage or over that period, domiciliated in the
same house,'" began the Advocate, reading out of a volune in his hand,
"'are also responsible.'"
"What balderdash, sir! I have no son; I never was married in my life;
and as for this Mr. Jekyl, if you mean to father him on me, I'll resist
to the last drop of my blood."
"'Denunciation and menace, with show of arms or without,'" began the
lawyer again, "'are punishable by fine and imprisonment.'"
Grounsell was now so worked up by fury that he attempted to force a
passage by main strength; but a general brandishing of knives by all
the family, from seven years of age upwards, warned him that the attempt
might be too serious, while a wild chorus of abusive language arose from
various sympathizers who poured in from the street to witness the scene.
A father who would not pay for his own son! an "assassin," who had no
bowels for his kindred; a "Birbante," a "Briccone," and a dozen similar
epithets, rattled on him like hail, till Grounsell, supposing that the
"bite" might be in proportion to the "bark," retreated into a small
chamber, and proposed terms of accommodation. Few men take pleasure
in acquitting their own debts, fewer still like to pay those of their
neighbors, and Grounsell set about the task in anything but a pleasant
manner. There was one redeeming feature, however, in the affair.
Jekyl's schedule could not have extracted a rebuke from the severest
Commissioner of Bankruptcy. His household charges were framed on the
most moderate scale of expenditure. A few crowns for his house-rent,
a few "Pauls" for his eatables, and a few "Grazie" for his washing,
comprised the whole charge of his establishment, and not even Hume would
have sought to cut down the "estimates." Doubtless more than one half of
the demands were unjust and extortionate, and many were perhaps already
acquitted; but as all the rogueries were but homoeopathic iniquities
after all, their doses might be endured with patience. His haste to
conclude the arrangements had, however, a very opposite tendency. The
more yielding he became, the greater grew their exactions, and several
times the treaty threatened to open hostilities again; and at last it
was full an hour after Jekyl's departure that Grounsell escaped from
durance, and was free to follow George Onslow to Pratolino.
With his adventures in the interval the reader is sufficiently
acquainted; and we now come back to that moment where, bewildered and
lost, he sat down upon the bench beside the high-road.
CHAPTER II. A SAD HOUSEHOLD
It was already past noon when Grounsell reached Florence. He was delayed
at the gate by the authorities examining a peasant's cart in front of
him,--a process which appeared to take a most unusual degree of care
and scrutiny,--and thus gave the doctor another occasion for inveighing
against the "stupid ignorance of foreigners, who throw every possible
impediment in the way of traffic and intercourse."
"What have they discovered now?" cried he, testily, as in a crowd of
vehicles, of all sorts and sizes, he was jammed up like a coal-vessel in
the river. "Is the peasant a revolutionary general in disguise? or has
he got Bibles or British cutlery under the straw of his baroccino?"
"No, Eccellenza." (Every one in a passion in Italy is styled Eccellenza,
as an "anodyne.") "It's a sick man, and they don't know what to do with
him."
"Is there a duty on ague or nervous fever?" asked he, angrily.
"They suspect he's dead, Eccellenza; and if so, there's no use in
bringing him into the city, to bring him out again by and by."
"And don't they know if a man be dead or alive?"
"Not when he's a foreigner, Illustrissimo; and such is the case here."
"Ah, very true!" said Grounsell, dryly, as if acquiescing in the truth
of the remark. "Let me have a look at him; perhaps I can assist their
judgment." And with this he descended, and made his way through the
crowd, who, in all the eagerness of curiosity, thronged around the cart
A peasant's great-coat was drawn over the figure and even the face
of the sick man, as he lay at full length on the mat flooring of the
baroccino; and on his chest some pious hand had deposited a rosary and a
wooden crucifix.
Grounsell hastily drew back the covering, and then clutching an arm of
those at either side of him, he uttered a faint cry, for the pale and
deathlike features before him were those of George Onslow. The instincts
of the doctor, however, soon rose above every other feeling, and his
hand seized the wrist and felt for the pulse. Its beatings were slow,
labored, and irregular, denoting the brain as the seat of injury.
Grounsell, therefore, proceeded to examine the head, which, covered with
clogged and matted blood, presented a terrific appearance; yet neither
there nor elsewhere was there any trace of injury by fire-arms. The
history of discovery was soon told. A shepherd had detected the body as
he passed the spot, and, hailing some peasants on their way to Florence,
advised their taking charge of it to the city, where they would be
surely recompensed. The natural suggestion of Grounsel's mind was that,
in making his escape from the gendarmes, Onslow had fallen over a cliff.
To convey him home, and get him to bed, if possible, before Sir Stafford
should hear of the misfortune, was his first care; and in this he
succeeded. It was the time when Sir Stafford usually slept; and
Grounsell was able to examine his patient, and satisfy himself that no
fatal injury was done, long before the old Baronet awoke.
"Sir Stafford wishes to see you, sir; he asked for you repeatedly
to-day," said Proctor.
"Has he heard--does he know anything of this?" said Grounsell, with a
gesture to the bed where George lay.
"Not a word, sir. He was very cheerful all the morning, but wondering
where you could have gone, and what Mister George was doing."
"Now for it, then," muttered Grounsell to himself, as, with clasped
hands and knitted brows, he walked along; his mind suffering the very
same anxieties as had oftentimes beset him on the eve of some painful
operation in his art.
"Well, Grounsell," said the old man, with a smile, as he entered, "is
it to give me a foretaste of my altered condition that you all desert me
to-day? You have never come near me, nor George either, so far as I can
learn."
"We've had a busy morning of it, Stafford," said the doctor, sitting
down on the bed, and laying his finger on the pulse. "You are
better--much better to-day. Your hand is like itself, and your eye is
free from fever."
"I feel it, Gronnsell,--I feel as if, with some twenty years less upon
my back, I could like to begin my tussle with the world, and try issue
with the best."
"You 're young enough, and active enough yet, for what is before you,
Stafford. Yesterday I told you of everything in colors perhaps gloomier
than reality. The papers of to-day are somewhat more cheery in their
tidings. The hurricane may pass over, and leave us still afloat; but
there is another trial for you, my old friend, and you must take heart
to bear it well and manfully."
Sir Stafford sat up in his bed, and, grasping Grounsell by either
shoulder, cried out, "Go on--tell it quickly."
"Be calm, Stafford; be yourself, my old friend," said Grounsell,
terrified at the degree of emotion he had called up. "Your own
courageous spirit will not desert you now."
"I know it," said the old man, as, relaxing his grasp, he fell back upon
the pillow, and then, turning on his face, he uttered a deep groan. "I
know your tidings now," cried he, in a burst of agony. "Oh, Grounsell,
what is all other disgrace compared to this?"
"I am speaking of George--of your son," interposed Gronnsell, hastily,
and seizing with avidity the opportunity to reveal all at once. "He left
this for Pratolino this morning to fight a duel, but by some mischance
has fallen over a cliff, and is severely injured."
"He's dead,--you would tell me he is dead!" said the old man, in a
faint, thrilling whisper.
"Far from it Alive, and like to live, but still sorely crushed and
wounded."
"Oh, God!" cried the old man, in a burst of emotion, "what worldliness
is in my heart when I am thankful for such tidings as this! When it is a
relief to me to know that my child--my only son--lies maimed and broken
on a sick-bed, instead of--instead of--" A gush of tears here broke in
upon his utterance, and he wept bitterly.
Grounsell knew too well the relief such paroxysms afford to interfere
with their course; while, to avoid any recurrence, even in thought,
to the cause, he hurriedly told all that he knew of George's intended
meeting with the Frenchman, and his own share in disturbing the
rendezvous.
Sir Stafford never spoke during this recital. The terrible shock seemed
to have left its stunning influence on his faculties, and he appeared
scarcely able to take in with clearness the details into which the other
entered.
"She's gone to Como, then," were the first words he uttered,----"to
this villa the Prince has lent her?"
"So I understand; and, from what Proctor says, the Russian is going to
marry the Dalton girl."
"Miss Dalton is along with Lady Hester?"
"To be sure; they travel together, and George was to have followed
them."
"Even scandal, Grounsell, can make nothing of this. What say you, man?"
"You may defy it on that score, Stafford. But let us talk of what is
more imminent,----of George."
"I must see him, Grounsell; I must see my poor boy," said he, rising,
and making an effort to get out of bed; but weakness and mental
excitement together overcame him, and he sank back again, fainting and
exhausted. To this a deep, heavy sleep succeeded, and Grounsell stole
away, relieved in mind by having acquitted himself of his painful task,
and free to address his thoughts to other cares.
"Lord Norwood wishes to see you, sir," said a servant to the doctor, as
he at last seated himself for a moment's rest in his chamber; and before
Grounsell could reply, the noble Viscount entered.
"Excuse this abrupt visit, sir; but I have just heard of poor Onslow's
accident Is there any danger in his condition?"
"Great and imminent danger, my Lord."
"By Jove!--sorry for it you don't happen to know how it occurred?"
"A fall, evidently, was the cause; but how incurred, I cannot even
guess."
"In the event of his coming about again, when might we expect to see him
all right,--speaking loosely, of course?"
"Should he recover, it will take a month, or, perhaps, two, before he
convalesces."
"The devil it will! These Frenchmen can't be made to understand the
thing at all; and as Guilmard received a gross personal outrage, he is
perfectly out of his mind at the delay in obtaining satisfaction. What
is to be done?"
"I am a poor adviser in such cases, my Lord; nor do I see that the
matter demands any attention from us whatever."
"Not from you, perhaps," said Norwood, insolently; "but I had the
misfortune to go out as his friend! My position is a most painful and
critical one."
"I should suppose that no one will understand how to deal with such
embarrassments better than your Lordship."
"Thanks for the good opinion; the speech I take to be a compliment,
however you meant it. I believe I am not altogether unskilled in such
affairs, and it is precisely because such is the case that I am here
now. Onslow, in other hands than mine, is a ruined man. The story, tell
it how you will, comes to this: that, having gone out to meet a man he
had grossly insulted, he wanders away from the rendezvous, and is found
some hours after at the foot of the cliff, insensible. He may have
fallen, he may have been waylaid,--though everything controverts this
notion; or, lastly, he may have done the act himself. There will be
advocates for each view of the case; but it is essential, for his honor
and reputation, that one story should be authenticated. Now, I am quite
ready to stand godfather to such a version, taking all the consequences,
however serious, on myself."
"This is very kind, very generous, indeed, my Lord," said Grounsell,
suddenly warming into an admiration of one he was always prejudiced
against.
"Oh, I'm a regular John Bull!" said the Viscount, at once assuming the
burden of that canticle, which helped him in all moments of hypocrisy.
"Always stand by the old stock,--nothing like them, sir. The Anglo-Saxon
blood will carry all before it yet; never suffer a rascally foreigner
to put his foot on one of your countrymen. Have him out, sir; parade the
fellow at once: that's my plan."
"I like your spirit!" cried Grounsell, enthusiastically.
"To be sure you do, old cock!" exclaimed Norwood, clapping him
familiarly on the shoulder. "Depend upon it, I 'll pull George through
this. I 'll manage the matter cleverly. There must be no mistake about
it; no room for doubt or equivocation, you know. All straightforward,
open, and manly: John Bull every inch of It That's my notion, at
least,----I hope it's yours?"
"Perfectly,--thoroughly so!"
"Well, then, just hand that note to Sir Stafford." Here he placed a
sealed letter in Grounsell's hand. "Tell him what I've just told you.
Let him fairly understand the whole question, and let me have the
contents this evening at the caf in the Santa Trinita,--say about
nine o'clock; not later than that These fellows always gather about that
hour."
"I'll take care of it," said Grounsell.
"All right!" cried Norwood, gayly, as he arose and adjusted the curls
beneath his hat. "My compliments to the old gent, and tell George not to
make himself uneasy. He 's in safe hands. Good-bye."
"Good-bye, my Lord, good-bye," said Grounsell, who, as he looked
after him, felt, as it were, unconsciously recurring to all his former
prejudices and dislikes of the noble Viscount "Those fellows," muttered
he, "are as inexplicable to me as a new malady, of which I neither know
the stages nor the symptoms. The signs I take for those of health may
be precisely the indications of corruption; and what I deem unsound may
turn out to be exactly the opposite." And so be fell into a musing fit,
in which certainly his estimate of Lord Norwood continued steadily
to fall lower and lower the longer he thought of him. "He must be
a rogue!--he must be a scoundrel! Nature makes all its blackguards
plausible, just as poison-berries are always brilliant to look at They
are both intended to be the correctives of rash impressions, and I
was only a fool ever to be deceived by him. Out of this, at all
hazards,--that's the first thing!" muttered Grounsell to himself, as
he walked hastily up and down the room. "The place is like a plague
district, and we must not carry an infected rag away from it! Glorious
Italy, forsooth! There's more true enlightenment, there's a higher
purpose, and a nobler view of life in the humblest English village, than
in the proudest halls of their Eternal City!"
In such pleasant reflections on national character he entered Sir
Stafford's room, and found his friend seated at a table covered with
newly arrived letters; the seals were all unbroken, and the sick man was
turning them over, and gazing at the different handwritings with a sad
and listless apathy.
"I 'm glad you 've come, Grounsell. I have not courage for this," said
he, pointing to the mass of letters before him.
"Begging impostors, one half of them, I 'll be sworn!" said Grounsell,
seating himself to the work. "Was I not right? Here's a Cabinet Minister
suing for your vote on an Irish question, and entreating your speedy
return to England, 'where, he trusts, the object you are both interested
in may be satisfactorily arranged.' Evasive rascal! Could n't he say,
'you shall have the Peerage for your support'? Would n't it be more
frank and more intelligible to declare, 'We take you at your price'?
These," said he, throwing half a dozen contemptuously from him, "are
all from your constituents. The 'independent borough' contains seventy
electors; and if you owned the patronage of the two services, with a
fair share of the public offices and India, you could n't content them.
I 'd tell them fairly, 'I have bought you already; the article is paid
for and sent home. Let us hear no more about it!' This is more cheering.
Shoenhals, of Riga, stands firm, and the Rotterdam house will weather
the gale. That's good news, Onslow!" said he, grasping the old man's
hand. "This is from Calcutta. Prospects are brightening a little in that
quarter, too. Come, come,--there's some blue in the sky. Who knows what
good weather 's in store for us?"
Onslow's lip trembled, and he passed his hand over his eyes without
speaking.
"This is from Como," said Grounsell, half angrily, tossing away a highly
perfumed little three-cornered note.
"Give it to me,----let me see it," said Onslow, eagerly; while with
trembling fingers he adjusted his spectacles to read. Grounsell handed
him the epistle, and walked to the window.
"She's quite well," read Sir Stafford, aloud; "they had delightful
weather on the road, and found Como in full beauty on their arrival."
Grounsell grumbled some angry mutterings between his teeth, and shrugged
up his shoulders disdainfully. "She inquires most kindly after me, and
wishes me to join them there, for Kate Dalton's betrothal."
"Yet she never took the trouble to visit you when living under the same
roof!" cried Grounsell, indignantly.
The old man laid down the letter, and seemed to ponder for some moments.
"What's the amount?--how much is the sum?" asked Grounsell, bluntly.
"The amount!--the sum!----of what?" inquired Sir Stafford.
"I ask, what demand is she making, that it is prefaced thus?"
"By Heaven! if you were not a friend of more than fifty years' standing,
you should never address me as such again," cried Onslow, passionately.
"Has ill-nature so absorbed your faculties that you have not a good
thought or good feeling left you?"
"My stock of them decreases every day,----ay, every hour, Onslow," said
he, with a deeper emotion than he had yet displayed. "It is, indeed,
a sorry compromise, that if age is to make us wiser, it should make us
less amiable, also!"
"You are not angry with me?--not offended, Grounsell?" said Onslow,
grasping his hand in both his own.
"Not a bit of it But, as to temperament, I can no more help my
distrust, than you can conquer your credulity, which is a happier
philosophy, after all."
"Then come, read that letter, Grounsell," said Onslow, smiling
pleasantly. "Put your prejudices aside for once, and be just, if not
generous."
Grounsell took the note, and walked to the window to read it. The
note was just what he expected,--a prettily turned inquiry after
her husband's health, interwoven with various little pleasantries of
travelling, incidents of the road, and so forth. The invitation was a
mere suggestion, and Grounsell was half angry at how little there was to
find fault with; for, even to the "Very sincerely yours, Hester Onslow,"
all was as commonplace as need be. Accidentally turning over the page,
however, he found a small slip of silver paper,--a bank check for five
hundred pounds, only wanting Onslow's signature. Grounsell crushed it
convulsively in his palm, and handed the note back to Onslow, without a
word.
"Well, are you convinced?--are you satisfied now?" asked Onslow,
triumphantly.
"I am perfectly so!" said Grounsell, with a deep sigh. "You must write,
and tell her that business requires your immediate presence in England,
and that George's condition will necessitate a return by sea. Caution
her that the Daltons should be consulted about this marriage, which, so
far as I know, they have not been; and I would advise, also, seeing that
there may be some interval before you can write again, that you should
send her a check,--say for five hundred pounds."
"So you can be equitable,-Grounsell," cried the other, joyously.
"And here is a letter from Lord Norwood," said Grounsell, not heeding
the remark, and breaking the seal as he spoke. "Laconic, certainly.
'Let me have the enclosed by this evening.--N.' The enclosed are
five acceptances for two hundred each; the 'value received' being his
Lordship's services in upholding your son's honor. Now here, at least,
Onslow, I 'll have my own way." And, with these words, he seated himself
at a table and wrote:----
My Lord,--Living in a land where assassination is cheap, and
even men of small fortune can keep a Bravo, I beg to return
your Lordship's bills, without submitting them to my friend
for endorsement, your price being considerably above the
tariff of the country, and more calculated to your own
exigencies than the occasion which it was meant to
remunerate.   I am, yours,
Paul Grounsell.
"What have you said there, Grounsell? you look so self-satisfied, it can
scarcely be over-civil."
"There,----'To the Viscount Norwood'" said Grounsell, as he sealed and
addressed the note. "We are getting through our work rapidly. In a week,
or even less, if George's symptoms show nothing worse, we shall get
away from this; and even on the sea one feels half as though it were
England."
We need not follow Grounsell through the busy days which ensued, nor
track him in his various negotiations with tradespeople,
bankers, house-agents, and that legionary class which are called
"commissionaires." Enough if we say that, in arranging for the departure
of his friends, his impressions of Italian roguery received many an
additional confirmation; and that, when the last day of their sojourn
arrived, his firm conviction was that none but a millionnaire could
afford to live in this the very cheapest capital of Europe!
And now they are gone! steaming calmly away across the Gulf of Genoa.
They have closed the little episode of their life in Italy, and with
heavy hearts are turning homeward. The great Mazzarini Palace looks sad
and forlorn; nor do we mean to linger much longer on a scene whence the
actors have departed.
CHAPTER III. A LAST SCENE
One last glance at the Mazzarini Palace, and we leave it forever.
Seated in the drawing-room where Lady Hester once held sway, in the
very chair around which swarmed her devoted courtiers and admirers, Mrs.
Ricketts now reclined, pretty much on the same terms, and with probably
some of the same sentiments, as Louis Blanc or his friend Albert might
have experienced on finding themselves domesticated within the Palace of
the Luxembourg. They were, so to say, parallel circumstances. There
had been a great reverse of fortune, an abdication, and a flight. The
sycophants of the day before were the masters now, and none disputed
the pretensions of any bold enough to assume dictation. To be sure, Mrs.
Ricketts's rule, like Ledru Rollings, was but a provisional government;
for already the bills for an approaching sale of everything were
posted over the front of the palace, and Racca Morlache's people were
cataloguing every article with a searching accuracy, very tormenting to
the beholders.
From some confused impression that they were friends of Lady Hester, and
that Mrs. Ricketts's health was in a precarious condition, Sir Stafford
gave orders that they should not be molested in any way, but permitted
to prolong their stay to the latest period compatible with the
arrangement for sale. A sense of gratitude, too, mingled with these
feelings; for Mrs. Ricketts had never ceased to indite euphuistic
notes of inquiry after George himself,--send presents of impracticable
compounds of paste and preserves, together with bottles of mixtures,
lotions, embrocations, and liniments, one tithe of which would have
invalided a regiment Gronnsell, it is true, received these civilities in
a most unworthy spirit; called her "an old humbug," with a very unpolite
expletive annexed to it; and all but hurled the pharmacopoeia at the
head of the messenger. Still, he had other cares too pressing to suffer
his mind to dwell on such trifles; and when Onslow expressed a wish
that the family should not be disturbed in their occupancy, he merely
muttered, "Let them stay and be d-----d;" and thought no more of them.
Now, although the palace was, so to speak, dismantled, the servants
discharged, the horses sent to livery for sale, the mere residence was
convenient for Mrs. Ricketts. It afforded a favorable opportunity for a
general "doing up of the Villino Zoe,"--a moment for which all her late
ingenuity had not been able to provide. It opened a convenient occasion,
too, for supplying her own garden with a very choice collection of
flowers from the Mazzarini,--fuchsias, geraniums, and orchidae, being
far beyond all the inventoriai science of Morlache's men; and lastly, it
conferred the pleasing honor of dating all her despatches to her hundred
correspondents from the Palazzo Mazzarini, where, to oblige her dear
Lady Hester, she was still lingering,----"Se sacrificando" as she
delighted to express it, "Jai doveri dell' amicizia." To these cares
she had now vowed herself a martyr. The General believed in her sorrows;
Martha would have sworn to them; and not a whit the less sincerely that
she spent hours in secreting tulip roots and hyacinths, while a deeper
scheme was in perpetration,--no less than to substitute a copy of
a Gerard Dow for the original, and thus transmit the genius of the
Ricketts family to a late posterity. Poor Martha would have assisted in
a murder at her bidding, and not had a suspicion of its being a crime!
It was an evening "at home to her few most intimate friends," when
Mrs. Ricketts, using the privilege of an invalid, descended to the
drawing-room in a costume which united an ingenious compromise between
the habit of waking and sleeping. A short tunic, a kind of female
monkey-jacket, of faded yellow satin edged with swansdown, and a cap
of the same material, whose shape was borrowed from that worn by the
beef-eaters, formed the upper portion of a dress to which wide
fur boots, with gold tassels, and a great hanging pocket, like a
sabretasche, gave a false air of a military costume. "It was singular,"
she would remark, with a bland smile, "but very becoming!" Besides, it
suited every clime. She used to come down to breakfast in it at Windsor
Castle. "The Queen liked it;" the Bey of Tripoli loved it; and the
Hospodar of Wallachia had one made for himself exactly from the pattern.
Her guests were the same party we have already introduced to our reader
in the Villino Zoe,--Haggerstone, the Pole, and Foglass being the
privileged few admitted into her august presence, and who came to
make up her whist-table, and offer their respectful homage on her
convalescence.
The Carnival was just over, the dull season of Lent had begun, and the
Rickettses' tea-table was a resource when nothing else offered. Such was
the argument of Haggerstone as he took a cheap dinner with Foglass at
the Luna.
"She 's an infernal bore, sir,--that I know fully as well as you can
inform me; but please to tell me who is n't a bore." Then he added, in a
lower voice, "Certainly it ain't you!"
"Yes, yes,----I agree with you," said Foglass; "she has reason to be
sore about the Onslows' treatment."
"I said a bore, sir,--not sore," screamed out Haggerstone.
"Ha!" replied the other, not understanding the correction. "I remember
one day, when Townsend--"
"D----n Townsend!" said Haggerstone.
"No, not Dan,--Tom Townsend. That fellow who was always with Mathews."
"Walk a little quicker, and you may talk as much balderdash as you
please," said the other, buttoning up his coat, and resolving not to pay
the slightest attention to his companion's agreeability.
"Who is here?" asked Haggerstone, as he followed the servant up the
stairs.
"Nobody but Count Petrolaffsky, sir."
"Un Comte  bon compte," muttered Haggerstone to himself, always pleased
when he could be sarcastic, even in soliloquy. "They 'll find it no easy
matter to get a tenant for this house nowadays. Florence is going down,
sir, and will soon be little better than Boulogne-sur-Mer."
"Very pleasant, indeed, for a month in summer," responded Foglass, who
had only caught up the last word. "Do you think of going there?"
"Going there!" shouted out the other, in a voice that made misconception
impossible. "About as soon as I should take lodgings in Wapping for
country air!"
This speech brought them to the door of the drawing-room, into which
Haggerstone now entered, with that peculiar step which struck him as
combining the jaunty slide of a man of fashion with the martial tread of
an old soldier.
"Ha! my old adherents,----all my faithful ones!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts,
giving a hand to each to kiss; and then, in a voice of deep emotion,
she said, "Bless you both! May peace and happiness be beneath your
roof-trees! joy sit beside your hearth!"
Haggerstone reddened a little; for, however alive to the ludicrous in
his neighbors, he was marvellously sensitive as to having a part in the
piece himself.
"You are looking quite yourself again," said he, bluntly.
"The soul, indeed, is unchanged; the spirit--"
"What's become of Purvis?" broke in Haggerstone, who never gave any
quarter to these poetic flights.
"You 'll see him presently. He has been so much fatigued and exhausted
by this horrid police investigation, that he never gets up till late. I
've put him on a course of dandelion and aconite, too; the first effect
of which is always unpleasant."
Leaving Foglass in conclave with the hostess, Haggerstone now approached
the Count, who had for several times performed his toilet operation of
running his hands through his hair, in expectation of being addressed.
"How d'ye do,----any piquet lately?" asked the Colonel, half
cavalierly.
"As if I was tinking of piquet, wid my country in shains! How you can
aske me dat?"
"What did you do with Norwood t'other night?" resumed the other, in a
voice somewhat lower.
"Won four hundred and fifty,--but he no pay!"
"Nor ever will."
"What you say?--not pay me what I wins!"
"Not a sou of it."
"And dis you call English noblemans,--pair d'Angleterre!"
"Hush! Don't be carried away by your feelings. Some men Norwood won't
pay because he does n't know them. There are others he treats the same
way because he does know them,--very equitable, eh?"
The observation seemed more intelligible to the Pole than polite, for he
bit his lip and was silent, while Haggerstone went on,----
"He 's gone, and that, at least, is a point gained; and now that these
Onslows have left this, and that cur Jekyl, we may expect a little
quietness, for a while, at least; but here comes Purvis." And that
worthy individual was led in on Martha's arm, a large green shade over
his eyes, and his face plentifully sprinkled with flour.
"What's the matter with you, man? you 're 'got up' like a ghost in a
melodrama."
"They 've taken all the cuti-cuti-cuti--"
"Call it skin, sir, and go on."
"Sk-skin off my face with a lin-liniment," cried he, "and I could
sc-scream out with pain whenever I speak!"
"Balm of marigolds, with the essential oil of crab-apple," said Martha.
"I made it myself."
"I wish to Hea-Heaven you had tr-tried it, too," whispered he.
"Brother Scroope, you are ungrateful," said Mrs. Ricketts, with the air
of a Judge, charging. "The vicissitudes of temperature, here, require
the use of astringents. The excessive heat of that police-court--"
"By the way, how has that affair ended?" asked Haggerstone.
"I'll tell you," screamed out Purvis, in a burst of eagerness. "They 've
fi-fi-fiued me a hundred and f-f-fifty scadi for being w-where I never
was, and fighting somebody I n-never saw."
"You got off cheaply, sir. I 've known' a man sentenced to the galleys
for less; and with a better character to boot," muttered he to himself.
"Lord Norwood and the rest said that I was a pr-pr-principal, and he
swore that he found me hiding in a cave."
"And did he so?"
"Yes; but it was only out of curi-curi-curi--"
"Curiosity, sir, like other luxuries, must be paid for; and, as you seem
a glutton, your appetite may be expensive to you."
"The mystery remains unsolved as to young Onslow, Colonel?" said Mrs.
Ricketts, half in question.
"I believe not, madam. The explanation is very simple. The gallant
guardsman, having heard of Guilmard's skill, preferred being reported
'missing' to 'killed,' having previously arranged with Norwood to take
his place. The price was, I fancy, a smart one,--some say five thousand,
some call it ten. Whatever the amount, it has not been paid, and Norwood
is furious."
"But the accident?"
"As for that, madam, nothing more natural than to crack your skull when
you lose your head." And Haggerstone drew himself up with the proud
consciousness of his own smartness.
"Then of course the poor young man is ruined?" observed Martha.
"I should say so, madam,--utterly ruined. He may figure on the committee
of a Polish ball, but any other society would of course reject him."
This was said to obtain a sneer at Petrolaffsky, without his being able
to guess why. "I believe I may say, without much fear of contradiction,
that these Onslows were all humbugs! The old banker's wealth, my
lady's refinement, the guardsman's spirit, were all in the same
category,--downright humbugs!"
"How he hates us,--how he detests the aristocracy!" said Mrs. Ricketts,
in a whisper to the Pole.
"And de Dalton----what of her?----is she millionnaire?" asked
Petrolaffsky.
"The father a small shopkeeper in Baden, sir; children's toys,
nut-crackers, and paper-knives being the staple of his riches. Foglass
can tell you all about it. He wants to hear about those Daltons,"
screamed he into the deaf man's ear.
"Poor as Job--has n't sixpence--lives 'three-pair back,' and dines for
a 'zwanziger.' Lame daughter makes something by cutting heads for canes
and umbrellas. He picks up a trifle about the hotels."
"Ach Gott! and I was so near be in loaf wid de sister!" muttered the
Pole.
"She is likely to d-d-do better, Count," cackled in Purvis. "She caught
her Tartar----ha, ha, ha!"
"Midchekoff doesn't mean marriage, sir, depend upon it," said
Haggerstone.
"Martha, leave the room, my dear," said Mrs. Ricketts, bridling. "He
could no more relish a pleasure without a vice than he could dine
without caviare."
"But they are be-be-betrothed," cried Purvis. "I saw a letter with an
account of the ceremony. Midchekoff fitted up a beautiful chapel at his
villa, and there was a Greek priest came sp-epecial from M-M-M-Moscow--"
"I thought you were going to say from the moon, sir; and it would be
almost as plausible," croaked Haggerstone.
"I saw the letter. It was n't shown to me, but I saw it; and it was that
woman from Breslau gave her away."
"What! old Madame Heidendorf? She has assisted at a great many similar
ceremonies before, sir."
"It was the Emperor sent her on purpose," cried Purvis, very angry at
the disparagement of his history.
"In this unbelieving age, sir, I must say that your fresh innocence
is charming; but permit me to tell you that I know old Caroline
Meersburg,--she was sister of the fellow that stole the Archduke
Michael's dress-sword at the Court ball given for his birthday. I
have known her five-and-thirty years. You must have met her, madam, at
Lubetskoy's, when he was minister at Naples, the year after the battle
of Marengo."
"I was wearing trousers with frills to them, and hunting butterflies at
that time," said Mrs. Ricketts, with a great effort at a smile.
"I have n't a doubt of it, madam." And then muttered to himself, "And if
childishness mean youth, she will enjoy a perpetual spring!"
"The ceremony," resumed Purvis, very eager to relate his story, "was
dr-droll enough; they cut off a----a----a lock of her hair and tied it
up with one of his."
"A good wig spoiled!" croaked Haggerstone.
"They then brought a b-b-b----"
"A baby, sir?"
"No, not a b-baby, a b-basin--a silver basin--and they poured water over
both their hands."
"A ceremony by no means in accordance with Russian prejudices," chimed
in Haggerstone. "They know far more of train-oil and bears' fat than of
brown Windsor!"
"Not the higher nobility, Colonel,--not the people of rank," objected
Mrs. Ricketts.
"There are none such, madam. I have lived in intimacy with them all,
from Alexander downwards. You may dress them how you please, but
the Cossack is in the blood. Raw beef and red breeches are more than
instincts with them; and, except the Poles, they are the dirtiest nation
of Europe."
"What you say of Polen?" asked Petrolaffsky.
"That if oil could smooth down the acrimony of politics, you ought to be
a happy people yet, sir."
"And we are a great people dis minet. Haven't we Urednfrskioctsch,
de best general in de world; and Krakouventkay, de greatest poet; and
Vladoritski, de most distinguish pianist?"
"Keep them, sir, with all their consonants; and Heaven give you luck
with them," said Haggerstone, turning away.
"On Tuesday--no, We-Wednesday next, they are to set out for St.
P-P-Petersburg. And when the Emperor's leave is gr-granted, then
Midchekoff is to follow; but not before."
"An de tyrant no grant de leave," said the Pole, gnashing his teeth and
grasping an imaginary dagger in his wrath. "More like he send her to
work in shains, wid my beautiful sisters and my faders."
"He'll have more important matters to think of soon, sir," said
Haggerstone, authoritatively. "Europe is on the eve of a great
convulsion. Some kings and kaisers will accept the Chiltern Hundreds
before the year's out."
"Shall we be safe, Colonel, here? Ought Martha and I--"
"Have no fears, madam; age commands respect, even from Huns and Croats.
And were it otherwise, madam, where would you fly to? France will have
her own troubles, England has the income-tax, and Germany will rake up
some old grievance of the Hohenstaufen, or the Emperor Conrad, and make
it a charge against Prince Metternich and the Diet! It's a very rascally
world altogether, and out of Tattersall's yard I never expect to hear of
honesty or good principles; and,  propos to nothing, let us have some
piquet, Count."
The table was soon got ready, and the players had just seated
themselves, when the sound of carriage-wheels in the court attracted
their attention.
"What can it mean, Scroope? Are you quite certain that you said I
wouldn't receive to-night?"
"Yes; I told them what you b-bade me; that if the Archduke called----"
"There, you need n't repeat it," broke in Mrs. Ricketts, for certain
indications around Haggerstone's mouth showed the sense of ridicule that
was working within him.
"I suppose, madam, you feel somewhat like poor Pauline, when she said
that she was so beset with kings and kaisers she had never a moment left
for good society?"
"You must say positively, Scroope, that I admit no one this evening."
"The Signor Morlache wishes to see you, madam," said a servant. And
close behind him, as he spoke, followed that bland personage, bowing
gracefully to each as he entered.
"Sorry--most sorry--madam, to intrude upon your presence; but the Prince
Midchekoff desires to have a glance at the pictures and decorations
before he goes away from Florence."
"Will you mention to him that to-morrow, in the afternoon, about five
or----"
"He leaves this to-morrow morning, madam; and if you could--"
[Illustration: 056]
But before the Jew could finish his request the door was flung wide, and
the great Midchekoff entered, with his hands in his coat-pockets, and
his glass in one eye. He sauntered into the room with a most profound
unconsciousness that there were people in it. Not a glance did he even
bestow on the living figures of the scene, nor did a trait of his manner
evince any knowledge of their presence. Ranging his eyes over the
walls and the ceilings, he neither noticed the martial attitude of
Haggerstone, nor the graceful undulations by which Mrs. Ricketts was, as
it were, rehearsing a courtesy before him.
"Originals, but all poor things, Morlache," said the Prince. And really
the observation seemed as though uttered of the company rather than the
pictures.
"Mrs. Ricketts has been good enough, your Highness--" began the Jew.
"Give her a Napoleon," said he, listlessly, and turned away.
"My sister, Mrs. Ricketts--Mrs. M-M-Montague Ricketts," began Scroope,
whose habitual timidity gave way under the extremity of provocation.
And the Prince turned slowly round, and surveyed the speaker and the
imposing form that loomed behind him.
"Tell them that I don't mean to keep any establishment here, Morlache."
And with this he strolled on, and passed into another room, while, like
as in a tableau, the others stood speechless with rage and indignation.
"He took you for the housekeeper, ma'am," said Haggerstone, standing up
with his back to the fire----"and a housekeeper out of place!"
"Martha, where's the General? Where is he, I say?" cried Mrs. Ricketts,
furious with passion.
"He went to bed at nine," whispered Martha. "He thought, by rising early
to-morrow, to finish the attack on Utrecht before night."
"You are as great a fool as himself. Scroope, come here. You must follow
that Russian. You must tell him the gross rudeness--"
"I'll be ha-ha-hanged if I do. I 've had enough of rows, for one winter
at least. I 'll not get into another sc-scrape, if I can help it."
"I 'm sorry, madam, that I cannot offer you my services," said
Haggerstone, "but I never meddle in a quarrel which can be made a
subject of ridicule. Mr. Foglass, I 'm certain, has no such scruple."
"The Prince appears a very agreeable man," said the ex-Consul, who, not
having the slightest notion of what was passing, merely followed his
instincts of praising the person of high rank.
"De shains of my enslaved country is on my hands. I 'm tied like one
galrien!" said Petrolaffsky, in a voice guttural with emotion.
"Your pardon once more, madam," said Morlache, slipping into the
chamber, and noiselessly approaching Mrs. Ricketts's chair. "The Prince
will take everything,----pictures, plate, china, and books. I hope
to-morrow, at noon, will not inconvenience you to leave this--"
"To-morrow! Impossible, sir. Perfectly impossible."
"In that case, madam, we must make some arrangement as to rent. His
Highness leaves all to me, and I will endeavor to meet your wishes
in every respect. Shall we say two thousand francs a month for the
present?" Without waiting for any reply, he turned to the Pole, and
whispered, "He 'll take you back again. He wants a chasseur, to send to
St. Petersburg. Come over to me in the morning, about ten. Mr. Foglass,"
cried he, in a loud voice, "when you write to London, will you mention
that the varnish on the Prince's drosky doesn't stand the cold of
Russia, and that they must try some other plan with the barouche? Your
brother is an ingenious fellow, and he 'll hit upon something. Colonel
Haggerstone, the Prince did n't return your call. He says you will
guess the reason when he says that he was in Palermo in a certain year
you know of. I wish the honorable company good-night," said he, bowing
with a deference almost submissive, and backing out of the room as he
spoke.
And with him we also take our leave of them. They were like the chance
passengers we meet on the road of a journey, with whom we converse when
near, and forget when we separate from. Were we not more interested for
the actors than the scenes on which they "strut their hour," we might
yet linger a few moments on the spot so bound up with our memory of Kate
Dalton,----the terrace where she sat, the little orangery where she
loitered of a morning, the window where she read, and dreamed of that
bright future, so much nearer to her grasp than she knew of! There they
were all!--destined to feel new influences and know other footsteps, for
she had left them forever, and gone forth upon her "Path" in life.
CHAPTER IV. A PACKAGE OF LETTERS
It was a bright clear morning in May. A somewhat late spring had
retarded vegetation, and the blossoming fruit-trees now added their
gorgeous beauty to the warmer tints of coming summer. We are once more
in Baden; but how different is it from what we saw it last. The frozen
fountains now plash, and hiss, and sparkle in the sun. The trim alleys
are flanked by the yellow crocus and the daffodil; the spray-like
foliage of the ash is flecking the sunlight on the merry river, along
whose banks the cheering sound of pleasant voices mingles with the
carol of a thousand birds. The windows are open, and gay balconies are
spreading, and orange-trees unfolding their sweetness to the breezy
air. All is life and motion and joy, for the winter is past, and nothing
remains of it save the snow-peaks on some distant mountains, and even
they are glowing in brilliant contrast with the deep blue sky beyond
them.
Lovely as the valley is in summer or autumn, it is only in spring
its perfect beauty appears. The sudden burst of vegetation--the rapid
transition from the frost-bound durance of winter to the life and
lightness of the young season, have a most exciting and exhilarating
effect. This seemed conspicuous enough in the inhabitants as they
chatted merrily in the streets, or met each other with pleasant
greetings. It was the hour of the post arriving, and around the
little window of the office were gathered the chief celebrities of the
village,--the principal hotel-keepers, curious to learn what tidings
their correspondents gave of the prospects of the coming summer.
Everything appeared to smile on that happy moment, for as the various
letters were opened, each had some good news to tell his neighbors,--now
of some great English Lord, now of some Hungarian magnate or Russian
Prince that was to make Baden his residence for the summer. "The Cour de
Bade is all taken," said one; "There will not be a room free in all
the Adler;" "The Swan must refuse the Queen of Naples,"--such were the
rumors that fell from lip to lip as in hearty congratulation they talked
over their good fortune.
One figure only of the assembled group seemed excepted from the general
Joy. He was a large elderly man, who, in a patched and threadbare
surtout, with a coarse scarlet muffler round his throat, appeared either
distrustful of the mild season or unprovided with any change of costume
to enjoy it. Seated on a stone bench in front of the window of the
post-office, with an arm on each knee, and his head bent heavily
forward, he never seemed to notice what went forward, nor hear one
syllable of the joyous recognitions about him.
The crowd at last dispersed, the happy recipients of good news were
turning homewards, and only one or two still lingered around the spot,
when the old man arose and approached the window. There was something
almost of shame in the way he slouched his hat over his eyes as he drew
nigh and knocked timidly at the closed pane.
His summons was unheard, and yet for some time he did not repeat
it,--perhaps he loved better to feed his hope even these short few
moments than again fall back into the dark gloom of his despair! At
last, and with a deep, hollow sigh, he tapped again.
"Have you anything for the name of Dalton,--Peter Dalton?" asked he,
in a voice wherein scarcely an accent revealed the once high-hearted
nature.
"Nothing," was the curt rejoinder. And the window was slammed to with
impatience.
He grasped the iron railing with a convulsive grip, as though a sudden
pang had shot through him, and then, by a great effort, he drew himself
up to his full height; his pale and haggard face grew paler as he
turned it upwards, and his bloodless lips trembled as they muttered some
indistinct syllables; then turning about, he brushed abruptly past the
few who stood around, and walked away.
He had not gone many paces when a boy overtook him, saying, "Come back,
sir; the postmaster has two letters for you."
Dalton looked stealthily at either side, to be sure that the speech was
addressed to him, and, with a fierceness that startled the boy, said,
"You're certain they're for me?"
"Yes, yes; all right,--here they are," cried the postmaster from the
window. "One, a soldier's letter from Munich, and free. The other is a
heavier packet, and costs four florins and twelve kreutzers."
"I must be satisfied with this one, then," said Dalton, "till I go back
for money. I brought no change out with me."
"No matter: you can send it," said the other.
"Maybe it's not so easy as you think," muttered Dalton to himself; while
he added, aloud, "Very well, I'll do so, and thank you." And he clutched
the two letters, and pressed them to his bosom.
With hurried steps he now paced homewards, but, stopping at every
instant, he drew forth the packets to gaze at them, and be certain that
no self-deception was over him, and that his possession was real and
tangible. His gait grew more firm, as he went, and his tread, as he
mounted the stairs, sounded assured and steady.
"You have a letter, father dearest," cried Nelly, as she flung wide the
door. "I saw you crossing the Platz, and I know, from your walk, that
you've got one."
"No, but better, Nelly--I 've two. That's from Frank; and here's Kate's,
and a bulky one--four florins twelve--devil a less."
"Oh, give it to me! Let me hear of her----let me feel beside her once
again!" cried Nelly. And with bursting eagerness she tore open the
envelope, from which two or three sealed notes fell out. "This is from
Lady 'Hester," said she; "and this a hand I do not know, but addressed
to you; and here are bills or money-orders for a large sum. What can all
this mean?"
"Can't you read what she says?" said Dalton, reddening, and suddenly
remembering that Nelly was not aware of his having written to Kate.
"Give it to me; I 'll read it myself." And he snatched the letter from
her fingers. "There's Frank's for you."
"Oh, father, father!" cried Nelly, in a burst of grief, as she tore
open Lady Hester's letter; "it is as I feared. Kate is about to be
married--if she be not already married."
"Without my leave--without asking my consent!" cried Dalton,
passionately. "Am I nobody at all? Am I the head of the family, or am
I not? Is this the way to treat her father? May I never see light, if
I won't have him 'out,' if he was a Prince of the Blood! Oh, the
ungrateful girl! Leave off crying there, and tell me all about it. Read
me her own letter, I say----if God will give me patience to listen to
it."
With a bosom almost bursting, and a lip quivering with emotion, Ellen
began,--
"La Rocca, Lake of Como.
Dearest Father and Sister,--Oh that I could throw myself at
your feet, and poor out all that my heart is full of----
tell you what I feel and hope and fear, and ask your counsel
and your blessing. I know not if the last few days be real;
my poor head is turning amid the scenes I 've passed through
and the emotions I have felt. I had no friend but Lady
Hester--no adviser but she! She has been a mother to me--not
as you would have been, Nelly--not to warn and restrain,
when perhaps both were needed, but to encourage and feed my
hopes.   I yielded to her counsels--"
"I don't understand one word of this," cried Dalton, impatiently. "What
did she do?"
Nelly's eyes ran rapidly over the lines without speaking; and then, in a
low but distinct voice, she said,---
"It is as I said; she is betrothed to this great Russian Prince."
"That fellow, they say, owns half Moscow. Fogles told us about him."
"Prince Midchekoff."
"That's the name. Well, it's a fine match,--there's no denying it.
How did it come about? and why didn't he come here and ask my consent?
What's the meaning of doing it all in this hurry?"
"The marriage can only take place in St. Petersburg, and in presence of
the Emperor; and she is merely betrothed, at present, to enable her to
accompany the lady, Madame de Heidendorf, to Russia, where the Prince
will follow in a few weeks."
"That bangs Banagher! Why could n't they get a priest where they are? Be
gorra! they 've scruples about everything but me! I 'm the only one
that's not considered! What the devil is the Emperor to her,--sure he
is n't her father? Well, well, go on."
"She would seem to have yielded to persuasion," said Nelly, feelingly.
"The Prince, with all his greatness, appears not to have won her heart.
See how she dwells upon his immense wealth and the splendor of his
position."
"Let us hear about that," cried Dalton, eagerly.
"My heart is nigh to bursting when I think of you and
dearest Nelly living with me, in all the enjoyment that
riches can bestow, nothing denied you that you can fancy,
and free to indulge every taste and every wish. To know that
I can at last repay, in some sort, all your affection--that
poor worthless Kate can minister to your pleasure and your
comfort--would make me dare a rasher destiny than this. And
he is so generous, Nelly. The whole of yesterday is like a
page from the 'Arabian Nights,' as I sat surrounded with
gorgeous articles of gold and gems--diamonds such as a queen
might wear, and rubies larger than the glass-drops I used to
deck my hair with long ago! And yet they tell me I have seen
nothing as yet, and that the treasures of Vladovitch Palace
I hear of at every moment are greater than most royal
houses. Lady Hester is kinder than ever, and the Heidendorf
also; but she is cold and reserved--too stately for my
taste--and I cannot overcome my awe of her. Is not this like
a confession of my unfitness for the station I am to
occupy?--are not these signs of inferiority? How little Hans
would stare at the objects of taste and art by which I am
surrounded and of which I never tire in admiring!
"There have been great changes in this family since I wrote,
and some mysterious circumstance is now hanging over them;
but Lady Hester has not told me anything, nor do I care to
repeat rumors which reach me through others. I only know
that Sir Stafford is about to proceed to England as soon as
Captain Onslow's health will permit; he, poor fellow, met
with an accident on the day we left Florence, and my maid,
who sat in the rumble, saw the mishap without knowing or
suspecting the victim! I have done everything to obtain
leave to visit you before I set out, or even to see you on
my way; but Madame de Heidendorf is absolute, and she has
so much important business in hand--such deep political
affairs to transact at Vienna and Dresden--that I find it is
impossible.
"The Prince has promised to write at once about Frank. He
says it will be better to obtain his promotion in the
Austrian service before he enters the Russian, and that this
shall take place immediately. I could see that on this point
he was acutely alive to the fact of our humble position;
but he knows from Lady Hester all about our family, and that
the Daltons acknowledge nothing superior to them in birth.
This, however, is always a difficulty to a foreigner; they
have no idea of untitled nobility; and I saw his chagrin
the other day when I told him to address papa as plain
Monsieur. Since yesterday morning I am called Princess; and
I cannot conceal from you the throb of delight the sound
still gives me! I often stop to ask myself if this be all a
dream, and shall I wake beside the fire and see dearest
Nelly bending over some little group, and Hans with
wondering eyes staring over her shoulders.
"The Prince only intends to spend one winter in Russia.
Madame de Heidendorf says that he will be named Ambassador
at Paris; but I hope and trust not: I feel too acutely my
inferiority for such a position. This she laughs at, and
merely says, 'Nous verrons.' Of course, wherever I am, you
will both be with me; meanwhile, what would you wish to do?
I told Monsieur Rubion, the Prince's secretary, that I
wanted money, and he gave me these bills, so he called them,
on Baden and Carlsruhe, as easily negotiable in that
neighborhood; pray, say if they be serviceable. The Prince
intends to visit you at Baden; and I suppose you will like
to see him. His manners are perfect, and except a degree of
constraint in first acquaintance, he is generally thought
very agreeable. Such preparations as they are making for my
journey, you 'd fancy I was a queen at the very least All my
trousseau is to come from Paris direct; and up to this I
have merely what Madame de H. calls the strictly
'indispensable;' which, shall I own? contrives to fill two
large fourgons and a heavy travelling-carriage. Nina is in a
perfect ecstasy at everything, and is eternally 'draping' me
in Brussels lace and Chantilly; so that, even while I
write, these flimsy tissues are floating around me; while
caskets of jewels and precious gems dazzle my eyes wherever
I turn them.
"The whole is like a gorgeous vision; would that it might
remain ever thus, for I almost tremble to take a step
further. Are these unworthy fears?   I hope they are."
Nelly paused, and laid down the letter on her knee. "Well, may I never
see grace, if that letter isn't enough to confuse a bench of bishops!"
cried Dalton. "She's marrying the first man in Europe,--be the other who
he will,--and she has as many crotchets and misgivings about it as if it
was little Hans, there, below! And he a Prince! a real Prince!--devil a
doubt of it--that scatters the money about like chaff! Here's an order
at sight for nine hundred gulden; and here's a bill at ten days--a nice
date--for fourteen hundred and eighty-six Prussian dollars; and this
is nearly as much more. Kate, my beauty, I knew you 'd do it! I never
looked at you in your old clogs and the worsted cloak that I did n't
think of the day I 'd see you in satin and velvet! Faix, it's the best
bottle of claret in the Adler I 'll drink your health in this day!
Nelly, who will we ask in to dinner?"
"Don't you think, papa, it were better we should not speak of this--"
"Why, better? Are we ashamed of it?"
"I mean, more prudent as regards ourselves, and more respectful to the
Prince."
"Respectful--to my son-in-law!--that's 'more of it.' Upon my conscience,
I'll have to go to school again in my old days. I know nothing of life
at all, at all! Respect, indeed!"
"I would but suggest, papa, that for Kate's sake--"
"There--there----don't provoke me. I never set my heart on a thing
yet--big or little--that I was n't met with a caution about this, or
a warning about that, till at last I got so tutored and corrected and
trained that, as Billy Morris used to say at whist, 'I dread a good hand
more than a bad one.'"
"Far be it from me, dearest father," said Nelly, smiling, "to throw a
shadow over a bright moment. If it will give you pleasure--"
"Sure I said it would,--sure I told you 't is what I 'd like. A fine
dinner at the 'Schwan;' four gulden a head, without wine; a dozen of
champagne in ice, hock for them that can drink it, and port and Lafitte
for Peter Dalton and men of his own sentiments. There's the programme,
Nelly, and you'll see if I can't fill up the details."
"Well, but we have yet much to do; here are several letters,--here is
Frank's. Let us learn how the dear fellow fares."
Dalton sat down without speaking; there was, indeed, more of resignation
than curiosity in his features, as he crossed his arms and listened.
"Dearest Nelly,----I only heard a few days ago that my last
two letters had been stopped; they were not, as they should
have been, submitted to my captain to read, and hence they
were arrested and suppressed. This goes by a private hand--a
friend of mine--a pedler from Donaueschingen--"
"A what?--a pedler is it?" broke in Dalton, angrily.
"Yes, papa; remember that poor Frank is still in the ranks."
"Well, God give me patience with you all!" burst out the old man, in
a torrent of passion. "Does he know that he's a Dalton?--does he feel
blood in his veins? Why the blazes must he seek out a thieving blaguard
with a pack full of damaged cambric to make a friend of? Is this the way
the family's getting up in the world?"
"Adolf Brawer, by name," read on Nelly, in a low and subdued
voice. "You will be surprised when I tell you that I owe all
his kindness and good-nature to you,--yes, to your own dear
self. On his way through the Tyrol he had bought two wooden
statuettes,--one a young soldier asleep beside a well; the
other a girl leaning from a window to hear the bugles of a
departing regiment Can you guess whose they were? And when
he came to know that I was the brother of the little N. D.
that was sculptured, half hid in a corner, and that I was
the original of the tired, wayworn recruit on the roadside,
I thought he would have cried with enthusiasm."
"Didn't I often say it?" broke in Dalton, as, wringing his hands in
despair, he paced the room with hasty strides. "Did n't I warn you a
thousand times about them blasted images, and tell you that, sooner or
later, it would get about who made them? Didn't I caution you about the
disgrace you 'd bring on us? The fear of this was over me this many a
day. I had it like a dream on my mind, and I used to say to myself, 'It
will all come out yet.'" #
Nelly covered her face with her apron as these bitter words were spoken;
but not a syllable, nor a sigh, did she reply to them; still, the frail
garment shook with an emotion that showed how intensely she suffered.
"A Virgin sold here, an Angel Gabriel there; now it was Hamlet; another
time Gotz with the iron hand. All the balderdash that ever came into
your head scattered over the world to bring shame on us! And then to
think of Kate!"
"Yes, dearest father, do think of her," cried Nelly, passionately. "She
is, indeed, an honor and a credit to you."
"And so might you have been, too, Nelly," rejoined he, half sorry for
his burst of anger. "I 'm sure I never made any difference between you.
I treated you all alike, God knows." And truly, if an indiscriminating
selfishness could plead for him, the apology was admirable.
"Yes, papa, but Nature was less generous," said Nelly, smiling through
her tears; and she again turned to the letter before her. As if fearful
to revive the unhappy discussion, she passed rapidly over Frank's
account of his friend's ecstasy; nor did she read aloud till she came to
the boy's narrative of his own fortunes.
"You ask me about Count Stephen, and the answer is a short
one. I have seen him only once. Our battalion, which was
stationed at Laybach, only arrived in Vienna about three
weeks ago, but feeling it a duty to wait on our relative, I
obtained leave one evening to go and pay my respects. Adolf,
who knew of my connection with the Field-Marshal, had lent
me two hundred florins; and this, too, I was anxious to pay
off,--another reason for this visit.
"Well, I dressed myself in my best cadet cloth, and silk
sword-knot,
Nelly,--none of your 'commissaire' toggery, but all fine and
smart-looking, as a gentleman-cadet ought to be,--and then
calling a fiacre, I ordered the man to drive to the
'Koertnor Thor,' to the Field-Marshal von Auersberg*s
quarters. I 'm not sure if I did n*t say to my uncle's. Away
we went gayly, and soon drew up in an old-fashioned
courtyard, from which a great stair led up four stories
high, at the top of which the 'Feld'--so they called him--
resided. This was somewhat of a come-down to my high-flown
expectations, but nothing to what I felt as the door was
opened by an old Jager with one leg, instead of, as I looked
for, a lackey in a grand livery.
"'What is 't cadet?' said he, in a tone of the coolest
familiarity.
"'The Field-Marshal von Auersberg lives here?' said I.
"He nodded.
"'I wish to see him.'
"He shook his head gravely, and scanning me from head to
foot, said, 'Not at this hour, cadet,----not at this hour.'
"'Let him see this card,' said I, giving one with my name.
'I 'm certain he 'll receive me.'
"I believe if I had presented a pistol at him, the old
fellow would have been less startled, as he exclaimed, 'A
cadet with a visiting-card! This would serve you little with
the Feld, younker,' cried he, handing it back to me; 'he
likes to see a soldier a soldier.'
"'Tell him my name, then,' said I, angrily; 'say that his
grand-nephew, Frank Dalton, has been standing at his door in
full parley with a servant for ten minutes.'
"The announcement created little of the astonishment I
calculated on, and the old soldier merely replied, 'All
under field-officer's rank come before eight of a morning.
you cannot expect to have the privilege of an archduke.' He
was about to close the door in my face as he spoke, but I
placed my shoulder against it and forced it back, thus
securing an entrance within the forbidden precincts.
"'Right about, quick march!' cried he, pointing to the
door, while his whole frame trembled with passion.
"'Not till you have delivered my message,' said I, calmly.
"'Then Bey'm Blitzen I will deliver it, and see how you 'll
like it,' cried he, as he stumped away down a passage and
entered a room at the end of it. I could soon hear the sound
of voices, and for the moment I was almost determined to
beat a retreat, when suddenly the old Jager came out and
beckoned me forward. There was a grin of most diabolical
delight on the old fellow's features as I passed into the
room and closed the door behind me.
"As well as I could see in the imperfect light, for it was
after sunset, the apartment was large and low-ceilinged,
with bookshelves round the walls, and stands for weapons and
military equipments here and there through it. At the stove,
and busily engaged in watching a coffee-pot, sat the Feld
himself, a loose gray overcoat covering his figure, and
concealing all of him but two immense jackboots that peeped
out beneath. He wore a Mtze, a kind of Hungarian cap, and a
long pipe depended from his mouth, the bowl resting on the
carpet. The most conspicuous feature of all was, however,
his enormous moustache, which, white as snow, touched his
collar-bone at either side.
"He never spoke a word as I entered, but stared at me
steadfastly and sternly for full three or four minutes. Half
abashed by this scrutiny, and indignant besides at the
reception, I was about to--
[Illustration: 071]
"'Franz Carl Infantry, third battalion,' said I, instantly
saluting with my hand.
"'Your name?'
"'Frank Dalton.'
"'Your business?'
"'To visit my grand-uncle, the Field-Marshal von Auersberg.'
"'And is it thus, younker,' cried he, rising, and drawing
himself up to his full height, 'that you dare to present
yourself before a
Feldzeugmeister of the Imperial Army?   Have they not
taught you even the commonest rules of discipline?   Have
they left you in the native barbarism of your own savage
country, that you dare, against my orders, present yourself
before me?'     "'I thought the claim of kindred--' began
I.
"'What know I of kindred, sirrah? What have kith and kin
availed me? I have stood alone in the world. It was not to
kindred I owed my life on the field of Rosbach; nor was it
a relative stanched my bleeding wounds at Wagram!'
"'The name of Dalton--'
"'I have won a prouder one, sir, and would not be reminded
by you from what I 've started.   Where 's your character-
certificate?'
"'I have not brought it with me, Herr General.    I scarcely
thought it would be the first question my father's uncle would
put to me.'
'"There was prudence in the omission, too, sir,' said he,
not heeding my remark. 'But I have it here.' And he drew
from a portfolio on the table a small slip of paper, and
read: '"Cadet Dalton, second company of the third
battalion, Franz Carl Regiment.----Smart on service, and
quick in discipline, but forward and petulant with those
above him in rank. Disposed to pride himself on birth and
fortune, and not sufficiently submissive to orders. Twice in
arrest, once, Kurzgeschlossen." A creditable character, sir!
Twice in arrest and once in irons! And with this you claim
kindred with a count of the empire, and an imperial field-
marshal! On the fifth of last month you entertained a party
at dinner at the Wilde Man,--most of them men of high rank
and large fortune. On the eighteenth you drove through Maria
Tell with a team of four horses, and passed the drawbridge
and the moat in full gallop. So late as Wednesday last you
hoisted a green flag on the steeple of the village church,
on pretence of honoring your father's birthday. I know each
incident of your career, sir, and have watched you with
shame and regret. Tell your father, when you write to him,
that all the favor of my august master would not endure the
test of two such protgs.   And now, back to your
quarters.'
"He motioned me to retire with a gesture, and I fell back,
almost glad at any cost to escape. I had just reached the
stair, when the Jager called me back to his presence.
"'Art an only son?' asked the Count, for the first time
addressing me in the second person.
"I bowed.
"'And hast three sisters?'
"'Two, Herr General.'
"'Older or younger than thyself?'
'"Both older, sir.'
'"How have they been brought up? Have they learned thrift
and housecraft, or are they wasteful and reckless, as their
native country and their name would bespeak them?'
"'Our humble fortune is the best answer to that question,
sir.'
'"It is not, sirrah!' cried he, angrily. 'The spendthrift
habit survives every remnant of the state that gave it
birth, and the beggar can be as improvident as the prince.
Go; thou hast as much to learn of the world as of thy duty.
Head erect, sir; shoulders back; the right thumb more
forwards. If the rest of the battalion be like thee, I'll
give them some work on the Prater ere long.'
"A haughty wave of his hand now finished our interview, and,
once outside the door, I descended the stairs, a whole
flight at every bound, in terror lest anything should induce
him to recall me.
"And this is Uncle Stephen, Nelly,--this the great protector
we used to build our hopes upon, and flatter ourselves would
be a second father to us!
"When I came out into the street, I knew not which way to
turn. I dreaded the very sight of a comrade, lest he should
ask me about our meeting, what pocket-money he had given me,
and how soon I should be an officer. It was only when I saw
Adolf coming towards me that I remembered all about my debt
to him, of which I had not spoken one word to my uncle. I
ought to have told him so, frankly. Yes, Nelly, I can hear
the murmured displeasure with which you read my confession,
'that I could n't do it.' I was unequal to the effort, and
could not bring myself to destroy that whole fabric of
fictitious interest in which I had wrapped myself. What
would Adolf have thought of me when I said, I have neither
wealth nor station nor prospect,--as humble a soldier as the
sentry you see yonder? What would become of that romance of
life in which we have so often spent hours revelling in a
brilliant future, every incident of which grew up in our
united fancies, and seemed to assume reality as we discussed
it? Where----oh, Nelly! to you I must reveal all----every
weakness, every littleness of my nature--where would be the
homage of respect the poor Bursche was wont to show the
nephew of a field-marshal? No, it was above my strength;
and so I took his arm, and talked away heedlessly about our
meeting, avoiding, where I could, all mention of my uncle,
and but jocularly affecting to think him an original, whose
strange, old-fashioned manners almost concealed the strong
traits of family affection.
"'What of thy promotion, Frank?' asked Adolf.
"'It will come in its own good time/ said I, carelessly.
'Nothing causes more dissatisfaction than the rapid
advancement of cadets of noble family.'
"'But they could make thee a corporal, at least?'
"I laughed scornfully at the remark, and merely said, 'They
may skip over the whole sous-officier grade, and only
remember me when I'm to be made a lieutenant/
"'Thou hast grown haughtier, Frank,' said he, half
reproachfully, 'since thy meeting with the "Feld." Mayhap in
a day or two thou wilt not like to be seen in company with a
"Wander-Bursche"?'
"I was bursting to throw my arms round his neck, and say,
'Never, whatever fortune have in store for me; thy
friendship is like a brother's, and can never be forgotten;
'but Pride--yes, Nelly, the cursed pride against which you
used to warn me--sealed my lips; and when I spoke, it was
something so cold, so meaningless, and so unworthy that he
left me. I know not how! No sooner was I alone, Nelly, than
I burst into tears. I cried for very shame; and if agony
could expiate my fault, mine should have done so.    What
humiliation before my friend could equal that I now felt
before my own heart! I thought of all your teachings,
dearest Nelly; of the lessons you gave me over and over
against this besetting sin of my nature! I thought of our
home, where poor Hanserl was treated by us as a friend! I
thought of our last parting, and the words you spoke to me
in warning against this very pride, ignoble and mean as it
is; and, oh! what would I have given to have thrown myself
into Adolfs arms, and told him everything! I have never seen
him since; he wrote to me a few lines, saying that he
should pass through Baden on his way to Frankfort, and
offering to carry a letter for me; but not once did he
allude to my debt, nor was there the slightest hint of its
existence. On this I wrote an acknowledgment of the loan,
and a pressing entreaty that he would come and see me; but
he pretended one thing and another, affected engagements at
the only hours I was free, and at last abruptly sent for my
letter just when I was writing it. I had much more to tell
you, Nelly, of myself, of the service, and of my daily life
here; but my thoughts are now disturbed and scattered; and
I feel, too, how your shame for my short-coming will take
away interest from what I say. You, Nelly, will have courage
to be just: tell him all that I have been weak enough to
conceal; let him know what suffering my unworthy shame has
cost me; and, above all, that I am not ungrateful.
"It seems like a dream all that you tell me of Kate. Is she
still in Italy, and where? Would she write to me? I am
ashamed to ask the question of herself. They spoke of our
brigade being sent to Lombardy; but even there I might be
far away from her; and if near, in the very same city, our
stations would separate us still more widely. Oh, Nelly! is
it worth all the success ever ambition the most successful
won, thus to tear up the ties of family, and make brothers
and sisters strangers? Would that I were back again with
you, and dearest Kate, too! I see no future here; the dull
round of daily discipline, teaching nothing but obedience,
shuts out speculation and hope! Where are the glorious
enterprises, the splendid chances I often dreamed of? My
happiest moments now are recalling the past; the long winter
evenings beside the hearth, while Hans was reading out to
us. There are rumors of great changes in the world of Europe;
but to us they are only the thunderings of a distant
storm, to break out in what quarter we know not. Oh, Nelly!
if it should lead to war! if some glorious struggle were to
break in upon this sluggish apathy!
"Adolf has sent again for this letter, so I must close it He
will not, he says, pass through Baden, but will post this in
Munich--so good-bye, dearest sister. Tell poor papa all that
you dare to tell of me, and farewell.
"Frank Dalton.
"When you write it must be under cover to the 'Herr Hauptman von Gauss,
2ten Compagnie, 3 Linien Bataillon, Franz Carl Infanterie.' Don't forget
this long address, nor to add a line to the captain himself, who is a
good-looking fellow, but somewhat conceited.
"I have just heard old Auersberg is to have a command again. I 'm
heartily sorry for it. So much for family influence!"
If the reader's patience has lasted through this long letter of Frank's,
it was more than Peter Dalton's did. For what between his ecstasy at
Kate's good fortune, his own rambling speculations on all that should
follow from it, and, above all, what from the slurring monotonous tone
in which Nelly passed over such portions as she did not wish him to
hear, he grew gradually more abstracted and dreamy, and at last fell off
into a deep and most happy slumber. Not a syllable did he hear of the
old Feld's reception of Frank; nor did he even awake as little Hans
stumped into the room, with a staff in either hand,--aids that, since
his accident, he could never dispense with.
"I heard that you had letters, Frulein," said he. "Do they bring good
tidings?"
"Some would call them so, Hanserl," said she, with a sigh. "Kate is
about to be married."
Hanserl made no reply, but sat slowly down, and crossed his arms before
him.
"The great Russian Prince Midchekoff, of whom you may have heard."
"I have seen him, Frulein; he was here in Baden, three years ago."
"Oh, then, tell me, Hanserl, what is he like? Is he young and
frank-looking? Seems he one that should have won a maiden's heart so
suddenly, that----that--"
"No, not that she could n't have written to her sister and asked for
counsel, Frulein," said Hans, continuing her sentence. "The Prince is
a cold, austere man, proud to his equals, I believe, but familiar enough
to such as me. I remember how he asked me of my life, where I came from,
and how I lived. He seemed curious to hear about the train of thoughts
suggested by living amid objects of such childish interest, and asked
me, 'If I did not often fancy that this mock world around me was the
real one?' 'You are right, Herr Prints,' said I; 'but, after all, here,
at least, we are equals.' 'How so?' said he. 'That your real world
is as great a mockery as mine.' 'Thou are right, dwarf,' said he,
thoughtfully, and fell a-musing. He should not have called me dwarf, for
men know me as Hans Rockle,--and this is your sister's husband!"
"Is he mild and gentle-mannered?" asked Nelly, eagerly.
"The great are always so, so far as I have seen; none but base
metal rings loudly, maiden. It is part of their pride to counterfeit
humility."
"And his features, Hans?"
"Like one of those portraits in the gallery at Wurtzburg. One who had
passions and a temper for a feudal age, and was condemned to the slavery
of our civilization."
"He is much older than Kate?" asked she again.
"I have seen too few like him even to guess at his age; besides, men
of his stamp begin life with old temperaments, and time wears them but
little."
"Oh, Hanserl, this seems not to promise well. Kate's own nature is
frank, generous, and impulsive; how will it consort with the cold traits
of his?"
"She marries not for happiness, but for ambition, maiden. They who
ascend the mountain-top to look down upon the scene below them, must not
expect the sheltering softness of the valley at their feet. The Frulein
Kate is beautiful, and she would have the homage that is paid to beauty.
She has chosen her road in life; let us at least hope she knows how to
tread it!"
There was a tone of almost sternness in Hanserl's manner that Nelly well
knew boded deep and intense feeling, and she forebore to question him
further for some time.
"You will leave this, then, Frulein?" said he at last "You will quit
the humble valley for the great world?"
"I know not, Hanserl, what my father may decide. Kate speaks of our
joining her in Russia; but the long Journey in his infirm state, not
to speak of other reasons, may prevent this. Shall I tell you of Frank?
Here is a long letter from him." And, almost without waiting for his
reply, she read out the greater portion of the epistle.
"I like the old Feld!" cried Hans, enthusiastically. "He would teach the
boy submission, and self-reliance, too,--lessons that, however wide
apart they seem, go ever hand in hand; an old warrior that has trained
his bold nature to habits of obedience in many a year of trial and
injustice, unfriended and alone, with nothing but his stout heart and
good sword to sustain him. I like that Feld, and would gladly pledge him
in a glass of Steinberger!"
"And you shall, my little man," said Dalton, waking up, and catching the
last words of Hanserl's speech. "The old Count was kind to Frank, and
I 'll drink his health this night, with all the honors. Read him the
letter, Nelly. Show him how old Stephen received the boy. That's blood
for you!--a true Dalton!"
Hanserl stared from father to daughter, and back again, without
speaking; while Nelly, blushing deeply, held down her head, without a
word.
"His letter to us was dry enough. But what matter for that? He never
wrote a line,--maybe, did n't speak a word of English for upwards of
forty years. You can't expect a man to have the 'elegant correspondent'
at his fingers' ends after that space of time. But the heart!--that's
the main point, Hans. The heart is in the right place. Read that bit
over again, Nelly; I forget the words he said."
"Oh, no, papa. Hans has Just beard it all, from beginning to end; and
you know we have so much to do. Here's Lady Hester's note, and here's
one from the Prince, still unopened."
"Ay, to be sure. I 'm certain you 'll excuse me, Hans," said Dalton,
putting on his spectacles, while he assumed a manner of condescending
urbanity very puzzling to the poor dwarf. "Why, Nelly dear, this is
French. Give me that note of Lady Hester's, and do you take this. Oh,
by my conscience, I 'm no better off now! The devil such writing as this
ever I seen! It's all 'm's' and 'w's' every bit of it You'll keep them
both for the evening, my dear. Hans will dine with us, and I 'll go out
to look for a bit of fish, and see if I can find another pleasant fellow
to round off the table with us. God be with old Kilmurray M'Mahon, where
I could have had twenty as easy as two, and each of them a good warrant
for four bottles, besides! Is n't it a droll world?" muttered he, as he
took down his hat and descended the stairs. "A good dinner, and only a
cripple for company! Faix! I 'm like the chap in the Bible, that had
to ask the beggars and the blaguards when he could n't get better." And
with this very wise reflection, Peter Dalton hummed a Jig to himself as
he took his way to the fish-market.
CHAPTER V. A HAPPY DAY FOR PETER DALTON
A youthful heir never experienced a more glorious burst of delight on
the morning of his twenty-first birthday, than did Peter Dalton feel
as he sauntered down the principal street of Baden. It was with a
step almost elastic, and his head high, that he went along; not humbly
returning the "Good-day" of the bowing shopkeeper, but condescendingly
calling his worthy creditors--for such nearly all of them were--by their
Christian names, he gave them to believe that he was still, as ever,
their kind and generous patron.
There was scarcely a shop or a stall he did not linger beside for a
minute or two. Everywhere there was something not only which he liked,
but actually needed. Never did wants accumulate so rapidly! With
a comprehensive grasp they extended to every branch of trade and
merchandise,--ranging from jewelry to gin, and taking in all, from fur
slippers to sausages.
His first visit was to Abel Kraus, the banker and moneylender,--a little
den, which often before he had entered with a craven heart and a sinking
spirit; for Abel was a shrewd old Israelite, and seemed to read the very
schedule of a man's debts, in the wrinkles around his mouth. Dalton now
unbarred the half door and stalked in, as if he would carry the place by
storm.
The man of money was munching his breakfast of hard eggs and black
bread,--the regulation full diet of misers in all Germany,--when Peter
cavalierly touched his hat and sat down. Not a word did Abel speak.
No courtesies about the season or the weather, the funds or the
money-market, were worth bestowing on so poor a client; and so he ate
on, scarcely deigning even a glance towards him.
"When you 've done with the garlic, old boy, I 've some work for you,"
said Dalton, crossing his arms pretentiously.
"But what if I do not accept your work? What if I tell you that we shall
have no more dealings together? The two last bills--"
"They'll be paid, Abel,--they'll be paid. Don't put yourself in a
passion. Times is improving,--Ireland 's looking up, man."
"I think she is," muttered the Jew, insolently; "she is looking up like
the beggar that asks for alms yonder."
"Tear and ages!" cried Dalton, with a stroke of his fist upon the
table that made every wooden bowl of gold and silver coin jump and ring
again,--"tear and ages! take care what you say! By the soul in my body,
if you say a syllable against the old country, I 'll smash every stick
in the place, and your own bones, besides! Ye miserable ould heathen!
that has n't a thought above sweating a guinea,--how dare you do it?"
"Why do you come into my counting-house to insult me, saar? Why you come
where no one ask you?"
"Is it waiting for an invitation I'd be, Abel? Is it expecting a card
with ould Kraus's compliments?" said Dalton, laughing. "Sure, isn't the
place open like the fish-market, or the ball-room, or the chapel, or any
place of diversion? There, now; keep your temper, old boy. I tell ye,
there's luck before ye! What d'ye think of that?" And, as he spoke, he
drew forth one of the bills, and handed it across the counter; and then,
after gloating, as it were, over the changed expression of the Jew's
features, he handed a second, and a third.
"These are good papers, Herr von Dalton; no better! The exchange, too,
is in your favor; we are giving--let me see--ten and three-eighths
'Convenzions-Gelt'."
"To the devil I fling your three-eighths!" cried Dalton. "I never forgot
the old song at school that says, 'Fractions drives me mad.'"
"Ah, always droll,----always merry!" cackled out Abel. "How will you
have these moneys?"
"In a bag,----a good strong canvas-bag!"
"Yes, to be sure, in a bag; but I was asking how you 'd have them. I
mean, in what coin,--in what for 'Gelt.'"
"Oh, that's it!" cried Dalton. "Well, give me a little of everything.
Let me have 'Louis' to spend, and 'Gros-chen' to give the beggars.
Bank-notes, too, I like; one feels no regretting parting with the dirty
paper that neither jingles nor shines: and a few crown pieces, Abel; the
ring of them on a table is like a brass band!"
"So you shall,--so you shall, Herr von Dalton. Ha, ha, ha! you are the
only man ever make me laugh!"
"By my conscience, then, it's more than you deserve, Abel; for you've
very often nearly made me cry," said Dalton, with a little sigh over
the past, as he recalled it to his memory.
The Jew did not either heed or hear the remark; for, having put away the
remnant of his frugal breakfast, he now began a very intricate series of
calculations respecting interest and exchange and commission, at which
poor Dalton gazed in a most complete mystification.
"Fourteen hundred and sixty-three, at ten three-eighths,--less cost of
commission; I will not charge you the one per cent--"
"Charge all that's fair, and no favor, old boy."
"I mean that I will not treat the Herr von Dalton like a stranger----"
"I was going to say, treat me like a Christian," said Dalton, laughing;
"but maybe that's the most expensive thing going."
"Always droll,--always have his jest," cackled Abel. "Now there's an
agio on gold, you pay five kreutzers for every Louis."
"By George! I 'll take a ship-load of them at the same price."
"Ha! U mean you pay that over the value," said the Jew.
"Faix! I often promised to pay more," said Dalton, sighing; "and what's
worse, on stamped paper too!"
As the Jew grew deeper in his figures, Dalton rambled on about Ireland
and her prospects, for he wished it to be supposed that his present
affluence was the long-expected remittance from his estates. "We 'll
get right yet," muttered he, "if they 'll only give us time; but ye see,
this is the way it is: we're like an overloaded beast that can't pull
his cart through the mud, and then the English comes up, and thrashes
us. By course, we get weaker and weaker--licking and abusing never made
any one strong yet. At last down we come on our knees with a smash.
Well, ye 'd think, then, that anybody with a grain of sense would say,
'Take some of the load off the poor devil's back--ease him a bit tell he
gets strength.' Nothing of the kind. All they do is to tell us that we
ought to be ashamed of ourselves for falling--that every other people
was doing well but ourselves--that it's a way we have of lying down,
just to get somebody to pick us up, and such like. And the blaguard
newspapers raises the cry against us, and devil a thief or a
housebreaker or a highway robber they take, that they don't put him
down in the police reports as a 'hulking Irishman,' or a 'native of the
Emerald Isle.' 'Paddy Fitzsimons, or Peter O'Shea, was brought up this
mornin' for cutting off his wife's head with a trowel.' 'Molly Maguire
was indicted for scraping her baby to death with an oyster-shell.'
That's the best word they have for us! 'Ain't ye the plague of our
lives?' they're always saying. 'Do ye ever give us a moment's peace?'
And why the blazes don't ye send us adrift, then? Why don't ye let us
take our own road? We don't want your company--faix! we never found
it too agreeable. It's come to that now, that it would better be a
Hottentot or a Chinese than an Irishman! Oh dear, oh dear, but we 're
hardly treated!"
"Will you run your eye over that paper, Herr von Dalton, and see if it
be all correct?" said Abel, handing him a very complex-looking array of
figures.
"'T is little the wiser I 'll be when I do," muttered Dalton to himself,
as he put on his spectacles and affected to consider the statement.
"Fourteen hundred and sixty-three----I wish they were pounds, but they
're only florins--and two thousand eight hundred and twenty-one--five
and two is seven and nine is fifteen. No, seven and nine is--I wish
Nelly was here. Bad luck to the multiplication-table. I used to be
licked for it every day when I was a boy, and it's been a curse to me
since I was a man. Seven and nine is fourteen, or thereabouts--a figure
would n't signify much, one way or f other. Interest at three-quarters
for twenty-one days--there I 'm done complete! Out of the four first
rules in Gough I'm a child, and indeed, to tell the truth, I 'm no great
things after subtraction."
"You will perceive that I make the charges for postage, commission,
and other expenses in one sum. This little claim of fifty-eight florins
covers all."
"Well, and reasonable it is, that I must say," cried Dalton, who,
looking at the whole as a lucky windfall, was by no means indisposed to
see others share in the good fortune. "How much is coming to me, Abel?"
"Your total balance is four thousand two hundred and twenty-seven
florins eight kreutzers, Mntze," said Abel, giving the sum a resonance
of voice highly imposing and impressive.
"How many pounds is that now?" asked Peter.
"Something over three hundred and fifty pounds sterling, sir."
"Is it? Faith! a neat little sum. Not but I often got rid of as much of
an evening at blind-hookey, with old Carters, of the 'Queen's Bays.' Ye
don't know Carters? Faix! and ye 'd be the very man he would know, if
ye were in the same neighborhood. I wish he was here to-day; and that
reminds me that I must go over to the market and see what's to be had.
Ye don't happen to know if there's any fish to-day?"
Abel could not answer this important question, but offered to send his
servant to inquire; but Dalton, declining the attention, strolled out
into the street, jingling his Napoleons in his pocket as he went, and
feeling all the importance and self-respect that a well-filled purse
confers on him who has long known the penniless straits of poverty.
He owed something on every side of him; but he could bear to face his
creditors now; he was neither obliged to be occupied with a letter, nor
sunk in a fit of abstraction as he passed them; nay, he was even jocular
and familiar, and ventured to criticise the wares for which, once, he
was almost grateful.
"Send your boy down to the house for some money--ye need n't mind the
bill; but I 'll give you fifty florins. There's a trifle on account. Put
them ten Naps, to my credit; that will wipe off some of our scores; it's
good for forty crowns." Such were the brief sentences that he addressed
to the amazed shopkeepers as he passed along; for Peter, like Louis
Philippe, couldn't bear the sight of an account, and always paid
something in liquidation. It was with great reluctance that he abstained
from inviting each of them to dinner; nothing but his fear of
displeasing Nelly could have restrained him. He would have asked the
whole village if he dared, ay, and made them drunk, too, if they 'd have
let him. "She's so high in her notions," he kept muttering to himself:
"that confounded pride about family, and the like! Well, thank God! I
never had that failing. If I knew we were better than other people, it
never made me unneighborly; I was always free and affable; my worst
enemy could n't say other of me. I 'd like to have these poor devils to
dinner, and give them a skinful for once in their lives, just to drink
Kate's health, and Frank's; they 'd think of the Daltons for many a long
year to come--the good old Dalton blood, that never mixed with the
puddle! What a heavenly day it is! and an elegant fine market. There's a
bit of roasting beef would feed a dozen; and maybe that isn't a
fine trout! Well, well, but them's cauliflowers!. Chickens and
ducks--chickens and ducks--a whole street of them! And there's a wild
turkey--mighty good eating, too! and venison!--ah! but it has n't the
flavor, nor the fat! Faix! and not bad either, a neck of mutton with
onions, if one had a tumbler of whiskey-punch afterwards."
Thus communing with himself, he passed along, totally inattentive to
the solicitations of those who usually supplied the humble wants of his
household, and who now sought to tempt him by morsels whose merits lay
rather in frugality than good cheer.
As Dalton drew near his own door, he heard the sounds of a stranger's
voice from within. Many a time a similar warning had apprised him that
some troublesome dun had gained admittance, and was torturing poor Nelly
with his importunities; and on these occasions Peter was wont, with more
cunning than kindness, to steal noiselessly downstairs again, and wait
till the enemy had evacuated the fortress. Now, however, a change had
come over his fortunes, and with his hat set jauntily on one side, and
his hands stuck carelessly in his pockets, he kicked open the door with
his foot, and entered.
Nelly was seated near the stove, in conversation with a man who, in
evident respect, had taken his place near the door, and from which
he rose to salute Dalton as he came in. The traveller--for such his
"blouse" or travelling-frock showed him to be, as well as the knapsack
and stick at his feet----was a hale, fresh-looking man of about thirty;
his appearance denoting an humble walk in life, but with nothing that
bordered on poverty.
"Herr Brawer, papa,--Adolf Brawer," said Nelly, whispering the last
words, to remind him more quickly of the name.
"Servant, sir," said Dalton, condescendingly; for the profound deference
of the stranger's manner at once suggested to him their relative
conditions.
"I kiss your hand," said Adolf, with the respectful salutation of a
thorough Austrian, while he bowed again with even deeper humility.
"The worthy man who was so kind to Frank, papa," said Nelly, in deep
confusion, as she saw the scrutinizing and almost depreciating look with
which Dalton regarded him.
"Oh, the pedler!" said Dalton, at last, as the remembrance flashed on
him. "This is the pedler, then?"
"Yes, papa. He came out of his way, from Durlach, Just to tell us about
Frank; to say how tall he had grown--taller than himself, he says--and
so good-looking, too. It was so kind in him."
"Oh, very kind, no doubt of it,----very kind indeed!" said Dalton, with
a laugh of most dubious expression. "Did he say nothing of Frank's debt
to him? Has n't that 'I O U' You were talking to me about anything to say
to this visit?"
"He never spoke of it, never alluded to it," cried she, eagerly.
"Maybe he won't be so delicate with me," said Dalton. "Sit down, Mr.
Brawer; make no ceremony here. We 're stopping in this little place till
our house is got ready for us. So you saw Frank, and he's looking well?"
"The finest youth in the regiment. They know him through all Vienna as
the 'Handsome Cadet.'"
"And so gentle-mannered and unaffected," cried Nelly.
"Kind and civil to his inferiors?" said Dalton; "I hope he's that?"
"He condescended to know me," said Brawer, "and call me his friend."
"Well, and maybe ye were," said Peter, with a majestic wave of the hand.
"A real born gentleman, as Frank is, may take a beggar off the streets
and be intimate with him. Them's my sentiments. Mark what I say, Mr.
Brawer, and you 'll find, as you go through life, if it is n't true;
good blood may mix with the puddle every day of the year, and not be the
worse of it!"
"Frank is so grateful to you," broke in Nelly, eagerly; "and we are so
grateful for all your kindness to him!"
"What an honor to me! that he should so speak of me!" said the pedler,
feelingly,--"I, who had no claim upon his memory."
"There was a trifle of money between you, I think," said Dalton,
ostentatiously; "have you any notion of what it is?"
"I came not here to collect a debt, Herr von Dalton," said Adolf,
rising, and assuming a look of almost fierceness in his pride.
"Very well, very well; just as you please," said Dalton, carelessly; "it
will come with his other accounts in the half-year; for, no matter how
liberal a man is to his boys, he'll be pestered with bills after
all! There's blaguards will be lending them money, and teachin' them
extravagance, just out of devilment, I believe. I know well how it used
to be with myself when I was in old 'Trinity,' long ago. There was a
little chap of the name of Foley, and, by the same token, a pedler,
too----"
"Oh, papa, he's going away, and you have n't thanked him yet!" cried
Nelly, feelingly.
"What a hurry he's in!" said Dalton, as he watched the eager haste with
which the pedler was now arranging the straps of his knapsack.
"Would you not ask him to stay--to dine with us?" faltered Nelly, in a
low, faint whisper.
"The pedler--to dine?" asked Dalton, with a look of astonishment
"Frank's only friend!" sighed she, mournfully.
"By my conscience, sometimes I don't know if I 'm standing on my head
or my heels," cried Dalton, as he wiped his brows, with a look of utter
bewilderment. "A pedler to dinner! There now--that's it--more haste
worse speed: he's broke that strap in his hurry!"
"Shall I sew it for you?" said Nelly, stooping down and taking out her
needle as she spoke.
"Oh, Frulein, how good of you!" cried Adolf; and his whole face beamed
with an expression of delight. "How dearly shall I value this old pack
hereafter!"
These last words, scarcely muttered above his breath, were overheard by
Nelly, and a deep blush covered her cheeks as she bent over the work.
"Where's your own maid? Couldn't one of the women do it as well?" cried
Dalton, impatiently. "Ye'd not believe, Mr. Brawer, that we have
the house full of servants this minute; a set of devils feasting and
fattening at one's expense."
"Thanks, Frulein," said the pedler, as she finished; "You little know
how I shall treasure this hereafter."
"Ask him to stay, papa," whispered Nelly once more.
"Sure he's a pedler!" muttered Dalton, indignantly.
"At least thank him. Tell him you are grateful to him."
"He 'd rather I 'd buy ten yards of damaged calico,--that's the flattery
he 'd understand best," said Dalton, with a grin.
"Farewell, Herr von Dalton. Farewell, Frulein!" said Adolf. And with a
bow of deep respect he slowly retired from the room, while Nelly turned
to the window to conceal her shame and sorrow together.
"It was this very morning," muttered Dalton, angrily, "when I spoke of
giving a little dinner-party, you did nothing but turn up your nose at
this, that, and t' other. There was nobody good enough, forsooth! There
was Monsieur Ratteau, the 'croupier' of the tables there, a very nice
man, with elegant manners and the finest shirt-studs ever I seen, and
you would n't hear of him."'
Nelly heard little of this reproachful speech, for, sunk in the recess
of the window, she was following with her eyes the retiring figure of
Adolf Brawer. He had just crossed the "Plate," and ere he turned into
a side street he stopped, wheeled round, and made a gesture of farewell
towards the spot where, unseen by him, Nelly was still standing.
"He is gone!" muttered she, half aloud.
"Well, God speed him!" rejoined Dalton, testily. "I never could abide a
pedler."
CHAPTER VI. MADAME DE HEIDENDORF
Kate Dalton's was a heavy heart as, seated beside her new friend, she
whirled along the road to Vienna. The scenery possessed every attraction
of historic interest and beauty. The season was the glorious one of an
Italian spring. There were ancient cities, whose very names were
like spells to memory. There were the spots of earth that Genius has
consecrated to immortality. There were the scenes where Poetry caught
its inspiration, and around which, even yet, the mind-created images of
fancy seem to linger, all to interest, charm, and amuse her, and yet she
passed them without pleasure, almost without notice.
The splendid equipage in which she travelled, the hundred appliances of
ease and luxury around her, the obsequious, almost servile devotion of
her attendants, recalled but one stern fact,--that she had sold
herself for all these things; that for them she had bartered her warm
affections,--her love of father and sister and brother,--the ties of
home and of kindred, even to the Faith at whose altar she had bent her
knees in infancy. She had given all for greatness.
In all her castle-buildings of a future, her own family bad formed
figures in the picture. To render her poor father happy; to surround his
old age with the comforts he pined after; to open to dear Nelly sources
of enjoyment in the pursuit she loved; to afford Frank the means of
associating with his comrades of rank, to mix in that society for which
he longed,--these were her objects, and for them she was willing to pay
dearly. But now she was not to witness the happiness of those she
loved. Already the hard conditions of her contract were to be imposed.
Banishment first, then Isolation; who could say what after?
Her travelling-companion was scarcely well calculated to smooth down the
difficulties of this conflict in her mind. Madame de Heidendorf was the
very reverse of Lady Hester. Without the slightest pretension to good
looks herself, she assumed to despise everything like beauty in
others, constantly associating its possession with the vanity of weak
intellects; she threw a kind of ridicule over these "poor, pretty
things," as she loved to call them, which actually seemed to make beauty
and folly convertible terms. Political intrigue, or, to speak more
fairly, mischief-making in state affairs, was her great and only
passion. By dint of time, patience, considerable cunning, and a very
keen insight into character, she had succeeded in obtaining the intimacy
of many of the first statesmen of Europe. Many had trusted her with the
conduct of little matters which the dignity of diplomacy could not stoop
to. She had negotiated several little transactions, opened the way to
reconciliations, smoothed the road to briberies, and allayed the petty
qualms of struggling morality, where any other than a feminine influence
would have been coarse and indelicate.
As a good monarchist, she was always well received at the Austrian
Court, and in St. Petersburg was accustomed to be treated with peculiar
honor.
By what amount of compensation, or in what shape administered,
Midchekoff had secured her present services, this true history is unable
to record; but that Kate was eminently fortunate, drawing such a prize
in the lottery of life as to enter the world under her auspices, were
facts that she dwelt upon without ceasing.
Frankness and candor are very charming things. They are the very soul of
true friendship, and the spirit of all affectionate interest; but they
can be made very disagreeable elements of mere acquaintanceship. Such
was Madame de Heidendorf s. She freely told Kate, that of all the great
Midchekoff's unaccountable freaks, his intended marriage with herself
was the very strangest; and that to unite his vast fortune and high
position with mere beauty was something almost incredible. There was a
landgravine of Hohenhckingen, an Archduchess, a main gauche of
the Austrian house itself; there was a granddaughter of the Empress
Catherine, with any of whom she could easily have opened negotiations
for him,--all of them alliances rich in political influences. Indeed,
there was another party,--she was not at liberty to mention the name;
and though, to be sure, she was "blind and almost idiotic," a union with
her would eventually have made him a "Serene Highness." "So you see,
my dear," said she, in winding up, "what you have cost him! Not," added
she, after a few seconds' pause,--"not but I have known such marriages
turn out remarkably well. There was that Prince Adalbert of Bohemia, who
married the singing woman,--what's her name?----that young creature that
made such a sensation at the 'Scala,'--' La Biondina' they called her.
Well, it is true, he only lived with her during the Carnival; but there
she is now, with her handsome house in the Bastey, and the prettiest
equipage in the Prater. I know several similar cases. The Archduke Max
and Prince Ravitzkay,--though, perhaps, not him; for I believe he sent
that poor thing away to the mines."
"His wife----to the mines!" gasped Kate, in terror.
"Don't be frightened, my dear child," said Madame, smiling; "be a good
girl, and you shall have everything you like. Meanwhile, try and unlearn
all those gaucheries you picked up with that strange Lady Hester. It
was a shocking school of manners,--all those eccentric, out-of-the-way
people, who lounged in and lounged out, talking of nothing but each
other, utterly ignorant of the great interests that are at stake in
Europe at this moment Try, therefore, and forget that silly coterie
altogether. When we arrive at Vienna, you will be presented to the
Archduchess Louisa."
"And I shall see dear--dear Frank!" burst out Kate, with an
irrepressible delight.
"And who is Frank, Madame?" said the other, proudly drawing herself up.
"My brother,--my only brother,--who is in the Austrian service."
"Is he on the Emperor's staff?"
"I know nothing of his position, only that he is a cadet."
"A cadet, child! Why, do you know that that means a common soldier,--a
creature that mounts with a musket, or carries a bread-bag over its
shoulder through the streets in a fatigue-jacket?"
"I care nothing for all that. He may be all you say, and twice as
humble, but he is my brother Frank still,--the playfellow with whom I
passed the day when--when I was happy--as I shall never be again!--the
fond, kind brother, whom we were all so proud of."
An expression of scornful compassion on Madame de Heidendorf 's features
at once stopped Kate, and she covered her face with her hands to hide
her shame.
"Madame la Princesse," began the Countess,--for whenever she peculiarly
desired to impress Kate with her duties, she always prefaced the lesson
by her new title,----"the past must be forgotten, or you will find
yourself totally unable to compete with the difficulties of your
station. There is but one way to make the Prince's msalliance
pardonable, which is by as seldom as possible parading its details. If,
then, you insist upon seeing your brother during our stay at Vienna,
it must be in secret you said something, I think, of an old
field-marshal,--a connection?"
"My father's uncle, Madame."
"Very true. Well, your brother can come with some letter or message from
him; or if Nina, your maid, has no objection, he might pass for a lover
of hers."
"Madame!" cried Kate, indignantly.
"I said, if Nina made no objection," said Madame de Heidendorf, as
though answering the indignant exclamation. "But these are matters of
my consideration, Madame,--at least, if I understand the spirit of the
Prince's instructions."
Some such scene as this, usually closing with a similar peroration,
formed the conversation of the road; and hour by hour Kate's courage
fell lower, as she contemplated all that her elevation had cost her. And
what a mockery was it, after all! It was true that she journeyed in a
carriage with all the emblazonry of royalty; that a group of uncovered
lackeys attended her as she descended; that she was ever addressed by a
proud title; a respectful, submissive devotion surrounding her at
every instant But, amid all this, there was not one look, one word of
kindness; nothing of interest or sympathy with her solitary grandeur. It
mattered little that the bars of her cell were of gold; it was a prison
still.
With what eagerness did she turn from the present, with all its
splendor, to think of her former life, when, wandering among the hills
of Baden she had listened to little Hans, or watched dear Nelly, as
the first gleams of her intentions began to manifest themselves on a
sculptured group. With what rapture had she heard passages that seemed
akin to something she had felt but could not express! How had she loved
the changeful effects of light and shade on a landscape where every
tree or rock or cliff was familiar to her! Oh, if she could but be back
again, hopeful, ardent, and trusting, as she once was! Oh, if the brief
past could be but a dream, and she were once more beside her father and
Nelly, knowing nothing of that world which, in so short a space, had
revealed so much before her! Even to those who so lately had supplied
the place of family to her, all were gone, and she was utterly alone.
She did not dare to think of George Onslow. It seemed to her like a
treason to recall his memory; and if his image did rise at times before
her fancy, a burning blush would cover her cheek, and a sense of shame
would send a throb like agony through her heart. The plans and projects
for her future life she heard of without interest; a vague and confused
impression of a long journey, halting here and there to be presented to
certain great and distinguished persons, and finally of her arrival at
St. Petersburg, were all that she knew. That the Prince was to join her
there, and then, with the Emperor's permission, return with her to
the south of Europe,--such were the outlines of a career over which a
sinking heart threw a gloomy shadow.
Madame de Heidendorf was too occupied with her own thoughts to notice
this despondency; besides that, she was incessantly teaching Kate some
one requisite or other of that rigid etiquette which prevailed in the
society she was about to enter; the precise titles by which she was to
address this or that personage; how many courtesies to give here, how
many reverences there,--little educational exercises that were always
accompanied by some warning admonition of their importance to one who,
like herself, had never seen anything like good society, and whose
breaches of good breeding would be certain of being severely commented
on.
"Think of the Prince, Madame," she would say; "think of what he will
suffer when they repeat any of your transgressions. I am afraid there
are many humiliations in store for him. And what a step to take at
such a moment, with these horrible Socialist doctrines abroad,--these
levelling theories of equality, and so forth. I hope his Majesty the
Emperor will pardon him; I hope he will forgive you."
This was a favorite speech of hers, and so often repeated that Kate at
last began to look on herself as a great criminal, and even speculated
on what destiny should befall her if the Emperor proved unmerciful.
These were sorry resources to shorten the weariness on a Journey, and
Kate felt a throb of pleasure--the first she had experienced--when the
towers of St. Stephen, in the far distance, announced the approach to
Vienna.
CHAPTER VII. AT VIENNA.
The gossiping world of Vienna had a new subject for speculation and
interest, as a guard of honor was seen standing at a large palace near
the "Hoff;" and the only information to explain the mystery was that
some great diplomatist had arrived the evening before, and Heaven
knew what wonderful events were in his charge and keeping. A gigantic
"Chasseur," in green and gold, who lounged about the portal, followed by
a great dog,--a "fanghund," whose silver collar was embossed with many
a quartering,--had engaged the attention of a very considerable crowd,
which opened from time to time to permit the passage of some royal
or princely equipage. As they thus fell back, a chance look would
be directed upwards to the windows of the first floor, and there,
passingly, they caught glimpses of one whose beauty soon formed the
theme of every tongue. This was Kate Dalton, who, now rested from the
fatigue of her journey, and dressed in the most becoming fashion, walked
up and down a splendid saloon, watching to catch every sound, or gazing
earnestly from the window to catch any sight that might betoken her
brother's coming. At Madame de Heidendorf's suggestion she had written
a few lines that morning early to the Field-Marshal von Dalton,
entreating, as a great favor, that he would procure leave for Frank to
come to her, and pass as much of his time as possible with her during
her stay in Vienna. The note, brief as it was, cost her some trouble;
she felt that much explanation might be necessary to state her present
position,--even who she was,--and yet this was a subject she had no
heart to enter into. Some expressions of affectionate interest towards
himself would also have been fitting, but she could not find time
for them. Frank, and Frank alone, was in her thoughts, and she left
everything to the old General's ingenuity, as she concluded her note by
subscribing herself, "Your affectionate niece, Kate Dal ton, Affianced
Princesse de Midchekoff."
It was the first time that she had written the words,----the first time
that she had ever impressed that massive seal of many quarterings, so
royal-looking as it seemed. It was, also, the first time she had ever
given an order to one of her servants; and the obsequious bows of the
groom of the chamber, as he withdrew, were all separate and distinct
sensations,--low, but clear knockings of vanity at her heart, to which
every object around contributed its aid. The apartment was splendid;
not in that gorgeous taste of modern decoration of which she had seen so
much already, but in a more stately fashion, recalling the grandeur of
a past age, and exhibiting traces of a long line of princely occupants.
The very portraits along the walls had a proud and haughty bearing, and
the massive chairs glittered in all the blaze of heraldry. If she
looked out, it was the towers of the "Hoff Bourg"--the Home of the
Hapsburgs--met her eye. If she listened, it was the clank of a soldier's
salute broke the stillness; while the dull roll of wheels beneath
the arched gateway told of the tide of visitors who came to pay their
homage.
If Kate's heart had been less bound up with anxiety to see her brother,
the scene beneath her window would have afforded her some interest, as
equipage after equipage succeeded,--now the quiet splendor of a court
chariot, now the more glaring magnificence of a cardinal's carriage.
Here came the lumbering old vehicle of an archhishop, the reverential
salute of the crowd indicating the rank of its occupant Then the quick
"present arms" of the sentry told of some general officer; while, at
intervals, the "turn out" of the whole guard denoted the arrival of a
royal prince. Ambassadors and ministers, chamberlains and chancellors,
the dignitaries of the realm, the "Hautes Charges" of the Court,--all
came in crowds to present their respects to the Grfin, for by this
brief designation was she known from one end of Europe to the other.
Madame de Heidendorf held a leve, and none would absent themselves from
so interesting an occasion.
It was the eve of a wonderful moment in Europe--it was the little lull
that preceded the most terrific storm that ever overturned thrones and
scattered dynasties--as these illustrious personages were met together,
to interchange compliments, to lisp soft phrases of flattery, and
discuss the high claims of some aspirant for a ribbon or a cross, a "Red
Eagle," or a "Black" one. A few, more far-sighted than the rest, saw the
cloud, not bigger than a man's hand, in the distance. A few could hear
the low rumblings that denoted the brooding hurricane; but even they
thought "the thing would last their time." And thus, with many a
pleasant jest, they chatted over the events of the hour, praised the
wisdom of kings, and laughed to scorn those vulgar teachers whose
democratic theories were just beginning to be whispered about. Some
were young, buoyant, and hopeful, ready to shed the last drop for
the principles they professed; others were old gray-headed men, tried
servants of Monarchy for half a century. But all were like-minded, and
self-gratulation and compliment was the order of the day. Leaving them
thus to such pleasant converse, where the clank of jewelled swords or
the tap of a diamond snuff-box formed the meet accompaniments of the
themes, we turn once more to her in whose fate we are more deeply
interested.
Twice had she rung the bell to ask if the messenger had not returned.
At last he came; but there was "no answer to her note." Her impatience
became extreme. She ordered the servant who carried the note to appear
before her; questioned him closely as to whether he had taken it, and
the reply he had received. A soldier had said, "Gut!" and shut the door.
Poor Kate! It was her first lesson in "soldier laconics," and to say
truly, she did not take it well. The "Princesse de Midchekoff" might
have been treated with more deference. She was passing a mirror as the
thought struck her, and her mien and air gave support to the belief; nor
could she restrain the sense of admiration, half tinged with shame, her
own beauty evoked.
"There is a soldier here, Madame," said a servant, "who has a letter he
will not deliver except into your own hands."
"Admit him--at once," said she, impatiently; and as she spoke the
soldier stepped forward, and drawing himself up, carried his hand to the
salute, while, presenting a letter, he said, "From the Field-Marshal von
Auersberg."
Kate scarcely looked at the bearer, but hastily tore open the
square-shaped epistle.
"You need not wait," said she to the servant; and then turning to the
letter, read,----
"'Madame la Princesse and beloved Niece,--It was with--to me
of late years----a rare satisfaction that I read the not the
less affectionate that they were polite lines you vouchsafed
to inscribe to me, an old and useless but not forgotten
servant of an Imperial master. Immediately on perusing the
aforesaid so-called note, I despatched my adjutant to the
head-quarters of the Franz Carl, to obtain----no service
rules to the contrary forbidding, nor any default's punition
in any wise preventing----a day's furlough for the Cadet von
Dalton--"
"What regiment is yours?" said Kate, hastily, to the soldier.
"Franz Carl Infanterie, Highness," said the youth, respectfully, using
the title he had heard assumed by the servant.
"Do you know many of your comrades,----among the cadets, I mean?"
"There are but seven in the battalion, Highness, and I know them all."
"Is Von Dalton an acquaintance of yours?"
"I am Von Dalton, Highness," said the youth, while a flush of surprise
and pleasure lighted up his handsome features.
"Frank! Frank!" cried she, springing towards him with open arms; and ere
he could recognize her, clasping him round the neck.
"Is this real? Is this a dream? Are you my own sister Kate?" cried the
boy, almost choked with emotion. "And how are you here? and how thus?"
and he touched the robe of costly velvet as he spoke.
"You shall know all, dear, dear Frank. You shall hear everything when
the joy of this meeting will let me speak."
[Illustration: 099]
"They call you Highness; and how handsome you've grown!"
"Have I, Frank?" said she, pressing him down to a seat beside her,
while, with hands interclasped, they sat gazing on each other.
"I am only beginning to remember you," said he, slowly. "You never used
to wear your hair in long ringlets thus. Even your figure is changed;
you are taller, Kate."
"It is the mere difference of dress, Frank," said she, blushing with
conscious pride.
"No, no; you are quite changed. Even as I sit here beside you, I feel I
know not what of shame at my daring to be so near----"
"So great a lady, you would say, dear Frank," said she, laughing. "Poor
boy, if you knew--" She stopped, and then, throwing her arms around his
neck, went on rapidly: "But, my own dear brother, tell me of yourself:
are you happy; do you like the service; are they kind to you; is Uncle
Stephen as we hoped he should be?"
"My story is soon told, Kate," said he; "I am where I was the day I
entered the army. I should have been made a corporal--"
"A corporal!" cried Kate, laughing.
"A good thing it is, too," said the youth. "No guards to mount, no
fatigue duty, neither night patrol nor watch, and four kreutzers extra
pay."
"Poor dear boy!" cried she, kissing his forehead, while she gazed on him
with a compassionate affection that spoke a whole world of emotion.
"But tell me of yourself, Kate. Why do they call you the Princess?"
"Because I am married, Frank,----that is, I am betrothed, and will soon
be married."
"And when did this occur? Tell me everything," cried he, impatiently.
"You shall know all, dearest Frank. Yoo have heard how Lady Hester
Onslow carried me away with her to Italy. Nelly has told you how we
were living in Florence,--in what splendor and festivity; our palace
frequented by all the great and distinguished of every country,--French
and German, and Spanish and Russian."
"I hate the Russians; but go on," said the boy, hastily.
"But why hate the Russians, Frank?" asked she, reddening as she spoke.
"They are false-hearted and treacherous. See how they have driven the
Circassians into a war, to massacre them; look how they are goading on
the Poles to insurrection. Ay, they say that they have emissaries at
this moment in Hungary on the same errand. I detest them."
"This may be their state policy, Frank; but individually----"
"They are no better; Walstein knows them well."
"And who is Walstein, Frank?"
"The finest fellow in the service; the one I would have wished you
married to, Kate, above all the world. Think of a colonel of hussars at
eight-and-twenty, so handsome, so brave, and such a rider. You shall see
him, Kate!"
"But it's too late, Frank," said she, laughing; "You forget it's too
late!"
"Ah! so it is," sighed the boy, seriously. "I often feared this,"
muttered he, after a pause. "Nelly's letters told me as much, and I said
to myself, 'It will be too late.'"
"Then Nelly has told you all, perhaps?" said she.
"Not everything, nor, indeed, anything at all very distinctly. I could
only make out what seemed to be her own impressions, for they appeared
mere surmises."
"And of what sort were they?" asked Kate, curiously.
"Just what you would suspect from her. Everlasting fears about
temptations and trials, and so forth, continually praying that your
heart might resist all the flatteries about you. The old story about
humility. I thought to myself, 'If the lesson be not more needful to
Kate than to me, she runs no great risk, after all!' for I was also
warned about the seductions of the world! a poor cadet, with a few
kreutzers a day, told not to be a Sybarite! Returning wet through from
a five hours' patrol, to burnish accoutrements in a cold, damp barrack,
and then exhorted against the contamination of low society, when all
around me were cursing the hardships they lived in, and execrating the
slavery of the service!"
"Our dearest Nelly knows so little of the world," said Kate, as she
threw a passing glance at herself in the mirror, and arranged the fall
of a deep fringe of gold lace which was fastened in her hair.
"She knows nothing of it," said the boy, adjusting his sword-knot. "She
thought our hussars wore white dolmans, and carried straight swords like
the cuirassiers."
"And the dear, simple creature asked me, in one of her letters, if I
ever wore wild-flowers in my hair now, as I used to do long ago," said
Kate, stealing another glance at the glass. "Flowers are pretty things
in the head when rubies make the pinks, and the dewdrops are all
diamonds."
Frank looked at her as she said this, and for the first time saw the
proud elation her features assumed when excited by a theme of vanity.
"You are greatly changed, dearest Kate," said he, thoughtfully.
"Is it for the worse, Frank?" said she, half coquettishly.
"Oh! as to beauty, you are a thousand times handsomer," cried the boy,
with enthusiasm. "I know not how, but every expression seems heightened,
every feature more elevated; your air and gesture, your very voice, that
once I thought was music itself, is far sweeter and softer."
"What a flatterer!" said she, patting his cheek.
"But then, Kate," said he, more gravely, "have these fascinations cost
nothing? Is your heart as simple? Are your affections as pure? Ah! you
sigh--and what a heavy sigh, too! Poor, poor Kate!"
And she laid her head upon his shoulder, while the heaving swell of her
bosom told what sorrow the moment was costing her.
"Nelly, then, told you of my betrothal?" whispered she, in a weak, faint
voice.
"No; I knew nothing of that. She told me all about the life you were
leading; the great people with whom you were intimate; and bit by bit,
a hint, some little allusion, would creep out as to the state of your
heart. Perhaps she never meant it, or did not know it; but I remarked,
in reading her letters over and over,--they were the solace of many a
weary hour,--that one name recurred so often in connection with yours,
you must have frequently referred to him yourself, for in each extract
from your letters I saw the name."
"This was strange. It must have been through inadvertence," said she,
musingly. "I thought I had scarcely spoken of him."
"See how your hand told truth, even against your consciousness," said
he, smiling.
Kate made no reply, but sat deep in thought.
"And is he here? When shall I see him?" asked Frank, impatiently.
"No, Frank. He is in Italy; he was detained there by business of
importance. Besides, it is not etiquette that we should travel together.
When the Emperor's permission has been obtained--"
"What Emperor?" asked Frank, in astonishment.
"Our Emperor----the Czar."
"What have you, an English girl born, to do with the Czar?"
"The Prince, my future husband, is his subject."
"Why, there is no end to this mystification," cried the boy,
impatiently. "How can an English soldier be a Russian Prince?"
"I don't understand you, Frank. Prince Midchekoff is a Russian by
birth."
"So that you are married to a Russian," said he, in a voice of deep
emotion, "and all this time I have been fancying my brother-in-law an
Englishman. I thought it was this same George----George Onslow."
A heavy, dull sound startled him as he said this. It was Kate, who had
fallen back, fainting, on the sofa. It was long before, with all Frank's
efforts at restoration, she came to herself; and even when consciousness
returned, tears flowed from her eyes and coursed down her cheeks
copiously, as she lay speechless and motionless.
"My own poor Kate, my poor, dear sister!" were all that Frank could say,
as he held her cold, clammy hand within his own; and, with an almost
breaking heart, gazed on her pale features. It was so like death! "And
might not death be better?" thought he, as he travelled over in his mind
the story, of whose secret he was now possessed. How differently did he
judge all Nelly's counsels now! In what a changed spirit did he think
of that wisdom which, but a few minutes back, he had sneered at! "And
so it is," muttered he. "If we who are born to humble fortunes would
cherish ambition, we must pay for it with our hearts' blood. Nelly was
right; she often said so. Over and over again did she tell me, 'goodness
is the only safe road to greatness.' Oh that one so beautiful as this
should have missed the path!" And, sobbing violently, he kissed her
hand, and watered it with his tears.
"Frank, you are with me,----you 'll not leave me," said she, faintly, as
she opened her eyes and stared in bewilderment around her. "I remember
everything now--everything," said she, with an emphasis on the last
word. "This is Vienna: I recollect all. Ring that bell, Frank: let Nina
come to me, but don't go away; be sure not to go."
Nina soon made her appearance, and with a look of half surprise, half
admiration at the handsome soldier, assisted Kate to arise.
"I'll be back presently, Frank," said she, with a faint smile, and left
the room. And the youth, overcome by emotion, sat down and buried his
face in his hands.
CHAPTER VIII. PRIESTLY COUNSELS
Frank was so full of his own reflections that he almost forgot his
sister's absence; nor did he notice how the time went oyer, when he
heard the sound of voices and the noise of a door closing; and, on
looking up, perceived a handsome man, something short of middle-aged,
who, dressed in the deep black of a priest, wore a species of blue
silk collar, the mark of a religious order. His features were perfectly
regular, and their expression the most bland and courteous it was
possible to imagine. There was a serene dignity, too, in his gait, as
he came forward, that showed how thoroughly at home he felt on the soft
carpet, and in the perfumed atmosphere of a drawing-room.
Bowing twice to Frank, he saluted him with a smile, so gentle and
so winning, that the boy almost felt as if they had been already
acquainted.
"I have come," said the priest, "to pay my respects to the Princesse
de Midchekoff, and, if my eyesight is not playing me false, I have the
honor to recognize her brother."
Frank blushed with pleasure as he bowed an assent.
"May I anticipate the kindness--which your sister would not refuse me,"
continued he, "and introduce myself. You may, perhaps, have heard of the
Abb D'Esmonde?"
"Repeatedly," cried Frank, taking the proffered hand in his own. "Nelly
spoke of you in almost every letter. You were always so kind to Kate in
Italy."
"How amply am I recompensed, were not the pleasure of knowing
Miss Dalton a sufficient reward in itself. It is rare to find that
combination of excellence which can command all the homage of fashion,
and yet win the approbation of a poor priest."
There was a humility, deep enough to be almost painful, in the tone in
which these words were uttered; but Frank had little time to dwell on
them, for already the Abb had taken a seat on the sofa beside him, and
was deep in the discussion of all Kate's attractions and merits.
There was a sincerity, an ardor of admiration, chastened only by the
temper of his sacred character, that delighted the boy. If allusion were
made to her beauty, it was only to heighten the praise he bestowed on
her for other gifts, and display the regulated action of a mind proof
against every access of vanity. Her correct judgment, her intuitive
refinement, the extreme delicacy of her sensibilities,--these were
the themes he dwelt upon, and Frank felt that they must be rare gifts
indeed, when the very description of them could be so pleasurable.
From what the Abb said, so far from her marriage with the great Russian
being a piece of fortune, she had but to choose her position amid the
first houses of Europe.
"It was true," he added, "that the 'Midchekoff's' wealth was like
royalty, and as he united to immense fortune great claims of personal
merit, the alliance had everything to recommend it."
"And this is so?" cried Frank, eagerly. "The Prince is a fine fellow?"
"Generous and munificent to an extent almost fabulous," said D'Esmonde,
who seemed rather to resume his own train of thought than reply to
Frank's question. "The splendor of his life has already canonized a
proverb."
"But his temper--his manner--his disposition?"
"Like all his countrymen, he is reserved, almost cold to strangers; his
intimates, however, talk of him as frankness and candor itself. Even on
political themes, where Russians are usually most guarded, he gives his
opinions freely and manfully, and, strange enough too, with a liberality
which, though common enough in our country, must be very rare indeed in
his."
"That is strange!" said Frank, thoughtfully.
"Yes," said D' Esmonde, dropping into the tone of one who insensibly
poured out his inmost thoughts in soliloquizing,----"Yes, he feels,
what we all do, that this state of things cannot last,--disparity of
condition may become too palpable and too striking. The contrast between
affluence and misery may display itself too offensively! Men may one
day or other refuse to sign a renewal of the bond of servitude, and
then--and then----"
"A civil war, I suppose," cried Frank, quietly; "but the troops will
always give them a lesson."
"Do you think so, my dear young friend?" said the Abb, affectionately;
"do you not rather think that soldiers will begin to learn that they are
citizens, and that, when forging fetters for others, the metal can be
fashioned into chains for themselves?"
"But they have an oath," said the boy; "they 've sworn to their
allegiance."
"Very true, so they have; but what is the oath?--the one half of the
compact which cannot be supposed binding when the other half be broken.
Let the social policy of a government fail in its great object,----the
happiness of a people; let a whole nation gradually cease to enjoy the
advantages for the sake of which they assumed the responsibilities
and ties of family; let them day-by-day fall lower in the scale of
civilization and comfort, and after surrendering this privilege to-day,
and that to-morrow, at last take their stand on the very verge of the
precipice, with nothing but abject slavery beneath,--what would you say
of the order to charge them with the bayonet, even though the formality
of a recruiting oath should seem to warrant the obedience?"
"I 'd do it; if I was ordered," said Frank, sternly.
"I don't think you would," said D'Esmonde, smiling. "I read your nature
differently. I can trace, even in the flashing of your eye this instant,
the ambition of a bold and energetic spirit, and that when the moment
came you would embrace the losing cause, with all its perils, rather
than stand by tyranny, in all its strength. Besides, remember, this is
not the compact under which you entered the service, although it might,
under certain peculiar circumstances, appeal to your sense of duty. An
army is not--at least it ought not to be--a 'gendarmerie.' Go forth
to battle against the enemies of your country, carry the flag of your
Vaterland into the plains of France, plant the double eagle once more
in the Place da Carrousel,--even aggressive war has its glorious
compensations in deeds of chivalry and heroism----But here is the
Princesse," said the Abb, rising, and advancing courteously towards
her.
"The Abb D'Esmonde!" cried Kate, with an expression of delight, as she
held ont her hand, which the priest pressed to his lips with all the
gallantry of a courtier. "How pleasant to see the face of a friend in
this strange land!" said she. "Abb, this is my brother Frank, of whom
you have heard me talk so often."
"We are acquaintances already," said D'Esmonde, passing his arm within
the soldier's; "and albeit our coats are not of the same color, I think
many of our principles are."
A few moments saw him seated between the brother and sister on the sofa,
recounting the circumstances of his journey, and detailing, for Kate's
amusement, the latest news of Florence.
"Lady Hester is much better in health and spirits, too," said the Abb;
"the disastrous circumstances of fortune would seem to have taken a
better turn; at least, it is probable that Sir Stafford's losses will
be comparatively slight. I believe her satisfaction on this head arises
entirely from feeling that no imputation of altered position can now be
alleged as the reason for her change of religion."
"And has she done this?" asked Kate, with a degree of anxiety; for she
well knew on what feeble grounds Lady Hester's convictions were usually
built..
"Not publicly; she waits for her arrival at Rome, to make her confession
at the shrine of St. John of Lateran. Her doubts, however, have all been
solved,--her reconciliation is perfect."
"Is she happy? Has she found peace of mind at last?" asked Kate,
timidly.
"On this point I can speak with confidence," said D'Esmonde, warmly;
and at once entered into a description of the pleasurable impulse a new
train of thoughts and impressions had given to the exhausted energies
of a "fine lady's" life. It was so far true, indeed, that for some
days back she had never known a moment of ennui. Surrounded by sacred
emblems and a hundred devices of religious association, she appeared to
herself as if acting a little poem of life, wherein a mass of amiable
qualities, of which she knew nothing before, were all developing
themselves before her. And what between meritorious charities, saintly
intercessions, visits to shrines, and decorations of altars, she had
not an instant unoccupied; it was one unceasing round of employment; and
with prayers, bouquets, lamps, confessions, candles, and penances, the
day was even too short for its duties.
The little villa of La Rocca was now a holy edifice. The drawing-room
had become an oratory; a hollow-cheeked "Seminariste," from Como, had
taken the place of the Maestro di Casa. The pages wore a robe like
acolytes, and even Albert Jekyl began to fear that a costume was in
preparation for himself, from certain measurements that he had observed
taken with regard to his figure.
"My time is up," said Frank, hastily, as he arose to go away.
"You are not about to leave me, Frank?" said Kate.
"Yes, I must; my leave was only till four o'clock, as the
Field-Marshal's note might have shown you; but I believe you threw it
into the fire before you finished it."
"Did I, really? I remember nothing of that. But, stay, and I will write
to him. I 'll say that I have detained you."
"But the service, Kate dearest! My sergeant--my over-lieutenant--my
captain--what will they say? I may have to pass three days in irons for
the disobedience."
"Modern chivalry has a dash of the treadmill through it," said
D'Esmonde, sarcastically; and the boy's cheek flushed as he heard it.
The priest, however, had already turned away, and, walking into the
recess of a window, left the brother and sister free to talk unmolested.
"I scarcely like him, Kate," whispered Frank.
"You scarcely know him yet," she said, with a smile. "But when can you
come again to me,--to-morrow^ early?"
"I fear not We have a parade and a field-inspection, and then 'rapport'
at noon."
"Leave it to me, then, dear Frank," said she, kissing him; "I must try
if I cannot succeed with the 'Field' better than you have done."
"There's the recall-bugle," cried the boy, in terror; and, snatching up
his cap, he bounded from the room at once.
"A severe service,--at least, one of rigid discipline," said D'Esmonde,
with a compassionating expression of voice. "It is hard to say whether
it works for good or evil, repressing the development of every generous
impulse, as certainly as it restrains the impetuous passions of youth."
"True," said Kate, pointedly; "there would seem something of priestcraft
in their rgime. The individual is nothing, the service everything."
"Your simile lacks the great element,--force of resemblance, Madame,"
said D'Esmonde, with a half smile. "The soldier has not, like the
priest, a grand sustaining hope, a glorious object before him. He
knows little or nothing of the cause in which his sword is drawn; his
sympathies may even be against his duty. The very boy who has just left
us,--noble-hearted fellow that he is,--what strange wild notions of
liberty has he imbibed! how opposite are all his speculations to the
stern calls of the duty he has sworn to discharge!"
"And does he dare--"
"Nay, Madame, there was no indiscretion on his part; my humble walk in
life has taught me that if I am excluded from all participation in the
emotions which sway my fellow-men, I may at least study them as they
arise, watch them in their infancy, and trace them to their fruit of
good or evil. Do not fancy, dear lady, that it is behind the grating of
the confessional only that we read men's secrets. As the physician gains
his knowledge of anatomy from the lifeless body, so do we learn the
complex structure of the human heart in the deathlike stillness of the
cell, with the penitent before us. But yet all the knowledge thus gained
is but a step to something further. It is while reading the tangled
story of the heart,--its struggles, its efforts, the striving after good
here, the inevitable fall back to evil there, the poor, weak attempt at
virtue, the vigorous energy of vice,--it is hearing this sad tale from
day to day, learning, in what are called the purest natures, how deep
the well of corruption lies, and that not one generous thought, one
noble aspiration, or one holy desire rises unalloyed by some base
admixture of worldly motive. It is thus armed we go forth into the
world, to fight against the wiles and seductions of life. How can we be
deceived by the blandishments that seduce others? What avail to us those
pretentious displays of self-devotion, those sacrifices of wealth, those
proud acts of munificence which astonish the world, but of whose secret
springs we are conversant? What wonder, then, if I have read the artless
nature of a boy like that, or see in him the springs of an ambition he
knows not of himself? Nay, it would be no rash boast to say that I have
deciphered more complicated inscriptions than those upon his heart I
have traced some upon his sister's!" The last three words he uttered
with a slow and deep enunciation, leaving a pause between each, and
bending on her a look of intense meaning.
Kate's cheek became scarlet, then pale, and a second time she flushed,
till neck and shoulders grew crimson together.
"You have no confidences to make me, my dear, dear child," said
D'Esmonde, as, taking her hand, he pressed her down on a sofa
beside him. "Your faltering lips have nothing to articulate,----no
self-repinings, no sorrows to utter; for I know them all!" He paused for
a few seconds, and then resumed: "Nor have you to fear me as a stern or
a merciless judge. Where there is a sacrifice, there is a blessing!"
Kate held down her head, but her bosom heaved, and her frame trembled
with emotion.
"Your motives," resumed he, "would dignify even a rasher course. I know
the price at which you have bartered happiness,--not your own only, but
another's with it!"
She sobbed violently, and pressed her hands over her face.
"Poor, poor fellow!" cried he, as if borne away by an impulse of candor
that would brook no concealment, "how I grieved to see him, separated,
as we were, by the wide and yawning gulf between us, giving himself
up to the very recklessness of despair, now cursing the heartless
dissipation in which his life was lost, now accusing himself of
golden opportunities neglected, bright moments squandered, petty
misunderstandings exaggerated into dislikes, the passing coldness of the
moment exalted into a studied disdain! We were almost strangers to each
other before,--nay, I half fancied that he kept aloof from me.
Probably,"--here D'Esmonde smiled with a bland dignity,--"probably he
called me a 'Jesuit,'--that name so full of terror to good Protestant
ears; but, on his sick-bed, as he lay suffering and in solitude, his
faculties threw off the deceptive influences of prejudice; he read me
then more justly; he saw that I was his friend. Hours upon hours have we
passed talking of you; the theme seemed to give a spring to an existence
from which, till then, all zest of life had been withdrawn. I never
before saw as much of passion, with a temper so just and so forgiving.
He needed no aid of mine to read your motives truly. 'It is not for
herself that she has done this,' were words that he never ceased to
utter. He knew well the claims that family would make on you, the
heartrending appeals from those you could not but listen to! 'Oh! if I
could but think that she will not forget me; that some memory of me will
still linger in her mind!'--this was his burning prayer, syllabled by
lips parched by the heat of fever; and when I told him to write to
you--"
"To write to me!" cried she, catching his arm, while her cheeks trembled
with intense agony; "You did not give such counsel?"
"Not alone that," said D'Esmonde, calmly, "but promised that I would
myself deliver the letter into your hands. Is martyrdom less glorious
that a cry of agony escapes the victim, or that his limbs writhe as the
flame wraps round them? Is self-sacrifice to be denied the sorrowful
satisfaction to tell its woes? I bade him write because it would be good
for him and for you alike."
She stared eagerly, as if to ask his meaning.
"Good for both," repeated he, slowly. "Love will be, to him, a
guide-star through life, leading him by paths of high and honorable
ambition; to you it will be the consolation of hours that even splendor
will not enliven. Believe me,"----here he raised his voice to a tone
of command and authority,--"believe me that negation is the lot of
all. Happiest they who only suffer in their affections! And what is the
purest of all love? Is it not that the devotee feels for his protecting
saint,--that sense of ever-present care, that consciousness of a
watching, unceasing affection, that neither slumbers nor wearies,
following us in our joy, beside us in our afflictions? Some humble
effigy, some frail representation, is enough to embody this conception;
but its essence lies in the heart of hearts! Such a love as this--pure,
truthful, and enduring--may elevate the humblest life into heroism, and
throw a sun-gleam over the dreariest path of destiny. The holy bond that
unites the grovelling nature below with glory above, has its humble type
on earth in those who, separated by fate, are together in affection. I
bade him write to you a few lines; he was too weak for more; indeed, his
emotion almost made the last impossible. I pressed him, however, to do
it, and pledged myself to place them in your hands; my journey hither
had no other object." As he spoke, he took forth a small sealed packet,
and gave it to Kate, whose hands trembled as she took it.
"I shall spend some days in Vienna," said he, rising to take leave;
"pray let me have a part of each of them with you. I have much to say
to you, and of other matters than those we have now spoken." And kissing
her hand with a respectful devotion, the Abb withdrew, without ever
once raising his eyes towards her.
Sick with sorrow and humiliation,--for such she acutely felt,----Kate
Dalton rose and retired to her room. "Tell Madame de Heidendorf, Nina,"
said she, "that I feel tired to-day, and beg she will excuse my not
appearing at dinner."
Nina courtesied her obedience, but it was easy to see that the
explanation by no means satisfied her, and that she was determined to
know something more of the origin of her young mistress's indisposition.
"Madame knows that the Archduke is to dine here."
"I know it," said Kate, peevishly, and as if desirous of being left in
quiet.
Nina again courtesied, but in the brilliant flashing of her dark eyes it
was plain to mark the consciousness that some secret was withheld from
her. The soubrette class are instinctive readers of motives; "their
only books are 'ladies' looks," but they con them to perfection. It
was, then, with a studied pertinacity that Nina proceeded to arrange
drawers and fold dresses, and fifty other similar duties, the discharge
of which she saw was torturing her mistress.
"I should wish to be alone, Nina, and undisturbed," said Kate, at last,
her patience being entirely exhausted.
Nina made her very deepest reverence, and withdrew.
Kate waited for a few seconds, till all sound of her retiring steps had
died away, then arose, and locked the door.
She was alone; the packet which the Abb had delivered lay on the table
before her; she bent down over it, and wept. The utter misery of sorrow
is only felt where self-reproach mingles with our regrets. All the pangs
of other misfortunes are light in comparison with this. The irrevocable
past was her own work; she knew it, and cried till her very heart seemed
bursting.
CHAPTER IX.  SECRETS OF HEAD AND HEART
I must ask of my reader to leave this chamber, where, overwhelmed by
her sorrows, poor Kate poured out her grief in tears, and follow me to a
small but brilliantly lighted apartment, in which a little party of four
persons was seated, discussing their wine, and enjoying the luxury of
their cigars. Be not surprised when we say that one of the number was a
lady. Madame de Heidendorf, however, puffed her weed with all the zest
of a smoker; the others were the Archduke Ernest, a plain, easy-tempered
looking man, in the gray undress of an Austrian General, the Foreign
Minister, Count Nrinberg, and our old acquaintance, the Abb D'Esmonde.
The table, besides the usual ornaments of a handsome dessert, was
covered with letters, journals, and pamphlets, with here and there a
colored print in caricature of some well-known political personage.
Nothing could be more easy and unconstrained than the air and bearing
of the guests. The Archduke sat with his uniform coat unbuttoned, and
resting one leg upon a chair before him. The Minister tossed over
the books, and brushed off the ashes of his cigar against the richly
damasked table-cloth; while even the Abb seemed to have relaxed the
smooth urbanity of his face into a look of easy enjoyment Up to this
moment the conversation had been general, the principal topics being
the incidents of the world of fashion, the flaws and frivolities, the
mishaps and misadventures of those whose names were familiar to his
Imperial Highness, and in whose vicissitudes he took the most lively
interest. These, and a stray anecdote of the turf in England, were the
only subjects he cared for, hating politics and State affairs with a
most cordial detestation. His presence, however, was a compliment that
the Court always paid "the Countess," and he submitted to his torn of
duty manfully.
Deeply involved in the clouds of his cigar-smoke, and even more
enveloped in the misty regions of his own reveries, he sipped his
wine in silence, and heard nothing of the conversation about him. The
Minister was then perfectly free to discuss the themes most interesting
to him, and learn whatever he could of the state of public opinion in
Italy.
"You are quite right, Abb," said he, with a sage shake of the head.
"Small concessions, petty glimpses of liberty, only give a zest for
more enlarged privileges. There is nothing like a good flood of popular
anarchy for creating a wholesome disgust to freedom. There must be
excesses!"
"Precisely so, sir," said the Abb. "There can be no question of an
antidote if there has been no poisoning."
"Ay; but may not this system be pushed too far? Is not his Holiness
already doing so?"
"Some are disposed to think so, but I am not of the number," said
D'Esmonde. "It is necessary that he should himself be convinced that the
system is a bad one; and there is no mode of conviction so palpable as
by a personal experience. Now, this he will soon have. As yet, he does
not see that every step in political freedom is an advance towards the
fatal heresy that never ceases its persecutions of the Church. Not that
our Revolutionists care for Protestantism or the Bible either; but, by
making common cause with those who do, see what a large party in England
becomes interested for their success. The right of judgment conceded in
religious matters, how can you withhold it in political ones? The men
who brave the Church will not tremble before a cabinet. Now the Pope
sees nothing of this; he even mistakes the flatteries offered to himself
for testimonies of attachment to the Faith, and all those kneeling
hypocrites who implore his blessing he fancies are faithful children of
Rome. He must be awakened from this delusion; but yet none save himself
can dispel it He is obstinate and honest."
"If the penalty were to be his own alone, it were not so much matter,"
said the Minister; "but it will cost a revolution."
"Of course it will; but there is time enough to prepare for it."
"The state of the Milanais is far from satisfactory," said the Minister,
gravely.
"I know that; but a revolt of a prison always excuses double irons,"
said D'Esmonde, sarcastically.
"Tell him of Sardinia, Abb," said Madame de Heidendorf.
"Your real danger is from that quarter," said D'Esmonde. "There is
a growing spirit of independence there,--a serious desire for free
institutions, wide apart from the wild democracy of the rest of Italy.
This is a spirit you cannot crush; but you can do better,--you can
corrupt it Genoa is a hotbed of Socialist doctrine; the wildest
fanaticism of the 'Reds' is there triumphant, and our priests are
manfully aiding the spread of such opinions. They have received orders
to further these notions; and it is thus, and by the excesses consequent
on this, you will succeed in trampling down that moderated liberty which
is the curse that England is destined to disseminate amongst us. It is
easy enough to make an excited people commit an act of indiscretion, and
then, with public opinion on your side--"
"How I detest that phrase!" said Madame de Heidendorf; "it is the lowest
cant of the day."
"The thing it represents is not to be despised, Madame," said the Abb.
"These are English notions," said she, sneeringly.
"They will be Russian ones yet, depend upon it, Madame."
"I 'd rather know what a few men of vast fortune, like Midchekoff, for
instance, think, than have the suffrages of half the greasy mobs of
Europe."
"By the way," said the Minister, "what is he doing? Is it true that he
is coquetting with Liberals and Fourierists, and all that?"
"For the moment he is," said Madame de Heidendorf; "and two or three of
the popularity-seeking sovereigns have sent him their decorations, and
if he does not behave better he will be ordered home."
"He is of great use in Italy," said the Minister.
"True; but he must not abuse his position."
"He is just vain enough to lend himself to a movement," said D'Esmonde;
"but he shall be watched."
These last words were very significantly uttered.
"You know the Princess, Abb?" asked the Minister, with a smile; and
another smile, as full of meaning, replied to the question.
"She's pretty, ain't she?" asked the Archduke.
"Beautiful is the word, sir; but if your Imperial Highness would like
to pass judgment personally, I 'll beg of her to come down to the
drawing-room."
"Of all things, most kind of you to make the offer," said he, rising
and arranging his coat and sword-knot into some semblance of propriety,
while Madame de Heidendorf rang the bell, and despatched a messenger to
Kate with the request.
Nina was overjoyed at the commission intrusted to her. Since Kate's
peremptory order, she had not ventured to intrude herself upon her;
but now, armed with a message, she never hesitated about invading the
precincts of that silent chamber, at whose door she often stood in doubt
and speculation.
She tapped gently at the door; there was no answer. A second summons was
alike unreplied to, and Nina bent down her head to listen. There were
long-drawn breathings, like sleep; but a heavy sigh told that the
moments were those of waking sorrow. Cautiously turning the handle
of the door, without noise, she opened it and passed in. The room was
shrouded in a dim half-light, and it was not till after the lapse of
some seconds that Nina could distinguish the form of her young mistress,
as, with her head buried in her hands, she sat before a table on which
lay an open letter.
So absorbed was Kate in grief that she heard nothing, and Nina
approached her, slowly, till at last she stood directly behind her,
fixedly regarding the heaving figure, the dishevelled hair, and the
trembling hands that seemed to clutch with eagerness some object within
their grasp. Kate suddenly started, and pushing back her hair from
her eyes, seemed as if trying to collect her wandering thoughts. Then,
unclasping a case, she placed a miniature before her, and contemplated
it attentively. Nina bent over her till she almost touched her in her
eagerness. Had any one been there to have seen her features at the
moment, they would have perceived the traits of intense and varied
passion, surprise, rage, and jealousy, all struggling for the mastery.
Her dark skin grew almost livid, and her black eyes glowed with anger;
while, with a force like convulsion, she pressed her hands to her heart,
as if to calm its beatings. A sea of stormy passions was warring within
her, and in her changeful expression might be seen the conflict of her
resolves. At last, she appeared to have decided; for with noiseless
steps she gradually retreated toward the door, her eyes all the while
steadily fixed on her mistress.
It seemed to require no slight effort to repress the torrent of rage
within her; for even at the door she stood irresolute for a moment, and
then, softly opening it, withdrew. Once outside, her pent-up passions
found vent, and she sobbed violently. Her mood was, however, more of
anger than of sorrow, and there was an air of almost insolent pride in
the way she now knocked, and then, without waiting for reply, entered
the room.
"Madame de Heidendorf requests that the Princess will appear in the
drawing-room," said she, abruptly, and confronting Kate's look of
confusion with a steadfast stare.
"Say that I am indisposed, Nina,----that I feel tired and unwell," said
Kate, timidly.
"There is an Archduke, Madame."
"What care I for an Archduke, Nina?" said Kate, trying to smile away the
awkwardness of her own disturbed manner.
"I have always believed that great folk liked each other," said Nina,
sarcastically.
"Then I must lack one element of that condition, Nina," said Kate,
good-humoredly; "but pray make my excuses,--say anything you like so
that I may be left in quiet."
"How delightful Madame's reveries must be, when she attaches such value
to them!"
"Can you doubt it, Nina?" replied Kate, with a forced gayety. "A
betrothed bride ought to be happy; you are always telling me so. I hear
of nothing from morn till night but of rich caskets of gems and jewels;
you seem to think that diamonds would throw a lustre over any gloom."
[Illustration: 120]
"And would they not?" cried Nina, passionately "Has not the brow nobler
and higher thoughts when encircled by a coronet like this? Does not
the heart beat with greater transport beneath gems like these?" And she
opened case after case of sparkling jewels as she spoke, and spread them
before Kate, on the table.
"And yet I have learned to look on them calmly," said Kate, with an
expression of proud indifference.
"Does not that dazzle you?" said Nina, holding up a cross of rose
diamonds.
"No!" said Kate, shaking her head.
"Nor that?" cried Nina, displaying a gorgeous necklace.
"Nor even that, Nina."
"Is Madame's heart so steeled against womanly vanities," said Nina,
quickly, while she threw masses of costly articles before her, "that not
one throb, not one flush of pleasure, is called up at sight of these?"
"You see, Nina, that I can look on them calmly."
"Then this, perchance, may move you!" cried Nina; and with a bound
she sprang to the table at which Kate was seated, and, dashing the
handkerchief away, seized the miniature, and held it up.
Kate uttered a shrill cry and fell back fainting. Nina gazed at her for
a second or so with a look of haughty disdain, and sprinkling the pale
features with a few drops of water, she turned away. With calm composure
she replaced each precious gem within its case, laid the miniature once
more beneath the handkerchief, and then left the room.
"Your Princess will not honor us, it seems, with her company," said the
Archduke, half in pique, as the messenger returned with Kate's excuses;
"and yet I looked for her coming to get rid of all the farrago of
politics that you wise folk will insist upon talking."
The Countess and the Minister exchanged most significant glances at
this speech, while D'Esmonde politely assented to the remark, by adding
something about the relaxation necessary to overwrought minds, and the
need that princes should enjoy some repose as well as those of lower
degree. "I can, however, assure your Imperial Highness," said he, "that
this is no caprice of the young Princess. She is really far from well,
and was even unable to receive her own relative this afternoon, the
Count von Dalton."
"What, is old Auersberg a relative of hers?"
"An uncle, or a grand-uncle,--I forget which, sir."
"Then that wild youth in the Franz Carl must be a connection too?"
"The cadet is her brother, sir."
"Indeed! What an extravagant fellow it is! They say that, counting on
being Auersberg's heir, he spends money in every possible fashion; and
as the tradespeople take the succession on trust, his debts are already
considerable. It was only yesterday his colonel spoke to me of sending
him to the Banat, or some such place. His family must be rich, I
suppose?"
"I believe quite the reverse, sir. Poor to indigence. Their entire hope
is on the Count von Auersberg."
"He held a frontier command for many years, and must have saved money.
But will he like to see it in hands like these?"
"I believe--at least so the story goes," said D'Esmonde, dropping his
voice to a whisper, "that the boy's arguments have scarcely assisted his
object in that respect. They say that he told the Count that in times
like these no man's fortune was worth a year's purchase; that when
monarchs were tottering and thrones rocking, it were better to spend
one's means freely than to tempt pillage by hoarding it."
"Are these his notions?" cried the Archduke, in amazement
"Yes; the wildest doctrines of Socialism are his creed,--opinions,
I grieve to say, more widely spread than any one supposes."
"How is this, then? I see the private regimental reports of every corps,
I read the conduct-rolls of almost every company, and yet no hint of
this disaffection has reached me.
"A priest could reveal more than an adjutant, sir," said the Abb,
smiling. "These youths who fancy themselves neglected,--who think their
claims disregarded,--who, in a word, imagine that some small pretension,
on the score of family, should be the spring of their promotion, are
easily seduced into extravagant ideas about freedom and so forth."
"Austria is scarce the land for such fruit to ripen in," said the
Archduke, laughing. "Let him try France, or the United States."
"Very true, your Highness," chimed in the Abb; "but such boys ought to
be watched,--their conduct inquired strictly into."
"Or better still, Monsieur l'Abb," said the Archduke, sternly,
"dismissed the service. I see no profit in retaining amongst us the
seeds of this French malady."
"I believe your Highness takes the true view of the difficulty," said
D'Esmonde, as though reflecting over it. "And yet you will be asked to
make an officer of him in a day or two."
"An officer of this boy, and why, or by whom?"
"The Princess, his sister, will make the request; probably through Von
Auersberg."
"But when I tell the Feld--"
"Ah, your Imperial Highness could not betray a confidence!" said
D'Esmonde. "I have ventured to disclose to you what has come to my
knowledge by means only accessible to myself; I therefore rely on your
Highness not to divulge, however you may use it."
"He shall not continue to wear our cloth; that you may certainly rely
on, Monsieur l'Abb," said the Archduke, sternly.
"In any case, wait for his sister's departure, sir," said D'Esmonde,
anxiously; "a few days or hours. As soon as this silly old lady has made
up that budget of gossip and scandal she fancies to be political news,
we 'll see her leave this, and then he can be dealt with as you think
proper."
The Archduke made no reply,--not seeming either to assent to or reject
the counsel. "It would break the old Marshal's heart," said he, at last;
"that gallant old soldier would never survive it."
"A treason might, indeed, kill him," said D'Esmonde. "But your Highness
will anticipate exposure by dismissal--dismissal, peremptory and
unexplained."
Again the Archduke was silent, but his lowering brow and dark expression
told that the subject was giving him deep and serious thought. "I paid
no attention to your conversation this evening, Abb," said be, at last;
"but it struck me, from a chance word here and there, that you suspect
these same 'Liberal' notions are gaining ground."
"Heresies against the Faith, sir, have begotten their natural offspring,
heresies against the State; and Governments do not yet awaken to the
fact that they who scorn the altar will not respect the throne. The
whole force of what are called Liberal institutions has been to weaken
the influence of the clergy; and yet it is precisely on that same
influence you will have to fall back. It is beneath the solemn shadow of
the Church you'll seek your refuge yet!"
"No, no, father," said the Archduke, with a laugh; "we have another
remedy."
"The mitre is stronger than the mitraille, after all," said
D'Esmonde, boldly. "Believe me, sir, that the solemn knell that tolls
an excommunication will strike more terror through Christendom than all
your artillery."
Either the remark or the tone in which it was uttered was unpleasing
to the Prince; indeed, all the Abbe's courtesy at times gave way to an
almost impetuous boldness, which royalty never brooks, for he turned
away haughtily, and joined the others at a distant part of the room.
There was something of scorn in the proud look which D'Esmonde gave
after him, and then slipped from the chamber with noiseless step and
disappeared. Inquiring the way to the Princess's apartment, the Abb
slowly ascended the stairs, pondering deeply as he went. Nina was
passing the corridor at the moment, and, supposing that he had mistaken
the direction, politely asked if she could offer him any guidance.
Scarcely noticing the questioner, he replied,----
"I was looking for the Princesse de Midchekoff's apartments."
"It is here, sir; but she is indisposed."
"If you would say that the Abb D'Esmonde--"
He had got thus far when, lifting his eyes, his glance fell upon her
features; and then, as if spell-bound, he stood silently gazing at her.
Nina's cheek grew crimson under the stare; but her eyes met his with
unshaken firmness.
"If I were to disbelieve all probabilities," said he, slowly, "I should
say that I see an old friend before me. Are you not the daughter of
Huertos, the Toridor of Seville?"
"Fra Eustace!" said Nina, stepping back and staring steadily at him.
"No longer so, Lola; I am the Abb D'Esmonde now," said he, while a
faint flush tinged his pale features.
"And I am Nina, the 'Cameriera,'" replied she, scornfully. "See how
unequally fortune has dealt with us!"
D'Esmonde made a sign towards the door, which she at once understood and
answered,----
"Yes, in the service of the Princess."
"This is indeed a strange meeting, Lola."
"Call me Nina," said the girl, flushing, "or I shall remember old times,
and my Spanish blood will little bear such memories."
"Where can we talk together, Nina?"
"Come this way, holy father," said she, with a half-sneering smile. "I
suppose a poor girl may receive her confessor in her chamber."
D'Esmonde walked after her without speaking. While crossing a gallery,
she unlocked a door, and admitted him into a small but neatly furnished
room.
"Dear Lola," said the priest, as, taking her hand, he looked
affectionately at her,--"I must needs call you by the old name,--what
turn of fortune has brought you here?"
"It is a question well becomes you," said the girl, releasing her
hand from his grasp, and drawing herself proudly up. "You cut the bark
adrift, and you wonder that it has become a wreck!"
"How this old warmth of temper recalls the past, and how I love you for
it, as I grieve over it, Lola; but be calm, and tell me everything, just
as you used to tell me years ago."
"Oh, if I had the same pure heart as then!" cried the girl,
passionately. "Oh, if I could but shed tears, as once I did, over each
slight transgression, and not have my spirit seared and hardened, as the
world has made it!"
"We cannot carry the genial freshness of youth into the ripe years of
judgment, Lola. Gifts decay, and others succeed them."
"No more of this casuistry. You are, I see, the same, whatever changes
time may have made in me; but I have outlived these trickeries. Tell
me, frankly, what do you want with me?"
"Must there needs be some motive of self-interest in renewing an old
but interrupted friendship, Lola? You remember what we once were to
each other?"
"Oh that I could forget it!----oh that I could wash out the thought, or
even think it but a dream! But how can you recall these memories? If the
sorrow be mine, is not the shame all yours?"
"The shame and the sorrow are alike mine," said D'Es-monde, in a voice
of deep dejection, "You alone, of all the world, were ever able to
shake within me the great resolves that in prayer and devotion I
had formed. For you, Lola, I was, for a space, willing to resign the
greatest cause that ever man engaged in. Ay, for love of you, I was
ready to peril everything--even to my soul! Is not this enough for shame
and sorrow too? Is not this humiliation for one who wears the robe that
I do?"
"You were a student in those days," said Nina, with a sneering smile;
"and I never heard you speak of all those dreadful sacrifices. You used
to talk of leaving the college with a light heart. You spoke of the
world as if you were impatient to mingle with it. You planned I know
not how many roads to fortune and advancement. Among other careers,
I remember"--and here she burst into a scornful laugh, that made the
priest's cheek grow crimson with passion----"I remember how you hit upon
one which speaks rather for your ardor than your prudence. Do you forget
that you would be a Toridor,--you whose cheek grew pale and whose
heart sickened as my father's horse lay embowelled in the ring, and who
fainted outright when the bull's horns were driven into the barricade
near you. You a Toridor! A Toridor should have courage!" And as she
spoke, her eyes flashed with the fire of passion.
"Courage!" said the priest, in a voice almost guttural from emotion;
"and is there no other courage than the vulgar defiance of personal
danger,--the quality of the veriest savage and the merest brute in
creation? Is there nothing more exalted in courage than to face bodily
peril? Are all its instincts selfishness? What think you of the courage
of him who, in all the conscious strength of intellect, with powers to
win an upward way amongst the greatest and the highest, can stoop to a
life of poverty and neglect, can give up all that men strive for,--home,
affection, family, citizenship,----content to toil apart and alone,
----to watch, to fast, and pray, and think,----ay, think till the very
brain reels with labor,--and all this for a cause in which he is but a
unit! Courage! Tell me not of courage beside that of him who dares to
shake the strongest thrones, and convulses empires with his word, whose
counsels brave the might of armies, and dare even kings to controvert;
and, greatest of all, the courage that for a cause can risk salvation!
Yes, Lola, he who to save others hazards his own eternity! Have I not
done it?" cried he, carried away by an impetuous rush of feeling. "Have
I not overborne the truth and sustained the falsehood? Have I not
warped the judgments, and clouded the faculties, and misdirected the
aspirations of many who came to me for counsel, knowing that if there
might be evil now there would be good hereafter, and that for present
and passing sorrow there would be a glorious day of rejoicing? To this
end have I spoke Peace to the guilty man and Hope to the hardened! Not
for him, nor for me, but for the countless millions of the Church,--for
the mighty hosts who look to her for succor and consolation! This I call
courage!"
And he drew himself proudly up, and folded his arms on his breast with
an air of haughty composure; while the girl, awed by his manner, and
subdued by the impetuosity of his speech, gazed at him in half fear and
wonderment.
"Tell me of your father, Lola," said D'Esmonde, in a low, soft voice, as
he drew her low seat to his side.
"He was killed at Madrid; he died before the Queen!" said she,
proudly.
"The death of a Toridor!" muttered the priest, mournfully.
"Yes, and Pueblos too,--he is dead!"
"Not the little child that I remember--"
"The same. He grew up to be a fine man; some thought him handsomer than
my father. My mother's family would have made a priest of him, but he
chose the prouder destiny."
"I cannot think of him but as the child,--the little fellow who played
about my knees; dressed like a matador, his long silky hair in a net."
"Oh, do not----do not speak of him," cried the girl, burying her face
between her hands; "my heart will not bear those memories."
The priest's face was lighted up with a malevolent delight as he bent
over her, as if revelling in the thought the emotions could call up.
"Poor little fellow!" said he, as if to himself. "How I remember his
bolero that he danced for me." He stopped, and she sobbed bitterly. "He
said that Lola taught him."
She looked up; the tears were fast coursing along her cheeks, which were
pale as death.
"Eustace," said she, tremulously, "these thoughts will drive me mad; my
brain is reeling even now."
"Let us talk of something else, then," said he. "When did you leave the
'Opera'--and why?"
"How can you ask? you were at Seville at the time. Have you forgotten
that famous, marriage, to which, by your persuasion, I consented; was
this scheme only one of those unhappy events which are to be the seed of
future good?"
The sneer made no impression on the priest, who calmly answered, "Even
so, Lola."
"What do you mean, sir?" cried she, angrily; "to what end am I thus?
Was I so base born and so low? Was my lot in life so ignominious that
I should not have raised my ambition above a fortune like this,--the
waiting-woman of one whose birth is not better than my own?"
"You are right, Lola,----perfectly right; and with patience and prudence
you will be her equal yet. Acton is an English noble--"
"What care I for that?" said she, passionately; "the marriage was a
counterfeit."
"The marriage was a true and valid one."
"And yet you yourself told me it was not binding."
"I had my reasons for the deceit, Lola," said he, persuasively. "You
were deserted and desolate; such widowhood would have brought you to
the grave with sorrow. It were better that you should strive against
misery."
"Even in shame?" asked she, scornfully.
"Even in shame, for the shame would be short-lived; but Lord Norwood is
alive, and you are his wife."
"Lord Norwood! I have heard that name so often," said she, musingly.
"At Florence, of course, he was every night at the Mazzarini Palace; the
same Gerald Acton you remember long ago."
"And he is a lord,--an English noble?"
"And you are an English peeress, Lola. There is not a coronet more safe
upon a titled head than I can make yours,--can and will make," added
he, slowly. "But you must be patient; I must now speak to you, Lola, of
themes in which you can take no interest, and subjects of which you know
nothing. But listen to me attentively, and hear me; for fortune has not
thus thrown us together without a meaning.
"The hour is come, Lola, when heretics and infidels have determined on
an attack of our faith; not as they have hitherto attempted, and with
such signal failure, by the weapons of controversy and discussion, but
by brute force; by the might of millions driven to madness from want
and misgovernment To avert this terrible calamity is now the unceasing
thought of the Church. Some have counselled one thing, some another;
some would go forth to the fight, trusting that, as of old, God
would not forget his people; there are others who deem this course
presumptuous and unwise. The hearts of kings are not as they once
were,--in their confessors' keeping. Our age and manners would send
forth no crusade. The battle must be otherwise contested. You could
not follow me, Lola, were I to tell you either of the perils or their
antidotes. Enough that I say we must have trusty and faithful agents in
every land of Europe, and in every rank in every people. From the secret
whisperings of the Czar to the muttered discontent of the Irish peasant,
we must know them all. To this end have we labored anxiously and eagerly
for some time back, and already have we made great progress. From every
Court of Europe we now receive tidings, and there is not a royal palace
where our interests are unguarded. Some serve us for the glorious cause
itself, some have their own price, some again are in our own hands
from motives of self-interest or terror, but all are alike true. This
Princess--this Dalton--I destined for a duty of the same nature. Married
to a man of Midchekoff's wealth and influence, she might have done
good service, but I scarcely dare to trust her; even at the sacrifice
of herself she might fail me, and, although in my power, I cannot count
upon her. Think, then, of my joy at finding you, one on whose fidelity I
may hazard life itself. You can be all to me, and a thousand times more
than ever she could."
"Your spy," said the girl, steadily, but without the slightest semblance
of anger.
"My friend, my counsellor, my correspondent, Lola."
"And the price?"
"You may name it. If your heart be set on mere worldly distinction, I
will prove your marriage, and although Norwood is not rich, his country
never neglects the class he belongs to. Would you break the tie, the
bond is in my keeping."
"I never loved him," cried she, passionately, "and you knew it. The
marriage was one of those snares on which your mind never ceases to
dwell--"
"If you loved another, Lola--?" said he, interrupting, and then waiting
for her to finish her speech.
"And if I had," burst she forth, "am I credulous enough to fancy that
your word can reconcile every difference of rank and fortune,--that you
can control destiny, and even coerce affection? No, no, Eustace; I have
outlived all that!"
"Then were you wiser when you believed it," said he, gravely. "Now for
his name."
There was a tone of almost commanding influence in which these last few
words were uttered, and his dark full eyes were steadily fixed on her as
he spoke them.
She hesitated to answer, and seemed to reflect.
"I ask no forced confession, Lola," said he, proudly, and rising at the
same time from his seat "In all the unreserve of our old affection, I
told you my secret; yours is with yourself."
"But can you--" She stopped.
"I can, and I will aid you," said he, finishing her sentence.
"There is the name, then!" cried she, as, with a passionate gesture, she
drew a sealed letter from her bosom, and showed him the superscription.
D'Esmonde almost started; but, recovering himself in an instant, he
said,----
"The address is not correct, Lola. It should be thus--" And taking a
pen, he drew it across the last line on the cover, and wrote, instead,
"Dewanpore Barracks, Calcutta." "We must talk together this evening,"
said he, restoring the letter, and, without more, withdrew.
CHAPTER X. D'ESMONDE'S LETTER
It will spare the reader a somewhat lengthy digression if we give him
a peep at an extract from a letter written at this period by the Abb
D'Esmonde to a friend and fellow priest in Ireland. It was written on
the very evening whose events we have just mentioned, and when fresh
from the scenes of which he speaks.
The name or circumstances of the Abbe's confidant have no interest for
us; nor need we allude to him more particularly than by stating that he
was one who took a prominent part in his country's politics, and was
a well-known agitator, both in print and on the platform. The present
moment might not be inopportune to show the injustice of that sneer so
often passed upon men of this stamp, and which assumes that their whole
lives are spent in the agitation of small and irritating questions of
mere local interest,--the petty intrigues of a village or a hamlet,--and
without knowledge or interest for those greater themes which stir the
heart of all Europe. We must not, however, be led away from our purpose,
but, leaving these inferences to our reader's appreciation, keep to the
sober business of our task.
We have only to premise that D'Esmonde and his friend had been
schoolfellows and college companions, and that the revelations made were
in all the confidence of unbounded trust and security. Neither was the
hazard of a post-office incurred, for the document was forwarded, with
several letters from Rome, by a private hand,--a priest, who twice each
year performed the journey on a similar errand, and--shall we startle
our reader if we add, in a spirit apart from all the caprices of
fiction----still travels on the same mission.
After some apology for the time the epistle would be on the road, seeing
that it should first return to Rome ere it began its journey northward,
D'smonde next alludes to some private and personal matters, and some
individuals of their acquaintance, and then proceeds:----
"It is not without much inconvenience that I am here at this
moment, but my presence was necessary to neutralize the
influence of this troublesome old Countess, and who would
fain stop, if she could, all these liberal movements ere
they have developed their true meaning. You can have no idea
how difficult is this task, nor with what persistent folly
people go on repeating each other's 'platitudes' about
'timely checks,' 'scotching the snake,' and so forth. It is
now upwards of half a century since Europe has seen a real
political convulsion.
A new lesson is wanting. I often used to hope that you of
the West might be able to give it. I had great expectations
of Chartism at one time. It possessed the due elements of
mischief in abundance; it was infidel and hungry; but it
wanted the great requisites,--determination and courage. The
example must come from the Continent, and, in one respect,
it is so much the better. Your home disturbers would be
necessarily the enemies of the Anglican Church, whereas
our anarchists here are inseparably associated with
Protestantism. This coup required some cleverness, but we
at last accomplished it. Ronge's movement of secession gave
the first opportunity; the Swiss troubles offered the
second; a little more, and the Bonnet rouge will be the
symbol of the Protestant faith. Mark the advantage of this;
see the distrust with which every nation of the Continent
will regard England and her constitution mongering; look how
they will be induced to associate her printed cottons with
her Church, and connect the spread of her trade with the
treacherous dissemination of her doctrines. So far, so good.
And then, remember, that to all this anarchy and ruin the
Church of the true faith alone offers any effectual
opposition,--the 'Platoon' for the hour of conflict; but to
the priest must they come to consolidate the shattered
edifice,--to rebuild the tottering fabric of society. Men do
not see this yet; and there is but one way to teach it,--a
tremendous lesson of blood and anarchy. This is in store for
them, believe me.
"My great difficulty is to persuade these people to
patience. They will not wait, as Napoleon did for the
Prussians, till they were 'en flagrant dlit;' and yet, if
they do not, the whole experiment goes for nothing. With all
their hordes of horse, foot, and dragoons, their grape and
canister, their grenades and rocket-batteries, they have not
the courage of a poor priest   His Holiness is, however,
doing better. He has taken the whole au srieux; he has
brought himself to believe that moderate reforms--what are
they?--will satisfy the wishes of demagogue ambition, and
that when he has lashed popular fury into full speed, he can
check it at will. Of course you guess what will follow, and
you already see what a busy time is before us. Oh, my dear
Michel, I can stop here, and, closing my eyes, revel in the
glorious future that must succeed! I see the struggle before
me; and know that some good men, mayhap some great ones,
will fall in it; but in the distance I see the dome of St.
Peter's rising majestically above the clouds of battle, and
the countless millions kneeling once more before its altars!
"I do not clearly understand you about Ireland, although I
agree in the policy of putting the Protestant rebel in the
foreground. A conflict ever so brief with the Government
would be most useful. I have thought a good deal on the
subject, and am convinced that nothing would awe England
more than the impression of any foreign assistance being
given to Irish insurrection, while it would lend to your
loyalty the grand trait of nationality. This is a highly
important feature. Remark how they are taunting us with
being ultramontane just now, and think what an answer this
will be to the sarcasm! I am sure--that is, if you concurred
with me--I could easily persuade some young fellows in this
service to join the movement. As officers, and well
acquainted with military details, they would have a
formidable effect in English eyes. I have two or three in my
mind already; one, a brother of my young Princess, that fair
damsel of whom I spoke in my last letter as my destined
charg d'affaires at St. Petersburg,--a very difficult
post to fill, and one for which I am by no means sure she
will be adequate. When I reflect on the difficulties
experienced by us in arriving at truth, we, who have the
hearts of men so open before us, I am astounded at any
success that attends a mere secular government. More than
two thirds of those with whom I live are, so to say, in my
power,--that is, their reputation and their fortunes; and
yet I must make them feel this ten times a day to turn them
to my account. Believe me the Holy Office was right: there
is an inseparable bond of union between truth and a thumb-
screw!
"Tell me if you wish for military aid; substantially, I am
well aware, it would be worth nothing, but it might assist
in pushing your patriots, who, I must own, are a cautious
race, a step further. This Dalton boy is a thorough Austrian
up to this,--a regular 'God and the Emperor' soldier; but I
have thrown more stubborn metal into the crucible, and seen
it come out malleable.
"You ask about the 'converts;' and I must own that their
defection is a greater slur on Protestantism than any matter
of glorification to us.    They are unceasing in their
exactions, and all fancy that no price is too high for the
honor of their alliance; not a shovel-hat amongst them who
does not expect to be a 'monsignore' at least!
"Some, however, like my friend Lady Hester, are wealthy, and
in this way reward the trouble they give us. On her security
I have obtained a loan, not of the sum you wished for, but
of a smaller amount, the particulars of which I enclose. I
know not if you will agree with me, but my opinion is, that
nothing should be expended on the Irish press. Its influence
is slight, and purely local; reserve all your seductions for
the heavier metal on the other side of the Channel, and who,
however ignorantly they talk, are always heard with respect
and attention.
"I cannot go over as you propose, nor, if I could, should I
be of any use to you. You all understand your people, their
habits and modes of thought, far better than we do, who have
been fencing with cardinals, and sparring with the sacred
college, for the last ten or a dozen years. Above all
things, no precipitation; remember that your grand policy is
the maintenance of that feverish condition that paralyses
every effort of English policy. Parade all your grievances;
but rather to display the submission with which you bear
them than to pray for their relief. Be touchy only for
trifles; keep all your martyrdom for great occasions; never
forget that this time it is your loyalty! is to be rewarded.
Adieu, my dear Michel. Tell his Grace whatever you think fit
of these my opinions, and say, also, that he may rely on us
here for withdrawing or confirming, as he pleases, any
concessions he may deem proper to grant the English
Government. We know his difficulties, and will take care not
to augment them. As to the cardinal's hat, let him have no
doubts; only beg him to be circumspect, and that this is not
the time to assume it! If men would but see what a great
cause we have, and how it is to be won by waiting,--nothing
more, Michel,----nothing more, believe me, than mere
waiting!
"All that you tell me, therefore, about titles and
dignities, and so forth, is premature. With patience you
will be enabled to assume all, from which a momentary
precipitation would infallibly see you repulsed. A few of
your leading men still cling to the ruinous notion of
elevating Ireland; for Heaven's sake cease not to combat
this. It is the Church--the Church alone--for which we
combat. Her difficulties are enough, without linking her
fortune to such a sinking destiny! you have many able men
amongst you, and they ought to see this proposition in its
true light.
"You are right--though you only threw it out in jest--about
the interest I feel for my little Princess and her brother.
It was the charity of a relative of theirs--a certain Mr.
Godfrey--that first gave me the entrance into my career.
He sent me to Louvain as a boy, and thence to Salamanca, and
afterwards to Borne. He paid liberally for my education, and
I believe intended, had he lived, to have provided
handsomely for me. The story has an ugly ending; at least
the rumors are gloomy ones; and I would rather not revive
their memory. Here have I fallen into a sad track of
thought, dear Michel; and now it is past midnight, and all
is silent about me, and I feel half as if I ought to tell
you everything, and yet that everything resolves itself into
nothing; for of my actual knowledge, I possess not one
single fact
"Can you conceive the position of a man with a great, a
glorious future before him,--rewards the very highest his
wildest ambition ever fancied,--a sphere to exercise powers
that he feels within, and but needing a field for their
display? Picture to yourself such a man, and then fancy him
tortured by one terrible suspicion, one damning doubt,--that
there is a flaw in his just title to all this; that some day
or other there may rise up against him--he knows not how or
whence or why--from the very earth as it were, a voice to
say, 'you are disowned, disgraced,--you are infamous before
men!' Such a terrible hell have I carried for years within
me! Yes, Michel, this ulcer is eating at my very heart, and
yet it is only like a vision of evil,--some mind-drawn
picture, carried up from infancy through boyhood, and
stealing on, year by year, into the prime of life,
strengthening its ties on me like a malady.
"You will say this is a diseased imagination,--the fruits of
an overworked brain, or, not improbably, the result of an
overwrought vanity, that would seek consolation for failures
in the dim regions of superstition. It may be so; and yet I
have found this terror beset me more in the seasons of my
strength and activity than in those of sickness and
depression. Could I have given a shape and color to my
thoughts, I might have whispered them in the confessional,
and sought some remedy against their pain; but I could not.
They flash on my waking faculties like the memories of a
recent dream. I half doubt that they are not real, and look
around me for the evidences of some change in my condition.
I tremble at the first footstep that draws near my door,
lest the new-comer should bring the tidings of my downfall!
"I was at Borne--a student of the Irish college--when this
cloud first broke over me. Some letter came from Ireland,--
some document containing a confession, I believe. I was
summoned before the superiors, and questioned as to my
family, of which I knew nothing; and as to my means, of
which I could tell as little. My attainments at the college
were inquired into, and a strict scrutiny aa to my conduct;
but though both were above reproach, not a word of
commendation escaped them; on the contrary, I overheard,
amid their whisperings, the terrible word 'degradato!'   You
can fancy how my heart sank within me at a phrase so
significant of shame and debasement!
"I was told the next morning that my patron was dead, and
that, having no longer the means to support the charges of a
student, I should become a 'laico;' in other words, a
species of servant in the college. These were dreadful
tidings; but they were short of what I feared. There was
nothing said of 'degradation.' I struggled, however, against
the hardship of the sentence,--I appealed to my proficiency
in study, the prizes I had won, the character I bore, and so
on; but although a few months more would have seen me
qualified for the priesthood, my prayer was rejected, and I
was made a 'laico.' Two months afterwards I was sent to the
convent of 'Espiazione,' at Ancona. Many of my early letters
have told you the sufferings of that life!--the awful
punishments of that gloomy prison, where all are
'degradati,' and where none are to be found save men stained
with the foulest crimes. I was seventeen months there,----a
'laico,'--a servant of the meanest class,--no consolation of
study, no momentary solace in tracing others' thoughts to
relieve the horrible solitude of my own. Labor--incessant
debasing labor--my lot from day till dawn.
"I have no clew to the nature of my guilt I declare solemnly
before Heaven, as I write these lines, that I am not
conscious of a crime, save such as the confessional has
expiated; and yet the ritual of my daily life implied such.
The offices and litanies I had to repeat, the penances I
suffered, were those of the 'Espiazione!' I dare not trust
myself to recall this terrible period,----the only
rebellious sentiment my heart has ever known sprang from
that tortured existence. As an humble priest in the wildest
regions of Alpine snow, as a missionary among the most
barbarous tribes, I could have braved hardships, want, death
itself; but as the 'de-gradato,' dragging out life in
failing strength, with faculties each day weaker, watching
the ebb of intellect, and wondering how near I was to that
moping idiocy about me, and whether in that state suffering
and sorrow slept! Oh, Michel! my hands tremble, and the
tears blot the paper as I write. Can this ordeal ever work
for good? The mass sink into incurable insanity,--a few,
like myself, escape; and how do they come back into the
world? I speak not of other changes; but what hardness of
the heart is engendered by extreme suffering, what
indifference to the miseries of others I How compassionless
do we become to griefs that are nothing to those we have
ourselves endured! you know well that mine has not been a
life of indolence, that I have toiled hard and long in the
cause of our faith, and yet I have never been able to throw
off the dreary influence of that conventual existence. In
the excitement of political intrigue I remember it least; in
the whirlwind of passions by which men are moved, I can for
a time forget the cell, the penance, and the chain. I have
strong resentments, too, Michel. I would make them feel that
to him they sentenced once to 'degradation' must they now
come for advice and guidance,--that the poor 'laico' can now
sit at their councils and direct their acts. There is
something so glorious in the tyranny of Rome, so high above
the petty sovereignty of mere kings, soaring beyond the
bounds of realms and states, crossing Alps and oceans,
proclaiming its proud edicts in the great cities of Europe,
declaring its truths in the silent forests of the Far West,
stirring the heart of the monarch on his throne, thrilling
the rugged breast of the Indian in his wigwam, that even to
bear a banner in its ranks is a noble privilege. And now I
come back to these children, with whose fortunes I feel
myself--I know not how--bound up. They were related to this
Mr. Godfrey, and that, perchance, may be the secret link
which binds us. The girl might have won a grand destiny,--
she had beauty, grace, fascination, all that men prize in
these days of ours; but there was no high ambition,--nothing
beyond the thirst for personal admiration. I watched her
anxiously and long. There was a weak goodness about her
heart, too, that gave no promise of self-sacrifice. Such,
however, as she is, she is mine. As for the boy, I saw him
yesterday for the first time; but he cannot be a difficult
conquest. Again I hear you ask me, why can I turn from great
events and stirring themes to think of these? and again I
own that I cannot tell you. Power over every one, the
humblest as the highest, the weakest in purpose and the
strongest of heart,--power to send forth or to restrain, to
crush or to exalt,--this is the prize of those who, like you
and me, walk humbly, that we may reign proudly.
"And now, dear Michel, good-bye. I have made you a
confession, and if I have told little, the fault is not
mine. You know all my sentiments on great events,--my hopes
and my anticipations. I must leave this to-morrow, or the
day after, for there is much to do beyond the Alps. If kings
and kaisers but knew as much as we poor priests, the coming
would scarce be a merry Christmas with them.
"Yours, in all truth and brotherhood,
"Mathew D'Esmonde.
"Feast of St Pancratras, Hof Thor, Vienna."
It was already daybreak when D'Esmonde finished his letter; but, instead
of retiring to bed, he opened his window, and sat enjoying the fresh air
of the morning. Partly from habit, he opened his book of "offices;" but
his eyes wandered, even from the oft-repeated lines, to the scene before
him,----the spreading glacis,----where already the troops were mustering
for parade. "What a strange thing is courage!" thought he. "I, who feel
my spirit quail at the very rumbling sound of a gun-carriage, haye a
soul to see all Europe convulsed, and every nation in arms, undismayed!"
CHAPTER XI. THE CADET VON DALTON
As Madame de Heidendorf's mornings were always passed in receiving the
visits or answering the letters of her political acquaintances, Kate was
free to spend her hours with Frank, exchanging confidences, and
talking of that dear home from which they were more separated even by
circumstance than by space.
The cadet had obtained leave for the entire day,--an inconceivable favor
in his eyes,--and Kate was seated at her breakfast when he appeared.
When they met the day before, Frank's undivided attention had been drawn
to Kate herself,--the change in her whole air and manner, that graceful
dignity of mien which elevated his regard for her to a species of
worship. Now, however, he had time to be struck with the accessories of
her position,--the gorgeous chamber, the splendid silver of the service,
the rich liveries, everything which bespoke her proud and affluent
condition.
"I almost start back with shame, Kate," said he, "if, in passing these
great mirrors, I catch a glimpse of my humble figure, so unsuited does
it seem to magnificence like this; nor can I help thinking that your
household agrees with me. With all their respectful courtesy, they must
wonder when they look on the brother of their Princess."
"You know well, dearest Frank, that in your service the highest in the
land must pass the ordeal of cadetship."
"Which means half an hour for an archduke, and a forenoon for a serene
highness. Even Walstein took but a week to spring from the ranks to
a lieutenancy; a month later saw him a rittmeister; and already he
commands a regiment."
"What a young soldier to have caught up the complaining cant about slow
promotion!" said Kate, laughing.
"Ten months a cadet, and not even made corporal yet!" sighed Frank. "To
be sure, I might have been, had it not been for the 'stockhaus.'"
"And what may that be, dear Frank?"
"The prison; neither more nor less. When I came here, Kate, the nephew
or grand-nephew of the Feld-Marschall von Auersberg, I thought it became
me to assume something like style in my mode of life. My comrades told
me as much, too; and as I had no difficulty in obtaining credit, I ran
in debt everywhere. I lent to all who asked me, and gave away to many
more. Every one said the Feld would pay one day or other, and I never
confessed how poor we were at home. I know I was wrong there, dearest
Kate; I feel that acutely now; but somehow the deception I began with
others gained even more rapidly on myself. From continually talking of
our Dalton blood, and our high position in our own country, I grew to
believe it all, and fancied that some, at least, of these imaginings
must be real. But, above all, I cherished the hope that promotion would
come at last, and that I should live to be an honored soldier of the
Kaiser.
"In the very midst of all this self-deception, the Feld returns to
Vienna from a tour of inspection, and, instead of sending to see me,
orders my Colonel to his presence. I know not, of course, what passed,
but report alleges that for an hour the old General harangued him in
terms the most bitter and insulting. Now, my dear sister, the wrath
poured out upon a commanding officer does not become diminished as it
descends through the successive grades of rank, and falls at last on the
private. For my misdemeanor the regiment was ordered away from Vienna,
and sent to Laybach, in the very depth of winter too. This could not
help my popularity much among my comrades; and as I was now as destitute
of credit as of means, you may fancy the alteration of my position,--the
black bread of the commissary instead of the refined cookery of the
'Schwan;' the midnight patrol, in rain or snow-drift, in place of
the Joyous carouse of the supper-table; the rude tyranny of a vulgar
sergeant, in lieu of the friendly counsels of an equal; all that is
menial and servile,--and there is enough of both in the service,--heaped
upon me day after day; till, at last, my only hope was in the chance
that I might ultimately imbibe the rude feelings of the peasant-soldier,
and drag out my existence without a wish or a care for better.
"As if to make life less endurable to me, the officers were forbidden
to hold intercourse with me; even such of the cadets as were above the
humbler class were ordered not to associate with me; my turns of duty
were doubled; my punishments for each trifling offence increased; and
there I was, a soldier in dress, a convict in duty, left to think over
all the flattering illusions I had once conceived of the service, its
chivalry, and its fame.
"I wrote to Walstein, telling him that if I could not obtain my freedom
otherwise, I would desert. A copy of my letter, I know not how obtained,
was sent to my Colonel, and I was sentenced to a month's arrest, a week
of which I was to pass in irons. They now made me a rebel in earnest,
and I came out of the 'stockbaus' more insubordinate than I went in. It
would weary, and it would fret you, dearest sister, were I to tell all
the petty schemes I formed of resistance, and all the petty tyrannies
they brought down upon my head; the taunt of my 'gentle blood,' my
'noble origin,' my 'high descent,' being added to every cruelty they
practised, till I was ready to curse the very name that associated me
with this bitterness. They told me that a second desertion was always
punished with death, and that even the attempt was accounted as the act.
I resolved, then, to finish with this dreary existence, and I wrote a
farewell letter to poor Nelly, telling her that, as I was certain of
being taken, these were the last lines I should ever write. In this I
repeated all I have now told you, and a vast deal more, of the hardships
and indignities I had endured; and this, like my former letter, was sent
back to me. Then came three months more of durance, after which I came
out what they deemed a good soldier."
"Subdued at last!" sighed Kate.
"Not a bit of it. Like a Banat charger I had a kick in me, after all
their teaching and training. I found out the lance-corporal of our
company was the man who had discovered my letters. I sent him a
challenge, fought, and wounded him. Here was another offence; and now
the Minister of War was to deal with me himself; and I half fancied they
would be glad to get rid of me. Far from it The 'stockhaus' again, and
short fetters, my wrist to my ankle, were the sovereign remedies for all
misdeeds. In this plight I made my entrance into Vienna."
"Did you never think of Uncle Stephen all this while, Frank,----never
appeal to him?"
"Ay, Kate, and what was worse, he thought of me, for he had my
punishment-rolls brought to him; and although from some good-natured
interference they did not forward more than a fourth of my misdeeds,
there was enough to condemn me in his eyes, and he wrote, 'No favor to
this cadet,' on the back of my certificate."
"Poor boy! so friendless and deserted."
"Persecuted by creditors, too," continued Frank, as, excited by the
recital of his sorrows, he paced the room in a transport of anger;
"fellows that never rested till they got me in their books, and now gave
me no peace for payment. Out of three kreutzers a day, Kate,--a penny
English,--I was to discharge all the debts of my extravagance, and live
in style! A Dalton, well born and nurtured, in a position of ignominious
poverty!"
"Not one to aid you?"
"Walstein was away in Bohemia with his regiment; and, perhaps, it
were better so, for I had told him such narratives of our family, such
high-flown stories of our princely possessions, that I could not have
had the courage to face him with an avowal of the opposite. At last I
did make a friend, Kate; at least one poor fellow took an interest in
me, talked to me of home, of you and Nelly; mostly of her, and of her
curious carvings, which he prized almost as much as little Hans used. He
sat with me many an hour under the trees of the Prater, or we strolled
along in the shady alleys of the 'Augarten;' and his companionship
somehow always soothed and comforted me, for he was so stored with book
learning that he could ever bring out something from Uhland or Richter
or Wieland that suited the moment, just as if the poet had one in his
mind when he wrote it. How often have I wished that I was like him,
Kate, and had a mind like his, teeming with its own resources against
sorrow."
"Tell me more of him, Frank dearest; I feel an interest in him already."
"And yet you would scarcely have liked him, if you saw him," said the
boy, with a bashful and hesitating manner.
"Why not, Frank? His appearance might have been little promising, his
face and figure commonplace--"
"No, no; not that,--not that Adolf was good-looking, with a fine, clear
brow, and a manly, honest face; nor was his manner vulgar,--at least,
for his station. He was a pedler."
"A pedler, Frank," cried Kate, growing scarlet as she spoke.
"Ay, I knew well how you would hear the word," said the boy; "I often
used to fancy my high-bred sister's scorn if she could but have seen the
companion whose arm lay around my neck, and who spoke to me as 'thou.'"
Kate made no answer, but her cheek was crimson, and her lip trembled.
"You and Walstein were never out of my thoughts," continued Frank; "for
I could fancy how each of you would look down upon him."
"Not that, Frank," said she, in confusion; "if he were indeed kind to
you,--if he were a true friend in that time of dreariness and gloom."
"So was he,----with hand and heart and purse. And yet,--confound that
sense of pride, which poisons every generous movement of the heart and
will not let it throb in unison with one of humble fortune!--I never
could get the Dalton out of my head. There it was, with that lumbering
old fabric of an Irish house, our wasteful habits, and our idle
dependants, all going down to ruin together; and instead of despising
myself for this, I only was ashamed--at what, think you?--of my
friendship for a pedler! Many a holiday have I kept my barrack-room
rather than be seen with Adolf in the Volks Garten or the Graben. I
liked to be along with him in the solitude of the Prater, or in our
country walks; but when he asked me to accompany him to the caf or
the theatre, Kate, to some ordinary in the Leopoldstadt, or some
wine-cellar on the Danube, I used to feign duty, or actually take a
comrade's guard, to avoid it How meanly you think of me for all this,
Kate! I see, by the flush upon your cheek, what shame the confession has
given you."
Kate's confusion grew almost intolerable; she twice tried to speak, but
the effort was above her strength, and Frank, who mistook her silence
for rebuke, at last went on,----
"You may guess, Kate, from what I have now told you, how much soldiering
has realized all my early hopes and ambitions. I suppose times were
different long ago."
"Of course they were, or Uncle Stephen would not now be a
field-marshal."
As if in echo to her words, at this moment a servant, throwing wide the
door, announced "The Feld" himself. Frank fell back as the old General
advanced into the room, bowing with a courtesy that would have done
honor to a courtier. He was dressed in the uniform of his rank, and wore
all his decorations,--a goodly mass, that covered one entire side of his
coat.
Approaching Kate with a manner of admirably blended affection and
respect, he kissed her hand, and then saluted her on either cheek.
"Forgive me, my dear niece," said be, "if I have not been earlier to pay
my respects, and say welcome to Vienna; but my note will have told you
that I was on duty yesterday with the Emperor."
Kate blushed and bowed, for unhappily she had not read the note through.
Frank's presence had made her forget all but himself. With all the
gallantry of his bygone school, the old Feld proceeded to compliment
Kate on her beauty and grace, expressing in proper phrase his pride at
the possession of such a relative.
"The Empress was the first to tell me of your arrival," said he; "and
nothing could be more gracious than the terms in which she spoke of
you."
With a thrill of pleasure Kate heard these words, and greedily drank in
every syllable he uttered. Not alone her betrothal to the Prince, but
all the circumstances of her future destiny, seemed to be matters of
deep interest to the Court, and poor Kate listened with wonder to the
Feld as he recounted the various speculations her marriage had given
rise to. She little knew within what a narrow circle the sympathies
of royalty are forced to revolve, and how glad they are of anything to
relieve the tedious monotony of existence. One most important question
had already arisen, since the Empress had expressed a wish that the
young Princess should be presented to her; but Madame de Heidendorf
refused her permission, on the ground that she had not yet been
presented at the Court of the Czar. All the difficulties of the two
cases, the arguments for either course, the old General deployed with an
earnestness that if it at first amused, at last deeply interested Kate;
the flattering sense of self-importance giving a consequence to trifles
which, if told of another, she would have smiled at.
"I was desirous of gratifying the Empress before I saw you, my dear
niece," said he, taking her hand; "but you may guess how much greater is
my anxiety now that I have learned to know you. It will be, indeed, a
proud day for the old Field-Marshal when he shall present one of his own
name and family, so gifted and so beautiful. A thorough Dalton!" added
he, gazing on her with rapture.
"How glad am I, sir, to see that all the distinctions your great career
has won have not effaced the memory of our old name and house."
"I have but added to it another as noble as itself," replied he,
haughtily. "Others have given their energies to degrade our ancient
lineage. It is to be your task and mine, Madame la Princesse, to replace
us in our rightful station."
Kate instinctively sought out Frank with her eyes, but could barely
catch a glimpse of his figure within a recess of a window. More than
once the poor cadet had meditated an escape; but as the door was on the
opposite side of the room, he saw discovery would be inevitable. With a
graceful courtesy the old Feld asked after Father and Nelly, expressing
his wish to see and know them, in terms which plainly conveyed to Kate
his utter ignorance of their station and habits.
"As a younger son myself, without the ties of fortune, I may be
permitted to doubt how far the head of a distinguished house has a
right, from any considerations of personal gratification, to reside away
from his country, Madame. I must own that my nephew's conduct in this
respect has not met my approval. I have not felt free to tell him so,
our intercourse being for so many years interrupted; but you will say as
much for me. Let him know that the great names of a nation ought not to
die out in people's memories."
"You are aware, sir," said Kate, timidly, "that papa's means are not
as they once were; circumstances of economy first suggested his coming
abroad."
"A reason that always has appeared to me insufficient," said the
other, sternly. "He could have reduced his establishment at home--fewer
hunters--less splendid banquets."
"Hunters and banquets!" sighed Kate; "how little he knows of us!"
"Here I see nothing but the best fruits of his system," said he, kissing
her hand with gallantry; "no cost could be accounted too much that
aided the attainment of such perfection. I am too old a courtier not
to distinguish between mere native gracefulness and that more polished
elegance which comes of refined intercourse. My niece is worthy to be a
princess! But your brother--"
"Oh! what of dear Frank?" cried she, eagerly.
"Simply this, Madame: habits of wasteful expenditure have unsuited him
to the stern realities of a soldier's life. With his fortune and his
tastes, he should have sought service among those popinjays that English
tailors make lancers or hussars of. He might have won the laurels
that are gathered on Honnslow or St. James's Park; he might have been
distinguished in that barbaric warfare you call an Indian campaign; but
here, in this empire, where soldiering means discipline, self-denial,
hardship, endurance!--I was eight years a cadet, Madame, twelve a
sous-lieutenant. I saw the decoration I should have received given to
another. The Dienst Kreutz I had won was refused me, because I had not
served twenty years; and yet, by accepting these and hundreds like them
as the inevitable necessities of the service, I am what now you see me."
"And if Frank will be but patient--"
"He may be a corporal within a year, Madame," said the Feld, gravely,
and with the air of a man who had advanced a somewhat bold pledge.
"But he must be an officer within a week, sir," said Kate, taking the
General's hand within her own. "I seldom ask favors, and as seldom are
they refused me. The chivalry of Austria will surely suffer no attaint
from one whose distinction it is to be your relative, and a Dalton.
Nay, dear uncle, this is the first, the very first request I have ever
made of you. It would not be meet for me to say, in your presence,
what a guerdon is his name for his good conduct."
"You are too sanguine, Madame. You do not know this boy."
"Every thought of his heart I know,--every hope that sustains him. He
himself has told me all his shortcomings."
"His insubordination?"
"Yes."
"Extravagance?"
"Yes."
"His days of imprisonment?"
"Yes."
"His arrests in irons?"
"All--everything; and what are they, save the boyish excesses of one
who, carried away by high spirits, and buoyed up by the flattering sense
of relationship to a great and distinguished name, has been led on to
follies by the mere native warmth of temperament? It is easy to see how
little he thought of himself, and how much of his uncle!"
The old General shook his head dubiously.
"There, dear uncle," said she, pressing him into a seat before a table
with writing-materials, "take that pen and write."
"Write what, dear child?" said he, with a softness very different from
his usual manner.
"I know nothing of the forms, nor the fitting phrases. All I want is
that Frank should have his sword-knot."
"You have learned the proper word, I see," said he, smiling, while he
balanced the pen doubtingly in his fingers "The Colonel of his regiment
is an imperial prince."
"So much the better, uncle. A Hapsburg will know how to reward a
Dalton."
"So, then, we begin thus," said the old General, whose half-suppressed
smile showed that he was merely jesting with her eagerness: "'Imperial
Highness,--the Cadet von Dalton, whose distinction it is to be the
grand-nephew of a very old soldier, and the brother of a very young
princess--'"
"Nay, surely, this will not do," said Kate.
"'A very young princess," resumed the Feld, as he continued to
write, "'who, confiding in her own captivations and your Highnesses
gallantry--'"
"This is but jesting with me, uncle, and I am serious," said she,
poutingly.
"And am not I serious, too, Madame?" cried he, laying down the pen. "If
I ask promotion for a boy whose whole career has been one infraction of
discipline, whose services are all inscribed in the Provost-Marshal's
return, is it not better that I should press his claims on the merits
of others than dwell upon his own misconduct? My dear child," said
he, affectionately, "there are natures that cannot bear a too sudden
prosperity, as there are individuals who cannot endure too sudden
changes of climate. Our Dalton blood has a little of this same
infirmity. Shall I tell you how I won my first step in the service? I
was at Hohenkirchen when Morea began his celebrated retreat through the
defiles of the Schwartzwald. The company in which I served as a simple
corporal occupied a large farm-house, on an elevated plateau, above the
road to Schweinfurt. We could see for miles along the valley, and
our position was taken up to observe the movement of the enemy, and
immediately report when his advanced guard came in sight. Our orders
also were to hold the place as long as we were able, and delay as much
as possible the enemy's advance; in other words, if we could retard him
by half a day, at the sacrifice of our party, our duty would be well
done. These unpleasant situations arise now and then in war; but one
comfort is, they seldom occur twice to the same man!"
[Illustration: 150]
"The captain who commanded us was an old officer, who had borne his slow
promotion with many a heart-burning, and now resolved, come what might,
to win his grade.
"Without waiting for the enemy, he took a patrol party, and set out to
meet them. We never saw them again! Our lieutenant, alike impatient,
determined on a reconnaissance, He had scarcely been gone half an
hour, when a quick rattling of fire-arms told us that he was engaged
with the enemy. One man alone returned to tell us that the rest had
fallen, and that the enemy was approaching in force. The command now
devolved on me. I had been four times passed over in promotion, distinct
acts of service left unnoticed, and my claims as much ignored as if
I was the veriest dolt. I will not pretend to say that I bore these
disappointments without pain; but they taught me one lesson at least,
'that duty is above all consideration of self.' I well knew what was
expected of us, and resolved, if possible, to fulfil it. I prepared at
once for a stout resistance,--a hopeless, of course, but an obstinate
one. Well, I will not imitate the tardiness of the duty by a similar
prolixity. We held the farm for two hours, during which the roof was
twice on fire from the enemy's shells; and when, at length, they stormed
the place, our defence was reduced to eight men, commanded by a corporal
with two shot-wounds in his chest. We were made prisoners, and carried
away to Strasburg, from whence I was exchanged under a cartel, and came
back to my regiment as a lieutenant. Had I merely sought promotion,
Madame, and followed the dictates of ambition and not of duty, I had
perhaps fallen like the others. It was in the very forgetfulness of
myself lay my prosperity and my reward."
Kate's eyes sought out Frank, resolved on one effort more for her
object, but the boy was gone. He had contrived to slip away unseen
during the conversation, and was now waiting at the corner of the
street, impatient for the General's departure, to return to his sister.
"I am to have the honor of dining in your company to-day," said the
Feld, rising to take leave. "Let me hope that my obduracy will not
weaken your regard for one so proud of being your uncle."
"No, uncle," said she, "and chiefly since I do not believe in the
obduracy, and have full faith in the affection."
With every testimony of regard, they now took leave of each other, and
the General retired as Kate betook herself to her own room.
She had scarcely left the apartment when the Archduke entered it. Madame
de Heidendorf had told him that the Princess was there with her uncle,
and he came expressly to see her. "Gone again!" exclaimed he; "am I
never to see this mysterious beauty?" while he threw his eyes around
the room. "What's this addressed to myself here?" added he, as he caught
sight of the paper which the Feld had half written. "To his Imperial
Highness the Archduke Franz Albrecht, commanding the Eleventh Regiment
of Infantry." Rapidly glancing over the few lines, he at once caught
their meaning, and detected the playful spirit in which they were
conceived. "The fair Princess must not be disappointed in her opinion,"
said he, laughingly, as he took up the pen and wrote: "Too happy to
anticipate the unexpressed wish, the Archduke appoints Cadet von Dalton
to a lieutenancy in the Hussars of the Wurtemberg Regiment," and signing
his well-known initials at the foot, he sealed and addressed the paper
to the Princesse de Midchekoff. This done, he left the house, passing
as he went a young cadet, whose military salute he scarcely noticed, nor
knew the anxious heart for whose happiness he had just provided.
Young Frank stood respectfully at the salute as the Prince passed, and
then bounded away to rejoin his sister. The drawing-room, however, was
empty, and it was by mere chance that he saw the letter, on which the
address was scarcely dry. Taking this with him, he hastened to her room.
"A letter for you, Kate," cried he, "and with a royal seal too!"
"Poor Frank!" said she, coming out to meet him. "That I should have such
tidings for you! The Feld is obdurate and unyielding. He fancies that
there is no road to honor save the old track he has trod himself."
"I knew as much, Kate. Had I stayed longer in the room, I could not have
refrained from bursting out to say, 'Hold, sister dearest; not the best
grade in all the service is worth so much solicitation. I 'll carry the
musket while I must, and the day they make me an officer I 'll smash the
sword across my knee and leave them!'"
Kate broke the seal of the packet without answering this passionate
speech, and then, with a cry of joy, exclaimed, "Here it is, Frank! The
Prince himself has given you the rank, and in the hussars too!"
"Let me see it," cried the boy,--"let me see it." And tearing the paper
from her hand, he read it again and again. "I scarce know--I can scarce
believe this real; but a Prince's word--a royal promise, Kate, is surely
sacred."
"Of that there can be no doubt, Frank."
"And I am a hussar and an officer," said he, with a burst of delight
"I'd not change with the kaiser this minute, Kate."
"My dear, dear Frank!" said she, passing her arm around his neck.
"And to owe it all to you, my sweet Kate! If anything could enhance the
pleasure of this piece of fortune, it is this fact. And such a regiment,
Kate,--the Prince Paul's. The turapp all one mass of gold, and the
chako splendid, and their horses the true Hungarian breed,--the native
horse crossed with the Arab! I feel already as if I were in the saddle,
and careering wildly about. Oh, Kate, what glorious news!"
Again and again he embraced her in his ecstasy, and she, hiding her head
upon his shoulder, tried to suppress the burst of emotions which filled
her heart, for she thought at what a price she purchased the power she
wielded.
They sat long with hands close locked beside each other,--neither
speaking,----each travelling his own road of thought; and how wide apart
they lay!
CHAPTER XII. VIENNA.
We cannot afford to linger in Vienna, nor speak of the week--the most
brilliant of all her life--Kate passed there. It was the first burst
of that ambition which had so long taken possession of her, and she saw
herself, at length, in all the pride of her station, and her beauty the
object of a hundred flatteries.
Fted at the Court, distinguished by the special attentions of the
Princes, most courteously received in all the society of the most
exclusive capital of Europe, the whirl of pleasure and excitement as
effectually precluded thought as it defied reflection. Hitherto she
had seen the world only as a dependant, or at least as something
appertaining to Lady Hester, in whose caprices she was bound to share,
making partnery, as it were, in all her likings and dislikings; but now
she was become the centre around which all these attentions revolved,
and her own will was the directing impulse of every action.
Of all the cities of the Continent, Vienna was most remarkable for
almost instinctively adopting the tone of its Court in respect to a
distinguished visitor. There was something like intuition in the way in
which they guessed the feeling of royalty, and as quickly made it their
own.
The restricted limits of the first society, of course, made this
practicable, as well as the fact that all belonging to it were more or
less engaged in the service of the Emperor. Kate Dalton was now to enjoy
this flattery, and find herself, wherever she went, the special object
of attention.
At the Hof Theatre, where they played her favorite operas; at the great
reviews in the Prater, at the balls of the palace, or the djeners of
Schonbrunn, she seemed the occasion of the fte, and to do her honor
all appeared assembled. Carried away by the triumphant delight of
pleasure so associated with power, she either forgot at times the price
at which her greatness had been purchased, or was disposed to still the
beatings of her heart by the thought, "My destiny is chosen; it is too
late to look back." To have grieved over her lot, besides, would have
seemed an utter selfishness, seeing that she was the means of dispensing
such happiness to all her family. Her poor father placed once more
in comfort; Nelly free to follow the dictates of her charming fancy,
without the alloying sense of toil; and dear Frank, in all the
exuberant joy of his promotion, eternally reminding her that she was his
patroness. The quick clatter of his charger's hoofs in the courtyard,
the clank of his sabre as he ran up the stairs, were but the glad
prelude to his daily outpouring of gratitude. Ay, "to be sorry now,
would be but selfish."
Such was the philosophy in which she wrapped herself; and day after day
the feeling gained strength within her. It was true there were moments
when all the sophistry gave way, and her affections flowed full and
strong in the deep channels of her heart. Then, indeed, she saw the
emptiness of all this gorgeous parade,--how little it gave of real
happiness,--how seldom it ever called forth one generous feeling, or one
high desire, and she wished the fates had dealt otherwise with her. At
times she almost longed for the humble home, in all its poverty, with
nothing but Nelly's bright smile and gentle voice to cheer its solitude!
It may have been this conflict----for conflict it was--that gave to her
demeanor a certain calm dignity, which, in the critical estimation
of society, elevated her high above any charge of frivolity or
capriciousness. She was a thought graver, perhaps, than her years; but
the feeling imparted an indescribable grace to one whose beauty was the
very type of brilliancy. After all, these were but passing clouds; nor
did she ever suffer herself to recur to the past, save when wayward
memories would obtrude uncalled for.
At last a letter came from Lady Hester; and although not a long one,
it called up thoughts that all her endeavors could not efface from
recollection. There were, once again, all the old familiar names with
which she used to be so conversant.
Lady Hester, however, was much changed: all the capricious irritability
of the fine lady had given place to a kind of importunate piety. She had
grown "devote," and her life a string of religious observances. After
dwelling complacently on the self-imposed round of her mortifications
and penances, she went on:----
"D'Esmonde has just returned, and delights me by saying that
you are quite free from any contagion as to the errors of
the Greek Church. Of course, outwardly, you must conform;
even if Midchekoff did not insist, his countrymen would; but
he says that St. Ursula is the sure resource in such cases,
and mentions the instance of a nun who took lessons in
Spanish from the Devil, and, by the aid of the blessed
Ursula, was nothing the worse.
"I told Jekyl, who left this on Friday, to send me an image
of St. Ursula, that I might forward it to you; but the
careless wretch has sent me a statuette of Fanny Elssler by
mistake. He discovered his error, however, and has written
me a most humble letter, mentioning, by the way, that he was
doing a 'Novena' for penance, and danced the polka all the
preceding night with a sharp peg in the sole of his foot.
With all his oddity, there is a great deal to like in him.
"I have only once heard from the Onslows; their conduct has
been too shocking; they are not ruined at all, but got up
the story, I verily believe, just to destroy my nerves. Sir
S. is living in Ireland, at that place with the horrid name
your father used to talk of, with Sydney; and George has
gone to India, a major, I think, in some cavalry regiment.
At Grounsell's kind suggestion, I have been cut off with a
miserable allowance of fifteen hundred a year; but even with
this I am content. St. Brigitta, of Cleves, lived on hard
peas, and never wore anything but an old sack for the last
seventeen years of her life; and Clestine has got a
charming pattern of a capote,  la Cistercine, which, when
made of white cashmere, will be perfectly simple and very
becoming. I wear my hair now always in bands, and very low
on the face. D'Esmonde says I 'm the image of the Madonna of
Domenichino, which you may remember, I always preferred to
Raphael's.
"Cardinal Bruschetti has been spending a few days here, and
I cannot tell you the charm I have felt in his society,
contrasted with the frivolous dissipation I have been used
to.   He is so suave, and so gentle, so persuasive, without
importunity, and so conciliating withal. Not the least
austerity about him; but at times actually gay! He quite
approves of my having kept Fripponi as my cook. 'A change of
cuisine,' said he, 'involves a change of digestion, a change
of temperament, and a moral change;' alterations far too
important to be incurred at once. This is so far pleasant as
certainly the man is an admirable artist. His Eminence said
yesterday that the salmi of ortolans was a dish fit for the
Pope. We drive out, or row, every day, on the lake, and I
shall be quite lonely when he leaves this. I am curious to
know if you remember a bust of him in the Vatican. He was,
and indeed is, a remarkably handsome man; and his leg has
been modelled I can't say how often. He asks me to whom I am
writing, and begs you will remember him in your prayers, how
touchingly simple, is it not?
"I ventured last night on a bit of importunity, and asked
his Eminence a favor. That poor dear Jekyl, you know, is
miserably off. His family, all so wealthy, he says, only
allow him a few hundreds a year; and with his generous
habits and wastefulness this must be actual want. Well, I
asked the Cardinal if there might not be some way of sending
him out as a missionary--like St. Vincent de Paul. I 'm
certain he 'd not like the dress nor the bare feet, but he
'd be so happy with those charming Tonga islanders, who,
such is their zeal, that they actually give four and five
scalps for a wax image of the Virgin. His Eminence hinted
that there might be difficulties, and he'd think of it I
"Your Prince passed through here on Tuesday, on his way to
Naples; he wants to see 'La Giovina' dance in that new
ballet of 'Paradiso.' They say she is perfectly lovely. The
Prince asked after you, and said something about its not
being etiquette for him to write to you, or that you should
write first, or, I really forget what; you know the slurring
way he has of talking, and how he walks away before he has
finished. He's worse than ever, I think, or probably it is
I that have less patience with him now since you are gone!
"Jekyl told me--in strict confidence, remember--that M. did
not stand well with his Court, and that there would be
nothing wonderful in the Czar's refusing his leave for the
marriage. What you ought to do in that case I cannot
conceive; a convent, I suppose, would be the only thing.
After all, it might probably have been as well if you had
taken poor George. The estate is still a good one, and he
has some amiable points in his character, and he certainly
loved you. I never told you the thousand confessions he made
me, nor his entreaties for my intercession, but there is no
harm now in letting you hear them. It is, however,
impossible to say with whom one could live happily!
George begged of me to send him every letter you wrote to
me, and of course you can use the knowledge of the fact at
your discretion.
"Now, for two little commissions, my dear Kate, and I have
done. I want you to get me a case of Tokay from the Teleki
estate--mind, not Pain's, which, his Eminence says, wants
the oily flavor. Some of the archdukes will manage this for
you. I 'm certain your long eyelashes have got further than
this already. The second is to send me a haunch of Bohemian
venison,--Schwartenschild's, if possible. The Cardinal says
that fat is become as scarce as true piety, and that a well-
fed buck is as rare as a good Christian!
"Are they wearing their corsages pointed at the back?----not
that I care, dearest, for I am above such vanities, but
Clestine wishes to know. When you receive the St. Ursula,
keep her in your own room, and with her face to the west;
and so good-by, and, with many prayers, believe me,
"Affectionately yours,
"THEODOSIA,
"Late Hester Onslow.
"Could you, by any chance, send me a good miniature of
yourself?----perhaps you guess for what purpose.
Haselquist's oil picture is too large for what I want; and,
besides, is really not like you. Even with all its
imperfections his Eminence sits looking at it for hours of
an evening, and says he can scarcely fancy anything
lovelier. I do not ask after Madame de H., for I hate the
woman. His Eminence has told me such things of her! But of
course you can only make the best of it for the present, and
get on as well as you can.
"D'Esmonde tells me that Frank is a fine boy, and very good-
looking, but fearfully dissipated, but I suppose the service
is like the Life Guards with us--and what can one expect? 
propos to this, Norwood has written to me twice some
inexplicable nonsense about you, which I have not replied
to. What does he mean by 'treating a flirt like a flounce'
Jekyl says that the police have stopped his passport, or he
should have been after you to Vienna. This is quite
unintelligible to me, and I don't know why I repeat it."
Never did a frivolous letter give more serious thought, nor bring
gloomier reflections, than did this epistle to Kate Dalton. Her mind
dwelt far less on the paragraph which concerned her own future than
on that which spoke of George,--his devoted affection and his enduring
sorrow! And so it was true that he loved her! He had even confided
the avowal to another, and asked for aid and counsel. Why had he then
concealed it from herself? Was the fault hers? Had her own conduct been
the reason? Had her encouragement of any other estranged him, or was the
teaching of the society in which she moved the reason? Poor fellow! how
unfairly had she treated him,----even to that very last incident of
their last meeting!--and now they were to meet no more! No, death itself
could not more effectually separate them than did space and destiny.
Even this she felt to be better, far better, than the chances of renewed
intimacy in the world. Lady Hester had not told her why she had never
divulged her secret; still less to what end she revealed it now, when
the knowledge must be only misery. The mention of Norwood, and the vague
half-threat connected with his name, gave her but little uneasiness,
since her mind had but space for one absorbing thought,--George loved
her! There was the sum of every reflection; and all the world around
her, in its splendor or its brilliancy, the tortuous paths of political
intrigue, the quiet byways of home-affection, the present and the
future, were all as nothing when weighed against this one thought.
If her first impression had been to blame Lady Hester for revealing the
secret, her second was to thank her with her whole heart. She remembered
D'Esmonde, too, and the reasonings by which he accompanied the delivery
of the letter; and she felt that this consciousness was a blessing
of which no vicissitude could rob her,--that come what might of
disappointment or sorrow in life, here, at least, in her heart of
hearts, was one hoarded treasure to compensate for all. If there were
but one to whom she could confide her secret, with whom she could talk
over her sorrow, she thought that she would be contented. To Nelly she
dared not; to Frank she could not speak of it; what, then, of Nina?
Alas! it was no longer a secret to her! Nina had seen the picture,
and although nothing in her manner betrayed the slightest consciousness,
Kate knew her too well not to feel herself in her power.
Nina's demeanor, however, exhibited nothing of insolent triumph; on the
contrary, her manner was gentle, even to submissiveness, and something
almost affectionate seemed to mingle with the feeling in which she
fulfilled her duties. Kate remarked this, and only needed the courage to
take advantage of it At first the very idea of Nina's consciousness
was torture; but day by day this terror grew weaker, till at last she
actually wished that the moment of explanation was over, and that she
could pour out all her griefs before her. "She may have loved unhappily,
herself; and if so, will pity me. In any case, a frank avowal on my part
will show that I knew nothing of his heart, and but little of my own,
till 'too late.' We are never to meet again," and so-and-so; in fact,
with many a casuistry, she satisfied herself that mere memory could
never be a sin,--that there could be nothing very wrong in looking back
as often as the future seemed lowering and gloomy. It is hard to say if
there might not have been some leaven of "pique" in these reasonings.
The Prince, according to Lady Hester, if he had not entirely forgotten,
was already indifferent about her. Some uncertainty of ceremonial
prevented his writing or hearing from her; and at this very moment he
was following out the ordinary life of dissipation which he led before.
Why care for him,----why even endeavor to nourish an affection that
must be blighted in the end? Besides, her marriage was never one of
inclination; Lady Hester had been most frank in explaining the Prince's
appreciation of it As to her own reasons for the step, she knew them too
well.
All that Kate had seen of life in her Florence experiences told her
that such cases were the ordinary events of the world. Few were happily
married,--disparity of age, inequality of condition, incompatible
tempers, and a hundred other causes were ever at work. Lady Hester used
to tell her that nobody was ever satisfied with their "married lot:
the good and right-minded only pined under it; the less scrupulous
proclaimed their dissatisfaction to the world, and asked for sympathy."
These were the two categories that comprehended all her theory. Now Kate
was quite resolved to be one of the former class; but she saw no reason
why she ought not to have one "confidante" of her cares.
With all the force of these persuasions she could not get over the
awkwardness of the confession, and would have given worlds that Nina
herself would take the first step. That simple-minded creature, however,
appeared dead to every hint or suggestion,--she could never see the
drift of any remark, save in its most obvious sense, and actually pushed
Kate's temper to the last entrenchment of patience by pure stupidity.
"Is it possible--can it be that I am deceived--that she has not
recognized the miniature?" thought Kate. "Is my secret still in my own
keeping?"
As this thought struck her, everything appeared to confirm it,--the
girl's manner, devoid of every trait of imperiousness, and actually
humble to servility. "Oh, if I could but be sure of this,--if I could
know that I could bury both my shame and my sorrow together!" In this
vacillating state of suspense--one day all hope and confidence, the
next, terror and dread--she lived on, till the period drew nigh for
their departure from Vienna.
Madame de Heidendorf had delayed beyond her intention, in the hope of
receiving some French news; and Kate eagerly watched the post for some
tidings from home,--for home it still was, in every feeling of her heart
"No letters again, Nina?" said she, despondingly, as the maid entered
the room.
"None, Madame."
"Have your friends forgotten you, Nina, as well as mine appear to have
done?"
"Nina has but few friends, Madame; and still fewer would think of
writing to her!"
"Poor Nina!" said Kate, affectionately; and the blood rushed to the
girl's face at the words, and her eyes flashed with an expression of
sudden passion.
"No pity, Madame,----no pity!" cried she, with a voice full of emotion,
"or I may forget myself,--forget myself and you also!" And with these
words she hurried from the room, without waiting for more. Kate sat
shocked and abashed by the girl's violence, and yet neither daring to
reprove her nor even remonstrate with her. What abject slavery was this
to feel! How mean did she seem to her own heart! What rottenness was
within that gilded splendor by which she was surrounded! Where was the
ambitious envy with which she once looked up to the rich and powerful
now? Where that intense desire to be among the great and the titled? and
with whom would she not have changed conditions, even to Nina herself?
It is not weak of heart and low of courage that one should face
the great journey of life. Its trials and crosses, even to the most
fortunate, demand all that we can summon of hope and of energy. And
yet so was it that she was about to begin the road--the long and dreary
road--before her! As she sat thus musing, a great noise was heard from
the street without. She arose and opened the window. The whole Platz
was crammed with people, eagerly talking and gesticulating. A surging,
waving motion, too, seemed to sway them, and at length she could detect
that they were slowly proceeding onward towards the gate of the city.
The deep roll of a drum then turned her attention, and, in the far
distance, she saw the glancing bayonets of an infantry column as they
advanced.
Military spectacles are of too frequent recurrence in Vienna to create
much surprise or excitement; and yet, evidently, from the looks and
gestures of the people, they were both present here. The band of a
regiment struck up the national hymn of Austria; and as the proud notes
swelled into the air, a dark body of Tyrolese Jgers poured into the
Platz. Still there was no enthusiasm of the people. They listened to
the loyal sounds in cold apathy. To the Tyrolese succeeded a Grenadier
battalion, after which came a long dense column of infantry of the line,
their knapsacks on their backs, and their bread rations strapped above
them. Behind these was the artillery, the long-tailed black horses
giving a solemn look to the procession, as its clanking sounds fell
mournfully on the ear. From the wide Platz they now moved on, and
passing out of the Krtner gate, defiled into the "Glacis." But a moment
before and that immense space was empty; and now, from every avenue
of the city, troops came pouring in like rivers to the sea. The
black-plumed hunters from Tyrol, the gigantic Croat Grenadiers,
the swarthy Bohemian Cuirassiers, and the white-cloaked dragoons of
Austria,--all were seen advancing and forming as if in battle array.
While Kate's eye ranged eagerly over the field in search of the blue
uniform of the Hungarians, Madame de Heidendorf entered the room with an
open letter in her hand.
"What can this mean?" asked Kate, anxiously. "It is surely not a mere
review?"
"Far from it, Madame," said the Countess, imposingly. "The great drama
is about to begin. News has come that Italy is in open revolt, and fresh
troops are to be despatched thither with all speed. Twelve thousand are
to march today, eight more to-morrow."
"And Frank--"
She stopped, abashed by the disdainful expression of Madame de
Heidendorf s face.
"Your brother's regiment, Madame, will form part of the force, and he
will, of course, contribute the importance of his presence. How happily
constituted must be the mind that can turn from the grand theme of
a whole nation's destiny to the petty fortunes of a corporal or a
sous-lieutenant!"
"And yet so it is," replied Kate, boldly; "dear Frank is nearer to my
heart than all that I see yonder. Oh, yes, Madame," cried she, replying
to the glance of scorn the Countess bestowed, "it is quite true. Mine
is an ignoble spirit. My affections are linked with lowly objects; would
that my ambitions had never risen above them!"
What reply Madame de Heidendorf might have given to this speech, so much
more daring than she had uttered before, there is no knowing, when Frank
burst into the room, and clasped his sister in his arms.
"I have but a moment, Kate, and we are off--off to Italy;" and then,
seeing the Countess, the boy bowed courteously, and apologized for his
abrupt entrance. "Count Stephen has got the command, and placed me on
his staff."
"I hope you may merit this proof of his confidence, sir," said Madame de
Heidendorf, haughtily.
"Frank will be a brave soldier, Madame," broke in Kate. "He is a
Dalton."
"He must be true as well as brave. Fidelity is needed now as much as
valor."
"And who will dare to question mine?" cried Frank; and then, as if
impatient that he should have been led away from a dearer theme, he
placed his arm within Kate's, and drew her towards the window. "I had so
much to say to you, my dearest sister. I have been thinking of nothing
but you--and--and--what you told me. I would break off this match----it
is not too late--you are only betrothed."
"Oh, no, no, Frank; do not give me such counsels. I am pledged in word
and bound in honor. I have taken a solemn vow."
"But you have been deceived,--I know you have; enough that I see such a
woman as that your companion. I tell you again, you must break it off."
"I cannot,--I cannot!"
"Then, by Heaven! I will do it myself. It surely is not for all the
glitter of this state and pomp that you would sell your affections?
These gauds have not corrupted you already? No, no, I read you better
than that Listen to my plan, then,--do not leave this till you hear from
me. If this lady--I do not know her name--insists on your departure, be
as peremptory, and say that you wish to see your family first. You are
not a slave, and cannot be coerced."
"I will hear no more of this, Frank; the very thought is maddening. No,
no, Frank; if you would be my friend, teach me how to fulfil my duty,
my sworn, pledged allegiance; do not seek to shake my faith, nor make me
less resolute in honor."
"It is, then, as I feared," cried he, passionately; "these cursed bribes
have bought you. Oh, it is not thus Nelly would have been won!"
"I know it,--I know it well!" cried she, bursting into tears; "but I
never was like her."
"But you were, and you are, dearest," said he, kissing her forehead,
"our own sweet Kate, that we were all so proud of. Oh, forgive me if I
said what could hurt you, for I would pour out my heart's blood to serve
or to save you."
There was a mournful emphasis on the last two words, which bespoke their
deep meaning; and now, locked in each other's arms, they wept bitterly.
"As the Field-Marshal von Auersberg has just ridden into the palace,
his aide-de-camp ought probably to dry his tears and receive him," said
Madame de Heidendorf, as she sailed proudly out of the room.
"You heard that, Kate?----you heard what she said to me? Think, then,
what kindness and sympathy she will feel for you!" said the boy, as he
dashed his hand indignantly against his forehead. "Was I not right about
these Russians?"
"Come, Frank, let us go to Uncle Stephen," said Kate, trying to smile
and seem at ease; and hand-in-hand they descended the stairs together.
The drawing-room into which they now entered was filled with officers
of different arms of the service, among whom Count Dalton stood
conspicuous, both from his size and the soldierlike character of a
figure that not even old age seemed able to impair.
"How provoking, my sweet niece," said he, taking Kate's hand between
both his, "now to part, just as I was learning the happiness of knowing
you. Here are all these gentlemen grumbling and complaining about
leaving their homes and families, and yet I 'll wager there is not one
amongst them carries away a heavier heart than I do. Come into this
room, my dear; let us have five minutes together." And Kate took his
arm, while he led her forward. Madame de Heidendorf, meanwhile, seated
herself on a sofa, and summoned the most distinguished officers of the
party to inform her as to all that was going forward.
It was one of her favorite affectations to be deeply versed in military
tactics; not that she acknowledged herself deficient in any art or
science, but soldiering was her strong point. She therefore questioned
and cross-questioned these unhappy gentlemen at great length.
"You have no mortars? Do I hear you aright. Colonel Rabowsky? No
mortars?"
"None, Madame."
"And how, may I ask, do you mean to reduce Milan to ashes?"
This was a very puzzling question; and she repeated it in a still more
commanding tone.
"Perhaps that may not be deemed desirable, Madame," modestly insinuated
another officer.
"Not desirable, sir? you said not desirable. Why, really I shall begin
to fancy I ought to go to school again in military matters. Are you
aware, sir, it's the very centre of these wretches; that it is fed
from Switzerland and Piedmont with all that is infamous in political
doctrine? Milan must be bombarded, sir!"
[Illustration: 166]
The Colonel bowed courteously to an opinion expressed with so much
authority.
"You 'll find, at least, that the Field-Marshal will be of my opinion,"
continued she. "As a military position, it is worth nothing."
"But as a capital city, Madame?" mildly interposed the Colonel.
"The old story," said she, contemptuously. "Women and children!"
"Most legitimate objects of protection, I trust, Madame."
But she turned contemptuously away, as if controversy with such an
adversary was beneath her.
"We have three rocket-batteries, Madame," interposed a staff officer,
desirous of offering himself to her notice.
"I hope you will use them with effect, sir. I envy you the pleasure of
seeing them plunging amidst that vile mob it is the fashion to call the
people nowadays."
"I hope we shall do our duty, Madame," said an old, stern-looking major,
who felt little flattered at this interference.
"I should like to see more chivalry,----more ardent devotion in the
defenders of a monarchy," said the Countess. "I can understand coldness
in the lower classes, but that the well-born and the noble should be
apathetic and slow to move is beyond my comprehension."
"Bey'm Blitzen," retorted the Major, "that is not bad I Here we are
going to shed our blood for the Kaiser, and we are told that it is not
enough, without we are born counts and barons."
"What is it, Heckenstein?" said Count Dalton, as he entered the room and
laid his hand familiarly on the other's shoulder. "I have seldom seen
you look so angry."
But the old soldier turned away without a reply.
"Madame de Heidendorf," said the old General, "I know not what you have
said to offend an old and tried servant of the Emperor,--a soldier of
Wagram and Auster-litz,--a faithful follower, when the fortunes of this
great Empire were at the lowest But, believe me, these are not times to
flout loyalty and despise fidelity."
"The times are worse than I thought them," said the Countess, "when
these principles have infected such men as Count Dalton. I had certainly
hoped that his young relative would have received a very different
lesson at his outset in life, nor can I wonder if such teachings end in
evil. Here is the Archduke. How I wish his Highness had come a little
earlier!"
As she spoke, the Prince entered, with all the careless ease of his
ordinary manner. It was impossible to detect from his countenance
whether he regarded the event as a serious one, or simply one of those
popular commotions which are ever occurring in a large empire.
"I know you are discussing politics, or something akin to them," said
he, laughingly. "Madame de Heidendorf has her 'cabinet countenance' on,
and Auersberg is looking as fierce as a field-marshal ought to do when
contradicted. Come, General, present me to the Princess. It is an honor
I have been long desiring. How tired you must be of all this, Madame!"
said he to Kate. "Such wise people as will not talk gossip,--such
high-minded souls as never will condescend to say a good thing, or hear
one, are insupportable." And, seating himself beside her, he rattled
on about Vienna, its society, and its pleasures, with all the ease and
flippancy of a young fashionable of the day, while, in an attitude of
deep respect, not unmixed with a dash of impatience, stood the old Count
before him.
"What does Auersberg want to tell us?" said the Prince, at last, looking
up at the old General's face.
"To say adieu, your Royal Highness."
"You don't go with the troops, surely?" said the Duke, laughing.
"At the head of my own regiment, your Royal Highness."
"Ah, by the bye, the Auersbergs are in your brigade. Very proper that.
And is this my protg?" said he, taking Frank's arm, and drawing him
forward. "There's your best example, sir. Be only as good a soldier,
and the name of Dalton will be a title of nobility amongst us. Good-bye,
Lieutenant General, farewell. Give that canaille a lesson quickly, and
come back to us as soon as you can."
Kate rose and followed Frank out of the room. For a few seconds they
were closely locked in each other's arms, without speaking. "Oh, Frank
dearest! when are we to meet again,--and how?" cried she, passionately.
"In pride and happiness, too, Kate," said the boy, joyfully. "I have no
fears for the future. But what is this, sister dearest,--gold?"
"Do not refuse me, Frank. It is the only happiness left me."
"But this is the Russian's, Kate."
"No, believe me, it is not Count Stephen has made me his heir; he has
given me all his fortune. Even good luck can come too late!" said she,
with a sigh.
"Do not leave this till I write to you, Kate. I will do so very
soon,--that is, if I can; but these are anxious times. You know,
Kate,"--here the boy whispered, in a voice low and tremulous from
agitation,--"You know, Kate, that I only left the ranks a couple of days
ago. I can tell then, better than all these great folk, what soldiers
think and say; they are not as they used to be. Lead them against the
Frenchman, and they will fight as they have ever fought; but if it be
to fire on their own townsfolk,--to charge through streets where they
lounged along, hand-in-hand with the people, like brothers,--they will
not do it."
"This is very alarming, Frank. Have you told the Count?"
"No; nor would I for worlds. What! betray my comrades, and be called
on before a court-martial to say who said this, and what man said t'
other?"
"But could you not, at least, give him some warning?"
"And be ordered from his presence for the presumption, or told that I
was a rebel at heart, or such tidings had never been uttered by me. The
old Feld would as soon believe that this earth was cut adrift to wander
at hazard through all space, as that treason should lurk behind an
Austrian uniform. It would be an evil hour for him who should dare to
tell him so."
"Oh, Frank, how terrible is all this!"
"And yet do I not despair; nay, Kate, but I am even more hopeful for
it; and, as Walstein says, if the Empire halt so long behind the rest of
Europe, she must one day or other take a race to come up with it."
"And is Walstein a----a----" She stopped.
"No; he's very far from a Democrat or a Republican. He 's too well born
and too rich and too good-looking to be anything but a Monarchist. Oh,
if you but saw him! But, hark! there are the trumpets! Here come the
'Wurtem-burgs;' and there's my charger, Kate. Is he not splendid? A
Banat horse, all bone and sinew."
"How I should like to have been a man and a soldier!" said she, blushing
deeply.
"There, that's Walstein,----that's he with the scarlet dolman!" cried
Frank. "But he 's coming over,----he sees us. No, he's passing on. Did
you see him, Kate?--did you remark him?"
"No, Frank dearest; I see nothing but you, my own fond brother." And she
fell upon his neck, weeping.
"Herr Lieutenant!" said a hussar, with his hand to his cap.
"Yes, I 'm ready,--I 'm coming," cried Frank. And with one long, last
embrace he tore himself away, springing down the stairs in mad haste.
"Madame de Heidendorf is good enough to say she will come and see the
troops defile from the Glacis," said the Archduke to Kate, as, still
overwhelmed with sorrow, she stood where Frank had left her. "Perhaps
you would do us the honor to come also?"
Kate accepted the invitation at once, and hurried to her room for a
bonnet.
"Not that one, Madame la Princesse," said Nina, eagerly; "the yellow
with black lace, rather. The national colors will be a flattery to his
Royal Highness."
"What a coquette you are, Nina!"
"And how irresistible would Madame be were she to condescend to be even
a little of one!" said Nina, smiling.
"Perhaps I may yet," said Kate, half sighing as she spoke; and Nina's
dark eyes sparkled as she heard her. "But what do you mean by coquetry,
Nina?" asked she, after a pause.
"It may mean much, Madame, or very little. With such as I am it may be
a rose-colored ribbon; with Madame la Princesse it may be the smile that
wins royalty. Coquetry, after all, is a mere recognition of admiration.
An old Spanish dramatist says, 'That a glance from bright eyes is like
the hoisting of an ensign to acknowledge a salute.'"
"How you run on, Nina, and how ashamed I feel when I catch myself
afterwards thinking over your words!"
Nina laughed merrily at this confession, while she opened the door
for Kate to pass out. In a moment after, Kate was seated beside the
Archduke, and Madame de Heidendorf followed in another carriage.
The Archduke was neither very good-looking nor agreeable. His manners
were not remarkable for any peculiar elegance, nor was there in his
air and bearing any of that special charm which very often seems the
prerogative of royal personages; and yet it would have been excessively
difficult to persuade Kate of all this as she drove along the streets
crowded with uncovered heads. The clank of the escort that rode at
either side, the quick roll of the drum and the rush out of the guard
to salute as he passed, created a sensation of pleasure in her mind
like the enjoyment of a delighted child. Oh, if Nelly could but see
her now!--if dear old papa were but there to look at her; and
Hanserl--little Hans----that loved the Hapsburg House as he loved the
Patron Saint of his own village!
It was, indeed, worth something to taste of splendor like this! And now
she issued forth into the spacious Glacis, glittering with thousands
of bayonets, and trembling under the tramp of the moving squadrons. The
whole line saluted as he drove slowly past, band after band taking up
the sounds, till the proud hymn of Austria filled the whole air. The
soldiers cheered, too, loud and long, for his Imperial Highness was
beloved by the army, and, like all his house, was a thorough soldier.
"You have never seen our troops under arms before!" said he, with a
proud elation in his look. "They are fine fellows, and faithful as they
are brave." He was about to say more, when the dull roll of a drum
was heard along the line, and the deep-voiced command from regiment to
regiment ran, "Alle nieder zum Gebet," and, at the word, every weapon
was lowered, and every head drooped forward in prayer. Not a sound--not
a whisper--was heard in that mighty host, till, after the expiration of
some minutes, the command once more summoned them to arms. Then came
the word "March!" and with a cheer that made the very air vibrate, the
troops set out for "Italy."
CHAPTER XIII. THE MARCH.
Is there any enthusiasm like that of a young soldier setting forth on
his first campaign? High in heart and hope, what can equal the glorious
picture his fancy draws of fame and honor? Where will his imagination
stop in creating scenes of heroic daring or deeds of noble chivalry? In
such a mood Frank Dalton rode along amongst his comrades, with whom at
once he became the greatest favorite. Explain it how one will, or give
up the problem in despair, but there is no denying the fact, the Irish
character has more of high spirits, more buoyancy, than that of any
continental people. Deriving pleasure or amusement from incidents that
others accept as commonplace, making even the rubs and collisions of
life subservient to his playful humor, the Irishman has resources of
ready wit and brilliant fancy you may seek for in vain amongst Germans,
or Italians, or even Frenchmen.
The contrarieties of nature, the contradictions of character, that
puzzle politicians and drive political economists half crazy, are
delightful elements of social intercourse; and what makes the "nation"
ungovernable very frequently renders the "individual" the most
easy-tempered and manageable man of his set. What a boon was it, then,
to the gloomy, thoughtful Bohemian, to the dreary German, or the fitful,
passionate nature of the wild Hungarian, to chance upon one who had
moods of mind to suit them all, and stories of amusing thought that none
of them possessed! Frank was the delight of the regiment; and whether he
rode in the front or in the rear a group was sure to be gathered round
him, listening with eagerness to his stories, or enjoying the quaint
drollery which every passing object or event was sure to elicit.
Emerging at a bound from the petty annoyances and vexatious cares of his
humble position, with all its harassing of debt and poverty, the boy was
almost wild with delight at his newly won freedom. A thorough Dalton,
he forgot every strait and difficulty he had passed through, and thought
only of the present, or so much of the future as his hopes embellished.
Kate's generosity, too, made him feel rich, and he was not unwilling to
be thought so. That passion for ascendancy, that over-eagerness to make
a fair figure before the world, no matter at what material sacrifice
or at what heavy cost, was bred "in his very bone;" but so inveterately
Irish is it that if the nation should ever be visited by the income-tax,
there is not a man in the land who will not over-estimate his means for
the sake of the boast to the collector!
wealthy comrade, if he be but free-handed, is sure to be popular on
a march. The fastidiousness that would stand aloof from more formal
attentions gives way here to the chances of the road; and civilities
that would elsewhere imply obligation are now the mere accidents of the
way.
To the honor of the Austrian service be it said, "Tuft-hunting" is not
to be found there. The officers of a regiment embrace representatives of
every class of the Empire, from the haughtiest names of Europe down to
the sons of the humblest peasant; and yet the camaraderie is perfect.
Very probably there is nothing more contributes to this than the absence
of all secrecy as to each man's resources. The prince is known to be
rich; the son of the little burgher, or Amtmann, is equally known to
be poor. Nothing is expected from any above his means, and no disgrace
attaches to narrow fortune. If, therefore, Frank was not surrounded by
shrewd-witted adventurers, eager to make the most of his extravagance,
he was not the less exposed to the flattering acknowledgments his
generous habits evoked, and the vanity that comes of being distinguished
amongst one's fellows. To be sure, this was his father's failing, and
his grandfather's before him! Frank, then, entertained all the officers
of his squadron on the march, practising a hundred little devices and
surprises for them. Now, it was a cold luncheon, laid out in a wood
at noonday; now, it was a smoking supper in a village, where even the
generals were fain to munch "commissary rations." Even the soldiers of
his "Zug" participated in this liberality, and many a flask of wine
was pledged to the health of the young lieutenant. As if to make him
perfectly happy, the old Count, his uncle, was obliged to hurry forward,
and thus Frank was relieved from the constraint of the only one whose
presence could have imposed reserve.
It was in the boundless freedom of this liberty, unchecked by prudence,
unrestrained by fear of consequences, Frank's lavish nature knew
no bounds. He wrote to Vienna for horses of high price; he ordered
carriages and liveries to be sent after him. The very surprise his
extravagance excited was an incense that he gloried in. How many a
generous nature has been wrecked by stupid admiration! how many a true
heart been corrupted by the vulgarity of notoriety!
"What will the Dalton do next?----what has the fellow in his head now?"
were surmises that he never heard without delight, and stimulated him
to new efforts to create astonishment. Ireland, too, so remote from
all their knowledge,--that far-away island,--furnished many a theme for
wonder, and he repeated, with ecstasy, several of his father's stories
of their former greatness and the barbaric splendor in which they lived.
How easy is self-deception, and what a strange cheat is that a man can
practise on himself! But so was it; he actually forgot the long years of
their obscure poverty, all their hard trials and distresses, the penury
of their daily life,--everything!--and could only think of Kate in all
her splendor, and himself in every indulgence of his fancy. And yet he
loved his father and Nelly too,--loved them both dearly. He would have
given worlds that the old man could have seen him as he rode at the head
of his men. He often felt his eyes grow dim as he fancied the burst of
delight it would have caused him. And poor Nelly! how he pictured her
features glowing with admiration, and yet trembling from agitation, for
he thought of all her warnings.
It is a singular fact, that in the short interval before the tremendous
events of the last great European convulsion, the aristocratic influence
seemed at its very highest point. Never in each State of the Continent
were the claims of family more regarded, nor the sway of proud names
more submissively recognized. Like the fever-flush before death, it
deceived many who beheld it! In the eyes of his astonished comrades,
young Dalton perfectly represented this character. Rich, well born,
brave, and eccentric, his seemed indeed an enviable lot in life.
Happy for him if the deception had stopped short with them! Unluckily,
however, it extended to himself, and he at last believed every fiction
that his own brain suggested.
In this wild delirium of the day-dream he rode along through the deep
glens and valleys of the Tyrol, along the banks of the rapid Inn,
through the glorious vale of Meran, and at last gained the great road
which, through Trent and Rovoredo, debouches on the Lago di Guarda. Here
a despatch from Vienna overtook them, with orders that a small party
should be sent off under some officer of intelligence to examine the
condition of the Stelvio Pass, the highest of all the Alpine roads of
Europe, and which, crossing from the South Tyrol, descends directly into
Italy by the Lake of Como.
Although it was still early, fresh snows were said to have fallen on
that elevated road, and it was an important question whether it were
longer practicable for the transit of artillery. Frank was delighted to
be selected for this duty,--a separate command, no matter bow small or
insignificant, had something adventurous and independent about it that
pleased him. There was a dash of peril, too, in the enterprise; for
already the Valteline and the Brianza were said to be overrun by bands
of patriot troops, raising contributions for the war, and compelling
others to take up arms.
Frank's instructions were, however, to examine and report upon the road,
and, avoiding all possible collision with the enemy, either to unite
with any Austrian brigade he could reach, or, if compelled, to retire
upon the Tyrol. Some of his comrades pitied him for being selected for
this lonely duty, others envied; but all regretted his departure,
and with many a warm wish for a speedy meeting, and many a pledge of
affection, they saw him depart on his enterprise.
In the small "Zug" of twenty men under his command, there was a young
Hungarian cadet, who, although of good family and birth, Frank remarked
never to have seen by any chance in society with the officers. Ravitzky
was a handsome, daring-looking fellow, with that expression of mingled
sadness and intrepidity in his face so peculiarly Hungarian. He was the
best horseman in the regiment, and a thorough soldier in his look and
carriage. It had often puzzled Frank why a youth with such advantages
had not been promoted. On the one or two occasions, however, on which he
asked the question, he had received evasive or awkward replies, and
saw that the inquiry was at the least an unpleasant theme among his
comrades.
Frank Dalton was well pleased at the opportunity now offered to know
something more of this young soldier, almost the only one under his
command who could speak any other language than Hungarian. Ravitzky,
however, although perfectly respectful in his manner, was cold and
reserved, showing no desire for an intimacy at which he might be
supposed to have felt proud. Without actually repelling, he seemed
determined to avoid nearer acquaintanceship, and appeared always happier
when he "fell back," to exchange a few guttural words with his comrades,
than when called to "the front," to converse with his officer.
Frank was piqued at all this; he saw that neither his rank, his supposed
wealth, nor his assumed position imposed upon the cadet; and yet these
were the very claims all his brother-officers had acknowledged. Amazed
at this wound to his self-love, he affected to forget him altogether,
or only remember him as one of the soldiers in his command. So far from
seeming displeased, Ravitzky appeared more at his ease than before, and
as if relieved from the worry of attentions that were distasteful to
him. This conduct completed the measure of Frank's indignation, and
he now began actually to hate the youth, on whom he practised all the
possible tyrannies of military discipline. These Ravitzky bore without
seeming to be aware of them, discharging every duty with an exactitude
that made punishment or even reproof impossible.
It is likely that if Frank had not been corrupted by all the adulation
he had so lately received,--if his self-esteem had not been stimulated
into an absurd and overweening vanity, he would have read this youth's
character aright, and have seen in him that very spirit of independence
which once he himself sought to display, albeit by a very different
road! Now, however, he received everything in a false light,--the
reserve was insolence, the coldness was disrespect, the punctuality in
duty a kind of defiance to him. How often he wished he had never taken
him! The very sight of him was now odious to his eyes.
Austrian troops enjoy so much of freedom on a march, that it is
difficult often for the most exacting martinet to seize opportunities
for the small tyrannies of discipline. Frank's ingenuity was now to be
tried in this way, and, it is but fair to confess, not unsuccessfully.
He compelled the men to appear each morning as smart as if on
parade,--their carbines in the bandoleers, and not slung at the
saddle,--he inspected every belt and strap and buckle, and visited even
the slightest infraction with a punishment Ravitzky accepted all this as
the ordinary routine of discipline, and never, even by a look, appeared
to resent it. Tyranny would seem to be one of the most insidious of
all passions, and, if indulged in little things, invariably goes on
extending its influences to greater ones.
At Maltz a new occasion arose for the tormenting influence of this
power, as the military post brought several letters from Vienna, one of
which was addressed to the cadet Ravitzky. It was about a week before
Frank was indignantly complaining to his sister of the shameless
violation of all feeling exhibited in opening and reading every
soldier's letter. He was eloquently warm in defending such humble
rights, and declaimed on the subject with all the impassioned fervor
of an injured man, and yet so corrupting is power, so subtle are the
arguments by which one establishes differences and distinctions, that
now he himself saw nothing strange nor severe in exercising this harsh
rule towards another.
He was out of temper, too, that morning. The trim and orderly appearance
of the men gave no opportunity of a grumble, and he strutted along on
foot in front of his party, only anxious for something to catch at. On
turning suddenly around, he saw Ravitzky with his open letter before
him, reading. This was a slight breach of discipline on a march where
infractions far greater are every day permitted; but it offered another
means of persecution, and he called the cadet imperiously to the front,
"Are you aware, cadet," said he, "of the general order regarding the
letters of all who serve in the ranks?"
"I am, Herr Lieutenant," said the other, flushing deeply, as he saluted
him.
"Then you knew that you were committing a breach of discipline in
opening that letter?"
"As the letter is written in Hungarian, Herr Lieutenant, I felt that to
show it to you could be but a ceremony."
"This explanation may satisfy you, sir; it does not suffice for me. Hand
me your letter."
Ravitzky grew scarlet at the command, and for an instant he seemed as
though about to dispute it; but duty overcame every personal impulse,
and he gave it.
"I see my own name here," cried Frank, as the one word legible to his
eyes caught him. "How is this?"
Ravitzky grew red and pale in a second, and then stood like one
balancing a difficulty in his own mind.
"I ask again, how comes a mention of me in this document?" cried Frank,
angrily.
"The letter, Herr Lieutenant, is from my cousin, who, aware that I was
serving in the same troop with you, offered to make me known to you."
"And who is this cousin with whom I am so intimate?" said Frank,
proudly.
"Count Ernest Walstein," said the other, calmly.
"What, he is your cousin? Are you really related to Walstein?"
The other bowed slightly in assent
"Then how is it, with such family influence, that you remain a cadet?
you have been two years in the service?"
"Nearly four years, Heir Lieutenant," was the quiet reply.
"Well, four years, and still unpromoted; how is that?"
Ravitzky looked as if unable to answer the question, and seemed confused
and uneasy.
"You have always been a good soldier. I see it in your 'character roll;'
there is not one punishment recorded against you."
"Not one!" said the cadet, haughtily.
"There must, then, be some graver reason for passing you over?"
"There may be," said the other, with a careless pride in his manner.
"Which you know?" said Frank, interrogatively.
"Which I guess at," said Ravitzky.
"Here is your letter, cadet," said Frank, banding it back to him. "I see
you will not make a confidant of me, and I will not force a confession."
Ravitzky took the letter, and, saluting with respect, was about to fall
back, when Frank said,----
"I wish you would be frank with me, and explain this mystery."
"You call it mystery, sir?" said the other, in astonishment "You are an
Irishman born, and call this a mystery?"
"And why not? What has my birth to do with it?"
"Simply that it might have taught the explanation. Is it truth, or am
I deceived in believing that your nation is neither well received nor
kindly met by the prouder country with which you are united; and
that, save when you stoop to blush at your nationality, you are never
recognized as claimant for either office or advancement?"
"This may have been the case once to some extent," said Frank,
doubtingly, "but I scarcely think such differences exist now."
"Then you are more fortunate than we," said Ravitzky.
"But I see men of your nation the very highest in military rank,--the
very nearest to the Sovereign?"
"Their's be the shame, then," said Ravitzky. "There are false hearts in
every land."
"This is a puzzle to me I cannot comprehend."
"I 'll tell you how to understand it all, and easily, too, Herr
Lieutenant. Take this letter and forward it to the Council of War;
declare that Cadet Ravitzky acknowledged to yourself that he was a
Hungarian, heart and soul, and, save the eagle on his chako, had nothing
of Austria about him. Add, that a hundred thousand of his countrymen
are ready to assert the same; and see if they will not make you an
Ober-lieutenant, and send me to Moncacs for life." He held out the
letter, as he spoke, for Frank to take, and looked as proudly defiant as
if daring him to the act.
"You cannot suppose I would do this?"
"And yet it is exactly your duty, and what you took a solemn oath to
perform not a week back."
"And if there be such disaffection in the troops, how will they behave
before an enemy?" asked Frank, eagerly.
"As they have always done; ay, even in this very campaign that now
threatens us, where men are about to strike a blow for liberty, you 'll
see our fellows as foremost in the charge as though the cause at stake
was not their own."
"Ravitzky, I wish you had told me nothing of all this."
"And yet you forced the confession from me. I told Walstein, over and
over, that you were not suited for our plans. You rich men have too
much to lose to venture on so bold a game; he thought otherwise, and all
because you were an Irishman!"
"But I have scarcely ever seen Ireland. I know nothing of its grievances
or wrongs."
"I believe they are like our own," said Ravitzky. "They tell me that
your people, like ours, are warm, passionate, and impatient; generous
in their attachments, and terrible in their hatred. If it be so, and if
England be like Austria, there will be the same game to play out there
as here."
Frank grew thoughtful at these words. He recalled all that the Abb
D'Esmonde had said to him about the rights of a free people and the
duties of citizenship, and canvassed within his own mind the devoirs of
his position; meanwhile Ravitzky had fallen back to the men and taken
his place in the ranks.
"They'll not compromise me before an enemy," thought Frank; "that I may
rely on." And with this trustful assurance he mounted and rode slowly
forward, deeply sunk in thought, and far less pleasantly than was
his wont to be. From all the excitement of his late life, with its
flatteries and fascinations, he now fell into a thoughtful mood, the
deeper that it was so strongly in contrast to what preceded it The
greater interests that now flashed across his mind made him feel the
frivolity of the part he had hitherto played. "Ravitzky is not older
than I am, and yet how differently does he speculate on the future!
His ambitions are above the narrow limits of selfish advancement, and
the glory he aims at is not a mere personal distinction."
This was a dangerous theme, and the longer he dwelt upon it the more
perilous did it become.
The snow lay in deep drifts in many parts of the mountain, and the
progress of the little party became daily slower as they ascended.
Frequently they were obliged to dismount and lead their horses for
miles, and at these times Frank and Ravitzky were always together. It
was intimacy without any feeling of attachment on either side, and yet
they were drawn towards each other by some strange mysterious sympathy.
Their conversation ranged over every topic, from the great events which
menaced Europe to the smallest circumstances of personal history; and in
all Frank found the cadet his superior. It was not alone that his views
were higher, more disinterested, and less selfish, but his judgments
were calmer and better weighed.
"You want to be a count of the Empire, and a grand cross of every
order of Europe," said Ravitzky one day to Frank, at the close of a
rather warm discussion. "I want to see my country free, and live an
humble soldier in the ranks." This bold avowal seemed to separate them
still more widely, and it was plain that each regarded the other with
distrust and reserve. It was after some days of this distance that Frank
endeavored to restore their intimacy by leading Ravitzky to speak of
himself, and at last ventured to ask him how it came that he still
remained a cadet, while others, in every way inferior to him, were made
officers.
"I have refused promotion some half-dozen times over," said the other.
"As a kaiser-cadet, my time of service will expire in a few months
hence; then I shall be free to leave the service. Were I to accept my
grade as an officer, I should have to take an oath of fidelity to the
Emperor, which I would not, and pledge myself to a course that I could
not do."
"Then they probably know the reasons for which you have declined
promotion?"
"Assuredly they can guess them," was the curt reply.
"You are a strange fellow, Ravitzky, and I scarcely understand you."
"And yet there is nothing less a mystery than my conduct or my motives,"
rejoined he, proudly. "My father is a noble, high in the service and
confidence of the Emperor, and although a Magyar by birth, is Austrian
by choice and predilection. My sympathies are with my countrymen. In
obedience to his wishes I have entered this service; in justice to
myself, I mean to quit it when I can with honor."
"And for what, or where?" asked Frank.
"Who knows?" said he, sorrowfully. "Many of our nation have gone over
the seas in search of a new land. Already we are almost as destitute of
a home as the Poles. But why talk of these things, Herr Lieutenant? I
may be led to say that which it would be your duty to report; you ought,
perhaps, as it is, to denounce me. Have no fears; my life would always
be spared; my family's fidelity would save me. This is one of the
glorious privileges of birth," cried he, scornfully. "The 'fusillade'
will be the sentence for one of those poor fellows yonder; but you and I
are too well born for justice to reach."
"Assuredly, I 'll not quarrel with the privilege!" said Frank, laughing.
"And yet, if I were as rich and as great as you are," said Ravitzky, "it
is exactly what I should do! With your fortune and your rank you want
nothing from king or kaiser. Who, then, would not strive for the higher
rewards that only a whole nation can confer?"
Frank blushed deeply at the allusion to his supposed wealth, but had not
the courage to refute it. He, however, sought an opportunity to turn the
conversation to other channels, and avoided, for the future, all mention
of every theme of politics or party. The mischief, however, was done. He
brooded forever in secret over all the Hungarian had told him; while
old memories of fresh wrongs, as narrated by his father long ago, kept
recurring and mingling with them, till not only the themes excluded
other thoughts, but that he felt the character of his own ambition
changing, and new and very different hopes succeeding to his former
ones.
CHAPTER XIV. THE SKIRMISH.
At last they reached the summit of the Stelvio, and began the descent of
the mountain; and what a glorious contrast does the southern aspect of
an Alpine range present to the cold barrenness of the north! From the
dreary regions of snow, they came at length to small patches of verdure,
with here and there a stunted pine-tree. Then the larches appeared,
their graceful feathery foliage checkering the sunlight into ten
thousand fanciful shapes; while streams and rivulets bubbled and rippled
on every side,--not icebound as before, but careering along in glad
liberty, and with the pleasant music of falling water. Lower down, the
grass was waving as the wind moved on, and cattle were seen in herds
revelling in the generous pasture, or seeking shelter beneath the deep
chestnut-trees; for, already, even here, the Italian sun was hot. Lower
again came dark groves of olives and trellised vines; long aisles of
leafy shade traversing the mountain in every direction, now curving in
graceful bends, now in bold zigzags, scaling the steep precipices, and
sometimes hanging over cliffs and crags, where not even the boldest hand
would dare to pluck the ruddy bunches.
Beneath them, as they went, the great plain of Lombardy opened to their
view,--that glorious expanse of wood and waving corn, with towns and
villages dotting the surface; while directly below, at their very feet,
as it were, stretched the Lake of Como, its wooded banks reflected in
the waveless water. What a scene of beauty was that fair lake, with its
leafy promontories, its palaces, and its Alpine background, all basking
under the deep blue of an Italian sky; while perfumes of orange groves,
of acacias and magnolias, rose like an incense in the air, and floated
upwards!
Even the hard nature of the wild Hungarian--the rude dweller beside
the dark-rolling Danube or the rapid Theiss--could not survey the
scene unmoved; and, dismounting from their saddles, the hussars moved
stealthily along, as if invading the precincts of some charmed region.
Frank was in no haste to leave so picturesque a spot, and resolved to
halt for the night beneath the shade of some tall chestnut-trees, where
they had sought shelter from the noonday sun. Como was at his feet,
straight down beneath him was the wooded promontory of Bellagio, and
in the distance rose the Swiss Alps, now tinged with the violet hue of
sunset Never was there a scene less likely to suggest thoughts of war
or conflict If the eye turned from the dark woods of the Brianza to the
calm surface of the lake, everything wore the same aspect of peaceful
security. Figures could be seen seated or walking on the terraces of
the villas; gorgeously decked gondolas stole over the bay, their
gold-embroidered ensigns trailing lazily in the water. Equipages and
troops of horsemen wound their way along the leafy lanes; not a sight
nor sound that did not portend ease and enjoyment.
With all Frank's ardor for adventure, he was not sorry at all this. His
orders to fall back, in case he saw signs of a formidable movement, were
too peremptory to be disobeyed, and he would have turned away with great
reluctance from a picture so temptingly inviting. Now there was no need
to think of this. The great dome of the Milan Cathedral showed on the
horizon that he was not thirty miles from the Austrian headquarters,
while all around and about him vouched for perfect quiet and
tranquillity.
Tempted by a bright moonlight and the delicious freshness of the night,
he determined to push on as far as Lecco, where he could halt for the
day, and by another night-march reach Milan. Descending slowly, they
gained the plain before midnight, and now found themselves on that
narrow strip of road which, escarped from the rock, tracks the margin
of the lake for miles. Here Frank learned from a peasant that Lecco was
much too distant to reach before daybreak, and determined to halt at
Varenna, only a few miles off.
This man was the only one they had come up with for several hours, and
both Frank and Ravitzky remarked the alarm and terror he exhibited as he
suddenly found himself in the midst of them.
"Our cloth here," said the cadet, bitterly, "is so allied to thoughts
of tyranny and cruelty, one is not to wonder at the terror of that poor
peasant."
"He said Varenna was about five miles off," said Frank, who did not like
the spirit of the last remark, and wished to change the topic.
"Scarcely so much; but that as the road was newly mended, we should be
obliged to walk our cattle."
"Did you remark the fellow while we were talking,--how his eye wandered
over our party? I could almost swear that I saw him counting our
numbers."
"I did not notice that," said the cadet, with an almost sneering tone.
"I saw that the poor fellow looked stealthily about from side to side,
and seemed most impatient to be off."
"And when he did go," cried Frank, "I could not see what way he took.
His 'Felice notte, Signori,' was scarce uttered when he disappeared."
"He took us for a patrol," remarked the other, carelessly; and whether
it was this tone, or that Frank was piqued at the assumed coolness of
the cadet, he made no further remark, but rode on to the front of
the party. Shortly after this the moon disappeared; and as the road
occasionally passed through long tunnellings in the rock, the way became
totally obscured, so that in places they were obliged to leave the
horses entirely to their own guidance.
"There 's Varenna at last!" said Frank, pointing out some lights, which,
glittering afar off, were reflected in long columns in the water.
"That may still be a couple of miles off," said Ravitzky, "for the
shores of the lake wind greatly hereabouts. But, there! did you not see
a light yonder?--that may be the village." But as he spoke the light
was gone; and although they continued to look towards the spot for
several minutes, it never reappeared.
"They fish by torchlight here," said Ravitzky, "and that may have been
the light; and, by the way, there goes a skiff over the water at a
furious rate!--hear how the fellows ply their oars."
The dark object which now skimmed the waters must have been close under
the rocks while they were speaking; for she suddenly shot out, and in a
few minutes was lost to view.
"Apparently the clink of our sabres has frightened those fellows, too,"
said Frank, laughing, "for they pull like men in haste."
"It's well if it be no worse," said the cadet.
"Partly what I was thinking, myself," said Frank. "We may as well be
cautious here." And he ordered Ravitzky, with two men, to ride forty
paces in advance, while four others, with carbines cocked, were to drop
a similar distance to the rear.
The consciousness that he was assuming a responsibility made Frank
feel anxious and excited, and at the same time he was not without the
irritating sense that attaches to preparations of needless precaution.
From this, however, he was rallied by remarking that Ravitzky seemed
more grave and watchful than usual, carefully examining the road as he
went along, and halting his party at the slightest noise.
"Did you hear or see anything in front?" asked Frank, as he rode up
beside them.
"I have just perceived," said the cadet, "that the boat which half
an hour ago shot ahead and left us, has now returned, and persists in
keeping a little in advance of us. There! you can see her yonder. They
make no noise with their oars, but are evidently bent on watching our
movements."
"We 'll soon see if that be their 'tactic,'" said Frank, and gave the
word to his men "To trot."
For about half a mile the little party rode sharply forwards, the very
pace and the merry clink of the accoutrements seeming to shake off that
suspectful anxiety a slower advance suggests. The men were now ordered
to walk their horses; and just as they obeyed the word, Ravitzky called
out, "See! there she is again. The winding of the bay has given them the
advantage of us, and there they are still in front!"
"After all," rejoined Frank, "it may be mere curiosity. Cavalry, I
suppose, are seldom seen in these parts."
"So much the better," said Ravitzky, "for there is no ground for them to
manouvre, with a mountain on one hand, and a lake on the other. There!
did you see that light? It was a signal of some kind. It was shown
twice; and mark, now! it is acknowledged yonder."
"And where is the boat?"
"Gone."
"Let us push on to Varenna; there must be some open ground near the
village!" cried Frank. "Trot!"
An older soldier than Frank might have felt some anxiety at the position
of a party so utterly defenceless if attacked; perhaps, indeed, his
inexperience was not his worst ally at this moment, and he rode on
boldly, only eager to know what and where was the peril he was called
on to confront Suddenly Ravitzky halted, and called out, "There's a tree
across the road."
Frank rode up, and perceived that a young larch-tree had been placed
across the way, half carelessly, as it seemed, and without any object of
determined opposition.
Two men dismounted by his orders to remove it, and in doing so,
discovered that a number of poles and branches were concealed beside the
rocks, where they lay evidently ready for use.
"They've had a Tyroler at work here," cried an old Corporal of the
Hussars; "they mean to stop us higher up the road, and if we fall back
we 'll find a barricade here in our rear."
"Over with them into the lake," said Frank, "and then forward at once."
Both orders were speedily obeyed, and the party now advanced at a rapid
trot.
They were close to Varenna, and at a spot where the road is closely
hemmed in by rocks on either side, when the sharp bang of a rifle was
heard, and a shrill cry shouted something from the hillside, and
was answered from the lake. Ravitzky had but time to give the word
"Forwards!" when a tremendous fire opened from the vineyards, the
roadside, and the boat. The red flashes showed a numerous enemy; but,
except these, nothing was to be seen. "Forwards, and reserve your fire,
men!" he cried. And they dashed on; but a few paces more found them
breasted against a strong barricade of timber and country carts,
piled up across the way; a little distance behind which rose another
barricade; and here the enemy was thickly posted, as the shattering
volley soon proved.
As Frank stood irresolute what course to take, the Corporal, who
commanded the rear, galloped up to say that all retreat was cut off
in that direction, two heavy wagons being thrown across the road, and
crowds of people occupying every spot to fire from.
"Dismount, and storm the barricade!" cried Frank; and, setting the
example, he sprang from his saddle, and rushed forwards.
There is no peril a Hungarian will not dare if his officer but lead
the way; and now, in face of a tremendous fire at pistol-range, they
clambered up the steep sides, while the balls were rattling like hail
around them.
The Italians, evidently unprepared for this attack, poured in a
volley and fled to the cliffs above the road. Advancing to the second
barricade, Frank quickly gained the top, and sprang down into the road.
Ravitzky, who was ever close behind him, had scarcely gained the height,
when, struck in the shoulder by a ball, he dropped heavily down upon the
ground. The attack had now begun from front, flanks, and rear together,
and a deadly fire poured down upon the hussars without ceasing, while
all attempt at defence was hopeless.
"Open a pass through the barricade," shouted Frank, "and bring up the
horses!" And while some hastened to obey the order, a few others grouped
themselves around Ravitzky, and tried to shelter him as he lay.
"Don't leave me to these fellows, Dalton," cried he, passionately;
"heave me over into the lake rather."
Frank now saw that the poor fellow's cheek was torn with a shot, and
that his left hand was also shattered.
"The fire is too heavy, Herr Lieutenant; the men cannot open a way for
the cattle," whispered the old Corporal.
"What's to be done then?" asked Frank; but the poor Corporal fell dead
at his side as he spoke. The brunt of the conflict was, however, at the
barricades; for, despairing of any prospect of removing the obstacles,
many of the hussars had ridden recklessly at them, and there, entangled
or falling, were shot down remorselessly by the enemy. One alone forced
his way, and with his uniform bloody and in rags dashed up to Frank.
[Illustration: 190]
"Get the cadet up in front of you," whispered Frank; and Ravitzky,
who was now unconscious, was lifted into the saddle; while the hussar,
grasping him with his strong arms, held him against his chest.
"Forward, now," said Frank; on, to the first village, "and see him cared
for."
"But you, Herr Lieutenant,--what's to become of you?"
"I 'll not leave my poor wounded comrades."
"There 's not a living man amongst them," cried the hussar. "Come along
with us, Herr Lieutenant; we may want your help too."
The firing ceased at this moment; and to the wild shouts and din of
conflict there succeeded a dead silence.
"Keep quiet--keep quiet--stand close beneath the rock," whispered Frank;
"here comes the boat." And, with slow and measured stroke, the skiff
neared the shore, about twenty paces from where they stood.
"Pull in boldly," cried a gruff voice, in Italian; "there's nothing to
fear now: neither man nor horse could survive that fire."
"Would that the great struggle could be accomplished so easily!" said a
softer tone, which Frank almost fancied he had heard before.
Lanterns were now seen moving in the space between the barricades; and
crowds pressed down to examine and pillage the dead.
"Have you found the officer's body?" asked he of the soft voice.
"I suspect the party was under a sergeant's command," said another.
"No, no," rejoined the other; "Giuseppe was positive that he saw an
officer."
"See that he has not escaped, then," said the other, eagerly. "The tale
of this night's adventure might be told in two ways at Milan."
"The cadet is dying, sir; his head has fallen back," whispered the
hussar to Frank.
"The lake, Dalton, the lake!" muttered the dying man, as he threw his
arms around Frank's neck. Frank caught him while he was falling, but,
overborne by the weight, reeled back against the rock.
"How many are in the boat?" whispered Frank.
"I see but one man, sir," said the hussar.
"Now for it, then," said Frank; "place him between us on a carbine, and
make for the boat."
With the energy of a newly inspired hope, the men obeyed in an instant;
and, carrying their wounded comrade, moved stealthily along beneath the
shadow of the rock. It was only as they emerged from this, and gained
the little gravelly beach, that their figures could be seen.
"Be quiet now, men, and leave that fellow to me," said Frank, as he
cocked his pistol. The clank of the sabres, however, seemed warning
enough for the crafty Italian, who jumped at once into the lake. With a
rush, the Hungarians sprang into the skiff, while Frank, seizing it by
the prow, pushed boldly out. The plunge and the splash had, meanwhile,
attracted notice, and several hurried down to the beach. Frank had but
time to order his men to lie down, when a crashing volley flew over
them. "Now, to your oars, boys, before they can load again." The
light skiff almost rose out of the water to their vigorous stroke: and
although the balls tore incessantly amongst them, they continued to row
on. Sheets of bright flame flashed across the water, as volley after
volley followed; but the Hungarians were soon out of the reach of the
fire, with no other loss than some slight wounds.
At first it seemed as if some pursuit were intended; but this was soon
abandoned, and the noise of horses and wheels on the road showed that
the multitude were departing land-wise. Frank now bethought him what
was best to be done. If the country were really in open revolt, the only
chance of safety lay in surrendering to something like authority; if
this were a mere partial outbreak, in all likelihood the opposite shores
of the lake would offer a refuge. A single light, like a star, shone in
the far distance, and thither Frank now steered the boat. Ravitsky
lay against his knees, his head on Frank's lap, breathing heavily, and
occasionally muttering to himself, while the men kept time to the oars
with a low, mournful chant, which sounded at least like a death-wail
over their comrade.
The lake opposite Varenna is nearly at its widest part; and it was full
three hours after the occurrence of the skirmish that they drew near
to the light, which they now saw proceeded from a little boat-house
belonging to a villa a short distance from shore. A small harbor, with
several boats at anchor in it, opened on the water's edge, and a
great flight of marble steps led up to a terraced garden, adorned with
fountains and groups of statuary.
Frank saw at once that he had invaded the precincts of one of those
princely villas which the Milanese nobility possess on the lake, and
was uncertain which course to take. His Austrian uniform, he well knew,
would prove a sorry recommendation to their kind offices. For some
time back the breech between the Austrians and the Lombards had gone on
widening, till at length every intercourse had ceased between them; and
even the public places resorted to by the one were sure to be avoided
on that account by the other. Scarcely a day passed without Milan
witnessing some passages of hostility or insolence, and more than one
fatal duel showed how far political dislike had descended into personal
hatred.
To ask for aid and assistance under circumstances such as these, would
have been, as Frank felt, a meanness; to demand it as a right would have
been as insolent a pretension; and yet what was to be done? Ravitzky's
life was in peril; should he, from any scruple whatever, hazard the
chances of saving his poor comrade? "Come what may," thought he, "I'll
claim their succor--theirs be the shame if they refuse it!"
The approach was longer than he suspected, and, as he went along, Frank
had occasion to remark the tasteful elegance of the grounds, and the
costly character of all the embellishments. He saw that he was about
to present himself before one of the "magnates" of the land, and half
prepared himself for a haughty reception. Crossing a little bridge, he
found himself on a grassy plateau, on which a number of windows looked
out; and these now all lay open, while seated within were several
persons enjoying the Italian luxury of a "bel fresco," as the air of the
lake gently stirred the leaves, and carried some faint traces of Alpine
freshness into the plains beneath. A large lamp, covered with a deep
shade, threw a dubious light through the chamber, and gave to the group
all the effect and coloring of a picture.
On an ottoman, supported by pillows, and in an attitude of almost
theatrical elegance, lay a lady, dressed in white, a black veil fastened
in her hair behind, being half drawn across her face. At her feet sat
a young man, with an air of respectful attention; and a little further
off, in an easy-chair, reclined the massive proportions of a priest,
fanning himself with his skull-cap, and seemingly gasping for air.
Behind all, again, was another figure,--a tall man, who, with a cigar in
his mouth, slowly paced the chamber up and down, stopping occasionally
to hear the conversation, but rarely mingling in it.
There was that air of indolent enjoyment and lassitude, that mingled
aspect of splendor and neglect, so characteristically Italian in the
scene, that Frank forgot himself, as he stood still and gazed on the
group, and even listened to the words.
"After all," said the young man, in Italian, "it is better to let them
do the thing in their own way! Catting off a patrol here, shooting
a sentry there, stabbing a general to-day, poisoning a field-marshal
to-morrow, seems to our notions a very petty war, but it makes a country
very untenable in the end!"
"Fuori i barbari! over the Alps with them at any cost!" growled the
priest.
"I agree with you," said the tall man, stopping to brush the cinder from
his cigar, "if you can drive them away in a stand-up fight; and I don't
see why you could not! Numerically, you are about five hundred to one;
physically, you look their equals. You have arms in abundance; you know
the country; you have the wishes of the people--"
"The prayers of the Church," interposed the lady.
"Beati sunt illi qui moriuntur pro patri," muttered the padre.
"You and I, father," said the young man, "would like a little of that
beatitude in this world too."
Frank had now heard more than he had desired to hear; and, unhooking
his sabre, he suffered it to clink at his heels as he boldly advanced
towards the windows.
"Who have we there?" cried the tall man, advancing to the terrace, and
challenging the stranger.
Frank replied, in French, that he was an Austrian officer, whose party
had been waylaid near Varenna, and who had made his escape with a
wounded comrade and a few others.
"So the shots we heard came from that quarter?" whispered the youth to
the lady.
She signed to him to be cautious, and the tall man resumed,----
"This is a private villa, sir; and as yet, at least, neither an Austrian
barrack nor an hospital."
"When I tell you, sir," said Frank, with difficulty restraining his
passion, "that my comrade is dying, it may, perhaps, excite other
feelings than those of national animosity."
"You are a Hungarian?" asked the youth.
"What of that?" broke in the padre. "Tutti barbari! tutti barbari!"
Meanwhile the tall man leaned over where the lady sat, and conversed
eagerly with her.
"You have to think how it will look, and how it will tell abroad," said
he, in English. "How shall we persuade the people that we are in their
cause if you make this villa an Austrian refuge?"
She whispered something low in reply, and he rejoined impatiently,----
"These are small considerations; and if we are to be always thinking of
humanity, let us give up the game at once."
"You 'll not refuse my comrade the consolations of his Church, at
least?" said Frank. "I see a reverend father here--"
"And you 'll never see him follow you one step out of this chamber,"
broke in the priest "Ego autem tanquam Burdus, non audiebam," muttered
he, with a wave of his hand.
"But if he be a good Catholic," interposed the youth, half slyly.
"Let them be confounded who seek to do me evil!" said the priest, with a
solemnity that said how deeply he felt for his own safety.
"This discussion is lasting too long," said Frank, impatiently. "I
cannot coerce your humanity, but I can demand as a right that a soldier
of your Emperor shall receive shelter and succor."
"I told you so," said the tall man, still addressing the lady in
English; "first the entreaty,----then the menace."
"And what are we to do?" asked she, anxiously.
"Let them occupy the boat-house; there are beds in the lofts. Jekyl will
see that they have whatever is necessary; and perhaps by to-morrow we
shall get rid of them." Turning towards the youth, he spoke to him for a
few minutes rapidly, and the other replied, "You are right I 'll look
to it." He arose as he spoke, and bowing politely to Frank, pronounced
himself ready to accompany him.
With a few words of apology for his intrusion, as awkwardly uttered as
they were ungraciously received, Frank retired from the chamber, to
retrace his steps to the harbor.
Little as he was disposed to be communicative, Albert Jekyl--for it
was our old acquaintance--contrived to learn, as they went along, every
circumstance of the late encounter.
The pliant Jekyl fully concurred in the indignant epithets of cowards
and assassins bestowed by Frank upon his late assailants, deplored with
him the miserable and mistaken policy of revolt among the people, and
regretted that, as foreigners themselves, they could not offer the
hospitality of the villa to the wounded man without exposing their lives
and fortunes to an Infuriated peasantry.
"What nation do you then belong to?" asked Frank, shrewdly concealing
his knowledge of English.
"We are, so to say, of different countries," said Jekyl, smiling, and
evading the question. "The padre is a Florentine--"
"And the lady?"
"She is a very charming person, and if it were not that she is a little
over-devout, a shade too good, would be the most delightful creature in
existence."
"The tall man is her husband, I conclude."
"No,----not her husband," smiled Jekyl again; "a person you 'll like
much when you see more of him. Short and abrupt, perhaps, at first, but
so kind-hearted and so generous."
"And has the villa got a name?" asked Frank, in a voice of some
impatience at finding how little his companion repaid his frankness.
"It is called La Rocca," said Jekyl. "Had you not been a stranger in
Italy, you would scarcely have asked. It is the most celebrated on the
whole lake."
Frank thought he had heard the name before; but when, where, or how, he
could not remember. Other cares were, besides, too pressing upon him to
make him dwell on the subject, and he willingly addressed himself to the
more urgent duties of the moment.
The boat-house stood in no need of all Jekyl's apologies. Frank had
lodged in many inferior quarters since he had begun soldiering; there
were several excellent bedrooms, and a delightful little salon
which looked directly out upon the lake. Ravitzky, too, had rallied
considerably, and his wounds, although formidable from the loss of
blood, showed nothing likely to prove fatal. Jekyl pledged himself to
send a surgeon at once to him; and, adding all kinds of civil speeches
and offers of personal services, at last left the friends together to
exchange confidences.
"What are our hosts like, Dalton?" said the cadet
"You would call them most patriotic, Ravitzky, for they would scarcely
give us shelter. Their only regret seemed that our friends yonder had
not done the work better, and finished off the rest of us."
"It is not pleasant to accept of an ungracious hospitality; but
I suppose that I, at least, shall not trouble them long. There 's
something hot goes on ebbing here that tells of internal bleeding; and
if so, a few hours ought to suffice."
Frank did his best to rally his poor comrade; but the task is a
difficult one with those whose fear of death is small.
"You'll have to write to Milan, Dalton," said he, suddenly.
"I should rather say, to hasten thither at once," said Frank. "I ought
to report myself as soon as possible."
"But you mustn't leave me, Dalton; I cannot part with you.  few hours
is not much to you; to me it is a life long. I want you also to write to
Walstein for me; he 'll take care to tell my mother."
Frank knew well the breach of discipline this compliance would entail,
and that he could scarcely be guilty of a graver offence against duty;
but Ravitzky clung to his wish with such pertinacity, throwing into the
entreaty all the eagerness of a last request, that Frank was obliged to
promise he would remain, and let the result take what shape it might.
While he, therefore, gave orders to his only unwounded comrade to hold
himself in readiness to set out for Milan by daybreak, he proceeded to
write the brief despatch which was to record his disaster. There are few
sadder passages in the life of a young soldier than that in which he has
to convey tidings of his own defeat. Want of success is so linked
and bound up with want of merit, that every line, every word, seems a
self-accusation.
However inevitable a mishap might appear to any witnessing it, a mere
reader of the account might suggest fifty expedients to escape it. He
knew, besides, the soldierlike contempt entertained in the service for
all attacks of undisciplined forces, and how no party, however small, of
"regulars" was esteemed insufficient to cope with a mob of peasants
or villagers. Any contradiction to so acknowledged a theory would be
received with loud reprobation, and, whatever came of it, the most
inevitable result would be the professional ruin of him unlucky enough
to incur such a failure.
"There's an end of the career of the Lieutenant von Dalton," said Frank,
as he concluded the paper. "Neither his uncle, the Field-Marshal, nor
his sister, the Princess, will have favor enough to cover delinquency
like this." It did, indeed, seem a most humiliating avowal, and probably
his own depressed state gave even a sadder coloring to the narrative. He
accompanied this despatch by a few lines to the Count, his grand-uncle,
which, if apologetic, were manly and straightforward; and, while bearing
a high testimony to Ravitzky's conduct, took all the blame of failure to
himself alone.
He would gladly have lain down to rest when this last was completed, but
the cadet pressed eagerly for his services, and the letter to Walstein
must be written at once.
"The surgeon tells me that there is internal bleeding," said he, "and
that, should it return with any degree of violence, all chance of
recovery is hopeless. Let us look the danger boldly in the face, then,
Dalton; and, while I have the time, let me tell Walstein all that I have
learned since we parted. The letter I will confide to your safe keeping
till such time as it can be forwarded without risk of discovery."
"Is there necessity for such precaution?" asked Frank.
"Can you ask me the question?"
"Then how am I to write it?" said he.
"Simply from my dictation," replied the other, calmly. "The sentiments
will not be yours, but mine. The mere act of the pen, for which these
fingers are too weak, can never wound the susceptibility of even your
loyalty. You are not satisfied with this?"
Frank shook his head dubiously.
"Then leave me where I am. I ask no companionship, nor friendship
either,--or, if you prefer it, hasten to Milan and denounce me as a
traitor. My character is well enough known not to need corroboration to
your charge; the allegation will never hurt me, and it may serve you,
Ay, Herr Lieutenant, it will prove an opportune escape for the
disgrace of this unlucky night. They will forgive you much for such a
disclosure."
Frank's temper would have been insufficient to bear such an insult
as this, had not the words been spoken by one already excited to the
madness of fever, and whose eye now flashed with the wild glare of
mania.
It was long before Frank could calm down the passionate excitement of
the sick man, and fit him for the task he wished to execute; and even
then Ravitzky undertook it in a sullen, resentful spirit that seemed to
say that nothing short of the necessity would have reduced him to such
a confidence. Nor was this all. Pain and nervous irritability together
made him difficult, and occasionally impossible, to understand. The
names of people and places of Hungarian origin Frank in vain endeavored
to spell; the very utmost he could do being to follow the rapid
utterance with which the other at times spoke, and impart something like
consistency to his wild, unconnected story.
That Ravitzky had been employed in secret communications with some of
the Hungarian leaders was plain enough, and that he had held intercourse
with many not yet decided how to act was also apparent. The tangled web
of intrigue was, however, too intricate for faculties laboring as his
were; and what between his own wanderings and Frank's misconceptions,
the document became as mysterious as an oracle. Perhaps Frank was
not sorry for this obscurity; or, perhaps, like the lady who consoled
herself for the indiscretion of keeping a lover's picture by the
assurance that "it was not like him," he felt an equal satisfaction in
thinking that the subject of his manuscript could never throw any light
upon any scheme that ever existed. Now it ran on about the feelings
of the Banat population, and their readiness to take up arms; now it
discussed the fordage #of rivers in Transylvania. Here was an account
of the arms in the arsenal of Arad; there a suggestion how to cut off
Nugent's corps on the Platen See. At times it seemed as if a great Sclav
revolt were in contemplation; at others the cause appeared that of the
Hungarian nobles alone, anxious to regain all the privileges of the old
feudalism. "At all events, it is rebellion," thought Frank; and heartily
glad was he when the task was completed, and everything save the address
appended. It was now sealed, and by Ravitzky's advice deposited within
the linings of Frank's pelisse, till such time as a safe opportunity
might offer of forwarding it to Walstein.
The task occupied some hours; and when it was completed, so tired was
Frank by former exertion and excitement, that he lay down on the floor,
and with his head on the sick man's bed, fell fast asleep. Such had
been his eagerness to finish this lengthy document, that he had never
perceived that he was watched as he wrote, and that from the little
copse beside the window a man had keenly observed him for several hours
long.
Ravitzky, too, fell into a heavy slumber; and now, as both slept, a
noiseless foot crossed the floor, and a man in the dark dress of a
priest drew nigh the bedside. Waiting for some seconds as if to assure
himself of the soundness of their sleep, he bent down and examined their
features. Of the cadet he took little notice; but when his eyes fell
upon Frank's face, pale and exhausted as he lay, he almost started back
with astonishment, and for several minutes he seemed as if trying to
disabuse himself of an illusion. Even the uniform appeared to surprise
him, for he examined its details with the greatest care. As he stood
thus, with the pelisse in his hand, he seemed suddenly to remember
the letter he had seen placed within the lining; and then, as suddenly
drawing out his penknife, he made a small aperture In the seam, and
withdrew the paper. He was about to replace the pelisse upon the bed,
when, by a second thought, as it were, he tore off the envelope of the
letter, and reinserted it within the lining.
A single glance at it appeared to convey the whole tenor of its
contents, and his dark eyes ran over the words with eager haste; then,
turning away, he moved cautiously from the room. Once in the free air
again, he reopened the paper, his sallow features seeming to light up
with a kind of passionate lustre as he traced the lines. "It is not--it
cannot be without a meaning that we are thus forever meeting in life!"
cried he; "these are the secrets by which destiny works its purpose, and
we blindly call them accident! Even the savage knows better, and deems
him an enemy who crosses his path too frequently. Ay, and it will come
to this one day," muttered he, slowly; "he or I,----he or I." Repeating
this over and over, he slowly returned to the villa.
CHAPTER XV. A VILLA AND ITS COMPANY
Having told our readers that the villa was called La Rocca, it is
perhaps needless that we should say that the lady was our old friend
Lady Hester, who, under the spiritual guidance of the Canon of the
Duomo, was now completing her religious education, while Lord Norwood
was fain to escape the importunity of duns and the impertinence of
creditors by a few weeks' retirement in this secluded region. Not that
this was his only inducement. For some time back he had pressed his
claim on various members of his Government for place or employment. He
had in vain represented the indignity of a peer reduced to beggary,
or the scarcely better alternative of play for support He had
tried--unsuccessfully, however--every sort of cajolery, menace, and
flattery, to obtain something; and after successively offering his
services for or against Carlism in Spain, with Russia or against her in
the Caucasus, with twenty minor schemes in Mexico, Sicily, Greece, and
Cuba, he at last determined on making Northern Italy the sphere of his
abilities, wisely calculating that before the game was played out he
should see enough to know what would be the winning side.
An accidental meeting with D'Esmonde, which renewed this old intimacy,
had decided him on taking this step. The Abb had told him that the
English Government of the day was secretly favorable to the movement;
and although, from the necessities of State policy and the requirements
of treaties, unable to afford any open or avowed assistance, would still
gladly recognize his participation in the struggle, and, in the event of
success, liberally reward him.
"A new kingdom of Upper Italy, with Milan for the capital, and Viscount
Norwood the resident minister plenipotentiary," there was the whole
episode, in three volumes, with its "plot," "catastrophe," and "virtue
rewarded," in appropriate fashion; and as times were bad, neither racing
nor cards profitable, patriotism was the only unexplored resource he
could think of.
Not that my Lord had much faith in the Abb. Far from it. He thought all
priests were knaves; but he also thought "that he 'll not cheat me.
No, no; too wide awake for that He 'll not try that dodge. Knows where
I 've graduated. Remembers too well what school I come of." He was
perfectly candid, too, in this mode of reasoning, calmly telling
D'Esmonde his opinions of himself, and frankly showing that any attempt
at a "jockey" of him must inevitably fail. The Abb, to do him justice,
took all this candor well,--affected to deem it the mere ebullition of
honest John Bullism; and so they were well met. At times, indeed,
the priest's enthusiasm carried him a little away, and he ventured to
speculate on the glorious career that conversion would open to the noble
Viscount, and the splendid fruits such a change would be certain to
produce. Norwood was, however, too practical for such remote benefits;
and if the Abb couldn't "make the thing safe," as he styled it, would
not listen to this suggestion. A rich Italian princess,--there were two
or three such prizes in the wheel,--or an infanta of Spain, might solace
many a theological doubt; but Norwood said there was no use in quoting
the "fathers" when he was thinking only of the "daughters."
And the priest wisely seemed to take him at his word. As for Lady
Hester, political intrigue was quite new to her, and, consequently, very
delightful. Since the Cardinal's departure for Rome, she had begun to
weary somehow of the ordinances of her new faith. The canonico but ill
replaced his Eminence. He had none of that velvety smoothness of manner,
that soft and gentle persuasiveness of the dignitary He could neither
smile away a doubt nor resolve a difficulty by a "bon mot" It is
but fair to say that he was no ascetic, that he loved good cheer
and pleasant converse, and was free to let others participate in the
enjoyment. Lady Hester, was, however, too much habituated to such
indulgences to reckon them other than necessaries. D'Esmonde, if he had
had time, might have compensated for all these deficiencies, but he
was far too deeply engaged with other cares, and his air of grave
preoccupation was more suited to awe her Ladyship than suggest ease in
his presence. And now we come to Albert Jekyl,--the last member of this
incongruous family. Nothing was less to his taste than any fanaticism,
whether it took the form of religion or politics. All such extravagances
were sure to interfere with society, impede intercourse, and disturb
that delightful calm of existence wherein vices ripen, and where men of
his stamp gather the harvest.
To overthrow a Government, to disturb the settled foundations of a
State, were, to his thinking, a species of inconvenance that savored
of intense vulgarity; and he classified such anarchists with men who
would like to smash the lamps, tear down the hangings, and destroy the
decorations of a salon in which they were asked to pass the evening,
preferring to sit down amid ruin and wreck rather than eat their supper
at a well-ordered and well-furnished board.
To Jekyl's eyes it was a very nice world as it was, if people would
only let it alone. "A world of bright eyes and soft tresses and white
shoulders, with Donizetti's music and Mot's champagne, was not to
be despised, after all." He had no sympathies, therefore, with these
disturbers; but he was too well bred ever to oppose himself to the
wishes of the company, and so he seemed to concur with what he could not
prevent. He could have wished that the Italians would take a lesson from
the Swiss, who only revolt when there is nothing else to do, and never
take to cutting each other's throats during the season when there are
travellers to be cheated; "but, perhaps," said he, "they will soon
get enough of it, and learn that their genius lies more in ballets and
bonbons than in bombs and rockets."
Of such various hopes and feelings were the party made up who now
awaited D'Esmonde's presence at the supper-table. It was past midnight,
and they had been expecting him with impatience for above an hour back.
Twice had the canonico fallen asleep, and started up with terror at what
he called a "fantasma di fame." Jekyl had eaten sardines and oysters
till he was actually starving. Lady Hester was fidgety and fretful,
as waiting always made her; while Norwood walked from the room to the
terrace, and out upon the grass to listen, uneasy lest any mischance
should have befallen one who was so deeply involved in their
confidences.
"It is but three or four and twenty miles to Milan," muttered Norwood;
"he might easily have been here by this."
"The road is infested with banditti," growled out the padre.
"Banditti!" said Norwood, contemptuously. But whether the sneer was
intended for the cut-throats' courage, or the folly of men who would
expect any booty from a priest, is hard to say; clearly the padre took
it in the latter sense, for he rejoined,----
"Even so, Milordo. When I was cur of Bergamo, they stopped me one night
on the Lecco road. A bishop was on a visit with me, and I had gone up to
Milan to procure some fish for our Friday's dinner. Oim! what a turbot
it was, and how deliciously it looked at the bottom of the calessino,
with the lobsters keeping guard at either side of it, and a small basket
of Genoa oysters,--those rock beauties that melt in the mouth like
a ripe strawberry! There they were, and I had fallen asleep, and was
dreaming pleasantly. I thought I saw St Cecilia dressing 'filets de sole
aux fines herbes,' and that she was asking me for sweet marjoram, when
suddenly I felt a sharp stick, as it were, in my side; and starting up,
I felt the point--the very point--of a thin stiletto between my ribs.
"'Scusi, padre mio,' said a whining voice, and a great black-bearded
rascal touched his cap to me with one hand, while with the other he held
the dagger close to my side, a comrade all the time covering me with a
blunderbuss on the opposite side of the cart,--'scusi, padre mio,
but we want your pursel' 'Maladetto sia--' 'Don't curse,' said he,
beggingly,--'don't curse, padre, we shall only have to spend more money
in masses; but be quick, out with the "quattrini."'
"'I have nothing but the Church fund for the poor.' said I, angrily.
"'We are the poor, holy father,' whined the rogue.
"'I mean the poor who hate to do evil,' said I.
"'It grieves us to the soul when we are driven to it!' sighed the
scoundrel; and he gave me a gentle touch with the point of the stiletto.
Dark as it was, I could see the wretch grin as I screamed out.
"'Be quick,' growled out the other, roughly, as he brought the wide
mouth of the trombone close to my face. There was no help for it I had
to give up my little leathern pouch with all my quarter's gatherings.
Many a warning did I give the villains of the ill-luck that followed
sacrilege,--how palsies and blindness and lameness came upon the limbs
of those who robbed the Church. They went on counting the coins without
so much as minding me. At last, when they had fairly divided the booty,
the first fellow said, 'One favor more, holy father, before we part.'
"'Would you take my coat or my cassock?' said I, indignantly.
"'Heaven forbid it!' said he, piously; 'we want only your blessing,
padre mio.'
"'My blessing on thieves and robbers!'
"'Who need it more, holy father?' said he, with another stick of the
point,----'who need it more?'
"I screamed aloud, and the wretches this time laughed outright at my
misery. Meanwhile they both uncovered and knelt down in the road before
me. Oim! oim! There was no help for it I had to descend from the
calessino!"
[Illustration: 208]
"And did you bless them, father?" asked Jekyl.
"That did I! for when I tried in the middle of the benediction to slip
in a muttering of 'Confundite ipsos qui quaerunt animam meam,' the
whining rogue popped out his accursed weapon, and cried, 'Take care,
holy father! We only bargain for the blessing.'"
"They left you the fish, however?" said Norwood.
"Not an oyster!" sighed the priest.
"'You would not have us eat flesh on the fast, padre mio!' said the
hypocritical knave. 'Poor fellows like us have no dispensation, nor the
money to buy it' And so they packed up everything, and then, helping me
to my seat, wished me a pleasant journey, and departed."
"I am curious to know if you really forgave them, padre?" said Jekyl,
with an air of serious inquiry.
"Have I not said so!" rejoined the priest, testily.
"Why, you tried to insinuate something that surely was not a blessing,
father."
"And if I did, the fellow detected it. Ah, that rogue must have served
Mass once on a time, or his ears had never been so sharp!"
"Are yours quick enough to say if that be the tramp of a horse?" asked
Norwood, as he listened to the sounds.
"Yes, that is a horse," cried Jekyl.
"Now, then, for the soup," exclaimed the canon. "Ah, yes!" added
he, with a sigh, as he turned to Lady Hester, "these are the
crosses,----these are the trials of life; but they are good for
us,--they are good for us! Poor mortals that we are! Non est sanitas
in carne me. Oim! oim!" And so moralizing, he gave her his arm as he
reentered the house. In less than a minute later, D'Esmonde galloped up
to the door, and dismounted.
"Has anything occurred?--you are late to-night," asked Norwood, hastily.
"Nothing. The city, however, was in great alarm, and the tocsin was
twice sounded in the churches when I left at ten o'clock; the guards
were doubled at the gates, and mounted patrols making the rounds in
every quarter."
"What was this for?" asked Norwood.
"A mere false alarm,----nothing more. The Austrians are harassed beyond
measure by these frequent calls to arms; and men grumble that they are
mustered twice or thrice during the night without any cause. A petard
exploded in the street, or a church bell rung, is sure to call out the
whole garrison."
"I begin to suspect that our Italian friends will be satisfied with
this, and never go further," said Norwood, contemptuously.
"You are wrong there. It is by the frequency and impunity of these
demonstrations, that they are working up courage for an overt movement
By the time that the Austrians have grown indifferent to such nightly
disturbances, the others will have gained hardihood for a real
outbreak."
"If they only be persuaded that war is assassination on a grand scale,
they might make excellent soldiers," simpered Jekyl; but the others
seemed to take no heed of his pleasantry.
"Have they not fixed a time?" asked Norwood, eagerly; "or is it all left
vague and uncertain as ever?"
"The Swiss are quite ready; we only wait now for the Piedmontese. Genoa
is with us at a word; so are Leghorn and the towns of the Romagna. The
signal once given, there will be such a rising as Italy has not seen for
centuries. England will supply arms, ammunition--"
"All but men," sighed Norwood; "and it is exactly what are wanting."
"And France--"
"Will give her sympathies," broke in Jekyl. "That dear France! that
always says God speed to disturbance and trouble wherever it be."
"What of that Austrian soldier?" said D'Esmonde, who did not quite like
the tone of either of his companions,--"is he better?"
"The surgeon says that he cannot recover," replied Jekyl; "and for that
reason I suspect that he 's in no danger."
"Have you seen the officer to-day?" asked the priest again.
"No," replied Norwood. "Jekyl and I twice endeavored to speak with
him; but he slept half the forenoon, and since that he has been writing
innumerable despatches to headquarters."
"They say at Milan that he 'll be shot for this misadventure," said
D'Esmonde; "that he acted in contravention to his orders, or did
something, I know not what, which will be treated as a grave military
offence."
"The canonico is furious with us for this delay," said Jekyl, laughing,
as he returned from a peep into the salon.
The Abb was, meanwhile, deep in a whispered conversation with Norwood.
"Ay," said the latter, doubtingly, "but it's a serious thing to tamper
with a soldier's fidelity. The Austrians are not the people to suffer
this with impunity."
"How are they to know it?"
"If it fail,--if this young fellow reject our offers, which, as a
Hungarian, it is just as likely that he will do?"
"But he is not a Hungarian. I know him, and all about him."
"And can you answer for his readiness to join us?"
"I cannot go that far; but seeing the position he stands in, what can be
more probable? And, take the worst case: suppose that he refuses, I have
him still!"
"How do you mean?"
"Simply that I have in my hands the means to destroy all his credit, and
peril his very life!" The sudden energy of passion in which he delivered
these words appeared to have escaped him unawares; for, as quickly
recovering his wonted smoothness of tone, he said, "Not that anything
short of the last necessity would drive me to such an alternative."
"May I never have to trust to your tender mercies, Abb!" said Norwood,
with a laugh, in which there was far more of earnest than of jesting;
"but let us talk of these things after supper." And with the careless
ease of a mere idler, he lounged into the house, followed by the others.
Once seated at supper, the conversation took a general turn, requiring
all the Abb's skill and Jekyl's tact at times to cover from the
servants who waited the secret meaning of many of those allusions to
politics and party which Lady Hester uttered, in the perfect conviction
that she was talking in riddles. Her indiscretion rendered her, indeed,
a most perilous associate; and in spite of hints, warnings, and signs,
she would rattle on upon the dangerous theme of revolt and insurrection;
the poor devices of deception she employed being but sorry blinds to the
native quickness of Italian shrewdness.
This little fire of cross-purposes sadly perplexed the canonico, who
looked up now and then from his plate with a face of stupid astonishment
at all that went forward.
"You have heard, I suppose, canon," said the Abb, adroitly addressing
him, "that the city authorities have only granted twelve thousand crowns
for the festival of San Giovanni?"
"Twelve thousand crowns! It will not pay for the throne of the Virgin,"
growled out the canon, "not to speak of the twenty-six angels in
sprigged muslin!"
"There are to be no angels this time. The priests of the Santa Croce are
to walk behind the canopy."
"It will ruin the procession," muttered the canon.
"They certainly look as little like angels as need be," interposed
Jekyl, slyly.
"Sixty lamps and two hundred tapers are a scant allowance," continued
D'Esmonde.
"Darkness,--positive darkness!" ejaculated the canon; "ubi evasit pietas
nostra?--what has become of our ancient faith?"
"The soldier, your reverence, wishes to see you immediately," said a
servant, entering in haste; "he fears that he is sinking fast."
"The heavy dews of the morning are falling--can he not wait till the sun
rises, Giuseppe?"
"You had better see him at once, canon," whispered the Abb.
"Oim! oim!" sighed the priest, "mine is a weary road--'potum meum cum
fletu miscebam,'" added he, finishing off his champagne, "is it far from
this?"
"Only to the boat-house, father," said Lady Hester.
"Per mares et ignos! it's a good half-hour's walk," growled he.
"You can have the pony carriage, father," interposed she.
"He starts at everything by night--don't trust the pony," said Jekyl.
"Well, then, be carried in my chair, father."
"Be it so,--be it so," muttered he. "I yield myself to anything,--'sicut
passer sub tecto,'--I have no will of my own."
"Go along with him, my Lord," whispered D'Esmonde: "the opportunity will
be a good one to see the young officer. While the father talks with the
sick man, you can converse with the friend. See in what frame of mind he
is."
"Does he speak French? for I am but an indifferent German," said
Norwood.
"Yes, French will do," said D'Esmonde, who, after a moment's hesitation
as to whether he should reveal the secret of Frank's country, seemed to
decide on still reserving the knowledge.
"But this could be better done to-morrow," said Norwood.
"To-morrow will be too late," whispered D'Esmonde. "Go now; you shall
know my reasons at your return."
Norwood took little heed of the canonico's attempts at conversation as
they went along. His mind was occupied with other thoughts. The moment
of open revolt was drawing nigh, and now came doubts of D'Esmonde's
sincerity and good faith. It was true that many of the priests were
disposed to the wildest theories of democracy,--they were men of more
than ordinary capacity, with far less than the ordinary share of worldly
advantages. D'Esmonde, however, was not one of these; there was no limit
to which his ambition might not reasonably aspire,--no dignity in his
Church above his legitimate hopes. What benefit could accrue to him from
a great political convulsion? "He'll not be nearer to the Popedom
when the cannon are shaking the Vatican!" Such were the puzzling
considerations that worked within him as he drew near the boat-house.
A figure was seated on the door-sill, with the head buried beneath his
hands, but on hearing the approach of the others be quickly arose and
drew himself up. "You are too late, sir," said he, addressing the priest
sternly; "my poor comrade is no more!"
"Ah me! and they would drag me out in the chill night air," groaned the
canonico.
The cruelty of that must have weighed heavily on his heart.
Frank turned away, and re-entered the house without speaking, while
Norwood followed him in silence. On a low truckle-bed lay the dead
soldier, his manly face calm and tranquil as the cold heart within his
breast. A weather-beaten, bronzed soldier sat at the foot of the bed,
the tears slowly flowing along his cheeks, as his bloodshot eyes were
fixed upon his comrade. It was the first blood that had been shed in the
cause of Italian independence, and Norwood stood thoughtfully staring at
the victim.
"Poor fellow!" said he; "they who gave his death-wound little knew what
sympathy for liberty that jacket covered, nor how truly the Hun is the
brother of the Italian."
"They were assassins and murderers," cried Frank, passionately; "fellows
who attacked us from behind walls and barricades."
"Your reproach only means that they were not soldiers."
"That they were cowards, rather,----rank cowards. The liberty that such
fellows strive for will be well worthy of them! But no more of this,"
cried be, impatiently; "is there a church near, where I can lay his
body,--he was a Catholic?"
"There is a chapel attached to the villa; I will ask permission for what
you require."
"You will confer a favor on me," said Frank, "for I am desirous of
hastening on to Milan at once."
"You will scarcely find your comrades there," said Norwood.
Frank started with surprise, and the other went on,----
"There are rumors of a serious revolt in the city, and some say that the
Imperial troops have retired on the Mantua road."
"They know nothing of Austrian soldiers who say these things," said
Frank, haughtily; "but there is the more need that I should lose no time
here."
"Come, then, I will show you the way to the chapel," said Norwood, who
could not divest himself of a feeling of interest for the young soldier.
Frank spoke a few words in Hungarian to his men, and hastily wrapping
the dead man in his cloak, they placed him on a door, his chako and his
sword at either side of him.
"You will see that he is buried as becomes a brave and a true soldier,"
said Frank, with a faltering accent, as they went along. "This will
defray the cost."
"No, no; there is no need of that," said Norwood, pushing away the
proffered purse. "We'll look to it ourselves."
"Let there be some record of him preserved, too, for his friends' sake.
His name was 'Stanislas Ravitsky.'"
"And may I ask yours?" said Norwood.
"You'll hear of it in the first court-martial return for Milan," said
Frank, bitterly.
"Then why go there?--why hasten to certain ruin?"
"You would say, why not desert?----why not forfeit my honor and my
oath? Because I am a gentleman, sir; and if the explanation be not
intelligible, so much the worse for you."
"I have left him in the chapel," said Norwood to D'Esmonde, a few
minutes after this conversation; "he is kneeling beside the corpse, and
praying. There is nothing to be done with him. It is but time lost to
attempt it."
"So much the worse for him," said D'Esmonde, significantly repeating
the words that Norwood related, while he hastily left the spot and
walked towards the high-road, where now an Austrian picket was standing
beside the horses.
"This is your warrant, sir," said D'Esmonde to the officer, handing him
a paper; "You 'll find the person you seek for in the chapel yonder."
The officer saluted in reply, and ordered his men to mount; while
D'Esmonde, passing into a thick part of the copse, was out of sight in a
moment.
CHAPTER XVI. PETER DALTON ON POLITICS, LAW, AND SOCIALITIES.
We have seen Baden in the dark winter of its discontent--in the
spring-time of its promise--and now we come back to it once more, in the
fall blaze of its noonday splendor. It was the height of the season!
And what a world of dissipation does that phrase embody! What reckless
extravagance, what thoughtless profusion, what systematic vice glossed
over by the lacquer of polished breeding, what beauty which lacks but
innocence to be almost divine! All the attractions of a lovely country,
all the blandishments of wealth, the aids of music and painting, the
odor of flowers, the songs of birds,--all pressed into the service of
voluptuous dissipation, and made to throw a false lustre over a scene
where vice alone predominates.
It was the camp of pleasure, to which all rallied who loved to fight
beneath that banner. And there they were, a mingled host of princes,
ministers, and generals. The spoiled children of fashion, the reckless
adventurer, the bankrupt speculator, the nattered beauty in all the
pride of her loveliness, the tarnished virtue in all the effrontery of
conquest! Strange and incongruous elements of good and evil,--of
all that is honored in heroism, and all that men shrink from with
shame,--there they were met as equals.
As if by some conventional relaxation of all the habits which rule
society, men admitted to their intimacy here those they would have
strenuously avoided elsewhere. Vice, like poverty, seemed to have
annihilated all the distinctions of rank, and the "decorated" noble and
the branded felon sat down to the same board like brethren.
Amid all the gay company of the Cursaal none appeared to have a greater
relish for the glittering pleasures of the scene than a large elderly
man, who, in a coat of jockey cut and a showy waistcoat, sat at the
end of one of the tables,--a post which the obsequious attention of
the waiters proclaimed to be his own distinctively. Within a kind of
ring-fence of bottles and decanters of every shape and size, he looked
the genius of hospitality and dissipation; and it was only necessary
to mark how many a smile was turned on him, how many a soft glance was
directed towards him, to see that he was the centre of all designing
flattery. There was a reckless, unsuspecting jollity in his look that
could not be mistaken; and his loud, hearty laugh bespoke the easy
self-satisfaction of his nature. Like "special envoys," his champagne
bottles were sent hither and thither down the table, and at each instant
a friendly nod or a courteous bow acknowledged his hospitable attention.
At either side of him were seated a knot of his peculiar parasites,
and neither was wit nor beauty wanting to make their society agreeable.
There is a species of mock affection, a false air of attachment in
the homage rendered to such a man as this, that makes the flattery
infinitely more seductive than all the respectful devotion that ever
surrounded a monarch. And so our old friend Peter Dalton--need we to
name him?--felt it. "Barring the glorious burst of a fox-hunting chorus,
or the wild 'hip, hip' of a favorite toast, it was almost as good as
Ireland." Indeed, in some respects, it had rather the advantage over the
dear island.
Peter was intensely Irish, and had all the native relish for high
company, and it was no mean enjoyment that he felt in seeing royal and
serene highnesses at every side of him, and knowing that some of the
great names of Europe were waiting for the very dish that was served
first in honor to himself. There was a glittering splendor, too, in the
gorgeously decorated "Saal," with its frescos, its mirrors, its lustres,
and its bouquets, that captivated him. The very associations which a
more refined critic would have cavilled at had their attractions for
him, and he gloried in the noise and uproar. The clink of glasses and
the crash of plates were to his ears the pleasant harmony of a convivial
meeting.
He was in the very height of enjoyment. A few days back he had received
a large remittance from Kate. It came in a letter to Nelly, which he had
not read, nor cared to read. He only knew that she was at St. Petersburg
waiting for Midchekoffs arrival. The money had driven all other thoughts
out of his head, and before Nelly had glanced her eye over half the
first page, he was already away to negotiate the bills with Abel Kraus,
the moneychanger. As for Frank, they had not heard of him for several
months back. Nelly, indeed, had received a few lines from Count Stephen,
but they did not appear to contain anything very interesting, for she
went to her room soon after reading them, and Dalton forgot to ask more
on the subject. His was not a mind to conjure up possible misfortunes.
Always too ready to believe the best, he took the world ever on its
sunniest side, and never would acknowledge a calamity while there was a
loophole of escape from it.
"Why wouldn't she be happy?--What the devil could ail her?----Why
oughtn't he to be well?----Wasn't he as strong as a bull, and not
twenty yet!" Such were the consolations of his philosophy, and he needed
no better.
His flatterers, too, used to insinuate little fragments of news about
the "Princess" and the "Young Count," as they styled Frank, which he
eagerly devoured, and as well as his memory served him, tried to repeat
to Nelly when he returned home of a night. These were enough for him;
and the little sigh with which he tossed off his champagne to their
health was the extent of sorrow the separation cost him.
Now and then, it is true, he wished they were with him; he'd have liked
to show the foreigners "what an Irish girl was;" he would have been
pleased, too, that his handsome boy should have been seen amongst "them
grinning baboons, with hair all over them." He desired this the more,
that Nelly would never venture into public with him, or, if she did,
it was with such evident shame and repugnance that even his selfishness
could not exact the sacrifice. "'T is, maybe, the sight of the dancing
grieves her, and-she lame," was the explanation he gave himself of this
strange turn of mind; and whenever honest Peter had hit upon what he
thought was a reason for anything, he dismissed all further thought
about the matter forever. It was a debt paid, and he felt as if he had
the receipt on his file.
On the day we now speak of he was supremely happy. An Irish peer had
come into the Saal leaning on his arm, and twice called him "Dalton"
across the table. The waiter had apologized to a royal highness for not
having better Johannisberg, as the "Schloss" wine had all been reserved
for the "Count," as Peter was styled. He had won four hundred Napoleons
at roulette before dinner; and a bracelet, that cost a hundred and
twenty, was glittering on a fair wrist beside him, while a murmur of his
name in tones of unquestionable adulation, from all parts of the table,
seemed to fill up the measure of his delight.
"What's them places vacant there?" called he out to the waiter, and
pointing to five chairs turned back to the table in token of being
reserved.
"It was an English family had arrived that morning who bespoke them."
"Faix! then, they 're likely to lose soup and fish," said Peter; "the
'coorses' here wait for no man." And as he spoke the party made their
appearance.
A large elderly lady of imposing mien and stately presence led the way,
followed by a younger and slighter figure; after whom walked a very
feeble old man, of a spare and stooping form; the end being brought up
by a little rosy man, with a twinkling eye and a short jerking limp,
that made him seem rather to dance than walk forward.
"They've ca-ca-carried off the soup already," cried the last-mentioned
personage, as he arranged his napkin before him, "and--and--and, I
fa-fancy, the fish, too."
"Be quiet, Scroope," called out the fat lady; "do be quiet."
"Yes, but we shall have to p-p-pay all the same," cried Scroope.
"There 's good sense in that, anyway," broke in Dalton; "will you take
a glass of champagne with me, sir? you 'll find it cool, and not bad of
its kind."
Mr. Purvis acknowledged the courtesy gracefully, and bowed as he drank.
"Take the ortolans to that lady, Fritz," said Dalton to the waiter; and
Mrs. Ricketts smiled her sweetest gratitude.
"We are dreadfully late," sighed she; "but the dear Princess of
Stauffenschwillingen passed all the morning with us, and we could n't
get away."
"I thought it was the woman about the ro-rope dancing detained you."
"Hush, Scroope--will you be quiet? Martha, dearest, don't venture on
those truffles. My poor child, they would be the death of you." And,
so saying, she drew her companion's plate before herself. "A most
agreeable, gentlemanlike person," muttered she, in a whisper, evidently
intended for Peter's ears. "We must find out who he is. I suppose
you know the Princess, sir? Don't you love her?" said she, addressing
Dalton.
"Faix! if you mean the old lady covered with snuff that comes here to
have her dogs washed at the well, without intending any offence to
you, I do not. To tell you the truth, ma'am, when I was in the habit of
fallin' in love, it was a very different kind of creature that did it!
Ay, ay, 'the days is gone when beauty bright my heart's ease spoilt.'"
"My heart's chain wove,'" smiled and whispered Mrs. Ricketts.
"Just so. It comes to the same thing. Give me the wine, Fritz. Will you
drink a glass of wine with me, sir?"
The invitation was addressed to General Ricketts, who, by dint of
several shoves, pokings, and admonitions, was at last made aware of the
proposition.
"Your father's getting a little the worse for wear, miss," said Dalton
to Martha, who blushed at even the small flattery of the observation.
"The General's services have impaired his constitution," remarked Mrs.
Ricketts, proudly.
"Ay, and to all appearance it was nothing to boast of in the beginning,"
replied Peter, as he surveyed with self-satisfaction his own portly
form.
"Fourteen years in the Hima-Hima-Hima--"
"Himalaya, Scroope,----the Himalaya."
"The highest mountains in the world!" continued Purvis.
"For wet under foot, and a spongy soil that never dries, I'll back the
Galtees against them any day. See, now, you can walk from morning to
night, and be over your head at every step you go."
"Where are they?" inquired Scroope.
"Why, where would they be? In Ireland, to be sure; and here's prosperity
to her, and bad luck to Process-servers, 'Polis,' and Poor-Law
Commissioners!" Dalton drained his glass with solemn energy to his
toast, and looked as though his heart was relieved of a weight by this
outburst of indignation.
"You Irish are so patriotic!" exclaimed Mrs. Ricketts, enthusiastically.
"I believe we are," replied Dalton. "'T is only we 've an odd way of
showing it."
"I remark that they ne-never live in Ireland when they can li-live out
of it," cackled Purvis.
"Well, and why not? Is it by staying at home in the one place people
learns improvements? you might drink whiskey-punch for forty years
and never know the taste of champagne. Potatoes wouldn't teach you the
flavor of truffles. There's nothing like travellin'!"
"Very true," sighed Mrs. Ricketts; "but, as the poet says, 'Where'er I
go, whatever realms I see--"'
"The devil a one you 'll meet as poor as Ireland," broke in Dalton, who
now had thrown himself headlong into a favorite theme. "Other countries
get better, but she gets worse."
"They say it's the po-po----" screamed Scroope.
"The Pope, is it?"
"No; the po-potatoes is the cause of everything."
"They might as well hould their prate, then," broke in Peter, whose
dialect always grew broader when he was excited. "Why don't they tell me
that if I was too poor to buy broadcloth, it would be better for me to
go naked than wear corduroy breeches? Not that I'd mind them,
miss!" said be, turning to Martha, who already was blushing at his
illustration.
"I fear that the evil lies deeper," sighed Mrs. Ricketts.
"You mean the bogs?" asked Dal ton.
"Not exactly, sir; but I allude to those drearier swamps of superstition
and ignorance that overlay the land."
Peter was puzzled, and scratched his ear like a man at a nonplus.
"My sister means the pr-pr-pr--"
"The process-servers?"
"No; the pr-priests--the priests," screamed Purvis.
"Bother!" exclaimed Dalton, with an accent of ineffable disdain. "'T is
much you know about Ireland!"
"You don't agree with me then?" sighed Mrs. Ricketts.
"Indeed I do not. Would you take away the little bit of education out of
a country where there's nothing but ignorance? Would you extinguish the
hopes of heaven amongst them that has nothing but starvation and misery
here? Try it,--just try it. I put humanity out of the question; but just
try it, for the safety's sake! Pat is n't very orderly now, but, faix!
you 'd make a raal devil of him then, entirely!"
"But popery, my dear sir--the confessional--"
"Bother!" said Dalton, with a wave of his hand. "How much you know about
it! 'T is just as they used to talk long ago about drunkenness. Sure,
I remember well when there was all that hue and cry about Irish
gentlemen's habits of dissipation, and the whole time nobody took
anything to hurt his constitution. Well, it's just the same with
confession,--everybody uses his discretion about it. You have your
peccadilloes, and I have my peccadilloes, and that young lady there
has her--Well, I did n't mean to make you blush, miss, but 'tis what I'm
saying, that nobody, barrin' a fool, would be too hard upon himself!"
"So that it ain't con-confession at all," exclaimed Purvis.
"Who told you that?" said Peter, sternly. "Is it nothing to pay
two-and-sixpence in the pound if you were bankrupt to-morrow? Does n't
it show an honest intention, any way?" said he, with a wink.
"Then what are the evils of Ireland?" asked Mrs. Ricketts, with an air
of inquiring interest.
"I 'll tell you, then," said Dalton, slowly, as he filled a capacious
glass with champagne. "It is n't the priests, nor it isn't the potatoes,
nor it isn't the Protestants either, though many respectable people
think so; for you see we had always priests and potatoes, and a
sprinkling of Protestants besides; but the real evil of Ireland--and
there's no man living knows it better than I do--is quite another thing,
and here's what it is." And he stooped down and dropped his voice to a
whisper. "'Tis this: 'tis paying money when you have n't it!" The
grave solemnity of this enunciation did not seem to make it a whit more
intelligible to Mrs. Ricketts, who certainly looked the very type of
amazement. "That's what it is," reiterated Dalton, "paying money when
you have n't it! There's the ruin of Ireland; and, as I said before, who
ought to know better? For you see, when you owe money, and you have n't
it, you must get it how you can. You know what that means; and if you
don't, I 'll tell you. It means mortgages and bond debts; rack-renting
and renewals; breaking up an elegant establishment; selling your horses
at Dycer's; going to the devil entirely; and not only yourself, but all
belonging to you. The tradesmen you dealt with, the country shop where
you bought everything, the tithes, the priests' dues,--not a farthing
left for them."
"But you don't mean to say that people shouldn't p-p-pay their debts?"
screamed Purvis.
"There's a time for everything," replied Dalton. "Shaving oneself is a
mighty useful process, but you wouldn't have a man get up out of his bed
at night to do it? I never was for keeping money,--the worst enemy would
n't say that of me. Spend it freely when you have it; but sure it's not
spending to be paying debts due thirty or forty years back, made by your
great-grandfather?"
"One should be just before being ge-gen-gene-gene----"
"Faix! I'd be both," said Dalton, who with native casuistry only
maintained a discussion for the sake of baffling or mystifying an
adversary. "I'd be just to myself and generous to my friends, them's my
sentiments; and it 's Peter Dalton that says it!"
"Dalton!" repeated Mrs. Ricketts, in a low voice,----"did n't he say
Dalton, Martha?"
"Yea, sister; it was Dalton."
"Did n't you say your name was Da-Da-a-a----"
"No, I didn't!" cried Peter, laughing. "I said Peter Dalton as plain as
a man could speak; and if ever you were in Ireland, you may have heard
the name before now."
"We knew a young lady of that name at Florence."
"Is it Kate,--my daughter Kate?" cried the old man, in ecstasy.
"Yes, she was called Kate," replied Mrs. Ricketts, whose strategic sight
foresaw a world of consequences from the recognition. "What a lovely
creature she was!"
"And you knew Kate?" cried Dalton again, gazing on the group with
intense interest. "But was it my Kate? Perhaps it was n't mine!"
"She was living in the Mazzarini Palace with Lady Hester Onslow."
"That's her,--that's her! Oh, tell me everything you know,--tell me all
you can think of her. She was the light of my eyes for many a year! Is
the old lady sick?" cried he, suddenly; for Mrs. Ricketts had leaned
back in her chair, and covered her face with her handkerchief.
"She 's only overcome," said Martha, as she threw back her own shawl
and prepared for active service; while Scroope, in a burst of generous
anxiety, seized the first decanter near him and filled out a bumper.
"She and yonr da-daughter were like sisters," whispered Scroope to
Dalton.
"The devil they were!" exclaimed Peter, who thought their looks must
have belied the relationship. "Isn't she getting worse?--she's trembling
all over her."
Mrs. Ricketts's state now warranted the most acute sympathy; for she
threw her eyes wildly about, and seemed like one gasping for life.
"Is she here, Martha? Is she near me----can I see her--can I touch
her?" cried she, in accents almost heartrending.
"Yes, yes; you shall see her; she 'll not leave you," said Martha, as if
caressing a child. "We must remove her; we must get her out of this."
"To be sure; yes, of course!" cried Dalton. "There's a room here empty.
It's a tender heart she has, any way;" and, so saying, he arose, and
with the aid of some half-dozen waiters transported the now unconscious
Zoe, chair and all, into a small chamber adjoining the Saal.
"This is her father's hand," murmured Mrs. Ricketts, as she pressed
Dalton's in her own,----"her father's hand."
"Yes, my dear!" said Dalton, returning the pressure, and feeling a
strong desire to blubber, just for sociality's sake.
"If you knew how they loved each other," whispered Martha, while she
busied herself pinning cap-ribbons out of the way of cold applications,
and covering up lace from the damaging influence of restoratives.
"It 's wonderful,--it's wonderful!" exclaimed Peter, whose faculties
were actually confounded by such a rush of sensations and emotions.
"Make him go back to his dinner, Martha; make him go back," sighed the
sick lady, in a half-dreamy voice.
"I couldn't eat a bit; a morsel would choke me this minute," said
Dalton, who could n't bear to be outdone in the refinements of excited
sensibility.
"She must never be contradicted while in this state," said Martha,
confidingly. "All depends on indulgence."
"It's wonderful!" exclaimed Dalton, again,----"downright wonderful!"
"Then, pray go back; she'll be quite well presently," rejoined Martha,
who already, from the contents of a reticule like a carpet-bag, had
metamorphosed the fair Zoe's appearance into all the semblance of a
patient.
"It's wonderful; it beats Banagher!" muttered Peter, as he returned to
the Saal, and resumed his place at the table. The company had already
taken their departure, and except Purvis and the General, only a few
stragglers remained behind.
"Does she often get them?" asked Peter of Purvis.
"Only when her fee-fee-feelings are worked upon; she's so se-sensitive!"
"Too tender a heart," sighed Peter, as he filled his glass, and sighed
over an infirmity that he thought he well knew all the miseries of. "And
her name, if I might make bould?"
"Ricketts,----Mrs. Montague Ricketts. This is Ge-Ge-General Ricketts."
At these words the old man looked op, smiled blandly, and lifted his
glass to his lips.
[Illustration: 228]
"Your good health, and many happy returns to yoo," said Peter, in reply
to the courtesy. "Ricketts,----Ricketts. Well, I 'm sure I heard the
name before."
"In the D-D-Duke's despatches you may have seen it." "No, no, no. I
never read one of them. I heard it here in Baden. Wait, now, and I'll
remember how." Neither the effort at recollection nor the aid of a
bumper seemed satisfactory, for Dalton sat musingly for several minutes
together. "Well, I thought I knew the name," exclaimed he, at last, with
a deep sigh of discomfiture; "'t is runnin' in my head yet; something
about chilblains,----chilblains."
"But the name is R-R-Ricketts," screamed Purvis.
"And so it is," sighed Peter. "My brain is woolgathering. By my
conscience, I have it now, though!" cried he, in wild delight. "I knew I
'd scent it out. It was one Fogles that was here,----a chap with a red
wig, and deaf as a door-nail."
"Foglass, you mean,--Fo-Foglass,----don't you?"
"I always called him Fogies; and I 'm sure it's as good a name as the
other, any day."
"He's so pl-pleasant," chimed in Scroope, who, under the influence of
Dalton's champagne, was now growing convivial,----"he's so agreeable;
always in the highest cir-circles, and dining with no-no-no----"
"With nobs," suggested Peter. "He might do better, and he might do
worse. I 've seen lords that was as great rapscallions as you 'd meet
from this to Kilrush."
"But Foglass was always so excl-exclusive, and held himself so high."
"The higher the better," rejoined Dalton, "even if it was out of one's
reach altogether; for a more tiresome ould crayture I never forgathered
with; and such a bag of stories he had, without a bit of drollery or
fun in one of them. You may think that kind of fellow good company in
England; but, in my poor country, a red herring and a pint of beer would
get you one he could n't howld a candle to. See now, Mister--"
"P-P-Purvis," screamed the other.
"Mister Purvis,--if that's the name,--see, now, 't is n't boasting I am,
for the condition we 're in would n't let any man boast,--but it's what
I 'm saying, the English is a mighty stupid people. They have their
London jokes, and, like London porter, mighty heavy they are, and
bitter, besides; and they have two or three play-actors that makes them
die laughing at the same comicalities every day of the year. They get
used to them as they do the smoke and the noise and the Thames water;
and nothing would persuade them that, because they 're rich, they 're
not agreeable and social and witty. And may I never leave this, but you
'd find cuter notions of life, droller stories, and more fun, under a
dry arch of the Aqueduct of Stoney Batter than if you had the run of
Westminster Hall. Look at the shouts of laughter in the Law Coorts; look
at the loud laughter in the House of Commons! Oh dear! oh dear! it makes
me quite melancholy just to think of it I won't talk of the Parliament,
because it's gone; but take an Irish Coort in Dublin or on the Assizes,
at any trial,--murder, if you like,----and see the fun that goes on:
the judge quizzing the jury, and the counsel quizzing the judge, and
the prisoner quizzing all three. There was poor ould Nor-bury,--rest
his soul!--I remember well how he could n't put on the black cap for
laughing."
"And is ju-justice better administered for all that?" cried Purvis.
"To be sure it is. Isn't the laws made to expose villany, and not let
people be imposed upon? Sure it's not to hang Paddy Blake you want,
but to keep others from following his example. And many 's the time
in Ireland when, what between the blunderin' of the Crown lawyers, the
flaws of the indictment, the conscientious scruples of the jury,--you
know what that means,--and the hurry of the judge to be away to
Harrogate or Tunbridge, a villain gets off. But, instead of going out
with an elegant bran-new character, a bit of a joke--a droll word spoken
during the trial--sticks to him all his life after, till it would
be just as well for him to be hanged at once as be laughed at, from
Pill-Lane to the Lakes of Killarney. Don't I remember well when one of
the Regans--Tim, I think it was--was tried for murder at Tralee;
there was a something or other they could n't convict upon. 'T was his
grandfather's age was put down wrong, or the color of his stepmother's
hair, or the nails in his shoes wasn't described right,----whatever it
was, it was a flaw, as they called it; and a flaw in a brief, like one
in a boiler, leaves everybody in hot water. "Not Guilty," says the jury,
'for we can't agree.'
"''Tis a droll verdict,' says O'Grady, for he was the judge. 'What d' ye
mean?'
"'Most of us is for hanging, my Lord; but more of us would let him off.'
"'What will you do, Mr. Attorney?' says the judge. 'Have you any other
evidence to bring forward?' And the Attorney-General stooped down and
began whispering with the bench. 'Very well,' says the judge, at last,
'we 'll discharge him by proclamation.'
"'Wait a minute, my Lord,' says ould Blethers, who got five guineas for
the defence, and had n't yet opened his mouth. 'Before my respected but
injured client leaves that dock, I call to your Lordship, in the name
and on behalf of British justice,--I appeal to you, by the eternal
principles of our glorious Constitution, that he may go forth into the
world with a reputation unstained and a character unblemished.'
"'Not so fast, Mister Blethers,' says old Grady,----'not so fast I 'm
going over Thieve-na-muck Mountain tonight, and, with the blessing of
God, I 'll keep your unblemished friend where he is till morning.' Now
you see the meaning of what I was telling you. 'T is like tying a kettle
to a dog's tail."
It is not quite clear to us whether Purvis comprehended the story or
appreciated the illustration; but he smiled, and smirked, and looked
satisfied, for Peter's wine was admirable, and iced to perfection.
Indeed, the worthy Scroope, like his sister, was already calculating how
to "improve the occasion," and further cultivate the esteem of one whose
hospitable dispositions were so excellent. It was just at this moment
that Martha glided behind Purvis's chair, and whispered a word in his
ear. Whatever the announcement, it required some repetition before it
became quite palpable to his faculties, and it was only after about five
minutes that his mind seemed to take in all the bearings of the case.
"Oh, I ha-have it!" cried he. "That's it, eh?" And he winked with a
degree of cunning that showed the most timely appreciation of the news.
"Would n't the young lady sit down and take something?" said Dalton,
offering a seat "A glass of sweet wine? They 've elegant Tokay here."
"Thanks, thanks," said Scroope, apologizing for the bashful Martha; "but
she's in a bit of a quandary just now. My sister wishes to return home,
and we cannot remember the name of the hotel."
Dalton took a hearty fit of laughing at the absurdity of the dilemma.
"'T is well," said he, "You were n't Irish. By my conscience! they'd
call that a bull;" and he shook his sides with merriment. "How did you
get here?"
"We walked," said Martha.
"And which way did you come?"
"Can you remember, Scroope?"
"Yes, I can re-re-member that we crossed a little Plate, with a
fountain, and came oyer a wooden bridge, and then down an alley of
li-li-linden-trees."
"To be sure ye did," broke in Dalton; "and the devil a walk of five
minutes ye could take in any direction here without seeing a fountain, a
wooden bridge, and a green lane. 'T is the same whichever way you turn,
whether you were going to church or the gambling-house. Would you know
the name, if you hear it? Was it the Schwan?" Purvis shook his head.
"Nor the Black Eagle?--nor the Cour de Londres?--nor the Russie?--nor
the Zaringer? Nor, in fact, any of the cognate hotels of Baden. Was n't
there a great hall when you entered, with orange-trees all round it,
and little couriers, in goold-lace jackets, smoking and drinking beer?"
Scroope thought he had seen something of that sort "Of course ye did,"
said Dalton, with another burst of laughter. "'Tis the same in every
hotel of the town. There 's a clock that never goes, too, and a
weather-glass always at 'set fair,' and pictures round the walls of all
the wonderful inns in Germany and Switzerland, with coaches-and-four
driving in at full gallop, and ladies on the balconies, and
saddle-horses waiting, and every diversion in life going on, while,
maybe, all the time, the place is dead as Darmstadt."
Scroope recognized the description perfectly, but could give no clew to
its whereabouts.
"Maybe 't is Kaufmayer's. Was it painted yellow outside?"
Scroope thought not. "It hadn't a garden in front?" He couldn't say
positively; but, if so, it was a small garden. "He did n't remark two
dogs in stone beside the door?" No, he had not seen them.
"Then, by the powers!" exclaimed Peter, "I give it up. Nelly's the only
body can make anything out of it."
"And who's Ne-Ne-Nelly?" screamed Purvis.
"My daughter, Miss Dalton," said Peter, haughtily, And as if rebuking
the liberty of the question.
Scroope hastened to apologize, and suddenly remembered how frequently he
had heard of the young lady from her sister, and how eager Mrs. Ricketts
would be to make her Acquaintance.
"There's nothing easier than that same," said Dalton. "Just come with
me to my little place, and take tea with us. Nelly will be right glad
to see them that was kind to her sister, and then we'll try if we can't
find out your inn."
"Can we do this, Martha?" cried Scroope, in seeming Agitation.
"I 'll speak to my sister," mildly replied she.
"Do, then, Miss," said Dalton. "Say 'tis just alone, and in the family
way, and that we have n't more than ten minutes' walk from this; or, we
'll get a coach if she likes."
The very thought of practising hospitality was ecstasy to honest Peter,
who, while Martha retired to consult her sister, ordered in a relay of
bottles to beguile the time.
"I like that little ould man," said he, confidingly, to Purvis, while he
bent a kindly glance on the General. "He doesn't say much, and, maybe,
he hears less; but he takes his glass pleasantly, and he lays it down
when it's empty, with a little sigh. I never knew a bad fellow had that
habit."
Scroope hinted that the General was one of the bright stars of the
British army.
"I did n't care that he took Tippoo Saib, or Bergen-op-Zoom, and that's
a big word,--for a wickeder pair of devils, by all accounts, never
lived,--if he's all right here." And Peter touched the left region
of his brawny chest "If he's good and generous, kind to the poor, and
steady to his friends, I'd be prouder to know him than if he was 'Bony'
or Brian Maguire!"
Scroope assured him that the General's greatness took nothing from the
kindly qualities of his heart; and, indeed, the mild looks of the old
man well corroborated the eulogy; and he and Dalton nodded and drank to
each other with all the signs of a most amicable understanding.
Martha was not long absent. She returned with all manner of
acknowledgments on the part of her sister; but gratitude was so
counterbalanced by delicacy, fears of intrusion were so coupled with
enthusiastic delight, that poor Dalton was quite unable to unravel the
web, and satisfy himself what were her real intentions.
"Is it that she won't come?" said he, in a state of bewilderment.
"Oh, no," said Martha; "she did not mean that."
"Well, then, she is coming," said he, more contentedly.
"She only fears the inconvenience,----the trouble she may give Miss
Dalton,--not to speak of the abruptness of such a visit."
"She does n't know Nelly,--tell her that. She doesn't know Nelly
Dalton," said Peter. "'T is the same girl does n't care for trouble or
inconvenience; just talk to her about Kate and you 'll pay her well for
all she could do for you."
"My sister thinks a carriage would be better, she is so very weak,"
mildly observed Martha.
"Well, we 'll get one in a jiffy. Fritz, my man, send down to the Platz
for a shandradan,--a wagon, I mean. 'T is a droll name for a coach." And
he laughed heartily at the conceit "And now, Mr. Purvis, let us finish
them before we go. The Gen'ral is doing his part like a man. It's
wonderful the nourishment would n't put flesh on him; you could shave
him with his shin bone!" and Dalton stared at the frail figure before
him with all the astonishment a great natural curiosity would create.
"What a kind creature! what a really Irish heart!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts,
as she slowly sailed into the room, and sank into a chair beside Dalton.
"It is like a dream, a delicious dream,--all this is. To be here in
Baden, with my dear Miss Kate Dalton's father,--actually going to drink
tea.----What a thought, Martha! to drink tea with dearest Nelly!"
Peter began to fear that the prospect of such happiness was about to
overwhelm her sensibilities once more; but fortunately, this time, she
became more composed, and discussed the visit with wonderful calm and
self-possession.
The carriage now drove up; and although Dalton would greatly have
preferred a little longer dalliance over the bottle, he politely gave
one arm to Mrs. Ricketts and the other to Martha, issuing forth from the
Cursaal in all the pride of a conqueror.
CHAPTER XVII. NELLY'S TRIALS
While Mr. Dalton is accompanying his guests along the Lichtenthal Alley,
and describing the various objects of interest on either hand, we will
take the opportunity of explaining to our reader why it happened that
honest Peter no longer inhabited the little quiet quarters above the
toyshop.
By Kate's liberality, for some time back he had been most freely
supplied with money. Scarcely a week passed over without a line from
Abel Kraus to say that such or such a sum was placed to his credit; and
Dalton once more revelled in those spendthrift habits that he loved.
At moments, little flashes of prudential resolve would break upon him.
Thoughts of Ireland and of the "old place" would arise, and he would
half determine on some course of economy which might again restore
him to his home and country. But the slightest prospect of immediate
pleasure was sufficient to rout these wise resolves, and Baden was
precisely the spot to suggest such "distractions." There was nothing
Peter so much liked in the life of this watering-place as the facility
with which acquaintance was formed. The stately reserve of English
people was his antipathy, and here he saw that all this was laid aside,
and that people conversed freely with the neighbor that chance had
given, and that even intimacies grew up between those who scarcely knew
each other's names.
Whatever might be thought of these practices by more fastidious critics,
to Peter Dalton they appeared admirable. In his estimation the world was
a great Donnybrook Fair, where everybody came to amuse and be amused.
Grave faces and careworn looks, he thought, should stay at home, and not
disturb the harmony of what he deemed a great convivial gathering.
It may easily be guessed from this what class of persons found access
to his intimacy, and how every smooth-tongued adventurer, every
well-dressed and plausible-looking pretender to fashion, became his
companion. Nothing but honest Peter's ignorance of foreign languages set
any limit to his acquaintance; and, even with this, he had a shake-hands
intimacy with every Chevalier d'Industrie of France and Germany, and a
cigar-lending-and-lighting treaty with every long-haired Pole in Baden.
As he dined every day at the Cursaal, he seldom returned home of
an evening without some three or four chance acquaintances, whom he
presented to Nelly without knowing their names. But they were sure to be
"tip-top chaps," and "up to everything." Not that the latter eulogy was
much of an exaggeration; the majority of them, indeed, well deserving
such a panegyric. If Dalton's long stories about Ireland and its joys or
grievances were very uninteresting to these gentlemen, they found
some compensation in the goodness of his wine and the abundance of his
cigars; and hock and tobacco digested many a story which, without
such adjuncts, would never have found a listener. Play is, however, so
paramount to all else at Baden, that, as the season advanced, even a hot
supper from the "Russie" and an ice-pail full of champagne-flasks could
not attract the company from the fascinations of the gaming-table, and
Peter saw that his choice spirits were deserting him.
"You live so far away," cried one. "Your house is full a mile from the
Cursaal."
"There is such a climb-up to that crib of yours, Dalton," cried another.
"One can't manage it in this hot weather. Why won't you pitch your
tent in the plain? It's like going up the Righi to try and reach your
quarters."
Such and such like were the polite admonitions administered by those who
wanted a convenient lounge for their spare half-hours, and who, while
affecting to think of their friend, were simply consulting what suited
themselves. And is this philosophy confined only to Baden? Is not the
world full of friendships that, like cab-fares, are regulated by
the mile? The man who is half a brother to you while you live on the
Boulevard de Gand, becomes estranged from your bosom when you remove to
the Champs lyses; and in these days of rapid transport, ten minutes'
walk would separate the most devoted attachments.
Dalton's pride was at first wounded by these remonstrances; but his
second thoughts led him to think them more reasonable, and even elevated
the grumblers in his esteem. "Sure, ain't they the height of the
fashion? Sure, is n't everybody trying to get them? Is it any wonder
they would n't scale a mountain for the sake of a glass of wine?" The
quiet home, so dear to him by many an association; the little window
that looked out upon the Alten Schloss, and beside which Nelly sat with
him each evening; the small garden underneath, where Hans cultivated
his beautiful carnations, and where many a little figure by Nelly's
hand graced some bed or alley,--all became now distasteful. "The stairs
creaked dreadfully; he did n't think they were quite safe. The ceilings
were so low, there was no breathing in the rooms. The hill would be
the death of him; he had pains in his knees for half the night after
he climbed it." Even the bracing air of the mountain, that was his once
boast and pride, was now a "searching, cutting wind, that went through
you like a knife." It was a mean-looking little place, too, over a
toy-shop, "and Hans himself was n't what he used to be."
Alas! there was some truth in this last complaint He was more silent and
more absent in manner than ever; sometimes would pass whole days without
a word, or remain seated in his little garden absorbed in deep thought.
The frequenters of his shop would seek in vain for him; and were it not
for Nelly, who in her father's absence would steal down the stairs
and speak to them, the place would have seemed deserted. On one or
two occasions she had gone so far as to be his deputy, and sold little
articles for him; but her dread of her father's knowing it had made her
ill for half the day after.
It was, then, a dreadful blow to Nelly when her father decided on
leaving the place. Not alone that it was dear by so many memories, but
that its seclusion enabled her to saunter out at will under the shade of
the forest-trees, and roam for hours along the little lanes of the deep
wood. In Hans, too, she took the liveliest interest He had been their
friend when the world went worst with them; his kindness had lightened
many a weary burden, and his wise counsels relieved many a gloomy hour.
It was true that of late he was greatly altered. His books, his favorite
volumes of Uhland and Tieck, were never opened. He never sat, as of
yore, in the garden, burnishing up his quaint old fragments of armor,
or gazing with rapture on his strange amulets against evil. Even to the
little ballads that she sang he seemed inattentive and indifferent, and
would not stop to listen beneath the window as he once did.
His worldly circumstances, too, were declining. He neglected his shop
altogether; he made no excursions, as of old, to Worms or Nuremberg for
new toys. The young generation of purchasers found little they cared for
in his antiquated stores, and, after laughing at the quaint old devices
by which a past age were amused, they left him. It was in vain that
Nelly tried to infuse some interest into the pursuit which once had been
his passion. All the little histories he used to weave around his toys,
the delusions of fancy in which he revelled, were dissipated and gone,
and he seemed like one suddenly awakened from a delicious dream to
the consciousness of some afflicting fact He strenuously avoided the
Daltons, too, and even watched eagerly for moments of their absence
to steal out and walk in the garden. When by chance they did meet, his
manner, instead of its old cordiality, was cold and respectful; and
he, whose eyes once sparkled with delight when spoken to, now stood
uncovered, and with downcast looks, till they went by him.
No wonder, then, if Dalton thought him changed.
"'T is nothing but envy 's killing him, Nelly," said he. "As long as we
were poor like himself, he was happy. It gratified the creature's pride
that we were behind with the rent; and while he was buying them images,
he was a kind of a patron to you; but he can't bear to see us well
off,----that's the secret of it all. 'Tis our prosperity is poison to
him."
To no end did Nelly try to undeceive her father on this head. It was a
corollary to his old theory about "the 'bad dhrop' that was always in
low people." In vain did she remind him of poor Hanserl's well-tried
friendship, and the delicacy of a kindness that in no rank of life could
have been surpassed. Dalton was rooted in his opinion, and opposition
only rendered him more unforgiving.
Quite forgetting the relations which once subsisted between them, he saw
nothing in Hanserl's conduct but black ingratitude. "The little chap,"
he would say, "was never out of the house; we treated him like one of
the family, and look at him now!
"You saw him yourself, Nelly,----you saw him shed tears the other day
when you spoke of the Princess. Was that spite, or not,--tell me that?
He could n't speak for anger when you told him Frank was an officer."
"Oh, how you mistake these signs of emotion, dearest father."
"Of course I do. I know nothing,--I 'm too old; I 'm in my dotage. 'Tis
my daughter Nelly understands the world, and is able to teach me."
"Would that I knew even less of it! Would that I could fall back to the
ignorance of those days when all our world was within these walls!"
"And be cutting the images, I hope, again!" said he, scornfully; "why
don't you wish for that? It was an elegant trade for a young lady of
your name and family! Well, if there's anything drives me mad, it's to
think that all them blasted figures is scattered about the world, and
one does n't know at what minute they 'll turn up against you!"
"Nay, father," said she, smiling sadly; "You once took an interest in
them great as my own."
"It only shows, then, how poverty can break a man's spirit."
Discussions like these, once or twice a week, only confirmed Dalton in
his dislike to his old abode, and Nelly at last saw that all resistance
to his will was hopeless. At last he peremptorily ordered her to give
Hans notice of their intended removal; for he had fixed upon a house in
the Lichtenthal Alley to suit them exactly. It was a villa which had a
few months before been purchased and fitted up by a young French count,
whose gains at the gaming table had been enormous. Scarcely, however,
had he taken possession of his sumptuous abode, than "luck" turned; he
lost everything in the world, and finished his career by suicide. In
a colony of gamblers, where superstition has an overweening influence,
none could be found rash enough to succeed to so ill-omened a
possession; and thus, for nigh half the season, the house continued shut
up and unoccupied. Dalton, whose mind was strongly tinctured with fears
of this kind, yet felt a species of heroism in showing that he was not
to be deterred by the dangers that others avoided; and as Abel Kraus, to
whom the property now belonged, continually assured him "it was just the
house for him," Peter overcame his scruples, and went to see it.
Although of small extent, it was princely in its arrangements. Nothing
that French taste and elegance could supply was wanting, and it was a
perfect specimen of that costly splendor which in our own day rivals
all the gorgeous magnificence of "the Regency." Indeed, it must be
owned that honest Peter thought it far too fine to live in; he trod the
carpets with a nervous fear of crushing the embroidery, and he sat down
on the brocaded sofa with as much terror as though it were glass. How he
was ever to go asleep in a bed where Cupid and angels were sculptured in
such endless profusion, he couldn't imagine; and he actually shrank back
with shame from his own face, as he surveyed it within the silver frame
of a costly toilet-glass.
Such were his impressions as he walked through the rooms with Abel, and
saw, as the covers were removed from lustres and mirrors, some new and
more dazzling object at each moment reveal itself. He listened with
astonishment to the account of the enormous sums lavished on these
sumptuous articles, and heard how twenty, or thirty, or forty thousand
francs had been given for this or that piece of luxury.
What was forty Napoleons a month for such splendor! Kraus was actually
lending him the villa at such a price; and what a surprise for Nelly,
when he should show her the little drawing-room in rose-damask he meant
for herself; and then there was a delightful arbor in the garden to
smoke in; and the whole distance from the Cursaal was not above ten
minutes' walk. Peter's fancy ran over rapidly all the jollifications
such a possession would entail; and if he wished, for his own sake, that
there were less magnificence, he consoled himself by thinking of the
effect it would have upon others. As he remarked to himself, "There 's
many thinks more of the gilding than the gingerbread!"
If Nelly's sorrow at leaving Hanserl's house was deep and sincere, it
became downright misery when she learned to what they were about to
remove. She foresaw the impulse his extravagance would receive from
such a residence, and how all the costliness of decoration would
suggest wasteful outlay. Her father had not of late confided to her
the circumstances of his income. He who once could not change a crown
without consulting her, and calling in her aid to count the pieces and
test their genuineness, would now negotiate the most important dealings
without her knowledge. From his former distrust of Kraus he grew to
believe him the perfection of honesty. There is something so captivating
to a wasteful man in being freely supplied with money,--with receiving
his advances in a spirit of apparent frankness,----that he would find it
impossible to connect such liberality with a mean or interested motive.
Kraus's little back room was then a kind of California, where he could
dig at discretion; and if in an unusual access of prudence honest Peter
would ask, "How do we stand, Abel?" Kraus was sure to be too busy to
look at the books, and would simply reply, "What does it matter? How
much do you want?" From such a dialogue as this Dalton would issue forth
the happiest of men, muttering to himself, how differently the world
would have gone with him if he "had known that little chap thirty or
forty years ago."
Without one gleam of comfort,--with terror on every side,--poor Nelly
took possession of her splendor to pass days of unbroken sorrow. Gloomy
as the unknown future seemed, the tidings she received of Kate and Frank
were still sadder.
From her sister she never heard directly. A few lines from Madame de
Heidendorf, from a country house near St. Petersburg, told her that the
Prince had not succeeded in obtaining the Imperial permission, and that
the marriage was deferred indefinitely. Meanwhile the betrothed Princess
lived a life of strict seclusion as the etiquette required, seeing
none but such members of the royal family as deigned to visit her.
Poor Nelly's heart was nigh to bursting as she thought over her dear
Kate,--the gay and brilliant child, the happy, joyous girl, now pining
away in dreary imprisonment. This image was never out of her mind, and
she would sit hour after hour in tears for her poor sister. What future
happiness, however great it might be, could repay a youth passed in
misery like this? What splendor could efface the impression of this
dreary solitude, away from all who loved and cared for her?
Of Frank, the tidings were worse again. A short and scarcely
intelligible note from Count Stephen informed her that, "although the
court-martial had pronounced a sentence of death, the Emperor, rather
than stain a name distinguished by so many traits of devotion to his
house, had commuted the punishment to imprisonment for life at Moncacs.
There was," he added, "a slight hope that, after some years, even
this might be relaxed, and banishment from the Imperial dominions
substituted. Meanwhile," said the old soldier, "I have retired forever
from a career where, up to this hour, no stain of dishonor attached to
me. The name which I bore so long with distinction is now branded with
shame, and I leave the service to pass the few remaining days of my life
wherever obscurity can best hide my sorrow and my ignominy."
Although Nelly at once answered this afflicting letter, and wrote again
and again to Vienna, to Milan, and to Prague, she never received any
reply, nor could obtain the slightest clew to what the sentence on Frank
referred. To conceal these terrible events from her father was her first
impulse; and although she often accused herself of duplicity for so
doing, she invariably came round to her early determination. To what
end embitter the few moments of ease he had enjoyed for years past? Why
trouble him about what is irremediable, and make him miserable about
those from whom his careless indifference asks nothing and requires
nothing? Time enough when the future looks brighter to speak of the
sorrows of the past!
This task of secrecy was not a difficult one. Dalton's was not a nature
to speculate on possible mischances so much as to hope for impossible
good turns of fortune; and when he knew that Kate had sent him money,
and Frank did not ask for any, the measure of his contentment was
filled. Kate was a Princess, and Frank an officer of hussars; and that
they were as happy as the day was long he would have taken an oath
before any "justice of the quorum," simply because he saw no reason why
they ought not to be so; and when he drank their healths every day after
dinner, and finished a bumper of champagne to their memory, he perfectly
satisfied his conscience that he had discharged every parental duty in
their behalf. His "God bless you, my darling child!" was the extent of
his piety as of his affection; and so he lived in the firm belief that
he had a heart overflowing with good and kind and generous sentiments.
The only unpleasant feelings he had arose for Nelly. Her eyes, that
in spite of all her efforts showed recent tears; her pale face; her
anxious, nervous manner worried and amazed him. "There 's something
strange about that girl," he would say to himself; "she would sing the
whole day long when we hadn't a shilling beyond the price of our dinner;
she was as merry as a lark, cutting out them images till two or three
o'clock of a morning; and now that we have lashings and leavings of
everything, with all manner of diversions about us, there she sits
moping and fretting the whole day." His ingenuity could detect no
explanation for this. "To be sure, she was lame, and it might grieve
her to look at dancing, in which she could take no part But when did she
ever show signs of an envious nature? She was growing old, too,----at
least, she was six or seven-and-twenty,--and no prospect of being
married; but was Nelly the girl to grieve over this? Were not all her
affections and all her hopes home-bound? 'T was n't fretting to be back
in Ireland that she could be!--she knew little of it before she left it."
And thus he was at the end of all his surmises without being nearer the
solution.
We have said enough to show that Nelly's sorrow was not causeless,
and that she had good reason to regret the days of even their hardest
fortune.
"Had we been but contented as we were!" cried she; "had we resisted
ambitions for which we were unfitted, and turned away from 'paths in
life' too steep and too arduous for our strength, we might have been
happy now! Who can say, too, what development of mind and intelligence
should not have come of this life of daily effort and exertion? Frank
would have grown manly, patient, and self-relying; Kate would have been,
as she ever was, the light of our home, making us sharers in all those
gifts of her own bright and happy nature; while even I might have risen
to worthier efforts of skill than those poor failures I have now to
blush for."
Such were the regrets which filled her heart, as she sat many an hour in
solitude, grieving over the past, and yet afraid to face the future.
CHAPTER XVIII. AN ACT OF SETTLEMENT.
Were we disposed to heroics, we might compare Mrs. Ricketts's
sensations, on entering the grounds of the villa, to the feelings
experienced by the ancient Gauls when, from the heights of the Alps,
they gazed down on the fertile plains of Italy. If less colored by the
glorious hues of conquering ambition, they were not the less practical.
She saw that, with her habitual good fortune, she had piloted the
Rickettses' barque into a safe and pleasant anchorage, where she might
at her leisure refit and lay in stores for future voyaging. Already she
knew poor Dalton, as she herself said, from "cover to cover,"--she had
sounded all the shallows and shoals of his nature, and read his vanity,
his vainglorious importance, and his selfish pride, as though they were
printed on his forehead. Were Nelly to be like Kate, the victory, she
thought, could not be very difficult. "Let her have but one predominant
passion, and be it love of admiration, avarice, a taste for dress, for
scandal, or for grand society, it matters not, I'll soon make her my
own."
"This will do, Martha!" whispered she, in Miss Ricketts's ear, as they
drove up the approach.
"I think so," was the low-uttered reply.
"Tell Scroope to be cautious,--very cautious," whispered she once more;
and then turned to Dalton, to expatiate on the beauty of the grounds,
and the exquisite taste displayed in their arrangement.
"It has cost me a mint of money," said Dalton, giving way irresistibly
to his instinct of boastfulness. "Many of those trees you see there came
from Spain and Portugal; and not only the trees, but the earth that's
round them."
"Did you hear that, Martha?" interposed Mrs. Rick-etts. "Mr. Dalton very
wisely remarks that man is of all lands, while the inferior productions
of nature require their native soils as a condition of existence."
"Yes, indeed," said Dalton, fathering the sentiment at once; "'tis only
the blacks that can't bear the cowld. But, after all, maybe they 're not
the same as ourselves."
"I own I never could think them so," smiled Mrs. Rick-etts, as though
the very appearance of Peter Dalton had confirmed the prejudice.
"Faix! I'm glad to hear you say that," said he, delightedly. "Tis many's
the battle Nelly and me has about that very thing. There's the villa,
now--what d' ye think of it?"
"Charming--beautiful--a paradise!"
"Quite a paradise!" echoed Martha.
"'T is a mighty expensive paradise, let me tell you," broke in Peter.
"I've a gardener, and four chaps under him, and sorrow a thing I ever
see them do but cut nosegays and stick little bits of wood in the
ground, with hard names writ on them; that's what they call gardening
here. As for a spade or a hoe, there's not one in the country; they do
everything with a case-knife and watering-pot."
"You amaze me," said Mrs. Ricketts, who was determined on being
instructed in horticulture.
"There's a fellow now, with a bundle of moss-roses for Nelly, and
there's another putting out the parrot's cage under a tree,----that's
the day's work for both of them."
"Are you not happy to think how your ample means diffuse ease and
enjoyment on all round you? Don't tell me that the pleasure you feel is
not perfect ecstasy."
"That's one way of considering it," said Dalton, dubiously, for he was
not quite sure whether he could or could not yield his concurrence.
"But if people did n't la-la-la--"
"Lay abed, you mean," cried Dalton; "that's just what they do; a German
wouldn't ask to awake at all, if it wasn't to light his pipe."
"I meant la-la-labor; if they did n't la-labor the ground, we should all
be starved."
"No political economy, Scroope," cried Mrs. Ricketts; "I will not permit
it. That dreadful science is a passion with him, Mr. Dal ton."
"Is it?" said Peter, confusedly, to whose ears the word "economy" only
suggested notions of saving and sparing. "I can only say," added he,
after a pause, "tastes differ, and I never could abide it at all."
"I was certain of it," resumed Mrs. Ricketts; "but here comes a young
lady towards us,--Miss Dalton, I feel it must be."
The surmise was quite correct. It was Nelly, who, in expectation of
meeting her father, had walked down from the house, and now, seeing a
carriage, stood half irresolute what to do.
"Yes, that's Nelly," cried Dalton, springing down to the ground; "she'll
be off now, for she thinks it's visitors come to see the place."
While Dalton hastened to overtake his daughter, Mrs. Ricketts had time
to descend and shake out all her plumage,--a proceeding of manual
dexterity to which Martha mainly contributed; indeed, it was almost
artistic in its way, for while feathers were disposed to droop here, and
lace taught to fall gracefully there, the fair Zoe assumed the peculiar
mood in which she determined on conquest.
"How do I look, Martha?" said she, bridling up, and then smiling.
"Very sweetly,--quite charming," replied Martha.
"I know that," said the other, pettishly; "but am I maternal,--am I
affectionate?"
"Very maternal,----most affectionate," was the answer.
"You're a fool!" said Mrs. Ricketts, contemptuously; but had barely time
to restore her features to their original blandness, when Nelly came up.
The few words in which her father had announced Mrs. Ricketts spoke
of her as one who had known and been kind to Kate, and Nelly wanted no
stronger recommendation to her esteem.
The quiet, gentle manner of the young girl, the almost humble simplicity
of her dress, at once suggested to Mrs. Ricketts the tone proper for the
occasion, and she decided on being natural; which, to say truth, was
the most remote thing from nature it is well possible to conceive. Poor
Nelly was not, however, a very shrewd critic, and she felt quite happy
to be so much at her ease as they walked along to the house together.
Mrs. Ricketts saw that Kate was the key-note to all her sister's
affection, and therefore talked away of her unceasingly. To have heard
her, one would have thought they had been inseparable, and that Kate had
confided to the dear old lady the most secret thoughts of her heart. The
amiable Zoe did, indeed, contrive to effect this rather by the aid of
an occasional sigh, a tone of lamentation and sorrow, than by direct
assertion; all conveying the impression that she was cut to the heart
about something, but would rather be "brayed in a mortar" than tell
it. Martha's mild and submissive manner won rapidly on Nelly, and she
wondered whether Kate had liked her. In fact, the visitors were all
so very unlike the usual company her father presented to her, she felt
disposed to think the best of them; and even Scroope came in for a share
of her good opinion.
The interior of the villa changed the current of conversation, and now
Mrs. Ricketts felt herself at home examining the rich brocade of the
hangings, the bronzes, and the inlaid tables.
"Lyons silk,----twenty-four francs a metre!" whispered she to Scroope.
"I thought they had n't a s-s-sixpence," observed the other.
"And these things are new, Scroope!--all new!"
"I--I--I was observing that, sister."
"What a creature he is, Scroope!--what a creature!"
"And the daughter, I suspect, is only ha-ha-half-witted."
"Humph!" ejaculated Zoe, as though she did not quite coincide with that
opinion.
The confidential dialogue was broken in upon by Dalton, who, having
dragged the poor General over the terrace and the flower-garden, was now
showing him the inside of the dwelling.
"If I could but see dear Kate here!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts, as she slowly
sank into a downy chair, "I'd fancy this was home. It's all so like
herself,--such graceful elegance, such tasteful splendor."
"It's neat,----I think it's neat," said Dalton, almost bursting with the
effort to repress his delight.
[Illustration: 250]
"Oh, sir, it's princely! It's worthy the great name of its possessor.
Dear Kate often told me of her beautiful home."
"I thought you li-li-lived over a toy-shop? Foglass said you li-lived--"
"So we did while the place was getting ready," said Dalton, flushing.
"Just let me sit here, and watch the rippling of that shining river!"
sighed Mrs. Ricketts, laying her hand on Dalton's, and, by a melting
look, withdrawing him from Scroope's unlucky reminiscence. "If I could
but pass the night here, I feel it would be ecstasy."
"What easier, if it's in earnest you are?" cried Dalton. "We never make
use of this little drawing-room. Nelly will get you a bed put up in five
minutes."
"Is n't that Irish, Scroope?--is n't that what I often told you of
Ireland?" cried Zoe, as her eyes glistened.
"Well, but I'm not joking," resumed Dalton; "small as the place is, we
can make room for you all. We 'll put Miss Martha in Nelly's room, and
the General can have mine; and there's a mighty snug tittle place for
you in the garden."
"Oh, dear, dear, dear Ireland, how I love you!" said Mrs. Ricketts,
closing her eyes, and affecting to talk in her sleep.
"There's worse places," murmured Dalton, who drank in national flattery
as the pleasantest "tipple" after personal. "But say the word, now, and
see if we won't make you comfortable."
"Comfortable!----you mean happy, supremely happy," ejaculated Zoe.
"And there's no inconvenience in it, none whatever," continued Dalton,
who now was breast-high in his plot. "That's a fine thing in this little
town of Baden; you can have everything at a moment's warning, from a
sirloin of beef to a strait-waistcoat."
Now Mrs. Ricketts laughed till her eyes overflowed with tears, at
Dalton's drollery; and Scroope, too, cackled his own peculiar cry; and
the old General chimed in with a faint wheezing sound,--a cross between
the wail of an infant and a death-rattle; in the midst of which Dalton
hurried away to seek Nelly, who was showing the garden to Martha.
"Now, mind me, Scroope," cried Mrs. Ricketts, as soon as they were
alone; "no selfishness, no eternal trouble about your own comfort. We
may probably pass the summer here, and--"
"But I--I----I won't sleep under the stairs, I--I----I promise you,"
cried he, angrily.
"You had a dear little room, with a lovely view, at Noringen. You are
most ungrateful."
"It was a d-d ear little room, six feet sqnare, and looked ont on a
tannery. My skin would have been leather if I had st-st-stayed another
week in it."
"Martha slept in a wardrobe, and never complained."
"For that matter, I passed two months in a sh-shower-bath," cried
Scroope; "but I--I won't do it a-any more."
To what excesses his rebellious spirit might have carried him it is hard
to say, for Dalton now came up with Nelly, who was no less eager than
her father to offer the hospitalities of the villa. At the hazard of
detracting in the reader's esteem from all this generous liberality, we
feel bound to add that neither Dalton nor his daughter ever speculated
on the lengthened sojourn which Mrs. Ricketts's more prophetic spirit
foreshadowed.
The accidental mistake about the hotel first suggested the offer, which
of course the next day was sure to obviate. And now, as it has so often
been an unpleasant task to record little flaws and frailties of the
Rickettses' nature, let us take the opportunity of mentioning some
traits of an opposite kind, which, even as a "set-off," are not
valueless. Nothing could be more truly amiable than the conduct of the
whole family when the question of their stay had been resolved upon. Had
Scroope been bred a cabinet-maker, he could n't have been handier with
bed-screws, laths, and curtain-rods. Martha, divested of shawl and
bonnet, arranged toilet-tables and looking-glasses like the most
accomplished housemaid; while, reclining in her easy-chair, the fair Zoe
vouchsafed praises on all the efforts around her, and nodded, as Jove
might, on mortal endeavors to conciliate him.
Poor Nelly was in ecstasy at all this goodness; such a united family was
a perfect picture. Nothing seemed to inconvenience them,--nothing went
wrong. There was a delightfully playful spirit in the way they met and
conquered little difficulties, and whenever hard pushed by fate there
was a wonderful reticule of Mrs. Ricketts's which was sure to contain
something to extricate them at once. Since Aladdin's lamp, there never
was such a magical contrivance as that bag; and the Wizard of the North,
who makes pancakes in a gentleman's hat and restores it unstained, and
who, from the narrow limits of a snuff-box, takes out feathers enough
to stuff a pillow-case, would have paled before the less surprising but
more practical resources of the "Rickettses' sack."
Various articles of toilet necessity, from objects peculiar to the
lady's own, down to the General's razors, made their appearance. An
impertinent curiosity might have asked why a lady going to dine at a
public ordinary should have carried about with her such an array
of flannel jackets, cordials, lotions, slippers, hair-brashes, and
nightcaps; but it is more than likely that Mrs. Ricketts would have
smiled at the short-sighted simplicity of the questioner, as she
certainly did at poor Nelly's face of quiet astonishment.
It was a downright pleasure to make sacrifices for people so ready to
accommodate themselves to circumstances, and who seemed to possess a
physical pliancy not inferior to the mental one. The General wanted
no window to shave at. Martha could bestow herself within limits that
seemed impossible to humanity. As for Scroope, he was what French
dramatists call a "grand utility,"--now climbing up ladders to arrange
curtain-rods, now descending to the cellars in search of unknown and
nameless requisites. A shrewd observer might have wondered that such
extensive changes in the economy of a household were effected for the
sake of one night's accommodation; but this thought neither occurred to
Dalton nor his daughter, who were, indeed, too full of admiration for
their guests' ingenuity and readiness, to think of anything else.
As for honest Peter, a house full of company was his delight. As he took
his place that evening at the supper-table, he was supremely happy. Nor
was it wonderful, considering the pleased looks and bland faces that
he saw on each side of him. All his stories were new to his present
audience. Mount Dalton and its doings were an anecdotic mine, of which
they had never explored a single "shaft." The grandeur of his family
was a theme all listened to with interest and respect; and as Mrs.
Ricketts's flattery was well-timed and cleverly administered, and
Scroope's blunders fewer and less impertinent than usual, the evening
was altogether a very pleasant one, and, as the cant is, went off
admirably.
If Nelly had now and then little misgivings about the over-anxiety
to please displayed by Mrs. Ricketts, and a certain exaggerated
appreciation she occasionally bestowed upon her father's "Irishism," she
was far too distrustful of her own judgment not to set down her fears
to ignorance of life and its conventionalities. "It would ill
become her," she thought, "to criticise people so well-bred and
so well-mannered." And this modest depreciation of herself saved the
others.
It was thus that the hosts felt towards their guests as they wished them
good-night, and cordially shook hands at parting.
"As agreeable an old lady as ever I met," said Dalton to his daughter;
"and not wanting in good sense either."
"I like Miss Martha greatly," said Nelly. "She is so gently mannered and
so mild, I'm sure Kate was fond of her."
"I like them all but the little chap with the stutter. He seems so
curious about everything."
"They are all so pleased--so satisfied with everything," said Nelly,
enthusiastically.
"And why wouldn't they? There's worse quarters, let me tell you, than
this! It is n't under Peter Dalton's roof that people go to bed hungry.
I wouldn't wonder if they'd pass a day or two with us."
"Do you think so?" said Nelly, scarcely knowing whether to be pleased or
the reverse.
"Well see to-morrow," said Dalton, as he took his candle and began to
climb up the stairs to the room which he was now to occupy instead of
his own chamber, singing, as he went, an old ballad,----
"The whole Balrothery hunt was there,
And welcome were they all!
With two in a bed, and four on the stairs,
And twelve in the Bachelor's hall!"
Leaving Dalton to con over the stray verses of his once favorite ballad
as he dropped off to sleep, we turn for a moment to the chamber which,
by right of conquest, was held by the fair Zoe, and where, before a
large mirror, she was now seated; while Martha was engaged upon that
wonderful head, whose external machinery was almost as complex as
its internal. Mrs. Ricketts had resolved upon adopting a kind of
materno-protective tone towards Nelly; and the difficulty now was to
hit off a coiffure to sustain that new character. It should combine the
bland with the dignified, and be simple without being severe. There
was something Memnonic in that large old head, from which the gray hair
descended in massive falls, that seemed worthy of better things than a
life of petty schemes and small intrigues; and the patient Martha looked
like one whose submissive nature should have been bent to less ignoble
burdens than the capricious fretfulness of a tiresome old woman. But so
is it every day in life; qualities are but what circumstances make them,
and even great gifts become but sorry aids when put to base uses!
There was another figure in the group, and for him no regrets arise as
to talents misapplied and tastes perverted. Nature had created Scroope
Purvis for one line of character, and he never ventured to walk out of
it. In a large and showy dressing-gown belonging to his host, and a pair
of most capacious slippers from the same wardrobe, Scroope had come
down to assist at a Cabinet Council. He had just performed a voyage of
discovery round the house, having visited every available nook, from
the garret to the cellars, and not omitting the narrow chamber to which
Nelly herself had retired, with whom he kept up an amicable conversation
for several minutes, under pretence of having mistaken his room. Thence
he had paid a visit to old Andy's den; and, after a close scrutiny of
the larder and a peep between the bars at the dairy, came back with the
honest conviction that he had done his duty.
"It's sm-small, sister----it's very small," said he, entering her
chamber.
"It's not smaller than Mrs. Balfour's cottage at the Lakes, and you know
we spent a summer there," said the lady, rebukingly.
"But we had it all to--to ourselves, sister."
"So much the worse. A cook and a cellar are admirable fixtures.--The
curls lower down on the sides, Martha. I don't want to look like Grisi."
There was something comforting in the last assurance, for it would have
sorely tested poor Martha's skill had the wish been the reverse.
"They don't seem to ha-have been long here, sister. The knif eboard in
the scullery has n't been used above a--a few times. I should n't wonder
if old Da-Da-Dalton won the villa at play."
"Fudge!--Fuller on the brow, Martha--more expansive there."
"Is n't the girl vulgar, sister?" asked Scroope.
"Decidedly vulgar, and dressed like a fright!--I thought it was only
you, Martha, that rolled up the back hair like a snail's shell." Martha
blushed, but never spoke. "I suppose she's the same that used to cut the
pipe-heads and the umbrella tops. I remarked that her fingers were all
knotted and hard."
"Her smile is very pleasing," submitted Martha, diffidently.
"It's like her father's laugh,--far too natural for my taste! There's
no refinement, no elegance, in one of your sweet, unmeaning smiles. I
thought I had told you that at least twenty times, Martha. But you have
grown self-willed and self-opinionated of late, and I must say, you
couldn't have a graver fault! Correct it in time, I beseech you."
"I 'll try," said Martha, in a very faint voice.
"If you try, you 'll succeed. Look at your brother. See what he has
become. There's an example might stimulate you."
Another and a far deeper sigh was all Martha's acknowledgment of this
speech.
"He was the same violent, impetuous creature that you are. There, you
need n't tear my hair out by the roots to prove it! He wouldn't brook
the very mildest remonstrance; he was passionate and irrestrainable, and
what I have made him. Oh, you spiteful creature, how you hurt me!"
This cry of pain was not quite causeless, for Martha was trembling
from head to foot, and actually only saved herself from falling by a
mechanical clutch at something like a horse's tail. With many excuses,
and in a voice broken by regrets, she resumed her task with a vigorous
effort for success, while Mrs. Ricketts and Purvis exchanged glances of
supreme contempt.
"I speak to you, Martha," resumed she, "for your own sake. You
cannot see what all the world sees,--the sinful selfishness of your
nature,----a vice, I must say, the less pardonable that you live beneath
the shadow of my counsels!--Scroope, don't creak that chair,--sit upon
that stool there.--Now that we shall probably spend two months here--"
"Here! Do--do you m-mean here?" cried Purvis.
"Of course I mean here, sir. There's nothing in the shape of a lodging
to be had under three or four hundred francs a month. This is a very
sweet place; and when the old gentleman can be induced to take a room in
the town for himself, and that his daughter learns, as she will,--though
certainly not from Martha,--what is due to me, it will be comfortable
and convenient. We'll ask the Princess, too, to spend a week with us;
for who knows, in the present state of politics, to what corner of
Germany we may yet be reduced to fly!"
"How will you m-m-manage with Haggerstone and the rest, when they
arrive, sister?"
"Easily enough. I 'll show them that it's for their advantage that we
are here. It is true that we agreed to take a house together; but every
plan is modified by the events of the campaign. Petrolaffsky will be
content if Mr. Dalton plays piquet; the Colonel will like his claret and
Burgundy; and Foglass will be pleased with the retirement that permits
him to prosecute his attentions to Martha."
Poor Martha blushed crimson at the tone rather, even than the words of
the speech; for, when nothing else offered, it was the practice of Mrs.
Ricketts to insinuate coquetry as among her sister's defects.
"You needn't look so much confused, my dear," resumed the torturer; "I
'm certain it's not the first affair of the kind you've known."
"Oh, sister!" cried Martha, in a voice of almost entreaty.
"Not that I think there would be anything unsuitable in the match; he is
probably fifty-eight or nine,--sixty at most,----and, excepting deafness
and the prosy tendency natural to his time of life, pretty much like
everybody else."
"You know, sister, that he never thought of me, nor I of him."
"I know that I am not in the confidence of either party," said Mrs.
Ricketts, bridling; "and I also know I am sincerely happy that my head
is not crammed with such fiddle-faddle. Before the great event comes
off, however, you will have time to attend to something else, and
therefore I beg you will keep in mind what I am about to say to you.
We are here, Martha," resumed she, with all the solemnity of a
judicial charge,--"we are here by no claims of relationship or previous
friendship. No secret ties of congenial tastes bind us up together. No
common attachment to some other dear creature forms a link between us.
We are here as much by chance as one can venture to call anything in
this unhappy world. Let us, then, show Fortune that we are not unworthy
of her goodness, by neglecting nothing which may strengthen our position
and secure our permanence. In a word, Martha, throw over all your
selfishness'----forget the miserable egotism that besets you, and study
that young girl's character and wishes. She has never been courted in
life--flatter her; she has never been even thought of----show her every
consideration; she is evidently of a thoughtful turn, and nobody can
mope better than yourself. Insinuate yourself day by day into little
household affairs, mingling counsels here and warnings there,--always
on the side of economy,--so that while affecting only to play with the
reins, you'll end by driving the coach."
"I 'm afraid I 've no head for all this, sister."
"Of course you have n't, nor for anything else without me to guide
you. I 'm perfectly aware of that. But you can learn. You can at least
obey!"
"My sister means that you can st-st-struggle against the natural
w-w-wilfulness of your d-disposition," cackled in Purvis.
"I'll do my best," murmured Martha, in a voice of humility.
"Women are so fond of sa-saving," cried Scroope, "You'll always be safe
when you c-c-cut down the estimates."
"Attend to that, Martha," remarked Mrs. Ricketts.
"Find out the price of ch-chickens, and always buy them a kreutzer
cheaper than she has done."
"There is nothing gives such an ascendency in a house as showing that
you can maintain the establishment for fourpence less per quarter," said
Zoe, gravely. "I have known connubial happiness, that has stood the test
of temper and illness for years, wrecked on the small rock of a cook's
bill. Like all wasteful men, you may be sure that this Dalton has many
miserly habits. Learn these, and indulge them. There was that poor
Marquis of Binchley, that never dined without a hundred wax candles in
the room, left all his fortune to a nephew he once found collecting the
sealing-wax from old letters and making it up for fresh use. Reflect
upon this, Martha; and always bear in mind that the vices of mankind
are comparatively uninstructive. It is their foibles, their small
weaknesses, that teach everything."
"When Ha-Ha-Haggerstone comes, and finds no room for him, you 'll
ha-ha-have the devil to pay."
"He shall take it out in dinners, Scroope; and what between drinking
Dalton's wine with him, and abusing him behind his back, you 'll see he
'll be perfectly happy."
"How long do you purpose to st-stay here, sister?" asked Scroope.
"Ask the butterfly how long the rose and the hyacinth will bloom," said
Mrs. Ricketts, pensively; for, by dint of smiling at herself in the
looking-glass, she had come round to that mock poetical vein which ran
through her strange incongruous nature. "And now good-night, dears,"
sighed she. "These are sweet moments, but they are paid for at a price.
Exhausted energies will have repose." She held out her hand to Martha,
who kissed it respectfully, and then waived a graceful adieu to Purvis,
as he retired.
"Sister Zoe has a head for everything," muttered Purvis to Martha.
"There's nothing she's not up to."
"She's very clever indeed!" sighed Martha.
"And this is n't the worst h-hit she has ever made. It was d-deucedly
well done to get in here."
Either Martha did n't concur in the sentiment, or Scroope's satisfaction
did not need any backing, for she made no reply.
"They 've given me a capital room; I fa-fancy Dalton's own, for I found
a heap of old bills and letters in a table-drawer, and something like
a--like a----like a writ"--here he laughed till the tears came at the
drollery of the thought,--"in the pocket of his dressing-gown."
"Good-night," said Martha, softly, as she glided into the little chamber
allotted to her. Poor Martha! Save Nelly's, hers was the saddest heart
beneath that roof. For the first time in all her long years of trial,
a ray of doubt, a flash of infidelity had broken upon her mind, and
the thought of her sister-in-law's infallibility became for a moment
suspected. It was not that abused and outraged submission was goaded
into rebellion; it was dormant reason that was suddenly startled into
a passing wakefulness. It was like one of those fitful gleams of
intelligence which now and then dart across the vacuity of dulled
intellects, and, like such, it was only a meteor-flash, and left no
trace of light behind it. Even in all its briefness the anguish it gave
was intense; it was the delusion of a whole life rent asunder at once,
and the same shock which should convulse the moral world of her thoughts
would rob her of all the pleasantest fancies of her existence. If Zoe
were not all goodness and all genius, what was to become of all the
household gods of the Villino? Titians would moulder away into stained
and smoked panels; "Svres" and "Saxe" would fall down to pasteboard and
starch; carved oak and ebony would resolve themselves into leather; and
even the friendship of princes and the devotion of philosophers be only
a mockery, a sham, and a snare!
Poor Martha! Deprived of these illusions, life was but one unceasing
round of toil; while, aided by imagination, she could labor on
unwearied. Without a thought of deception, she gloried in the harmless
frauds to which she contributed, but could n't resist the contagion of
credulity around her. How easily could such a spirit have been moulded
to every good gift, and qualities like these have been made to minister
to comfort and happiness, and the faith that was given to gilt paper,
and glue, and varnish, elevated to all that is highest in the moral and
material world!
And now they were all in slumber beneath that roof,--all save one. Poor
Nelly sat at her window, tearful and sad. In the momentary excitement of
receiving her guests she had forgotten her cares; but now they came back
upon her, coupled with all the fears their wasteful habits could suggest
At times she blamed herself for the tame cowardice which beset her, and
restrained her from every effort to avert the coming evil; and at times
she resigned herself to the gloomy future, with the stern patience
of the Indian who saw his canoe swept along into the rapids above the
cataract. There was not one to turn to for advice or counsel, and the
strength that would have sustained her in any other trial was here
sapped by the dread of giving pain to her father. "It would ill become
me to give him cause for sorrow,--I, that of all his children have
ministered nothing to his pride nor his happiness!" Such was the
estimate she held of herself, and such the reasoning that flowed from
it.
CHAPTER XIX. THE CURSAAL.
The attempt to accommodate a company to which the house was unsuited
would have been a source of painful annoyance to most men. To Peter
Dalton it was unqualified pleasure. The subversion of all previous
arrangements, the total change in the whole order of domesticity, were
his delight The changing of rooms, the being sent to sleep in strange
and inconvenient corners, the hurry-scurry endeavors to find a
substitute for this or a representative for that, the ingenious devices
to conceal a want or to supply a deficiency, afforded him the most
lively amusement; and he went about rubbing his hands, and muttering
that it did his heart good. It was "so like Mount Dalton when he was a
boy."
All Mrs. Ricketts's softest blandishments were so many charms clean
thrown away. His thoughts were centred on himself and his own amiable
qualities, and he revelled in the notion that the world did not contain
another as truly generous and hospitable as Peter Dalton. In accordance
with the singular contradictions of which his character was made up, he
was willing to incur every sacrifice of personal inconvenience, if it
only served to astonish some one, or excite a sensation of surprise
at his good-nature; and while all Nelly's efforts were to conceal the
inconveniences these hospitalities inflicted, Peter was never satisfied
except when the display could reflect honor on himself, and exact
a tribute of flattery from his guests. Nor was he all this time in
ignorance of Mrs. Ricketts's character. With native shrewdness be had at
once detected her as an "old soldier." He saw the practised readiness
of her compliance with everything; he saw the spirit of accommodation
in which she met every plan or project. He knew the precise value of her
softest look or her sweetest smile; and yet he was quite content with
possessing the knowledge, without any desire to profit by it. Like one
who sits down to play with sharpers, and resolves that either the stake
shall be a trifle or the roguery be very limited, he surrendered himself
to the fair Zoe's seductions with this sort of a reservation to guide
him.
If Mrs. Ricketts did not cheat him by her goodness, she took her revenge
by the claims of her grandeur. Her intimacy with great people--the very
greatest--exalted her to the highest place in Dalton's esteem. Honest
Peter knew nothing of the years of toil and pain, the subtle arts, the
deep devices, the slights, the affronts, the stern rebuffs here, the
insolent denials there, by which these acquisitions, precarious as
they were, had been won. He did not know how much of the royalty was
left-handed, nor how much of the nobility was factitious. All he could
see was the gracious salutes wafted to her from coroneted carriages, the
soft smiles wafted from high places, the recognitions bestowed on her in
the promenade, and the gracious nods that met her in the Cursaal.
Mrs. Ricketts was perfect in all the skill of this peculiar game, and
knew how, by the most ostentatious display of respect in public, not
only to exalt the illustrious person--age who deigned to acknowledge
her, but also to attach notice to herself as the individual so highly
favored. What reverential courtesies would she drop before the presence
of some small German "Hochheit," with a gambling-house for a palace, and
a roulette-table for an exchequer! What devotional observances would
she perform in front of the chair of some snuffy old Dowager "Herzogin,"
of an unknown or forgotten principality! How pertinaciously would she
remain standing till some "Durchlaut" was "out of the horizon;" or
how studiously would she retire before the advancing step of some puny
potentate,--a monarch of three huesars and thirty chamberlains! Poor
Peter was but a sorry pupil in this "School of Design." He found it
difficult to associate rank with unwashed faces and unbrushed clothes;
and although he did bow, and flourish his hat, and perform all
the other semblances of respect, he always gave one the idea of
an irreverential Acolyte at the back of a profoundly impressed and
dignified high-priest.
Dalton was far more at his ease when he paraded the rooms with Mrs.
Ricketts on one arm, and Martha on the other, enjoying heartily all the
notice they elicited, and accepting, as honest admiration, the staring
wonderment and surprise their appearance was sure to excite. Mrs.
Ricketts, who had always something geographical about her taste in
dress, had this year leaned towards the Oriental, and accordingly
presented herself before the admiring world of Baden in a richly
spangled muslin turban, and the very shortest of petticoats, beneath
which appeared a pair of ample trousers, whose deep lace frills covered
the feet, and even swept the floor. A paper-knife of silver gilt, made
to resemble a yataghan, and a smelling-bottle, in the counterfeit of
a pistol, glittered at her girdle, which, with the aid of a very well
arched pair of painted eyebrows, made up as presentable a Sultana as one
usually sees in a second-rate theatre. If Dalton's blue coat and tight
nankeen pantaloons----his favorite full-dress costume--did somewhat
destroy the "Bosphorean illusion," as Zoe herself called it, still
more did Martha's plain black silk and straw bonnet,--both types of the
strictly useful, without the slightest taint of extraneous ornament.
Purvis and the General, as they brought up the rear, came also in for
their meed of surprise,--the one lost under a mass of cloaks, shawls,
scarfs, and carpets, and the other moving listlessly along through the
crowded rooms, heedless of the mob and the music, and seeming to follow
his leader with a kind of fatuous instinct utterly destitute of volition
or even of thought A group so singularly costumed, seen every day dining
at the most costly table, ordering whatever was most expensive; the
patrons of the band, and the numerous flower-girls, whose bouquets were
actually strewed beneath their feet, were sure to attract the notice of
the company,--a tribute, it must be owned, which invariably contains a
strong alloy of all that is ill-natured, sarcastic, and depreciating.
Zoe was a European celebrity, known and recognized by every one. The
only difficulty was to learn who the new "victim" was, whence he came,
and what means he possessed. There are few places where inventive genius
more predominates than at Baden, and Dalton was alternately a successful
speculator in railroads, a South American adventurer, a slaver, and a
Carlist agent,----characters for which honest Peter had about as many
requisites as he possessed for Hamlet or Cardinal Wolsey. He seemed to
have abundance of money, however, and played high,--two qualities of no
small request in this favored region. Dalton's gambling tastes were all
originally associated with the turf and its followers. A race in his
eyes was the legitimate subject of a bet; and if anything else could
rival it in interest, it was some piece of personal prowess or skill,
some manly game of strength or activity. To men of this stamp the
wager is merely a pledge to record the sentiments they entertain upon a
particular event. It is not, as gamesters understand it, the whole
sum and substance of the interest. Personal pride, the vainglory of'
success, is the triumph in one case; in the other there is no question
of anything save gain. To this difference may be traced the wide
disparity of feeling exhibited by both in moments of failing fortune.
To one loss comes with all the harassing sensations of defeat; wounded
self-esteem and baffled hope giving poignancy to the failure. To the
other it is a pure question of a moneyed forfeiture, unaccompanied with
a single thought that can hurt the pride of the player. Hence the
wild transports of passion in the one case, and the calm, cold
self-possession in the other.
We need scarcely say to which class Dalton belonged; indeed, so far
as the public play at Baden was concerned, it was the notoriety that
pleased him most. The invariable falling back to make way for him as he
came up; the murmur of his name as he passed on; the comments on what
he would probably do; and, not least of all, the buzz of admiring
astonishment that was sure to arise as he plumped down before him the
great canvas bag full of gold, which the banker's porter had just handed
him!
All the little courtesies of the croupiers, those little official
flatteries which mean so much and so little, were especially reserved
for him; and the unlucky player who watched his solitary Napoleon
"raked in" by a yawning, listless croupier, became suddenly aware, by
the increased alacrity of look around him, that a higher interest was
awakened as Peter drew nigh.
The "Count's" chair was ostentatiously placed next the banker's; a store
of cards to mark the chances laid before him. The grave croupier----he
looked like an archdeacon--passed his gold snuff-box across the table;
the smartly wigged and waistcoated one at his side presented the cards
to cut, with some whispered remark that was sure to make Dalton laugh
heartily. The sensation of this entre was certain to last some
minutes; and even the impatience of the players to resume the game was
a tribute that Dalton accepted as complimentary to the bustle of his
approach.
In accordance with the popular superstition of the play-table, Dalton's
luck was an overmatch for all the skill of more accomplished gamblers;
knowing nothing whatever of the game, only aware when he had won or
lost, by seeing that his stake had doubled or disappeared, he was an
immense winner. Night after night the same fortune attended him, and so
unerringly seemed all his calculations made, that the very caprices of
his play looked like well-studied and deep combinations. If many of
the bystanders were disposed to this opinion, the "bankers" thought
otherwise; they knew that,-in the end, the hour of retribution must
come, and, through all their losses, not only observed every mark of
courteous deference towards him, but by many a bland smile and many a
polite gesture seemed to intimate the pleasure they felt in his good
fortune. This was all that was wanting to fill up the measure of
Dalton's delight.
"There isn't a bit of envy or bad feeling about them chaps," he would
often say; "whether I carry away forty Naps, or four hundred of a night,
they 're just as civil. Faix! he knew many a born gentleman might take a
lesson from them."
So long as he continued to win, Dalton felt comparatively little
interest in play, beyond the notice his presence and his large stakes
were sure to excite. As a game it possessed no hold upon him; and when
he had changed his heaps of glittering gold for notes, he arose to leave
the table, and to forget all that had occurred there as matters of no
possible interest to remember.
Such was no longer the case when fortune turned. Then, and for the first
time, the gambler's passion awoke in his heart, and the sting of
defeat sent its pangs through him. The prying, searching looks of the
by-standers, too, were a dreadful ordeal; for all were curious to see
how he bore his losses, and Dalton was no accomplished gamester who
could lose with all the impassive gravity of seeming indifference. Still
less was he gifted with that philosophy of the play-table that teaches
a timely retreat before adverse fortune. He knew nothing of those sage
maxims by which the regular gambler controls his temper and regulates
his conduct; nor had he learned the art by which good and sterling
qualities, the gifts of noble natures, can be brought into the service
of a low and degrading vice! Dalton, it must be owned, was what is
called "a bad loser,"--that is, he lost his temper with his money; and
the more steadily luck seemed against him the more determinedly did
he "back his fortune." Now doubling, now trebling his stake, he lost
considerable sums; till at last, as the hand of the clock stood within
a few minutes of the closing hour, he emptied the remainder of his bag
upon the table, and, without counting, set it all upon a card.
"Rouge perd et couleur!" cried the banker, and raked in the glittering
heap; and, amid a murmur of half-compassionate astonishment, Peter arose
from the table. Mrs. Ricketts and her suite were all in the ball-room,
but Dalton only remembered them when he had gained the open air. The
terrible shock of his reverse had overwhelmed all his faculties, and
almost stunned him to unconsciousness. At last he bethought him of his
guests; but it was some time before he could summon sufficient composure
of look to go in search of them. He had been so accustomed--to use his
own phrase--"to ride the winner," that he did n't know how to face the
company as a beaten man. He thought of all the glances of impertinent
pity his presence would call forth, and imagined the buzz of remark
and comment every line of his features would give rise to. Poor
Peter!--little knew he that such signs of sympathy are never given to
the very saddest of misfortunes, and that, in such a society, no one
wastes a thought upon his neighbor's reverses, except when they serve as
a guide to himself.
He did, indeed, overhear from time to time little broken sentences
like these: "The old fellow with the white moustache has had a squeeze
'to-night.'" "He caught it heavy and thick." "Must have lost close on a
thousand Naps." "Bank walked into him;" and so on,----comments as free
from any tone of sympathy as the proudest heart could possibly have
asked for. But even these were easier to bear than the little playful
cajoleries of Mrs. Ricketts on his supposed successes.
Knowing him to be a frequent winner, and hearing from Scroope the large
sums he occasionally carried away, she invariably accosted him with
some little jesting rebuke on his "dreadful luck"--that "wicked good
fortune"--that would follow him in everything and everywhere.
Purvis had been a close spectator of all that went on this unlucky
evening, and was actually occupied with his pencil in calculating the
losses when Peter entered the room.
"He had above eighteen or twenty bank-notes of a th-thousand francs,"
cried he, "when he be-be-began the evening. They are all gone now. He
played at least a dozen 'rouleaux' of fifty Naps.; and as to the bag, I
can m-make no guess how m-m-much it held."
"I 'll tell you then, sir," said Peter, good-humoredly, as he just
overheard the last remark. "The bag held three hundred and eighty
Napoleons; and as you 're pretty correct in the other items, you 'll
not be far from the mark by adding about fifty or sixty Naps, for little
bets here and there."
"What coolness, what stoical indifference!" whispered Mrs. Ricketts to
Martha, but loud enough for Dalton to hear. "That is so perfectly
Irish; they can be as impetuous as the Italian, and possess all the
self-restraint and impassive bearing of the Indian warrior."
"But w-w-why did you go on, when luck was a-a-gainst you?"
"Who told me it was against me till I lost all my money?" cried Dalton.
"If the first reverse was to make a man feel beat, it would be a very
cowardly world, Mr. Purvis."
"Intensely Irish!" sighed Mrs. Ricketts.
"Well, maybe it is," broke in Peter, who was not in a mood to accept
anything in a complimentary sense. "Irish it may be; and as you remarked
a minute ago, we're little better than savages--"
"Oh, Mr. Dalton,----dear Mr. Dalton!"
"No matter; I'm not angry, ma'am. The newspapers says as bad,--ay,
worse, every day of the week. But what I 'm observing is, that the man
that could teach me how to keep my money could never have taught me how
to win it You know the old proverb about the 'faint heart, 'Mr. Purvis?"
"Yes; but I----I----I don't want a f-f-fair lady!"
"Faix! I believe you're right there, my little chap," said Peter,
laughing heartily, and at once recovering all his wonted good-humor at
the sound of his own mellow-toned mirth; and in this pleasant mood
he gave an arm to each of his fair companions, and led them into the
supper-room. There was an ostentatious desire for display in the order
Dalton gave that evening to the waiter. It seemed as if he wished to
appear perfectly indifferent about his losses. The table was covered
with a costly profusion that attracted general notice. Wines of the
rarest and most precious vintages stood on the sideboard. Dalton did the
honors with even more than his accustomed gayety. There was a stimulant
in that place at the head of the table; there was some magical influence
in the duty of host that never failed with him. The sense of sway and
power that ambitious minds feel in high and pre-eminent stations were
all his, as he sat at the top of his board; and it must be owned that
with many faults of manner, and many shortcomings on the score of taste,
yet Peter did the honors of his table well and gracefully.
Certain is it Mrs. Ricketts and her friends thought so. Zoe was in
perfect ecstasies at the readiness of his repartees and the endless
variety of his anecdotes. He reminded her at once of Sheridan and "poor
dear Mirabeau," and various other "beaux esprits" she used to live with.
Martha listened to him with sincere pleasure. Purvis grew very tipsy
in the process of his admiration, and the old General, suddenly brought
back to life and memory under the influence of champagne, thought him so
like Jack Trevor, of the Engineers, that he blubbered out, "I think I 'm
listening to Jack. It's poor Trevor over again."
Was it any wonder if in such intoxications Peter forgot all his late
reverses, nor ever remembered them till he had wished his company
good-night, and found himself alone in his own chamber? Pecuniary
difficulties were no new thing to Dalton, and it would not have
interfered with his pleasant dreams that night had the question been one
of those ordinary demands which he well knew how to resist or evade by
many a legal sleight and many an illegal artifice; but here was a debt
of honor. He had given his name, three or four times during the evening,
for large sums, lost on the very instant they were borrowed. These must
be repaid on the next day; but how, he knew not. How he "stood" in Abel
Kraus's books he had not the remotest idea. It might be with a balance,
or it might be with a deficit All he really knew was that he had
latterly drawn largely, and spent freely; and as Abel always smiled and
seemed satisfied, Peter concluded that his affairs needed no surer or
safer evidences of prosperity. To have examined ledgers and day-books
with such palpable proofs of solvency would have been, in his eyes, an
act of as great absurdity as that of a man who would not believe in the
sunshine till he had first consulted the thermometer.
"I must see Abel early to-morrow. Abel will set it all right," were
the conclusions to which he always came back; and if not very clearly
evident how, why, or by what means, still he was quite satisfied that
honest Kraus would extricate him from every difficulty. "The devil go
with it for black and red," said he, as he lay down in his bed. "I 'd
have plenty of cash in my pocket for everything this night, if it was
n't for that same table; and an ugly game it is as ever a man played.
Shuffle and cut; faites your 'jeu'; thirty-four--thirty-three; red
wins--black loses; there's the whole of it; sorrow more on 't except
the sad heart that comes afterwards!" These last words he uttered with a
deep sigh, and then turned his face to the pillow.
He passed a restless, feverish night; the sleep being more harassing
than even his waking moments, disturbed, as it was, by thoughts of
all he had lately gone through. All the tremendous excitement of the
play-table, heightened by the effect of wine, made up a wild chaotic
confusion in his brain, that was almost madness. He awoke repeatedly,
too, eager for daylight, and the time to call upon honest Abel. At these
times he would pace his room up and down, framing the speeches by
which he meant to open the interview. Kraus was familiar with his usual
"pleas." With Ireland and her stereotyped distresses he was thoroughly
conversant. Famine, fever, potato-rot, poor-rates, emigration, and
eviction were themes he could have almost discussed himself; but all he
recognized in them was an urgent demand for money, and an occasion for
driving the very hardest of bargains. The Russian remittances had been
less regular of late; so at least Abel averred, for Dalton neither knew
nor tried to know any details. The dates were frequently inconvenient,
and the places of payment oftentimes remote. Still, Abel was
civil,--nay, almost cordial; and what can any man ask for more than a
smile from his banker!
Dalton was quite at ease upon one point,--Kraus was sure to know nothing
of his late losses at play; in fact, out of his little den wherein he
sat he seemed to be aware of nothing in the whole wide world. A small
"slip," which arrived each morning from Frankfort, told him the current
exchanges of the day. The faces of his clients revealed all the rest But
Dalton was greatly deceived on this point There was not the slightest
incident of Baden with which he was not familiar, nor any occurrence in
its life of dissipation on which he was uninformed. His knowledge was
not the offspring of any taste for scandal, or any liking for the secret
gossiping of society. No; his was a purely practical and professional
information. The archduke who had lost so heavily at "roulette" would
need a loan on the morrow; the count who was about to elope with the
marchioness must have bills on Paris; the colonel who had shot the baron
in a duel could n't escape over the frontier without money. In a word,
every vice and iniquity seemed the tributaries of his trade; and whether
to consummate their wickedness or escape its penalty, men must first
come to Abel Kraus.
To see him crouching behind his little desk, poring over the scattered
fragments of dirty papers, which were his only books, you would never
have suspected that he had a thought above the mystic calculations
before him. Watch him more narrowly, however, and you will perceive that
not a figure can cross the street and approach his door without meeting
a shrewd, quick glance from those dark eyes; while a faint muttering
sound betrays his detection of the visitor's object.
Long, then, before Dalton swaggered up to the moneychanger's den, Abel
knew every circumstance of the previous night, and had actually before
him, on his desk, a correct account of all the sums he had lost at play.
Abel was not unprepared for such tidings. Dalton was precisely the man
to rush headlong into play the moment fortune turned with him, and the
pang of defeat was added to the bitterness of a loss; Abel only wondered
that the reverse had not come earlier. And so he mumbled below his
breath, as with his hat set jauntily on one side, and his hands stuck
carelessly beneath his coat-tails, Dalton came forward.
Peter had so far "got up" his air of easy indifference as to whistle
a tune; but, somehow, as he drew nearer to the door, the sounds waxed
fainter and fainter, and, before he had crossed the threshold, bad sunk
away into the cadence of a heavy sigh. Abel never looked up as the other
entered, but, affecting the deepest preoccupation, went on with his
figures.
"Morrow, Abel," said Dalton, as he threw himself into a chair, and,
removing his hat, began to wipe his forehead with his handkerchief.
"This is a murdering hot day. It's not ten yet, and the sun's roasting!"
"Fine weather for de harvest, Herr von Dalton, but a leetle rain do no
harm."
"Faix! I think not; neither to man nor beast."
Abel grinned at the brawny throat and massive proportions that seemed so
unequal to sustain the heat, but said nothing.
"How's the exchange, Abel?" said Peter; "how's the exchange?"
Now, in justice to our worthy friend Dalton, we must own that he put
this question without having the very remotest idea of its meaning. An
inscription from the tomb of the Pharaohs would have been to the full as
intelligible to him as an abstract from the "City Article." He asked
it as certain "charming women" inquire about the compass on board
ship,--something, in fact, suitable to the time and place, and proper to
be done on like occasions.
"De exchange is very uncertain; de market is up and down," said Abel,
dryly.
"That's bad," said Dalton, gravely,----"that's very bad!"
"De Mongolian loan is de reason," rejoined Abel.
Dalton gave a grunt, that might mean assent or displeasure with that
view of the case, but did not trust himself with more.
"Dey will not take de scrip at eighty-two, and I tink dey are right."
"Faix! I don't doubt but that they are!" chimed in Peter.
"Dey are right, if all be true we hear of de security. It is de mines
of de State dat are hypotheked,--how you call it,--what you say,
'hypotheked'?"
Dalton was completely puzzled now, and could only scratch his ear,--his
invariable symptom of utter discomfiture.
"Tis no matter," cried Abel, with a grating, harsh laugh. "Dey promise,
and no pay; and dat is very bad--ha! ha! ha!"
Now Dalton joined in the laugh, but with as ill a grace as needs be.
"Dey promise, and dey no pay, Herr von Dalton!" repeated the Jew,
with another laugh, as though he could not tear himself away from so
excellent a jest. "Dey borrow, dat dey may make explorations--how you
call dem--wit oder men's money. If dey de win, well! if dey lose--bah!
dey are bankrupt!"
Now, all these allusions were of the most provoking character to poor
Dalton, who could not help feeling a very different sympathy for
the Mongolians from that expressed by Abel Kraus. "Who knows what
difficulties they are in?--maybe they'd pay it if they could," muttered
he, as he slapped his boot with his cane, and fell into a musing fit.
"Dey shall not have one kreutzer of my moneys; I can tell dem dat!" said
Kraus, as he buttoned up the keys of his strong-box, as though suiting
the action to his words.
"Don't put up the keys so soon, Abel!" said Dalton, with an effort at a
laugh. "I want to see the inside of that little iron trunk there."
"You no want money, Herr von Dalton!" exclaimed the other, in amazement.
"You no want money! you draw eight hundred florin on Tuesday; you have
four hundred on Wednesday evening, and seven rouleaux of Napoleons; on
Saturday again I send you twenty thousand franc!"
"All true,--every word of it," said Dalton; "but there's no use telling
a hungry man about the elegant dinner he ate last week! The short of the
matter is, I want cash now."
Kraus appeared to reflect for a few minutes, and then said, "If a leetle
sum will do--"
"Faix! it will not. I want five hundred Naps., at the very least."
Kraus threw down his pen, and stared at him without speaking.
"One would think from your face, Abel, that I was asking for a loan of
the National Debt. I said five hundred Naps.!"
Abel shook his head mournfully, and merely muttered "Ja! ja!" to
himself. "We will look over de account, Herr von Dalton," said he, at
last; "perhaps I am wrong, I no say, I am sure; but I tink--dat is, I
believe--you overdraw very much your credit."
"Well, supposing I did; is it the first time?" said Dalton, angrily.
"Ain't I as good a man now as I was before?"
"You are a very goot man, I know well; a very goot and a very pleasant
man; but you know de old German proverb, 'Das Gut ist nicht Gelt.'"
"I never heard it till now," muttered Peter, sulkily; "but if a robber
in this country put a pistol to your head, he 'd be sure to have a
proverb to justify him! But to come to the point,----can I have the
money?"
"I fear very mush--No!" was the dry response.
"No,--is it?" cried Dalton, starting up from his seat; "did you say no?"
Kraus nodded twice, slowly and deliberately.
"Then bad luck to the rap ever you'll see more of my money," cried
Peter, passionately. "You old Jewish thief, I ought to have known you
long ago; fifty, sixty, seventy per cent I was paying for the use of
my own cash, and every bill I gave as good as the bank paper! Ain't
you ashamed of yourself, tell me that,--ain't you downright ashamed of
yourself?"
"I tink not; I have no occasions for shame," said the other, calmly.
"Faix! I believe you there," retorted Dalton. "Your line of life doesn't
offer many opportunities of blushing. But if I can't bring you to know
shame, maybe I can teach you to feel sorrow. Our dealing is ended from
this day out. Peter Dalton does n't know you more! He never saw you! he
never heard of your name! D'ye mind me now? None of your boasting among
the English here that you have Mr. Dalton's business. If I hear of
your saying it, it's not a contradiction will satisfy me. Understand
me well--it's not to leave a mark of friendship that I 'll come in here
again!"
The fierce tone in which Dalton said these words, and the gesture he
made with a tremendous walking-stick, were certainly well calculated to
excite Abel's terrors, who, opening a little movable pane of the window,
looked out into the street, to assure himself of succor in case of need.
"What's the use of family, rank, or fortune," cried Dalton, indignantly,
as he paced up and down the little shop, in a perfect frenzy of passion,
"if a little dirty Jew, with a face like a rat-terrier, can insult
you? My uncle is one of the first men in Austria, and my daughter's a
Princess; and there's a creature you would't touch with the tongs has
the impudence to--to--to--" Evidently the precise offence did not at
once occur to Dalton's memory, for after several efforts to round
off his phrase--"to outrage me----to outrage me!" he cried, with the
satisfaction of one who had found a missing object.
Meanwhile Abel, who had gradually resumed his courage, was busily
engaged in some deep and intricate calculations, frequently referring
to a number of ill-scrawled scraps of paper on a file before him, not
heeding, if he heard, the storm around him.
"Dere, saar," said he at length, as he pushed a slip of paper towards
Dalton,--"dere, saar; our affairs is closed, as you say. Dere is your
debit,--eighteen hundred and seventy-three florins, 'convenzion money.'
Dere may be leetle charges to be added for commissions and oder tings;
but dat is de chief sum, which you pay now."
There was a sharp emphasis on the last monosyllable that made Dalton
start.
"I'll look over it; I'll compare it with my books at home," said he,
haughtily, as he stuffed the slip of paper into his waistcoat-pocket.
"Den you no pay to-day?" asked Abel.
"Nor to-morrow, nor the day after, nor, maybe, awhile longer," said
Dalton, with a composure he well knew how to feel in like circumstances.
"Very well, den; I will have securities. I will have bail for my moneys
before tree o'clock this day. Dere is de sommation before de Tribunal,
Herr von Dalton." Aud he handed a printed document, stamped with the
official seal of a law court, across the table. "You will see," added
the Jew, with a malicious grin, "dat I was not unprepared for all dis.
Abel Kraus is only an old Jew, but he no let de Gentile cheat him!"
Dalton was stunned by the suddenness of this attack. The coolly planned
game of the other so overmatched all the passionate outbreak of his own
temper that he felt himself mastered at once by his wily antagonist.
"To the devil I fling your summons!" cried he, savagely. "I can't even
read it."
"Your avocat will explain it all. He will tell you dat if you no pay
de moneys herein charged, nor give a goot and sufficient surety dereof
before de Civil Grericht, dis day, dat you will be consign to de prison
of de State at Carlsruhe, dere to remain your 'leben lang,' if so be you
never pay."
"Arrest me for debt the day it's demanded!" cried Dalton, whose
notions of the law's delay were not a little shocked by such peremptory
proceedings.
"It is in criminal as well as in civil Grericht to draw on a banker
beyond your moneys, and no pay, on demand."
"There's justice for you!" cried Dalton, passionately. "Highway robbery,
housebreaking, is decenter. There's some courage, at least, in them!
But I wouldn't believe you if you were on your oath. There is n't such a
law in Europe, nor in the East'Ingies'!"
Abel grinned, but never uttered a word.
"So any ould thief, then, can trump up a charge against a man----can
send him off to jail--before he can look around him!"
"If he do make false charge, he can be condem to de galleys," was the
calm reply.
"And what's the use of that?" cried Dalton, in a transport of rage. "Is
n't the galleys as good a life as sitting there? Is n't it as manly a
thing to strain at an oar as to sweat a guinea?"
"I am a burgher of the Grand Duchy," said Abel, boldly; "and if you
defame me, it shall be before witnesses!" And as he spoke he threw wide
the window, so that the passers-by might hear what took place.
Dalton's face became purple; the veins in his forehead swelled like a
thick cordage, and he seemed almost bursting with suppressed passion.
For an instant it was even doubtful if he could master his struggling
wrath. At last he grasped the heavy chair he had been sitting on, and
dashing it down on the ground, broke it into atoms; and then, with
an execration in Irish, the very sound of which rang like a curse, he
strode out of the shop, and hastened down the street.
[Illustration: 278]
Many a group of merry children, many a morning excursionist returning
from his donkey-ride, remarked the large old man, who, muttering and
gesticulating, as he went, strode along the causeway, not heeding nor
noticing those around him. Others made way for him as for one it were
not safe to obstruct, and none ventured a word as he passed by. On he
went, careless of the burning heat and the hot rays of the sun,--against
which already many a jalousie was closed, and many an awning spread,--up
the main street of the town, across the "Plate," and then took his way
up one of the steep and narrow lanes which led towards the upper town.
To see him, nothing could look more purpose-like than his pace and the
manner of his going; and yet he knew nothing of where he walked nor
whither the path led him. A kind of instinct directed his steps into an
old and oft-followed track, but his thoughts were bent on other objects.
He neither saw the half-terrified glances that were turned on him, nor
marked how they who were washing at the fountain ceased their work, as
he passed, to stare at him.
At last he reached the upper town; emerging from which by a steep flight
of narrow stone steps, he gained a little terraced spot of ground,
crossed by two rows of linden-trees, under whose shade he had often sat
of an evening to watch the sunset over the plain. He did not halt here,
but passing across the grassy sward, made for a small low house which
stood at the angle of the terrace. The shutters of the shop-window were
closed, but a low half-door permitted a view of the interior; leaning
over which Dalton remained for several minutes, as if lost in deep
revery.
The silent loneliness of the little shop at first appeared to engross
all his attention, but after a while other thoughts came slowly
flittering through his muddy faculties, and with a deep-drawn sigh he
said,----
"Dear me! but I thought we were living here still! It's droll enough how
one can forget himself! Hans, Hans Rockle, my man!" cried he, beating
with his stick against the doors as he called out. "Hanserl! Hans, I
say! Well, it's a fine way to keep a shop! How does the creature know
but I'm a lady that would buy half the gimcracks in the place, and he's
not to be found! That's what makes these devils so poor,--they never
mind their business. 'Tis nothing but fun and diversion they think of
the whole day long. There's no teaching them that there's nothing like
indhustry! What makes us the finest people under the sun? Work--nothing
but work! I 'm sure I 'm tired of telling him so! Hans, are you asleep,
Hans Rockle?" No answer followed this summons, and now Dalton, after
some vain efforts to unbolt the door, strode over it into the shop.
"Faix! I don't wonder that you had n't a lively business," said he,
as he looked around at the half-stocked shelves, over which dust and
cobwebs were spread like a veil. "Sorrow a thing I don't know as well
as I do my gaiters! There's the same soldiers, and that's the woodcutter
with the matches on his back, and there's the little cart Frank mended
for him! Poor Frank, where is he now, I wonder?" Dalton sighed heavily
as he continued to run his eye over the various articles all familiar to
him long ago. "What's become of Hans?" cried he at last, aloud; "if it
was n't an honest place, he would n't have a stick left! To go away and
leave everything at sixes and sevens--well, well, it's wonderful!"
Dalton ascended the stairs--every step of which was well known to
him--to the upper story where he used to live. The door was unfastened,
and the rooms were just as he had left them--even to the little table
at which Nelly used to sit beside the window. Nothing was changed; a
bouquet of faded flowers--the last, perhaps, she had ever plucked in
that garden--stood in a glass in the window-sill; and so like was all
to the well-remembered past, that Dalton almost thought he heard her
footstep on the floor.
"Well, it was a nice little quiet spot, any way!" said he, as he sank
into a chair, and a heavy tear stole slowly along his cheek. "Maybe it
would have been well for me if I never left it! With all our poverty we
spent many a pleasant night beside that hearth, and many's the happy day
we passed in that wood there. To be sure, we were all together, then!
that makes a difference! instead of one here, another there, God knows
when to meet, if ever!
"I used to fret many a time about our being so poor, but I was wrong,
after all, for we divided our troubles amongst us, and that left a small
share for each; but there's Nelly now, pining away--I don't know for
what, but I see it plain enough; and here am I myself with a heavy heart
this day; and sure, who can tell if Kate, great as she is, has n't her
sorrows; and poor Frank, 't is many a hard thing, perhaps, he has to
bear. I believe in reality we were better then!"
He arose, and walked about the room, now stopping before each
well-remembered object, now shaking his head in mournful acquiescence
with some unspoken regret; he went in turn through each chamber, and
then, passing from the room that had been Nelly's, he descended a little
zigzag, rickety stair, by which Hans had contrived to avoid injuring
the gnarled branches of a fig-tree that grew beneath. Dalton now
found himself in the garden; but how unlike what it had been! Once the
perfection of blooming richness and taste,--the beds without a weed, the
gravel trimly raked and shining, bright channels of limpid water running
amid the flowers, and beautiful birds of gay plumage caged beneath the
shady shrubs,--now all was overrun with rank grass and tall weeds; the
fountains were dried up, the flowers trodden down,--even the stately yew
hedge, the massive growth of a century, was broken by the depredations
of the mountain cattle. All was waste, neglect, and desolation.
"I 'd not know the place,--it is not like itself," muttered Dalton,
sorrowfully. "I never saw the like of this before. There's the elegant
fine plants dying for want of care! and the rose-trees rotting just for
want of a little water! To think of how he labored late and early here,
and to see it now! He used to call them carnations his children: there
was one Agnes, and there was another Undine--indeed, I believe that was
a lily; and I think there was a Nelly, too; droll enough to make out
they were Christians! but sure, they did as well; and he watched after
them as close! and ay, and stranger than all, he'd sit and talk to them
for hours. It's a quare world altogether; but maybe it's our own fault
that it's not better; and perhaps we ought to give in more to each
other's notions, and not sneer at whims and fancies when they don't
please ourselves."
It was while thus ruminating, Dalton entered a little arbor, whose
trellised walls and roofs had been one of the triumphs of Hanserl's
skill. Ruin, however, had now fallen on it, and the drooping branches
and straggling tendrils hung mournfully down on all sides, covering the
stone table, and even the floor, with their vegetation. As Dalton stood,
sad and sorrow-struck at this desolation, he perceived the figure of
Hans himself, as, half-hidden by the leaves, he sat in his accustomed
seat. His head was uncovered, but his hair fell in great masses on
either side, and with his long beard, now neglected and untrimmed, gave
him an unusually wild and savage look. A book lay open on his knees,
but his hands were crossed over it, and his eyes were upturned as if in
revery.
Dalton felt half ashamed at accosting him; there was something
ungracious in the way he had quitted the poor dwarfs dwelling; there
had been a degree of estrangement for weeks before between them, and
altogether he knew that he had ill-requited all the unselfish kindness
of the little toy-seller; so that he would gladly have retired without
being noticed, when Hans suddenly turned and saw him.
It was almost with a cry of surprise Hans called out his name.
"This is kind of you, Herr von Dalton. Is the Frulein--" He stopped
and looked eagerly around.
"No, Hanserl," said Dalton, answering to the half-expressed question,
"Nelly is n't with me; I came up alone. Indeed, to tell the truth, I
found myself here without well knowing why or how. Old habit, I suppose,
led me, for I was thinking of something else."
"They were kind thoughts that guided your steps," said the dwarf, in
accents of deep gratitude, "for I have been lonely of late."
"Why don't you come down and see us, Hanserl? It's not so far off, and
you know Nelly is always glad to see you."
"It is true," said the dwarf, mournfully.
"You were always a good friend to us, Hanserl," said Dalton, taking the
other's hand and pressing it cordially; "and faix! as the world goes,"
added he, sighing, "there 's many a thing easier found than a friend."
"The rich can have all,--even friendship," muttered Hans, slowly.
"I don't know that, Hans; I 'm not so sure you 're right there."
"They buy it," said the dwarf, with a fierce energy, "as they can buy
everything,--the pearl for which the diver hazards life, the gem that
the polisher has grown blind over, the fur for which the hunter has
shed his heart's blood. And yet when they 've got them they have not got
content."
"Ay, that's true," sighed Dalton. "I suppose nobody is satisfied in this
world."
"But they can be if they will but look upward," cried Hans,
enthusiastically; "if they will learn to think humbly of themselves, and
on how slight a claim they possess all the blessings of their lot;
if they will but bethink them that the sun and the flowers, the
ever-rolling sea, and the leafy forest are all their inheritance,--that
for them, as for all, the organ peals through the dim-vaulted aisle
with promises of eternal happiness,--and lastly, that, with all the wild
contentions of men's passions, there is ever gushing up in the human
heart a well of kind and affectionate thoughts; like those springs we
read of, of pure water amid the salt ocean, and which, taken at the
source, are sweet and good to drink from. Men are not so bad by nature;
it is the prizes for which they struggle, the goals they strive for,
corrupt them! Make of this fair earth a gaming-table, and you will have
all the base passions of the gamester around it."
"Bad luck to it for gambling," said Dalton, whose intelligence was just
able to grasp at the illustration; "I wish I 'd never seen a card; and
that reminds me, Hans, that maybe you 'd give me a bit of advice. There
was a run against me last night in that thieving place. The 'red' came
up fourteen times, and I, backing against it every time, sometimes ten,
sometimes twenty,----ay, faix! as high as fifty 'Naps.' you may think
what a squeeze I got! And when I went to old Kraus this morning, this
is what he sticks in my hand instead of a roll of banknotes." With these
words Dalton presented to Hans the printed summons of the "Tribunal."
"A Gerichts-Ruf!" said Hans, with a voice of deep reverence; for he
entertained a most German terror for the law and its authority. "This is
a serious affair."
"I suppose it is," sighed Dalton; "but I hope we 're in a Christian
country, where the law is open?"
Hans nodded, and Peter went on:----
"What I mean is, that nothing can be done in a hurry; that when we have
a man on our side, he can oppose and obstruct, and give delays, picking
a hole here and finding a flaw there; asking for vouchers for this and
proofs for that, and then waiting for witnesses that never come, and
looking for papers that never existed; making Chancery of it, Hans, my
boy,--making Chancery of it."
"Not here,--not with us!" said Hans, gravely. "You must answer to this
charge to-day, and before four o'clock too, or to-morrow there will be
writ of 'contumacy' against you. You have n't got the money?"
"Of course I haven't, nor a ten-pound note towards it."
"Then you must provide security."
"'T is easy said, my little man, but it is not so easy dealing with
human beings as with the little wooden figures in your shop beyond."
"There must be 'good and substantial bail,' as the summons declares;
such as will satisfy the Court," said Hans, who seemed at once to
have become a man of acute worldly perception at sight of this printed
document.
"Security--bail!" exclaimed Dalton. "You might as well ask Robinson
Crusoe who 'd be godfather to his child on the desert island. There's
not a man, woman, or child in the place would give me a meal's meat
There's not a house I could shelter my head in for one night; and see
now," cried he, carried away by an impulse of passionate excitement, "it
is n't by way of disparagement I say it to this little town,--for the
world all over is the same,--the more you give the less you get! Treat
them with champagne and venison; send money to this one, make presents
to that, and the day luck turns with you, the best word they 'll have
for you is, 'He was a wasteful, careless devil; could n't keep it when
he had it; lived always above his means; all hand and mouth.' It's a
kind friend that will vouchsafe as much as 'Poor fellow! I 'm sorry for
him.'"
"And to what end is wealth," cried Hans, boldly, "if it but conduce
to this? Are the friends well chosen who can behave thus? Are the
hospitalities well bestowed that meet such return? or is it not rather
selfishness is paid back in the same base coin that it uttered?"
"For the matter of that," said Dalton, angrily, "I never found that
vulgar people was a bit more grateful than their betters, nor low
manners any warranty for high principles; and when one is to be
shipwrecked it's better to go down in a 'seventy-four' than be drowned
out of a punt in a mill-pond."
"It's past noon already," said Hans, pointing to the son-dial on his
house. "There 's little time to be lost."
"And as little to be gained," muttered Dalton, moodily, as he strolled
out into the garden.
"Let me have this paper," said Hans; "I will see the Herr Kraus myself,
and try if something cannot be done. With time, I suppose, you could
meet this claim?"
"To be sure I could, when my remittances arrive,----when my instalments
are paid up, when my rents come in, when--" He was about to add, "when
luck changes," but he stopped himself just in time.
"There need be no difficulty if you can be certain," said Hans, slowly.
"Certain!--and of what is a man certain in this life?" said Dalton, in
his tone of moralizing. "Was n't I certain of the Corrig-O'Neal estate?
Wasn't I certain of Miles Dalton's property in the funds? Wasn't I
certain that if the Parliament was n't taken away from us that I 'd have
my own price for the boroagh of Knocknascanelera?--and sorrow one of the
three ever came to me. Ay, no later than last night, was n't I certain
that black would come up--"
"When I said certain," broke in Hans, "I meant so far as human
foresight could pledge itself; but I did not speak of the chances of the
play-table. If your expectations of payment rest on these, do not talk
of them as certainties."
"What's my estates for? Where's my landed property?" cried Dalton,
indignantly. "To hear you talk, one would think I was a chevalier of
indhustry, as they call them."
"I ask your pardon, Herr," said Hans, humbly. "It is in no spirit of
idle curiosity that I speak; less still, with any wish to offend you. I
will now see what is best to do. You may leave all in my hands, and by
four o'clock, or five at furthest, you shall hear from me."
"That's sensible,----that's friendly," cried Dalton, shaking the
other's hand warmly, and really feeling the most sincere gratitude for
the kindness.
If there was any act of friendship he particularly prized, it was the
intervention that should relieve him of the anxiety and trouble of
a difficult negotiation, and leave him, thoughtless and careless, to
stroll about, neither thinking of the present nor uneasy for the
future. The moment such an office had devolved upon another, Dalton felt
relieved of all sense of responsibility before his own conscience; and
although the question at issue were his own welfare or ruin, he ceased
to think of it as a personal matter. Like his countryman, who consoled
himself when the house was in flames by thinking "he was only a lodger,"
he actually forgot his own share of peril by reflecting on the other
interests that were at stake. And the same theory that taught him to
leave his soul to his priest's care, and his health to his doctor's,
made him quite satisfied when a friend had charge of his honor or his
fortune.
It was as comfortable a kind of fatalism as need be; and, assuredly, to
have seen Peter's face as he now descended the steps to the lower town,
it would be rash to deny that he was not a sincere believer in his
philosophy. No longer absent in air and clouded in look, he had a smile
and a pleasant word for all who passed him; and now, with a jest for
this one, and a kreutzer for that, he held on his way, with a tail of
beggars and children after him, all attracted by that singular
mesmerism which draws around certain men everything that is vagrant
and idle,--from the cripple at the crossing to the half-starved cur-dog
without an owner.
This gift was, indeed, his; and whatever was penniless and friendless
and houseless seemed to feel they had a claim on Peter Dalton.
CHAPTER XX. THE LAST STAKE OF ALL.
Dalton found his little household on the alert at his return home; for
Mrs. Ricketts had just received an express to inform her that her "two
dearest friends on earth" were to arrive that evening in Baden, and she
was busily engaged in arranging a little fte for their reception.
All that poor Nelly knew of the expected guests was that one was a
distinguished soldier, and the other a no less illustrious diplomatist;
claims which, for the reader's illumination, we beg to remark were
embodied in the persons of Colonel Haggerstone and Mr. Foglass. Most
persons in Mrs. Ricketts's position would have entertained some scruples
about introducing a reinforcement to the already strong garrison of the
villa, and would have been disposed to the more humble but safe policy
enshrined in the adage of "letting well alone." But she had a spirit far
above such small ambitions, and saw that the Dalton hospitalities were
capable of what, in parliamentary phrase, is called a "most extended
application."
By the awestruck air of Nelly, and the overweening delight manifested by
her father, Zoe perceived the imposing effect of great names upon both,
and so successfully did she mystify the description of her two coming
friends, that an uninterested listener might readily have set them down
for the Duke and Prince Metternich, unless, indeed, that the praises she
lavished on them would have seemed even excessive for such greatness.
A triumphal arch was erected half-way up the avenue, over which, in
flowery initials, were to be seen the letters "B." and "P.," symbols to
represent "Bayard" and "Puffendorf;" under which guise Haggerstone and
the Consul were to be represented. Strings of colored lamps were to
be festooned along the approach, over which an Irish harp was to be
exhibited in a transparency, with the very original inscription of "Caed
Mille failtha," in Celtic letters beneath.
The banquet--the word "dinner" was strictly proscribed for that day--was
to be arrayed in the hall, where Dalton was to preside, if possible,
with an Irish crown upon his head, supported by Nelly as the genius of
Irish music; and Zoe herself in a composite character,--half empress,
half prophetess,--a something between Sappho and the Queen of Sheba;
Martha, for the convenience of her various household cares, was to be
costumed as a Tyrolese hostess; and Purvis, in a dress of flesh-colored
web, was to represent Mercury, sent on purpose from above to deliver a
message of welcome to the arriving guests. As for the General, there was
a great doubt whether he ought to be Belisarius or Suwarrow; for, being
nearly as blind as the one and as deaf as the other, his qualifications
were about evenly balanced.
If not insensible to some of the absurdities of this notable project,
Dalton forgot the ridicule in the pleasanter occupation of the bustle,
the movement, and the tumult it occasioned. It did his heart good to see
the lavish waste and profusion that went forward. The kitchen-table, as
it lay spread with fruit, fish, and game, might have made a study for
Schneiders; and honest Peter's face glowed with delight as he surveyed a
scene so suggestive of convivial thoughts and dissipation.
"No doubt of it, Nelly," said he; "but Mother Ricketts has grand
notions! She does the thing like a princess!" The praise was so far
well bestowed that there was something royal in dispensing hospitality
without regarding the cost; while, at the same time, she never
entertained the slightest sentiment of esteem for those in whose favor
it was to be exercised. Among the very few things she feared in this
world was Haggerstone's "tongue," which she herself averred was best
conciliated by giving "occupation to his teeth." The banquet was "got
up" with that object, while it also gave a favorable opportunity of
assuming that unbounded sway in Dalton's household which should set the
question of her supremacy at rest forever.
To this end was poor Martha engaged with puff-paste and jellies and
whip-cream, with wreaths of roses and pyramids of fruit, from dawn
till dusk. To this end was Purvis nearly driven out of his mind by
endeavoring to get off by heart an address in rhyme, the very first
line of which almost carried him off in a fit of coughing,--the word
"Puffendorf" being found nearly as unmanageable to voice as it was
unsuited to verse. While poor Belisarius, stripped of rule and compass,
denied access to water-colors, Indian-ink, or charcoal, spent a most
woful day of weary expectancy.
It was, indeed, an awful scene of trouble, fatigue, and exertion
on every side, adding one more to those million instances where the
preparation for the guest has no possible relation to the degree of
esteem he is held in. For so is it in the world: our best receptions
are decreed to those we care least for; our "friend" is condemned to
the family dinner, while we lavish our fortune on mere acquaintances. In
these days the fatted calf would not have been killed to commemorate the
return of the prodigal, but have been melted down into mock-turtle, to
feast "my Lord" or "Your Grace."
The day wore on, and as the arrangements drew nearer to completion, the
anxieties were turned towards the guests themselves, who were to have
arrived at five o'clock. It was now six, and yet no sign of their
coming! Fully a dozen times had Mrs. Ricketts called Martha from some
household cares by the adjuration, "Sister Anne, sister Anne, seest thou
nobody coming?" Mercury had twice ventured out on the high-road, from
which he was driven back by a posse of hooting and laughing children;
and Dalton himself paced up and down the terrace in a state of nervous
impatience, not a little stimulated by hunger and certain flying visits
he paid to the iced punch, to see if it was keeping cool.
There is, assuredly, little mesmeric relation between the expecting host
and the lingering guest, or we should not witness all that we do of our
friends' unpunctuality in this life. What a want of sympathy between the
feverish impatience of the one and the careless dalliance of the other!
Not that we intend this censure to apply to the case before us, for
Haggerstone had not the very remotest conception of the honors that
awaited him, and jogged along his dusty road with no greater desire
to be at the end of the journey than was fairly justifiable in one who
travelled with German post-horses and Foglass for a companion.
Six o'clock came, and, after another hour of fretful anxiety, it
struck seven. By this time beef had become carbon, and fowls were like
specimens of lava; the fish was reduced to the state of a "pure,"
while everything meant to assume the flinty resistance of ice was calmly
settling down into a fluid existence. Many an architectural device of
poor Martha's genius was doomed to the fate of her other "castles," and
towers and minarets of skilful shape dropped off one by one, like the
hopes of her childhood. All the telegraphic announcements from the
kitchen were of disasters, but Mrs. Ricketts received the tidings with
a Napoleonic calmness; and it was only when warned by the gathering
darkness over Dalton* s brow that she thought it wiser to "give in."
Dalton's ill-humor had, however, a different source from that which she
suspected. It proceeded from the quiet but steady importunity with which
little Hans paced up and down before the door, now appearing before
one window, now before another, totally insensible to the cold
discouragement of Dalton's looks, and evidently bent on paying no
attention to all the signs and signals intended for his guidance.
"Doesn't he see we've company in the house? Has n't the little creature
the sense to know that this is no time to be bothering and teasing about
money? Has he no decency? Has he no respect for his superiors?" Such
were the deep mutterings with which Dalton tried to "blow off the steam"
of his indignation, while with many a gesture and motion he intimated
his anger and impatience. "Faix! he 's like a bailiff out there," cried
he at last, as he issued forth to meet him. Whatever might have been
the first angry impulses of his heart, his second thoughts were far more
gentle and well disposed as he drew near to Hansrl, who stood cap in
hand, in an attitude of deep and respectful attention.
"They have accepted the bail, Herr von Dalton, and this bond needs but
your signature," said Hans, mildly, as he held forth a paper towards
him.
"Who's the bail? Give me the bond," said Dalton, rapidly; and not
waiting for the answer to his question, "Where's the name to be,
Hanserl?"
"Here, in the space," said the dwarf, dryly.
"That 's soon done, if there's no more wanting," rejoined Peter, with a
laugh. "'T is seldom that writing the same two words cost me so little.
Won't you step in a minute, into the house? I 'd ask you to stop and eat
your dinner, but I know you don't like strangers, and we have company
to-day. Well, well, no offence; another time, maybe, when we 're alone.
He 's as proud as the devil, that little chap," muttered he, as he
turned back within the house; "I never saw one of his kind that was n't
'T is only creatures with humpbacks and bent shins that never believes
they can be wrong in this world; they have a conceit in themselves
that's wonderful! Not that there isn't good in him, too; he's a friendly
soul as ever I seen! There it is, now. Peter Dalton's hand and deed;"
and he surveyed the superscription with considerable satisfaction.
"There it is, Hans, and much good may it do you!" said he, as he
delivered the document with an air of a prince conferring a favor on a
subject.
"You will bear in mind that Abel Kraus is a hard creditor!" said Hans,
who could not help feeling shocked at the easy indifference Dalton
exhibited.
"Well, but haven't we settled with him?" cried Peter, half impatiently.
"So far as surety for his claim goes--"
"Yes, that's what I mean,----he's sure of his money; that's all he
wants. I 'd be the well-off man to-day if I was sure of getting back
all ever I lent! But nobody does, and, what's more, nobody expects it."
"This bond expires in twelve days," added Hans, more than commonly
anxious to suggest some prudential thoughts.
"Twelve days!" exclaimed Peter, who, instead of feeling alarmed at the
shortness of the period, regarded it as so many centuries. "Many's
the change one sees in the world in twelve days. Would n't you take
something,--a glass of Marcobrunner, or a little plain Nantz?"
Hans made no reply, for, with bent-down head and hands crossed on his
bosom, he was deep in thought.
"I 'm saying, that maybe you'd drink a glass of wine, Hans?" repeated
Dalton; but still no answer came. "What dreamy creatures them Germans
are!" muttered Peter.
"And then," exclaimed Hanserl, as if speaking to himself, "it is but
beginning life anew. Good-bye--farewell." And so saying, he touched his
cap courteously, and moved hastily away, while Dalton continued to
look after him with compassionate sorrow, for one so little capable of
directing his path in life. As he re-entered the house, he found Mrs.
Ricketts, abandoning all hopes of her distinguished guests, had just
ordered the dinner; and honest Peter consoled himself for their absence
by observing that they should be twice as jolly by themselves! Had it
depended on himself alone, the sentiment might have had some foundation,
for there was something of almost wild gayety in his manner. All the
vicissitudes of the morning, the painful alternations of hope and
fear,--hope so faint as to be a torture, and fear so dark as to be
almost despair,--had worked him up to a state of extreme excitement.
To add to this, he drank deeply, quaffing off whole goblets of wine, and
seeming to exult in the mad whirlwind of his own reckless jollity. If
the jests he uttered on Scroope's costume, or the other allegorical
fancies of Zoe's brain, were not of the most refined taste, they were at
least heartily applauded by the indulgent public around his board. Mrs.
Ricketts was in perfect ecstasies at the flashes of his "Irish wit;"
and even Martha, fain to take on credit what was so worthily endorsed,
laughed her own meek laugh of approval. As for Purvis, champagne
completed what nature had but begun, and he became perfectly
unintelligible ere dinner was over.
All this while poor Nelly's sufferings were extreme; she saw the
unblushing, shameless adulation of the parasites, and she saw, too, the
more than commonly excited glare in her father's eyes,----the wildness
of fever rather than the passing excitation of wine. In vain, her
imploring, beseeching glances were turned towards him; in vain she
sought, by all her little devices, to withdraw him from the scene of
riotous debauch, or recall him from the excesses of a revel which was an
orgie. In his wild and boastful vein he raved about "home," as he still
called it, and of his family possessions,----at times vaunting of his
wealth and greatness, and then, as suddenly breaking into mad invectives
against the Jews and money-lenders, to whom his necessities had reduced
him.
"A good run of luck over there!" cried he, frantically, and pointing
to the blaze of lamps which now sparkled through the trees before the
Cursaal. "One good night yonder, and Peter Dalton would defy the world.
If you 're a lucky hand, Miss Martha, come over and bet for me. I 'll
make the bank jump for it before I go to bed! I know the secret of it
now. It's changing from color to color ruins everybody. You must be
steady to one,--black or red, whichever it is; stick fast to it. You
lose two, three, maybe six or seven times running; never mind, go on
still. 'T is the same with play as with women, as the old song
says,----
If they're coy, and won't hear when you say you adore,
Just squeeze them the tighter and press them the more."
"Isn't that it, Mrs. Ricketts? Ah, baithershin! you never knew that
song. Miss Martha's blushing; and just for that I 'll back 'red' all the
evening; and there's the music beginning already. Here's success to us
all! and, faix! it's a pleasant way to deserve it."
Nelly drew near him as they were leaving the room, and, passing her arm
fondly about him, whispered a few words in his ear.
"And why not this evening?" said he, aloud, and in a rude voice. "Is
it Friday, that it ought to bring bad luck? Why should n't I go this
evening? I can't hear you; speak louder. Ha! ha! ha! Listen to that,
Miss Martha. There's the sensible Nelly for you! She says she had a
dhrame about me last night."
"No, dearest papa; but that it was like a dream to me. All the narrative
seemed so natural,--all the events followed so regularly, and yet I was
awake just as I am now."
[Illustration: 294]
"More shame for you, then. We can't help ourselves what nonsense we
think in our sleep."
"But you'll not go, dearest papa. You'll indulge me for this once, and I
'll promise never to tease you by such follies again."
"Faix! I'll go, sure enough; and, what's more, I'll win five thousand
pounds this night, as sure as my name's Peter. I saw a black cat shaving
himself before a new tin saucepan; and if that isn't luck, I'd like to
know what is. A black cat won the Curragh Stakes for Tom Molly; and it
was an egg saucepan made Dr. Groves gain the twenty thousand pounds in
the lottery. And so, now, may I never leave this room if I'd take two
thousand pounds down for my chances to-night!"
And in all the force of this confidence in fortune, Dalton sallied forth
to the Cursaal. The rooms were more than usually crowded, and it was
with difficulty that, with Mrs. Ricketts on one arm and Martha on the
other, he could force his way to the tables. Once there, however, a
courteous reception awaited him, and the urbane croupier moved his own
august chair to make room for the honored guest. Although the company
was very numerous, the play was as yet but trifling; a stray gold piece
here or there glittered on the board, and in the careless languor of the
bankers, and the unexcited looks of the bystanders, might be read the
fact that none of the well-known frequenters of the place were betting.
Dalton's appearance immediately created a sensation of curiosity.
Several of those present had witnessed his losses on the preceding
night, and were eager to see what course he would now pursue. It was
remarked that he was not accompanied, as heretofore, by that formidable
money-bag which, with ostentatious noise, he used to fling down on
the table before him. Nor did he now produce that worn old leather
pocket-book, whose bursting clasp could scarce contain the roll of
bank-notes within it. He sat with his hands crossed before him, staring
at the table, but to all seeming not noticing the game. At length,
suddenly rousing himself, he leant over and said a few words, in a
whisper, to the croupier, who, in an equally low tone, communicated with
his colleague across the table. A nod and a smile gave the quiet reply;
and Dalton, taking a piece of paper, scrawled a few figures on it with
a pencil, and with a motion so rapid as to be unseen by many of the
bystanders, the banker pushed several "rouleaux" of gold before Dalton,
and went on with the game.
Dalton broke one of the envelopes, and as the glittering pieces fell
out, he moved his fingers through them, as though their very touch was
pleasure. At last, with a kind of nervous impatience, he gathered up a
handful, and without counting, threw them on the table.
"How much?" said the croupier.
"The whole of it!" cried Dalton; and scarcely had he spoken, when he
won.
A murmur of astonishment ran through the room as he suffered the double
stake to remain on the board; which speedily grew into a loader ham
of voices, as the banker proceeded to count out the gains of a second
victory. Affecting an insight into the game and its chances which he did
not possess, Dalton now hesitated and pondered over his bets, increasing
his stake at one moment, diminishing it at another, and assuming all
the practised airs of old and tried gamblers. As though in obedience to
every caprice, the fortune of the game followed him unerringly. If he
lost, it was some mere trifle; when he won, the stake was sure to be
a large one. At length even this affected prudence--this mock
skill--became too slow for him, and he launched out into all his
accustomed recklessness. Not waiting to take in his winnings, he threw
fresh handfuls of gold amongst them, till the bank, trembling for its
safety, more than once had to reduce the stakes he wished to venture.
"They'd give him five hundred Naps, this moment if he 'd cease to play,"
said some one behind Dalton's chair. "There 's nothing the bank dreads
so much as a man with courage to back his luck."
"I 'd wish them a good-night," said another, "if I 'd have made so good
a-thing of it as that old fellow; he has won some thousand Napoleons, I
'm certain."
"He knows better than that," said the former. "This is a 'run' with
him, and he feels it is. He 'll 'break' them before the night's over."
Dalton heard every word of this colloquy, and drank in the surmise as
greedily as did Macbeth the Witches' prophecy.
"He deserves to win, too," resumed the last speaker, "for I never saw a
man play more boldly."
"So much for boldness," cried the other; "he has just risked a fifth
time on the red and lost. See if it be not two hundred 'Naps.'"
The defeat did not dishearten him, for again Dalton covered the board
with gold. As if that moment had been the turning-point of his destiny,
his losses now began, and with all the rapidity of his previous gains.
At first he bore the reverse calmly and patiently; after a while a
slight gesture of impatience, a half-muttered exclamation would escape
him; but when loss followed loss unceasingly, and one immense stake
disappeared after another, Dalton's fingers trembled, and his cheeks
shook like one in ague. His straining bloodshot eyes were fixed on the
play with the intensity of passion, and a convulsive shudder would shake
his massive frame at each new tidings of loss. "Am I never to have luck
again? Is it only to lead me on that I won? Can this go on forever?"
were the low-muttered words which now he syllabled with difficulty, for
already his utterance was thick, and his swollen tongue and flattened
cheeks seemed threatened with paralysis.
His last stake was swept away before him, and Dalton, unable to speak,
stretched forth his arms across the table to arrest the banker's hand.
"A hundred 'Naps,' on the red," cried he, wildly; "no--two hundred--neck
or nothing, I 'll go five--d' ye hear me?--five hundred on the red!"
A short conversation in whispers ensued between the croupiers, after
which one of them spoke a few words to Dalton in a low voice.
"You never said so when I was losing," cried Peter, savagely. "I heard
nothing about the rules of the tables then."
"The stake is above our limit, sir; above the limit laid down by law,"
said the chief banker, mildly.
"I don't care for your laws. I lost my money, and I 'll have my
revenge."
"You can make half de stakes in my name, saar," said a long-moustached
and not over-clean-looking personage beside Dalton's chair.
"That will do----thank you," cried Dalton. "Bet two hundred and fifty
for me and I'll stake the rest."
A moment more, and the low voice of the croupier proclaimed that red had
lost!
"What does he say--why won't he speak plainly?" cried Dalton, in a voice
of passionate energy.
"You lose de stake," muttered the man behind him.
"Of course I do; what other luck could I have? Lose--lose--lose!"
said he to himself, in a low, moaning voice. "There they go--the
fools!----betting away as fresh as ever. Why won't they take warning by
me? beggared, rained as it has left me. May I never! if the red isn't
winning every time now!" And, as he spoke, his eyes followed a great
heap of gold which some fortunate gambler just drew in before him. "How
much did he win, then?" cried Dalton; but none replied to a question so
contrary to every etiquette of the table.
"He never counts it," muttered Peter, as he continued to gaze on the
lucky player with a kind of envious admiration. "They say it's best not
to count one's winnings. I don't know what's best; I believe 't is only
the devil knows--for it was he invented the game.--Red, again, the
winner!"
"Why you no back de red?" whispered the man behind his chair.
Dalton started, and was about to give an angry reply, but corrected
himself, and merely stared stupidly at him.
"You win eleven hundred Napoleons if you do go on," said the other,
showing in proof of his assertion the card on which he had marked all
the chances.
"And where 's the money?" cried Dalton, as, with a hissing utterance, he
spoke, and he pointed to the table before him. "Have I Coutts's bank at
my back, or is all Lombard Street in my pocket? 'T is easy to say, go
on! Red again, by Jingo!"
"I tell you dat!" said the other, gravely.
Dalton turned round in his chair, and stared steadfastly at the speaker.
His mind was in that state of wild confusion when every conception,
however vague and fanciful, assumes a certain degree of reality, and
superstitions take on them all the force of warnings. What if his
prompter were the devil himself! was it not exactly what he had often
heard of? He never saw him there before, and certainly appearances were
not much against the hypothesis. He was tall and spare, with a high,
narrow forehead, and a pair of most treacherous-looking black eyes,
that seemed to let nothing escape their vigilance. Unabashed by or
indifferent to Dalton's scrutiny, he went on with his chronicle of
the game, noting down the chances, and only muttering a few words to
himself.
"Nine times red," said he, as he counted the scores.
"Will it go ten?" asked Dalton, with a purposelike energy that showed
his faith in the oracle; but the other never heeded the question.
"Back de red, I say; back de red dis time," whispered he in Dalton's
ear.
"Don't you see that I have no money?" said Dalton, angrily.
"Dey will lend on your name; ask for a hundred Naps. Be quick, be
quick."
Dalton stooped across the table, and whispered the croupier, who
returned a look of doubt and uncertainty. Peter grew more pressing, and
the other bent over, and spoke to his colleague. This time the request
was not met with a smile and a bland bow, and Dalton watched with angry
impatience all the signs of hesitation and deliberation between them.
"Say your banker is closed,--that you must have de moneys," whispered
the dark man.
"Must I wait till the bank is open to-morrow morning," said Dalton, "or
do you mean to give me this trifle?"
"Our rules are strictly opposed to the practice of lending, Count,"
whispered the croupier at his side; "we have already transgressed them
in your favor, and--"
"Oh, don't inconvenience the Count," interposed his colleague. "How much
is it?"
"Say two hundred,--two!" muttered the unknown.
"Two hundred Naps.," cried Dalton, resolutely.
"This will make five hundred and forty to-night, Count."
"And if it was five thousand," said Peter, running his fingers through
the gold with ecstasy, "what matter? There goes fifty on the red."
"Ah, you play too rash," whispered the dark man.
"What business is it of yours? am I your ward?" cried Dalton,
passionately, for the stake was lost in the instant. "Bed, again fifty.
May I never! if I don't believe 'tis you brings me the bad luck," said
Dalton, darting a savage glance at the other, whose impassive face never
betrayed the slightest emotion.
"I no wish to disturb your game, saar," was the meek reply of the dark
man; and with a bow of meek humility he backed through the crowd and
disappeared.
In a moment Dalton felt shocked at his own rudeness, and would have
given worlds to have recalled his words, or even apologized for them;
but other thoughts soon supplanted these, and again his whole heart was
in the game.
"You did n't bet last time," remarked some one near him, "and your
favorite color won."
"No, I was looking about me. I was thinking of something else," replied
he; and he sat fingering the gold pieces as though unwilling to part
with them.
The game went on; luck came and went; the gold glittered and clinked;
the same endless "refrain"----"Fates votre jeu, Messieurs," followed
by the same sing-song phrases, continued to roll on, and Dalton sat, now
counting his money, and piling up the pieces into tens or twenties; or,
with his head resting on his hand, deep in serious thought. Twice he
placed a heavy stake upon the table, and recalled it at the very moment
of the game's beginning. Every gesture and action showed the terrible
struggle between hope and fear that went on within him. A red spot
glowed on one cheek, while the other was pale as death, and his lips
from time to time were moved with a short spasmodic jerk, as if some
sudden pain shot through him. At last, with a great effort, he pushed
all the gold into the centre of the table, and cried out, but in a voice
so strange and inarticulate that the words could not be distinguished.
"You said 'rouge,' Count, I think?" asked the croupier.
"I fancy the gentleman said 'noir,'" remarked a bystander.
"Let him declare for himself," observed another.
"But the game has already begun," said the banker.
"So much the worse for the bank," remarked another, laughing, "for it's
easy to see what will win."
"Pray declare your color, sir," said an impatient gambler at Dalton's
side; "the whole table is waiting for you."
Dalton started, and, darting an angry look at the speaker, made an
effort to rise from the table. He failed at first, but grasping the
shoulder of the croupier, he arose to his full height, and stared
around him. All was hushed and still, not a sound was heard, as in that
assembly, torn with so many passions, every eye was turned towards the
gigantic old man, who, with red eyeballs and outstretched hands, seemed
to hurl defiance at them. Backwards and forwards he swayed for a second
or two, and then, with a low, faint cry,--the last wail of a broken
heart,--he fell with a crash upon the table. There he lay, his white
hairs streaming over the gold and silver pieces, and his bony fingers
flattened upon the cards. "A fit!----he's in a fit!" cried some, as they
endeavored to raise him.--"Worse still!" remarked another, and he passed
his hand from the pulse to the heart, "he is dead!"
The hero of a hundred fights, he who has seen death in every shape and
on every field, must yield the palm of indifference to its terrors to
the gambler. All the glorious insanity of a battle, all the reckless
enthusiasm of a storm, even the headlong impetuosity of a charge, cannot
supply the cold apathy of the gambler's heart; and so was it that they
saw in that lifeless form nothing beyond a disagreeable interruption to
their game, and muttered their impatience at the delay in its removal.
"Well," said Mrs. Ricketts, as she sat in an adjoining apartment, "have
you any tidings of our dear 'Amphytrion?'----is he winning to-night?"
The question was addressed to the tall, dark man, who so lately had
been standing behind Dalton's chair, and was our old acquaintance, Count
Petrolaffsky.
"He no win no more, Madame," replied he, solemnly.
"Has he gone away, then?--has he gone home without us?"
"He has gone home, indeed----into the other world," said he, shaking his
head.
"What do you mean, Count? For Heaven's sake, speak intelligibly."
"I mean as I do say, Madame. He play a game as would ruin Rothschild;
always change, and always at de wrong time, and never know when to make
his 'paroli.' Ah, dat is de gran' secret of all play; when you know when
to make your 'paroli' you win de whole world! Well, he is gone now; poor
man, he cannot play no more!"
"Martha--Scroope, do go--learn something--see what has happened."
"Oh, here's the Colonel. Colonel Haggerstone, what is this dreadful news
I hear?"
"Your accomplished friend has taken French leave of you, Madame, and
was in such a hurry to go that he wouldn't wait for another turn of the
cards."
"He ain't d-d-dead?" screamed Purvis.
"I'm very much afraid they insist on burying him tomorrow or next day,
under that impression, sir," said Haggerstone.
"What a terrible event!--how dreadful!" said Martha, feelingly; "and his
poor daughter, who loved him so ardently!"
"That must be thought of," interrupted Mrs. Ricketts, at once roused to
activity by thoughts of self-interest. "Scroope, order the carriage at
once. I must break it to her myself. Have you any particulars for me,
Colonel?"
"None, Madame! If coroners were the fashion here, thay 'd bring in a
verdict of died from backing the wrong color, with a deodand against the
rake!'"
"Yes, it is ver' true, he always play bad," muttered the Pole.
And now the room began to fill with people discussing the late incident
in every possible mood and with every imaginable shade of sentiment. A
few--a very few--dropped some expressions of pity and compassion.
Many preferred to make a display of their own courage by a bantering,
scornful tone, and some only saw in the event how unsuited certain
natures were to contend with the changeful fortunes of high play. These
were, for the most part, Dalton's acquaintances, and who had often told
him--at least, so they now took credit for--that "he had no head
for play." Interspersed with these were little discussions as to the
immediate cause of death, as full of ignorance and as ingenious as
such explanations usually are, all being contemptuously wound up by
Haggerstone's remark, "That death was like matrimony,--very difficult
when wanted, but impossible to escape when you sought to avoid it!" As
this remark had the benefit of causing a blush to poor Martha, he gave
his arm to the ladies, with a sense of gratification that came as near
happiness as anything he could imagine.
"Is Miss Dalton in the drawing-room?" said Mrs. Rick-etts, as with an
air of deep importance she swept through the hall of the villa.
"She's in her room, Madame," said the maid.
"Ask if she will receive me,--if I may speak to her."
The maid went out, and returned with the answer that Miss Dalton was
sleeping.
"Oh, let her sleep!" cried Martha. "Who knows when she will taste such
rest again?"
Mrs. Ricketts bestowed a glance of withering scorn on her sister, and
pushed roughly past her, towards Nelly's chamber. A few minutes after a
wild, shrill shriek was heard through the house, and then all was still.
CHAPTER XXI. NELLY'S SORROWS
Stunned, but not overcome, by the terrible shock, Nelly Dalton sat
beside the bed where the dead man lay in all that stern mockery of calm
so dreadful to look upon. Some candles burned on either side, and threw
a yellowish glare over the bold strong features on which her tears had
fallen, as, with a cold hand clasped in his, she sat and watched him.
With all its frequency, Death never loses its terrors for us! Let a man
be callous as a hard world and a gloomy road in it can make him; let him
drug his mind with every anodyne of infidelity; let him be bereft of all
affection, and walk alone on his life road; there is yet that which can
thrill his heart in the aspect of the lips that are never to move more,
and the eyes that are fixed forever. But what agony of suffering is it
when the lost one has been the link that tied us to life,--the daily
object of our care, the motive of every thought and every action! Such
had been her father to poor Nelly. His wayward, capricious humors, all
his infirmities of temper and body, had called forth those exertions
which made the business of her life, and gave a purpose and direction to
her existence; now repaid by some passing expression of thankfulness or
affection, or, better still, by some transient gleam of hope that he was
stronger in health or better in spirits than his wont; now rallied by
that sense of duty which can ennoble the humblest as it can the greatest
of human efforts, she watched over him as might a mother over an ailing
child. Catching at his allusions to "home," as he still called it, she
used to feed her hopes with thinking that at some distant day they were
to return to their own land again, and pass their last years in tranquil
retirement together; and now hope and duty were alike extinguished.
"The fount that fed the river of her thoughts" was dry, and she was
alone--utterly alone--in the world!
Old Andy, recalled by some curious instinct to a momentary activity,
shuffled about the room, snuffing the candles, or muttering a faint
prayer at the bedside; but she did not notice him any more than the
figure who, in an attitude of deep devotion, knelt at the foot of the
bed. This was Hanserl, who, book in hand, recited the offices with all
the fervent rapidity of a true Catholic. Twice he started and looked up
from his task, disturbed by some noise without; but when it occurred a
third time, he laid his book gently down and stole noiselessly from the
room. Passing rapidly through the little chamber which used to be called
Nelly's drawing-room, he entered the larger dining-room, in which now
three or four ill-dressed men were standing, in the midst of whom was
Abel Kraus in active colloquy with Mr. Purvis. Hanserl made a gesture to
enforce silence, and pointed to the room from whence he had just come.
"Ah!" cried Scroope, eagerly, "You 're a kind of co-co-connection, or
friend, at least, of these people, ain't you? Well, then, speak to this
wo-worthy man, and tell him that he mustn't detain our things here; we
were merely on a visit."
"I will suffer nothing to leave the house till I am paid to the last
kreutzer," said Kraus, sternly; "the law is with me, and I know it."
"Be patient; but, above all, respect the dead," said Hans, solemnly. "It
is not here nor at this time these things should be discussed."
"But we wa-want to go; we have ta-ta-taken our apartments at the
'Russie.' The sight of a funeral and a--a--a hearse, and all that, would
kill my sister."
"Let her pay these moneys, then, and go in peace," said Kraus, holding
forth a handful of papers.
"Not a gr-groschen, not a kreutzer will we pay. It's an infamy, it's a
sh-sh-shameful attempt at robbery. It's as bad as st-stopping a man on
the highway."
"Go on, sir,--go on. You never made a speech which cost you dearer,"
said Kraus, as he took down the words in his pocket-book.
"I--I--I did n't mean that; I did n't say you were a housebreaker."
"Speak lower," said Hans, sternly. "And you, sir; what is this demand?"
"Two thousand francs,----rent of this house; which, with damage to the
furniture and other charges, will make two thousand eight hundred."
"I will pay it," said Hans, stopping him.
"Your credit would be somewhat better, Master Hans, had you not given a
certain bail bond that you know of," said Kraus, sneeringly.
"I have wherewith to meet my debts," said Hans, calmly.
"I will claim my bond within a week; I give you notice of it," said
Kraus.
"You shall be paid to-morrow. Let us be in peace to-night; bethink you
what that room contains."
"He ain't black, is he? I--I would n't look at him for a thousand
pounds," said Purvis, with a shudder.
"If she remain here after noon, to-morrow," said Kraus, in a low voice,
"a new month will have begun."
"To-morrow afternoon; Lord! how close he r-ran it," exclaimed Purvis.
"Once more, I say, be patient," said Hans. "Let these good people go,
you shall lose nothing; I pledge the word of a man who never told
a falsehood. I will pay all. Have some pity, however, for this
orphan,--one who has now neither a home nor a country."
"Yes, yes, he 'll have p-pity; he 's an excellent man is Mr. Kraus.
I shouldn't wonder if we'd come to terms about this vi-villa for
ourselves."
Hans turned a look of anger towards him, and then said: "Go, sir, and
take those that belong to you away also. This place no longer can suit
you nor them. He who lies yonder can be flattered and fawned on no more;
and, as for her, she is above your compassion, if it even lay in your
heart to offer it."
"He ain't quite right here," whispered Purvis to Kraus, as he tapped
his forehead significantly. "They told me that in the town." Kraus moved
away without reply, and Purvis followed him. "He's rich, too, they say,"
added he, in a whisper.
"They'll scarcely say as much this day week," said Kraus, sneeringly;
while, beckoning his people to follow him, he left the house.
No sooner did Mrs. Ricketts learn that her worldly possessions were
safe, and that the harpy clutches of the law could make no seizure among
those curious turbans and wonderful tunics which composed her wardrobe,
than she immediately addressed herself to the active duties of the hour
with a mind at ease, and, while packing her trunks, inadvertently stowed
away such little stray articles as might not be immediately missed, and
might serve hereafter to recall thoughts of "poor dear Miss Dalton," for
so she now preferred to name her.
"Those little box figures, Martha, don't forget them. They of course
don't belong to the house; and Scroope suspects that the bracket for the
hall lamp must have been her carving also."
"I 've p-put away two pencil drawings marked 'N. D.,' and a little
sketch in oil of the Alten Schloss; and I 've my pockets stuffed with
the tulip roots."
"Well thought of, Scroope; and there's a beautiful paper-knife,--poor
thing, she's not likely to want it now. What a sad bereavement! And are
his affairs really so bad?"
"Ov-over head and ears in debt There ain't enough to bury him if the
dwarf does not shell out,--but he will. They say he's in love with
Nelly,--he, he, he!"
"Shocking, quite shocking. Yes, Martha, that telescope is a very good
one. What improvidence, what culpable improvidence!"
"And is she quite friendless?" asked Martha, feelingly.
"Not while she has our protection," said Mrs. Rickett, grandly. "I
've determined 'to take her up.'"
Martha reddened slightly at the phrase, for she knew of some others who
had been so "taken up," and with what small profit to their prosperity.
"Her talents, when aided by our patronage, will always support her,"
said Mrs. Ricketts; "and I mean, when the shock of this calamity
is past, to employ her on a little group for a centrepiece for our
dinner-table. She will, of course, be charmed to have her genius
displayed to such advantage. It will afford us a suitable opportunity of
introducing her name."
"And we shall have the piece of carving for nothing," said Martha, who
innocently believed that she was supplying another argument of equal
delicacy and force.
"You 're an idiot!" said Mrs. Ricketts, angrily; "and I begin to fear
you will never be anything else."
"I 'm quite sure I shall not," muttered the other, with a faint
submissiveness, and continued the task of packing the trunks.
"Take care that you find out her sister's address, Martha. I 'm sadly
in want of some furs; that tippet, I suppose, is only fit for you now,
and my sable muff is like a dog in the mange. The opportunity is a most
favorable one; for when the Princess, as they persist in calling her,
knows that her sister is our dependant, we may make our own terms. It
would be the very ruin of her in St Petersburg to publish such a fact."
"But Miss Dalton will surely write to her herself."
"She can be persuaded, I trust, to the contrary," said Mrs. Ricketts,
knowingly. "She can be shown that such an appeal would, in all
likelihood, wreck her sister's fortunes, that the confession of such a
relationship would utterly destroy her position in that proud capital;
and if she prove obstinate, the letter need not go; you understand that,
at least," added she, with a contemptuous glance that made poor Martha
tremble.
Mrs. Ricketts was now silent, and sat revelling in the various thoughts
that her active mind suggested. Upon the whole, although Dalton's dying
was an inconvenience, there were some compensating circumstances. She
had gained a most useful protge in Nelly,----one whose talents
might be made of excellent use, and whose humble, unpretending nature
would exact no requital. Again, the season at Baden was nearly over; a
week or two more, at most, was all that remained. The "Villino," which
she had left for the summer to some confiding family, who believed
that Florence was a paradise in July and August, would again be at her
disposal; and, in fact, as she phrased it, "the conjunctures were all
felicitous," and her campaign had not been unfruitful. This latter
fact attested itself in the aspect of her travelling-carriage, with its
"spolia" on the roof, and its various acquired objects under the body.
Pictures, china, plate, coins, brocades, old lace, books, prints,
manuscripts, armor, stained glass, trinkets, and relics of all kinds,
showed that travel with her was no unprofitable occupation, and that
she had realized the grand desideratum of combining pleasure with solid
advantage.
Meanwhile, so ingenious is thorough selfishness, she fancied herself
a benefactor of the whole human race. All the cajoleries she used to
practise, she thought were the amiable overflowings of a kindly nature;
her coarse flatteries she deemed irresistible fascinations; her
duperies even seemed only the triumphs of a mind transcendently rich in
resources, and never for a moment suspected that the false coin she was
uttering could be called in question, though the metal was too base for
imposition. There is no supply without demand, and if the world did not
like such characters there would be none of them. The Rickettses
are, however, a large and an increasing class of society, and, to our
national shame be it said, they are distinctively English in origin. And
now we leave her, little regretting if it be forever; and if we turn
to a darker page in our story, it is, at least, to one wherein our
sympathies are more fairly enlisted.
That long night passed over like a dreary dream, and morning was now
mingling its beams with the glare of the tapers, as Nelly sat beside the
death-bed.
"Come with me, Frulein! come away from this," said Hanserl, as with a
tearful eye and quivering lip he stood before her.
Nelly shook her head slowly, and for answer turned her gaze on the dead
man.
"You shall come back again; I promise you, you shall come back again,"
said he, softly.
She arose without a word and followed him. They passed through an outer
room, and entered the garden, where Hans, taking her hand, led her to a
seat.
"You will be better here, Frulein," said he, respectfully; "the air is
fresh and balmy."
"He sat beside me on this bench three nights ago," said she, as if
talking to herself, "and said how he wished I could be with Kate, but
that he could not part with me; and see,--we are parted, and for a
longer separation! Oh, Hanserl! what we would give to recall some of the
past, when death has closed it forever against us!"
"Remember Wieland, Frulein; he tells us that 'the Impossible is a tree
without fruit or flowers.'"
"And yet my mind will dwell on nothing else. The little thwartings of
his will, the cold compliance which should have been yielded in a better
spirit, the counsels that often only irritated,--how they rise up now,
like stern accusers, before me, and tell me that I failed in my duty."
"Not so, Frulein, not so," said Hans, reverently.
"But there is worse than that, Hanserl, far worse," said she, trembling.
"To smooth the rough path of life, I descended to deception. I told him
the best when my heart felt the worst. Had he known of Kate's real life,
and had he sorrowed over her fortunes, might not such grief have been
hallowed to him! To have wept over Frank--the poor boy in prison--might
have raised his thoughts to other themes than the dissipation that
surrounded him. All this was my fault I would have his love, and see
the price it has cost me!" She hid her face between her hands, and never
spoke for a long time. And at length she lifted up her eyes, red as they
were with weeping, and with a heavy sigh said, "How far is it to Vienna,
Hanserl?"
"To Vienna, Frulein! It is a long journey,----more than four hundred
miles. But why do you ask?"
"I was thinking that if I saw Count Stephen--if I could but tell him our
sad story myself--he might intercede for poor Frank, and perhaps obtain
his freedom. His crime can scarcely be beyond the reach of mercy, and
his youth will plead for him. And is it so far away, Hanserl?"
"At the very least; and a costly journey, too."
"But I would go on foot, Hans. Lame as I am, I can walk for miles
without fatigue, and I feel as if the exertion would be a solace to me,
and that my mind, bent upon a good object, could the more easily turn
away from my own desolation. Oh, Hans, think me not selfish that I speak
thus; but thoughts of my own loneliness are so linked with all I have
lost, I cannot separate them. Even the humble duty that I filled gave a
value to my life, without which my worthlessness would have crushed
me; for what could poor lame Nelly be,--I, that had no buoyancy for the
young, no ripe judgment for the old? And yet, in caring for him that is
gone, I found a taste of love and happiness."
"I will go with you, Frulein; you shall not take this weary road alone.
Heaven knows that, without you, this place would be too dreary for me."
"But your house, Hanserl,--all that you possess,--the fruits of all your
hard industry--"
"Speak not of them," said Hans, reddening. "They who deem me rich are
mistaken. I have speculated ill, I have made bad ventures, and what I
have will but pay my debts, and I will be glad to quit this spot."
"And I," said Nelly, with a voice of deep emotion,--"I cannot say that I
can help you. I know nothing of what may remain to me in this world; my
father never spoke to me latterly of his means, and I may be, for aught
I know, a beggar. Will you see his banker and speak with him?"
"I have done so," said Hans, slowly. "He claims some small sum as due to
him."
"And how am I to pay it?" said Nelly, growing pale. "It is true, I can
labor--"
"Have no care for this, Frulein. It shall be looked to, and you shall
repay it hereafter."
"Oh, Hanserl, beware!" said she, solemnly; "we are an unfortunate
race to those who help us; my poor father often said so, and even his
superstitions are hallowed to me now."
A gesture from some one within the house called Hans away, and Nelly was
left alone. She sat with her eyes closed and her arms firmly clasped,
deep in her own sad thoughts, when she heard a footstep close by. It was
only Andy, who, with a piece of ragged crape fastened round his arm, was
slowly tottering towards her. His face was flushed, and his eyes wild
and excited, as he continued to mutter and reply to himself,----
"A Dalton; one of the ould stock, and maybe the last of them, too."
"And what is it, Andy?----tell me, what is it?" said she, kindly.
"There's no wake,--there is n't as much as a tenant's child would have!"
"We are almost friendless here, Andy. It is not our own country."
"Ain't they Christians, though? Could n't they keep the corpse company?
Is it four candles and a deal coffin ought to be at a Dalton's burial?"
"And we are poor also," said she, meekly.
"And has n't the poorest respect for the dead?" said he, sternly.
"Wouldn't they sell the cow, or the last pig, out of honor to him
that's gone to glory? I 'll not stay longer in the place; I 'll have my
discharge; I 'll go back to Ireland."
"Poor fellow," said Nelly, taking his hand kindly, and seating him
beside her. "You loved him so! and he loved you, Andy. He loved to
hear you sing your old songs, and tell over the names of his favorite
hounds."
"Bessy and Countess were the sweetest among them," said the old man,
wandering away to old memories of the past, "but Nora was truer than
either." And so he fell into a low mumbling to himself, endeavoring,
as it seemed, to recall the forgotten line of some hunting chant, while
Nelly returned to the house to take her last farewell ere the coffin lid
was closed.
CHAPTER XXII. A LAST ADIEU
The pleasure-seekers of Baden were not likely to be diverted from their
pursuits by such humble calamities as Nelly Dalton's, and the gay world
went on its gay road as merrily as though death or ruin could have no
concern for them. Already the happy groups were gathering before the
Cur-saal. The sounds of music filled the air. Wealth was displaying its
gorgeous attractions, beauty her fascinations, and wit its brilliancy;
and none had a thought for that sad episode which a few hours had half
obliterated from every mind. Under a spreading chestnut-tree, and around
a table sumptuously spread for breakfast, a large party was assembled,
discussing the news of the morning and the plans of pleasure for the
day. Some had but thoughts for the play-table, and could attune their
ears to no other sounds than the clink of the gold and the rake of the
croupier; others chatted of the world of politics and fashion; and a
few, with that love of the picturesque the taste for painting engenders,
were admiring the changeful effects of passing clouds on the landscape,
and pointing out spots of peculiar beauty and sublimity.
"How well the Alten Schloss looks, with that mass of shadow on it,"
remarked a young man to a fair and delicate-looking girl beside him;
"and see how the weeping ash waves over the old walls, like a banner."
"And look!" cried she, "mark that little procession that is slowly
winding up the pathway,--what effect a few figures give to the scene, as
they appear and disappear with each turning of the road. Some pilgrimage
to a holy shrine, I fancy."
"No; it is a funeral. I can mark what Shelley calls the step of the
bearers 'heavy and slow;' and if you listen, you'll catch the sound of
the death-bell."
"It's quite a picture, I declare," said she. "I wish I had brought my
sketch-book."
And so it is ever! The sorrows that are rending some hearts in twain are
but as objects of picturesque effect to others. And even the young and
the tender-minded learn to look on the calamities that touch them not,
as things of mere artistic meaning.
Up that steep road, over rock and rugged stone, brushing between the
tangled briers, or with difficulty being turned around some sharp angle,
was now borne the corpse of him who had so often wended the same path on
his homeward way. Four peasants carried the coffin, which was followed
by Nelly and old Andy; Hans, from a sense of respect, walking behind
them. It was a long and arduous ascent, and they were often obliged to
halt and take breath; and at such times Nelly would kneel down beside
the coffin and pray. The sufferings of the last two days had left deep
traces on her features, which had lost every tinge of color. Her eyes,
too, were deep-set and heavy; but in the elevated expression of her brow
at moments, and the compression of her lips, might be seen the energy of
one who had a firm purpose, and was resolved to carry it through.
"Sit down and rest yourself, Frulein," said Hans, as he saw that she
faltered in her step. "We are yet far from the top."
"I will rest at the fountain," said she, faintly. "It was a favorite
spot of his." And they moved slowly on once more.
The fountain was a little well, carved in the native rock, around which
some rude seats were also fashioned, the whole sheltered by a thick
roof of foliage, which, even in noonday, cast a deep shadow around, and
effectually screened it from the path that wound along beside it.
Scarcely had the bearers deposited the coffin beside the well, when the
sound of voices was heard as a considerable number of persons descended
the path. Words in French, German, and English showed that the party
consisted of representatives of these nations; but one voice, if once
heard not readily forgotten, towered high above all the rest.
"I cannot offer my arm, madam," cried a sharp, ringing accent, "as the
infernal road will not admit of two abreast; but I can go before and
pilot you."
"Oh, thanks, sir," replied a mild, meek tone; "I can get on very well
indeed. I am only uneasy about my sister."
"I don't suspect that she incurs either much risk or fatigue, madam,"
rejoined the other, "seeing that she is seated in an armchair, and
carried by two of the stoutest fellows in Baden."
"But the exertion, in her weak state--"
"She might make the ascent of Mont Blanc, madam, with the same
appliances; and if you only told her that there were bargains to be had
at the top, I verily believe she would do so."
"You don't think the things were cheap here, Colonel?" said Miss Martha,
who thought by a diversion to draw Haggerstone away from so dangerous a
discussion.
"I am no connoisseur in Dutch dolls, nor Noah's arks, madam, although
modern society presents us with something very like both; but I
concluded that the prices were not exorbitant. I went there myself from
a sense of equity. I once put a bullet into the little rascal's skin,
and I have bought a salad-fork and a nut-crackers in requital."
"It was kindly thought of," sighed Martha, gently.
"They only cost me nine kreutzers, madam," rejoined Haggerstone, who was
more afraid of being thought a dupe than ill-natured, "so that my
sense of generosity did not make a fool of me, as it did with the dwarf
himself."
"How so?"
"Why, in going security for that old Irishman, Dalton. It is to pay this
debt that he has been sold out to-day, and I fancy that Swiss cottages
and barking poodles will realize a very small dividend."
"Oh, Hanserl!" said Nelly, "what do I hear?"
"Hush, Frulein!" said he, with a gesture to enforce silence. "I will
tell you of these things hereafter."
And now the others passed, and were soon out of hearing.
"Oh, Hanserl!" cried Nelly, bitterly, "how misfortunes crowd upon me!
It was but a moment back I was feeding my mind with the sad consolation
that my griefs were all my own,--that the gloom of my dreary fortune
cast no shadow on another; and now I see that I was wrong. You must
pay the dear penalty of having befriended us!--the fruits of all your
hard years of industry!"
"And you would rob me of their best reward,--the glorious sense of
a generous action?" broke in Hans. "They were years of toil and
privation, and they might have been years of pleasure if avarice and
greed had grown upon me; but I could not become a miser."
"The home you had made your own, lost to you forever!" sighed Nelly.
"It was no longer a home when you left it."
"The well-won provision for old age, Hanserl."
"And has not this event made me young again, and able to brave the
world, were it twice as adverse as ever I found it? Oh, Frulein, you
know not the heart-bounding ecstasy of him who, from the depths of an
humble station, can rise to do a service to those he looks up to! And
yet it is that thought which now warms my blood, and gives an energy to
my nature that, even in youth, I never felt."
Nelly was silent; and now neither spoke a word, but sat with bent-down
heads, deep sunk in their own reveries. At last she arose, and once more
the sad procession resumed its way. They toiled slowly along till they
reached the little level table-land, where the church stood,--a little
chapel, scarcely larger than a shrine, but long venerated as a holy
spot. Poor Dalton had often spent hours here, gazing on the wide expanse
of plain and mountain and forest that stretched away beneath; and it was
in one of his evening rambles that he had fixed upon the spot where they
should lay him, if he could not "rest his bones with his forefathers."
"Sixty-eight!" muttered the old priest, as he read the inscription on
the coffin-lid; "in the pride and vigor of manhood! Was he noble, that I
see these quarterings painted here?"
"Hush! that is his daughter," whispered Hanserl.
"If he were of noble blood, he should have lain in the chapel and on a
catafalque," muttered the priest.
"The family is noble, but poor," said Hans, in a low whisper.
"A low Mass, without the choir, would not ruin the poorest," said the
priest, who sprinkled the coffin with half impatience, and, mumbling a
few prayers, retired. And now the body was committed to the earth, and
the grave was filled. The last sod was patted down with the shovel; and
Nelly, unable to bear her grief any longer in silence, threw herself on
the spot, and wept bitterly. Hans withdrew, and motioned to the others
to follow him; and none remained but old Andy, who, on his knees and
with clasped hands, seemed to think that he was praying, although all
his attention was directed to a little group of children who stood near,
and whom he awed into reverence by many a threatening gesture.
And thus the long day stole over; and it was only as evening drew nigh
that Nelly could be induced to take her last farewell, and breathe her
last prayer over the grave of her father.
CHAPTER XXIII. THE TYROL JOURNEY.
If our task as story-teller had not other claims on us, we would gladly
linger with Nelly Dalton, as, in company with Hanserl and old Andy, she
wended her slow way through the deep valleys of the Schwartz wald. The
little party might have created astonishment in even more frequented
districts than the primitive tract in which they journeyed, and have
suggested many a puzzling doubt as to what rank or condition they
belonged to. For Andy's convenience Hans had purchased an ass and a
small cart, such as are sometimes used by the travelling beggars of
every land. Seated in this, and in his old hunting-cap and scarlet
coat, the old man fancied it was some pleasure excursion, or that he was
"trundling along" to "cover," as he used to do sixty years ago. Nelly
walked at his side, now roused from her deep musings to reply to some
meaningless question of the old man, or now feeding her sad memories
as she listened to the little snatches of song which occasionally broke
from him. Hanserl formed the rear-guard, making with his redoubted
battle-axe and a most formidable old Turkish pistol, not the least
singular figure in the procession. Their very baggage too had something
strange and incomprehensible to common eyes; for, amidst stray scraps of
old armor, the little remnants of Hanserl's collection, were to be seen
an unfinished figure by Nelly's hand, or the rude beginning of some new
group. Along with these were books and tools, and an infinity of queer
costumes, of the dwarfs own designing, for various seasons of the year.
Still, there was no impertinence in the curiosity that met them. If
Andy's strange equipage and stranger dress might have raised a smile,
Nelly's gentle look and modest air as rapidly checked it, and they who
would have laughed outright at Hanserl's mock-chieftainship were subdued
to a respectful deference by the placid dignity of her who walked before
him. It was in that memorable year whose doings are recorded in our
memory with all the solemn force of History, and all the distinct and
vivid effect of events passing before our own eyes; that era, when
Thrones rocked and tottered, and kings, who seemed destined to transmit
their crowns to unborn generations, became exiles, and cast away, their
state a mockery, and their princely homes given up to pillage; when
the brightest day-dreams of good men became bound up with the wildest
imaginings of the bold and the bad, and the word Freedom comprehended
all that was most glorious in self-devotion, and all that was most
relentless in hate,----in that troubled time, Hanserl wisely sought
out the districts of mountain and crag--the homes of the hunter--in
preference to the more travelled roads, and prudently preferred even
the devious windings of the solitary glens to the thronged and peopled
highways that connected great cities.
His plan was to direct their steps through the Vorarlberg into the
Tyrol, where, in a small village near Meran, his mother still lived.
There, in case of need, Nelly would find a refuge, and, at all events,
could halt while he explored the way to Vienna, and examined how far it
might be safe for her to proceed thither. Even in all her affliction,
out of the depths of a sorrow so devoid of hope, Nelly felt the glorious
influence of the grand scenery through which they travelled. The giant
mountains, snow-capped in early autumn; the boundless forests that
stretched along their sides; the foaming cataracts as they fell in
sheets of hissing water; the tranquil lakes that reflected tower and
cliff and spire; the picturesque village, where life seemed to ripple on
as peacefully as the clear stream before the peasant's door; the song of
the birds, the tolling of the bells, the laugh of the children; the Alp
horn answered from cliff to cliff, and dying away in distant echo,--all
these were realizations of many a girlish hope, when she wished her
father to seek out some secluded village, and pass a life of obscure but
united labor. There was no Quixotism in the fancy. She knew well what
it was to toil and work; to rise early, and go late to rest; to feed on
coarse fare, and be clad in mean attire. All that poverty can inflict
of privation she had tasted, but fearlessly and with a bold heart;
self-reliance elevating her thoughts above every little adverse
incident, and giving to her struggle that character of a task, a holy
and a righteous task, which made at once her life's purpose and reward.
Scarcely a village at which they halted that did not strike her as like
what her mind had often pictured for "their own," and many a quaint old
house, with its carved galleries and latticed porch, she stood to gaze
on, fancying it their home and peopling every spot with the forms of
those she loved. Oh! why had they not chosen this humble road?--why had
their "Paths in Life" separated?--were the bitter reflections which now
filled her eyes with tears and made her bosom heave almost to bursting.
She did not foolishly suppose that the peasant can claim exemption from
the trials and crosses of life, and that sorrow finds no entrance into
remote and unfrequented tracts, but she knew that such burdens would
not be too heavy for their strength, and that, while living a life of
unpretending poverty, they should be free from the slavery of an assumed
position, and able to combat the world fairly and honestly.
Of all lands the Tyrol is best suited to foster such feelings as
these. There is a harmony and a keeping about it that is rarely found
elsewhere. The dwellings of the people, so according with the character
of the scenery; the costumes, the greetings, the songs of the
peasantry; their simple and touching piety; their manners, so happily
blending independence with courtesy, are felt at once as a charm, and
give a color to the enjoyment of every one who sojourns amongst
them. These were the sights and sounds which, better than all the
blandishments of wealth, could soothe poor Nelly's sorrow, and make her
thankful in the midst of her afflictions even to have witnessed them. As
for Hanserl, his excitement grew daily higher as he passed the Arlberg
and drew near the spots he had seen in childhood. Now preparing some
little surprise for Nelly, as they turned the angle of a cliff and gazed
down upon a terrible gorge beneath; now apprising her of some little
shrine where pious wayfarers were wont to halt and pray; now speculating
if the old host of the village inn would be alive, or still remember
him, he went along merrily, occasionally singing some "Alp Lied," or
calling to mind some ancient legend of the scene through which they
journeyed. Above all, however, was his delight at the thought of seeing
his old mother again. No sense of disappointment dashed this pleasure
because he was returning poor and penniless. Home and the "Frau Mutter,"
as he reverently called her, had their hold upon his heart quite
distinct from every accident of fortune. To tell her of all he had seen
in far-away lands,--for Hanserl thought himself a great traveller; to
describe the great Cathedral of Worms, its vaulted aisles and painted
windows, its saintly effigies and deep-toned organ, and the thousands
who could kneel before the high altar! Then, what marvellous relics were
there to describe!--not to speak of the memorable valley at Eschgau,
where "Siegfried slew the Dragon." Poor Hans! the scenes of his youth
had made him young again, and it was the very triumph of his joy when he
could interest Nelly in some story, or make her listen with attention to
the rude verses of some "Tyroler" poem.
Gladly would we linger with them as they went slowly along through the
deep valley of Landech, and, halting a day at the Pontlatzer Brcke,
that Hans might describe the heroic defence of his countrymen against
the French and Bavarian forces, and then, skirting along the Engadine,
came in sight of the great Orteler Spitze,--the highest of the Tyrol
Alps. And now they reached Nauders, and traversing a wild and dreary
mountain tract, where even in autumn the snow is seen in clefts and
crevices of the rock, they gradually gain the crest of the ridge, and
look down at length on glorious Meran with the devotion of the pilgrim
in sight of the Holy City. Hans knelt down and prayed fervently as his
eyes beheld that garden valley with its vine-clad slopes and waving
woods; its silvery river gliding along beneath bright villages and
feudal castles. But soon he saw them no longer, for his eyes swam over
with tears, and he sobbed like a child.
"There, Frulein, yonder, where you see the river winding to the
southward, you see an old tower,--'the Passayer Turm,' it is called; the
'Fru Mutter' lives there. I see some one in the garden." And, overcome
by emotion, he hid his face and wept.
Near as they seemed to the end of their journey, it was night ere they
gained the valley at the foot of the mountain. The cottages were closed,
and, except in the town--still about a mile distant--not a light was to
be seen. The Tyrolers are an early race, and retire to rest soon after
dusk. Hanserl, however, wanted no guidance to the way, and trudged along
in front of the cart, following each winding of the track as though he
had gone it but the day before. Except a chance caution about the road,
he never spoke,--his heart was full of "home." The fatigue of a long
day's journey, and the cold of the night air, had made Andy querulous
and discontented, and it was all Nelly could do to answer the fretful
questions and soothe down the irritation of the old man; but Hans heard
nothing of either. At last they reached a little open space formed by a
bend in the river, and came in sight of the old tower, at the foot of
which, and abutting against it, stood a small cottage. A light gleamed
from a little window, and no sooner had Hans seen it than he
exclaimed,----
"Gott sey dank! Frulein, she is well. That is the Fru Mutter."
Poor Nelly's lip quivered as she tried to speak, for, humble as it
was, what would she have given to have had even such a "home"? And now,
passing through a little garden, Hans halted, and assisted Andy from the
cart.
"Where are we, at all? Sure this is n't a place to stop the night in!"
cried the old man, querulously.
"Hush, Andy, hush!" whispered Nelly.
"'Tis thieves and vagabonds, maybe, lives here, Miss Nelly," said he, in
a low voice.
"No, Andy, no; it is a kind welcome that awaits us."
"Ayeh!" exclaimed he, "I know betther than that!"
Hans by this time had approached the door and raised the latch,--for in
the Tyrol the night rarely calls for other fastening. Nelly heard
the sharp, clear sound of an old woman's voice above the hum of a
spinning-wheel, and then the glad burst of joy as the mother recognized
her son. Unwilling to interrupt their happiness, Nelly moved away out of
hearing, when Hanserl came running out, followed by the old woman.
"This is the Frulein, mother," cried he, with a burst of delight; and
the old woman, taking Nelly's hand, kissed it with deep respect.
With native courtesy she welcomed Nelly, and, as she entered her house,
pointed with pride to a Madonna of Nelly's own carving, which stood on a
bracket against the wall.
"You see, Frulein," said she, "how I have known you for many a day
back; and there is your Saint Christopher, and there the 'Blessed Agnes
at the Well.'" And so was it. The groups and figures which she believed
to have been sold by Hanserl, were all stored up here and treasured
like household gods. "Many a traveller has come here just to see these,"
continued the old peasant-woman, "and many a tempting sum have they
offered if I would sell them, but in all my poverty I did not stoop to
this."
"Frau Mutter, Fru Mutter," said Hans, rebukingly, and trying to cut
short what he feared might offend Nelly.
"Nay, Hanserl, it is but the truth," said she, firmly; "I will not say
that I did not do more wisely too, for they who came left me always some
little present. Even the poor gave me their blessing, and said that they
were happier when they had prayed before the blessed Agnes." While thus
running on in all the garrulity of old age, she never neglected the
care of receiving her guests with suitable hospitality. Old Andy was
accommodated with a deep straw chair near the stove. The little chamber,
which, for its view upon the Passayer Thai, had been specially devoted
to receive travellers, was got ready for Nelly; and Hans, once more at
home, busied himself in arranging the household and preparing supper.
"You are wondering at all the comforts you find here, Hanserl," said
the old woman, "but see here, this will tell you whence they came;" and,
opening an old ebony cabinet, she took out a large square letter with a
heavy seal. "That reached me on a Christmas-day, Hanserl; the paper was
from the Imperial Chancellerie of Vienna, setting forth that, as the
widow of Hans Roeckle, of Meran, born of Tyrol parents, and married to a
Tyroler, had attained the age of eighty years, and never asked alms, nor
sought for other aid than her own industry, she was now entitled to the
Maria Teresa pension of twelve kreutzers a day for the rest of her life.
I told them," said the old woman, proudly, "that my son had always taken
care to provide for me, and that there were others that might want it
more than I, but the kreis-hauptman said that my refusal would be
an offence to the Kaiser, who had heard of my name from one of the
archduchesses who travelled this way, and who had seen these blessed
images and wished to buy them; so that I was fain to yield, and take, in
thankfulness, what was offered in generosity. You see, Hanserl, how true
is it, the Frulein has been our good angel; we have never had bad luck
since the Madonna came here!"
Nelly slept soundly that night, and, for the first time since her
calamities, her dreams were happy ones. Lulled by the ripple of the
river beside her window, and the ceaseless murmuring of the old woman's
voice as she sat up talking with her son the whole night long, she
tasted at length the sweets of deep and refreshing sleep. And what a
gorgeous scene burst upon her waking eyes! Around, on every side of
the little plain, rose the great mountains of the Tyrol; some green
and tree-clad to their summits, others snow-capped or hid in the
azure-colored clouds above them. Ancient castles crowned the crags, and
foaming cataracts leaped from each fissured gorge; while below, in the
valley, there lay a garden of rich profusion,--the vine, the olive,
and the waving corn,--with villages and peasant-houses half hid in
the luxuriant verdure. From the lowing cattle beside the river to the
re-echoing horn upon the mountains, there seemed to come greeting and
answer. All was grandeur and sublimity in the scene; but, more striking
than these, was the perfect repose, the deep tranquillity of the
picture. The sounds were all those of peasant labor, the song of the
vine-dresser, the rustling noise of the loaded wagon as it moved through
some narrow and leafy road, the hissing of the sickle through the ripe
corn.
"And yet," said Hanserl, as Nelly stood in silent enjoyment at the
little porch,--"and yet, Frulein, beyond those great mountains yonder,
there is strife and carnage. Here all is peaceful and happy; but the
whole world of Europe is tempest-torn. Italy is up,--all her people are
in wild revolt; Hungary is in open insurrection. I speak not of other
lands, whose fortunes affect us not, but the great empire of our Kaiser
is convulsed to its very centre. I have just been at Meran, troops are
marching in every hour, and every hour come new messengers to bid them
hasten southward. Over the Stelvio, where you see that dark line yonder,
near the summit of the mountains, on they pour! They say, too, that
Upper Austria is in rebellion, and that the roads from Innspruck are
unsafe to travel. We are safe here, Frulein, but you must not venture
further. We will try, from some of the officers who pass through, to
glean tidings of the Count, your grand-uncle, and where a letter may
reach him; but bear with this humble shelter for a while, and think it a
home."
If Nelly was disappointed and baffled by this impediment to her journey,
she was not one to pass her time in vague regrets, but at once addressed
herself to the call of new duties with a willing mind and a cheerful
spirit.
Resuming her long-neglected tools, she set to work once more, stimulated
by the new scenes and subjects around her. To the little children who
often formed her "studies," she became the schoolmistress. To the old
who were stricken with sickness or the helplessness of age she used to
read for hours together. Every little pathway led her to some office of
charity or kindness, till the "good Frulein" became a village byword,
and her name was treasured and her footstep welcomed in every cottage
around.
Her humble dress, her more humble manner, took nothing from the
deference they yielded her. They felt too intensely the inborn
superiority of her nature to think of any equality between them, and
they venerated her with something like devotion. A physician to the
sick, a nurse to the bedridden, a teacher to the ignorant, a blessing
and an example to all, Nelly's hours were but too short for the calls
of her duties, and, in her care for others, she had no time to bestow on
her own sorrows.
As for Hanserl, he worked from daylight to dusk. Already the little
garden, weed-grown and uncared-for before, was as blooming as his former
one at the Alten Schloss. Under Nelly's guidance many a device was
executed that seemed almost miraculous to the simple neighbors; and the
lichen-clad rocks, the waving water-lilies or trellised creepers, which,
in the wild wantonness of nature they had never noticed, now struck
them as the very creations of genius. Even old Andy was not forgotten in
their schemes of happiness; and the old huntsman used to spend hours in
the effort to tame a young fox a peasant had brought him,--a labor not
the less interesting that its progress suffered many a check, and that
many a laugh arose at the backslidings of the pupil.
And now we leave them for a brief season, all occupied and all happy;
nor do we like the fate that calls us away to other and very different
associates.
CHAPTER XXIV. FLORENCE.
It was of a calm but starless night in winter that Florence was
illuminated in honor of a victory over the Austrian troops at Goito.
Never was patriotic ardor higher,--never were stronger the hopes of
Italian independence. From the hour of their retreat from Milan, the
imperial forces had met with little but reverses, and, as day by day
they fell back towards the Tyrol Alps, the hosts of their enemies
swelled and increased around them; and from Genoa to the Adriatic all
Italy was in march to battle. It is not to speculate on the passable
current of events, nor yet to dwell on the causes of that memorable
failure, by which dissentient councils and false faith--the weakness
of good men and the ambition of bad ones--brought rain when there might
have been victory, still less is it to gaze upon the brilliant spectacle
of the rejoicing city, that we are now wending our way along the Arno,
scarcely stopping to notice the thousand stars that glitter on the
Duomo, nor the flickering lines of light which trace out the gigantic
tower of the Palazzo Vecchio. Our theme is more humble than the former,
and far too serious for such dalliance as the latter.
Leaving the crowded streets, resounding with the wild acclamations and
wilder songs of the people, we pass over the Ponte Vecchio, and enter
once again the dark abode of Racca Morlache. Whether from any suspicion
of his unpopularity with the people, or from some secret necessity for
precaution, the door is fastened by many an extra bolt, and more than
one massive chain retains the iron shutters of the window. Perhaps there
is something in this conscious security that has made him so sparing in
his display of external joy, for two dim, discolored lamps were all that
appeared above the door, and these were soon hurled down in contemptuous
anger by the populace, leaving the little building in total darkness.
In easy indifference to such harmless insult, and not heeding the loud
knock which, from stick or stone, the iron shutters resounded under, the
Jew sat at his table in that little chamber beside the Arno, of which
the reader already knows the secret. Several decanters of wine are
before him, and as he sips his glass and smashes his filbert, his air is
that of the very easiest unconcern.
Attempting, but with inferior success, an equal degree of calm, sits the
Abb D'Esmonde on the opposite side of the table. With all his training,
his calm features betray at moments certain signs of anxiety, and, while
he speaks, you can see that he is listening to the noises in the street
without.
"How I detest that song!" said Morlache, as the full swell of a
deep-voiced chorus filled the air. "I verily believe the Revolution has
not inflicted us with anything more outraging to good taste than the air
of 'Viva Pio Nono.'"
"Always excepting Pio Nono himself," said D'Esmonde, "who is far more
the child than the father of this movement."
"Not bad for a priest to renounce allegiance to his holy master!" said
Racca, laughing.
"You mistake me, Signor Morlache," said D'Esmonde, eagerly. "I spoke
of Pio Nono, the politician,--the rash innovator of time-honored
institutions, the foolish donor of concessions that must be won back at
the price of blood, the man who has been weak enough to head a movement
which he ought to have controlled in secret. How the people shout! I
hear many a voice in accents of no Italian origin."
"Yes, the city is full of Poles and Hungarians."
"It will soon be time to drop the curtain on this act of the drama,
Morlache; enough has been done to show the world the dangerous doctrines
of these fanatics. They who cry 'No property in France,' shout 'No King
in Germany,' 'No Pope in Rome.' The peaceful or well-ordered must be
taught to see in us their safeguard against these men. They must
learn to think the Church the sanctuary it was of old. From all these
convulsions which shatter empires, we are the refuge!"
"But you yourself gave the first impulse to this very movement, Abb?"
"And wisely and well we did it! Should we have stood passive to watch
the gradual growth of that cursed spirit they miscall independent
judgment,--that rankest heresy that ever corrupted the human heart?
Should we have waited till Protestantism with its Bible had sowed the
seeds of that right of judgment which they proclaim is inherent in all
men? Would it have been safe policy to admit of discussing what was
obligatory to obey, and look on while this enlightenment--as they
blasphemously term it--was arraigning the dogma of the Church as
unblushingly as they questioned the decree of a minister?"
"I perceive," said the Jew, laughing, "You great politicians are not
above taking a lesson from the 'Bourse,' and know the trick of puffing
up a bad scheme to a high premium, prepared to sell out the day before
'the fall.'"
"We had higher and nobler views," said D'Esmonde, proudly. "The men who
will not come to the altars of the Church must be taught her doctrines
before the portals. Our task is to proclaim Rome----eternal Rome--to
Europe!"
"Up to this your success has not been signal," said Morlache, with a
sneer. "This victory at Goito has given fresh vigor to the Republicans.
The Austrians once driven beyond the Alps, Monarchy wilt be short-lived
in Italy."
"And who says that they will be so driven? Who ever dreams of such a
result, save some wild fanatic of Genoa, or some half-informed minister
at London? The King of Naples only waits for the excuse of a Calabrian
disturbance to recall his contingent. The Pope has already issued an
order to Durando not to pass the Po. The Piedmontese themselves are on
the verge of an irreparable quarrel,--the men of Savoy and the north for
Monarchy; the Genoese, wild with their own ancient ideas of a Ligurian
Republic. Is it the Lombards, think you, will conquer Lombardy? or
do you fancy that Florence and Pisa are the nurseries of heroes? No,
Morlache, the game of revolt is played out in Italy; the last trump is
Goito."
"But if, flushed with conquest, the Piedmontese press on to greater
successes?"
"They cannot,--they would not, even if they could," broke in D'Esmonde.
"Is it the Republicans will shed their blood to conquer a kingdom of
Upper Italy for Carlo Alberto? Is it the interest of Rome or Naples to
see such a power in the Peninsula? Will the troops of the Monarchy, on
the other hand, fight for a cause that is to obliterate the throne? No;
believe me, their mutual grudges have been well weighed and estimated.
We never dared this bold policy without seeing clearly that their
interests could never be reconciled.--I think I hear the sound of oars;
yes, he must be coming at last!" D'Esmonde opened the window as he
spoke, and looked out upon the river, which, reflecting along the sides
the gorgeous pageantry of the illumination, was dark as ink in the
middle of the stream. "Not a word of this, Morlache, when he joins us,"
added D'Esmonde.
"He is not in your confidence, then?" asked the other.
"He? Of course he is not! If for no weightier reasons than that he is
English and a Protestant,--two things which, however weak they may prove
either in patriotism or religion, never fail in their hatred of the
Church and her cause. Like one of the Condottieri of old, he has joined
the quarrel because hard knocks are usually associated with booty.
Whenever he finds that he has no stake on the table, he 'll throw down
his cards."
"And the other,--the Russian?"
"He is more difficult to understand; but I hope to know him yet Hush,
the boat is close in; be cautious!" And, so saying, he filled his glass,
and reseated himself in all the seeming ease of careless dalliance. In a
few minutes after, the prow of a light skiff touched the terrace, and a
man stepped out and knocked at the shutter.
"Welcome at last," said D'Esmonde, shaking hands with him. "We had
almost despaired of seeing you to-night you appear to have been favored
with a long audience!"
"Yes, confound it!" cried the other, who, throwing off his
travelling-cloak, showed the figure of Lord Norwood. "We were kept
dangling in an antechamber for nigh an hour. Midchekoff's fault, for
he would not give his name, nor say anything more than that we were two
officers with secret despatches from the camp. The people in waiting
appeared to think the claim a poor one, and came and went, and looked at
us, splashed and dirty as we were; but not, even out of curiosity, did
one ask us what tidings we brought. We might have stayed till now, I
believe, if I had not taken the resolution to follow an old priest--a
bishop, I fancy--who seemed to have the entre everywhere; and pushing
vigorously after him, I passed through half a dozen ill-lighted rooms,
and at last entered a small drawing-room, where the great man was
seated at piquet with old Cassandroni, the minister. I must say that,
considering the unauthorized style of my approach, nothing could be more
well-bred and urbane than his reception of me. I was blundering out
some kind of apology for my appearance, when he pointed to a chair, and
begged me to be seated. Then, recognizing Midchekoff, who had just come
in, he held out his hand to him. I gave him the despatches, which
he pushed across the table to Cassandroni, as if it were more his
'affair;' and then turning to Midchekoff, conversed with him for some
time in a low voice. As it would not have been etiquette to observe him
too closely, I kept my eyes on the minister; and, faith, I must say that
he could scarcely have looked more blank and out of sorts had the news
reported a defeat. I suppose these fellows have a kind of official
reserve which represses every show of feeling; but I own that he folded
up the paper with a degree of composure that quite piqued me.
"'Well, Cassandroni,' said his master, 'what's your news?'
"'Very good news, sir,' said the other, calmly. 'His Majesty has
obtained a signal victory near Goito against a considerable force of the
Imperial army, under the command of Radetzky. The action was long and
fiercely contested; but a successful advance of artillery to the side of
a river, and a most intrepid series of cavalry charges turned the flank
of the enemy, and gained the day. The results do not, however, appear
equal to the moral effect upon the army, for there were few prisoners,
and no guns taken.'
"'That may perhaps be explained,' said I, interrupting; 'for when the
Austrians commenced their movement in retreat--' Just as I got thus far,
I stopped; for I found that the distinguished personage I was addressing
had once more turned to Midchekoff, and was in deep conversation with
him, totally regardless of me and my explanation.
"'You have been wounded, my Lord?' said he, after a moment.
"'A mere scratch, sir,--a poke of a lance,' said I, smarting under the
cool indifference of his manner.
"'I hope you 're not too much fatigued to stop to supper,' said he; but
I arose at the instant, and pleading the excuse of exhaustion and want
of rest, begged to be permitted to retire; and here I am, not having
tasted anything since I left Padua, and not in the very blandest of
tempers, either, at the graciousness of my reception. As for Midchekoff,
he kept his seat as coolly as if he meant to pass his life there. I
hesitated for a second or two, expecting that he would join me; but
not a bit of it He smiled his little quiet smile, as much as to say,
'Good-night,' and so I left him."
"He is probably detained to give some particulars of the engagement,"
said D'Esmonde.
"How can he?--he was never in it; he was writing letters all day at
headquarters, and never came up till seven in the evening, when he rode
down with a smart groom after him, and gave the Duke of Savoy a sandwich
out of a silver case. That will be the only memorable fact he can retail
of the day's fortune."
"The cause looks well, however," said D'Esmonde, endeavoring to divert
his thoughts into a more agreeable direction.
"Tell me what is the cause, and I will answer you," said Norwood,
sternly. "So far as I see, we are dividing the spoils before we have
hunted down the game."
"You surely have no doubt of the result, my Lord?" replied the other,
eagerly. "The Austrians must relinquish Italy."
"Then who is to take it,--that's the question? Is Lorn-bardy to become
Piedmont, or a Red Republic? or are your brethren of the slouched hat to
step in and portion out the land into snug nurseries for Franciscans
and Ursulines? Egad, I 'd as soon give it up to old Morlache yonder,
and make it a New Jerusalem to educate a young race of moneylenders and
usurers!"
"I wish we had even as much security for our loans," said Morlache,
smiling.
"I hear of nothing but money,----great loans here, immense sums raised
there," cried Norwood; "and yet what becomes of it? The army certainly
has seen none of it. Large arrears of pay are due; and as for us
who serve on the staff, we are actually supporting the very force we
command."
"We are told that large sums have found their way into Austria in shape
of secret service," said D'Esmonde, "and with good result too."
"The very worst of bad policy," broke in Norwood. "Pay your friends
and thrash your enemies. Deserters are bad allies at the best, but are
utterly worthless if they must be paid for desertion. Let them go over
like those Hungarian fellows,--a whole regiment at a time, and bring
both courage and discipline to our ranks! but your rabble of student
sympathizers are good for nothing."
"Success has not made you sanguine, my Lord," said Morlache, smiling.
"I have little to be sanguine about," replied he, roughly. "They have
not spoiled me with good fortune; and even on this very mission that I
have come now, you 'll see it is that Russian fellow will receive all
the reward; and if there be a decoration conferred, it is he, not I,
will obtain it."
"And do you care for such baubles, my Lord?" asked D'Esmonde, in
affected surprise.
"We soldiers like these vanities as women do a new shawl, or your
priests admire a smart new vestment, in which I have seen a fellow
strut as proudly as any coxcomb in the ballet when he had completed his
pirouette. As for myself," continued he, proudly, "I hold these stars
and crosses cheaply enough. I 'd mortgage my 'San Giuseppe' to-morrow if
Morlache would give me twenty Naps, on it."
"The day of richer rewards is not distant, my Lord," said D'Esmonde.
"Lombardy will be our own ere the autumn closes, and then--and then--"
"And then we 'll cut each other's throats for the booty, you were going
to say," burst in Norwood; "but I 'm not one of those who think so,
Abb. My notion is that Austria is making a waiting race, and quietly
leaving dissension to do amongst us what the snow did for the French
at Moscow."
D'Esmonde's cheek grew pale at this shrewd surmise; but he quickly said,
----
"You mistake them, my Lord. The interests at stake are too heavy for
such a critical policy; Austria dare not risk so hazardous a game."
"The wiseheads are beginning to suspect as much," said Norwood; "and
certainly amongst the prisoners we have taken there is not a trait
of despondency nor even a doubt as to the result of the campaign. The
invariable reply to every question is, the Kaiser will have his own
again,--ay, and this even from the Hungarians. We captured a young
fellow on the afternoon of Goito, who had escaped from prison, and
actually broke his arrest to take his share in the battle. He was in
what Austrians call Stockhaus arrest, and under sentence either of death
or imprisonment for life, for treason. Well, he got out somehow, and
followed his regiment on foot till such time as one of his comrades was
knocked over; then he mounted, and I promise you he knew his work in
the saddle. Twice he charged a half-battery of twelves, and sabred our
gunners where they stood; and when at last we pushed the Austrian column
across the bridge, instead of retreating, as he might, he trusted to
saving himself by the river. It was then his horse was shot under him,
as he descended the bank, and over they both rolled into the stream. I
assure you it was no easy matter to capture him even then, and we took
him under a shower of balls from his comrades, that showed how little
his life was deemed, in comparison with the opportunity of damaging us.
When he was brought in, he was a pitiable object; his forehead was laid
open from a sabre cut, his collar-bone and left arm broken by the fall,
and a gunshot wound in the thigh, which the surgeon affirmed had every
appearance of being received early in the action. He would n't tell us
his name, or anything about his friends, for he wished to have written
to them; the only words he ever uttered were a faint attempt at 'Hurrah
for the Emperor!'"
"And this a Hungarian?" said D'Esmonde, in surprise.
"He might have been a Pole, or a Wallach, for anything I know; but he
was a hussar, and as gallant a fellow as ever I saw."
"What was the uniform, my Lord?" asked the Abb.
"Light blue, with a green chako,--they call them the regiment of Prince
Paul of Wurtemberg."
"Tell me his probable age, my Lord; and something of his appearance
generally," said D'Esmonde, with increasing earnestness.
"His age I should guess to be two or three and twenty,--not more,
certainly, and possibly even less than that In height he is taller than
I, but slighter. As to face, even with all his scars and bruises, he
looked a handsome fellow, and had a clear blue eye that might have
become an Englishman."
"You did not hear him speak?" asked the priest, with heightening
curiosity.
"Except the few words I have mentioned, he never uttered a syllable. We
learned that he had broken his arrest from one of his comrades; but the
fellow, seeing our anxiety to hear more, immediately grew reserved, and
would tell us nothing. I merely allude to the circumstance to show that
the disaffection we trust to amongst the Hungarians is not universal;
and even when they falter in their allegiance to the State, by some
strange contradiction they preserve their loyalty to the 'Kaiser.'"
"I wish I could learn more about your prisoner, my Lord," said the Abb,
thoughtfully. "The story has interested me deeply."
"Midchekoff can, perhaps, tell you something, then, for he saw him later
than I did. He accompanied the Duke of Genoa in an inspection of the
prisoners just before we left the camp."
"And you said that he had a fair and Saxon-looking face?" said the Abb.
"Faith, I 've told you all that I know of him," said Norwood,
impatiently. "He was a brave soldier, and with ten thousand like him on
our side I 'd feel far more at my ease for the result of this campaign
than with the aid of those splendid squadrons they call the 'Speranza d'
Italia'."
"And the Crociati, my Lord, what are they like?" said Morlache,
smiling.
"A horde of robbers; a set of cowardly rascals who have only courage
for cruelty; the outpourings of jails and offcasts of convents; degraded
friars and escaped galley-slaves."
"My Lord, my Lord!" interrupted Morlache, suppressing his laughter with
difficulty, and enjoying to the full this torrent of indignant anger.
"You are surely not describing faithfully the soldiers of the Pope,--the
warriors whose banners have been blessed by the Holy Father?"
"Ask their General, Ferrari, whom they have three times attempted to
murder. Ask him their character," said Norwood, passionately, "if
D'Esmonde himself will not tell you."
"Has it not been the same in every land that ever struck a blow for
liberty?" said the Abb. "Is it the statesman or the philosopher who
have racked their brains and wasted their faculties in thought for the
good of their fellow-men that have gone forth to battle? or is it not
rather the host of unquiet spirits who infest every country, and who
seek in change the prosperity that others pursue in patient industry?
Some are enthusiastic for freedom, some seek a field of personal
distinction, some are mere freebooters; but whatever they be, the cause
remains the same."
"You may be right,----for all I know you are right," said Norwood,
doggedly; "but, for my own part, I have no fancy to fight shoulder to
shoulder with cut-throats and housebreakers, even though the Church
should have hallowed them with its blessing." Norwood arose as he said
this, And walked impatiently up and down the chamber.
"When do you propose to return to the army, my Lord?" said D'Esmonde,
after a pause.
"I'm not sure; I don't even know if I shall return at all!" said
Norwood, hastily. "I see little profit and less glory in the service!
What say you, Morlache? Have they the kind of credit you would like to
accept for a loan?"
"No, my Lord," said the Jew, laughing; "Lombardy scrip would stand low
in our market. I 'd rather advance my moneys on the faith of your good
friend the Lady Hester Onslow."
Norwood bit his lip and colored, but made no reply.
"She has crossed into Switzerland, has she not?" asked D'Esmonde,
carelessly.
"Gone to England!" said the Viscount, briefly.
"When----how? I never heard of that," said the Abb. "I have put off
writing to her from day to day, never suspecting that she was about to
quit the Continent."
"Nor did she herself till about a week ago, when Sir Stafford took an
equally unexpected departure for the other world--"
"Sir Stafford dead! Lady Hester a widow!"
"Such is, I believe, the natural course of things for a woman to be when
her husband dies."
"A rich widow, too, I presume, my Lord?" said the Abb, with a quiet but
subtle glance at Norwood.
"That is more than she knows herself at this moment, I fancy; for
they say that Sir Stafford has involved his bequests with so many
difficulties, and hampered them with such a mass of conditions, that
whether she will be a millionnaire or be actually poor must depend
upon the future. I can answer for one point, however, Abb," said he,
sarcastically; "neither the Sacred College nor the blessed brethren of
the 'Pace' are like to profit by the banker's economies."
"Indeed, my Lord," said the Abb, slowly, while a sickly pallor came
over his countenance.
"He has left a certain Dr. Grounsell his executor," continued Norwood;
"and, from all that I can learn, no-man has less taste for painted
windows, stoles, or saints' shin-bones."
"Probably there may be other questions upon which he will prove equally
obdurate," said the Abb, in a voice only audible to the Viscount "Is
her Ladyship at liberty to marry again?"
"I cannot, I grieve to say, give you any information on that point,"
said Norwood, growing deep red as he spoke.
"As your Lordship is going to England--"
"I didn't say so. I don't remember that I told you that!" cried he,
hastily.
"Pardon me if I made such a palpable mistake; but it ran in my head that
you said something to that purport."
"It won't do, Abb! it won't do," said Norwood, in a low whisper. "We,
who have graduated at the 'Red House' are just as wide awake as you of
Louvain and St. Omer."
D'Esmonde looked at him with an expression of blank astonishment, and
seemed as if he had not the most vague suspicion as to what the sarcasm
referred.
"When can I have half an hour with you, Morlache?" said the Viscount
"Whenever it suits you, my Lord. What say you to to-morrow morning at
eleven?"
"No, no! let it be later; I must have a ten hours' sleep after all this
fatigue, and the sooner I begin the better."
"Where do you put up, my Lord,--at the Htel de l'Arno?" asked the Abb.
"No; I wish we were there with all my heart; but, to do us honor, they
have given us quarters at the 'Crocetto,' that dreary asylum for stray
archdukes and vagabond grand-duchesses, in the farthest end of the city.
We are surrounded with chamberlains, aides-de-camp, and guards of honor.
The only thing they have forgotten is a cook. So I 'll come and dine
here to-morrow."
"You do me great honor, my Lord. I 'm sure the Abb D'Esmonde will favor
us with his company also."
"If it be possible, I will," said the Abb. "Nothing but necessity would
make me relinquish so agreeable a prospect."
"Well, till our next meeting," said the Viscount, yawning, as he put
on his hat "It's too late to expect Midchekoff here to-night, and so
good-bye. The streets are clear by this time, I trust."
"A shrewd fellow, too," said Morlache, looking after him.
"No, Morlache, not a bit of it!" said D'Esmonde. "Such intellects bear
about the same proportion to really clever men as a good swordsman does
to a first-rate operator in surgery. They handle a coarse weapon, and
they deal with coarse antagonists. Employ them in a subtle negotiation
or a knotty problem, and you might as well ask a sergeant of the Blues
to take up the femoral artery. Did you not remark awhile ago that, for
the sake of a sneer, he actually betrayed a secret about Sir Stafford
Onslow's will?"
"And you believe all that to be true?"
"Of course I do. The only question is whether the Irish property, which,
if I remember aright, was settled on Lady Hester at her marriage, can
be fettered by any of these conditions? That alone amounts to some
thousands a year, and would be a most grateful accession to those
much-despised brethren his Lordship alluded to."
"You can learn something about that point to-morrow, when he dines
here."
"He'll not be our guest to-morrow, Morlache. I must continue to
occupy him for a day or two. He shall be invited to dine at court
to-morrow,--the request is a command,--so that you will not see him.
Receive Midchekoff if he calls, for I want to hear what he is about
here; his money requirements will soon give us the clew. And I, too,"
said he, stretching and speaking languidly,--"I, too, would be the
better of some repose; it is now thirty-six hours, Morlache, since I
closed my eyes in sleep. During that space I have written and dictated
and talked and argued, urging on the lukewarm, restraining the rash,
giving confidence to this one, preaching caution to that; and here I am,
at the end of all, with my task as far as ever from completion. Events
march faster than we, do what we will; and as the child never comes
up with the hoop he has set in motion till it has fallen, so we rarely
overtake the circumstances we have created till they have ceased to
be of any value to us. Now, at this precise moment I want to be in
the Vatican, at the camp of Goito, in the council-chamber at
Schnbrunn,--not to speak of a certain humble homestead in a far-away
Irish county; and yet I have nothing for it but to go quietly off to
bed, leaving to fortune--I believe that is as good a name for it as any
other--the course of events which, were I present, I could direct at
will. Napoleon left a great example behind him; he beat his enemies
always by rapidity. Believe me, Morlache, men think very much upon a par
in this same world of ours; the great difference being that some take
five minutes where others take five weeks: the man of minutes is sure to
win."
Just as the Abb had spoken, Norwood returned, saying,----
"By the way, can either of you tell me if Jekyl is here now?"
"I have not seen him," said Morlache, "which is almost proof that he is
not His first visit is usually to me."
The streets were silent. A few stray lamps yet flickered over the
spacious cupola of the Duomo, and a broken line of light faintly tracked
one angle of the tower of the Piazza Vecchia; but except these last
lingering signs of the late rejoicings, all Florence lay in darkness.
"How quiet is everything!" said Morlache, as he took leave of his guests
at his door.' "The streets are empty already."
"Ay," muttered the Abb, "the rejoicing, like the victory, was but
short-lived. Do our roads lie the same way, my Lord?" asked he of
Norwood.
"Very seldom, I suspect," replied the Viscount, with a laugh. "Mine is
in this direction."
"And mine lies this way," said D'Esmonde, bowing coldly, but
courteously, as he passed on, and entered the narrow street beyond the
bridge. "You are quite right, my Lord," muttered he to himself; "our
paths in life are very different. Yours may be wider and pleasanter,
but mine, with all its turnings, goes straighter." He paused and
listened for some seconds, till Norwood's steps had died away in the
distance, and then turning back, he followed in the direction the other
had taken.
Norwood walked rapidly along till he came to that small house on the
Arno where Jekyl lived, and stopping in front of it, he threw a handful
of sand against the window. To this signal, twice repeated, no reply was
given to the Viscount He waited a few seconds, and then moved on. The
Abb stood under the shadow of the tall palaces till the other was out
of sight, and then, approaching the door, gave a long, low whistle.
Within a few seconds the sash was opened, and Jekyl's voice heard,----
"It's you, Abb. There 's the key. Will you excuse ceremony, and let
yourself in?"
D'Esmonde opened the door at once, and, mounting the stairs, entered
the little chamber in which now Jekyl stood in his dressing-gown and
slippers; and although suddenly roused from sleep, with a smile of
courteous welcome on his diminutive features,----
"I paid no attention to your first signal, Abb," said he, "scarcely
thinking it could be you."
"Nor was it," said D'Esmonde, seating himself. "It was Lord Norwood, who
doubtless must have had some important reason for disturbing you at this
hour. I waited till he went off before I whistled. When did you arrive?"
"About three hours ago. I came from Lucerne, and was obliged to take
such a zig-zag course, the roads being all blocked up by marching
soldiers, guns, and wagons, that I have been eight days making the
journey of three."
"So, Lady Hester is a widow! Strange, I only heard it an hour ago."
"The post has been interrupted, or you would have known it a week back.
I wrote to you from Zurich. I accompanied her so far on her way to
England, and was to have gone the whole way, too, but she determined to
send me back here."
"Not to settle her affairs in Florence," said D'Esmonde, with a quiet
slyness.
"Rather to look after Lord Norwood's," said Jekyl. "I never could
exactly get to the bottom of the affair; but I suppose there must be
some pledge or promise which, in a rash moment, she has made him, and
that already she repents of."
"How has she been left in the will?" asked D'Esmonde, abruptly.
"Her own words are, 'Infamously treated.' Except a bequest of ten
thousand pounds, nothing beyond the Irish estate settled at the time of
her marriage."
"She will easily get rid of Norwood, then," rejoined the Abb, with a
smile. "His price is higher."
"I'm not so sure of that," broke in Jekyl; "the noble Viscount's late
speculations have all proved unfortunate, even to his book on Carlo
Alberto. He thinks he has gone wrong in not hedging on Radetzky."
"What does he know of the changes of politics?" said D'Esmonde,
contemptuously. "Let him stick to his stablemen and the crafty youths
of Newmarket, but leave state affairs for other and very different
capacities. Does she care for him, Jekyl? Does she love him?"
"She does, and she does not," said Jekyl, with a languishing air,
which he sometimes assumed when asked for an opinion. "She likes his
fashionable exterior, his easy kind of drawing-room assurance, and,
perhaps not least of all, the tone of impertinent superiority he
displays towards all other men; but she is afraid of him,----afraid
of his temper and his tyrannical humor, and terribly afraid of his
extravagance."
"How amusing it is!" said D'Esmonde, with a yawn. "A minister quits
the cabinet in disgust, and retires into private life forever, when his
first step is to plot his return to power. So your widow is invariably
found weighing the thoughts of her mourning with speculations on a
second husband. Why need she marry again; tell me that?"
"Because she is a widow, perhaps. I know no other reason," lisped out
Jekyl.
"I cannot conceive a greater folly than that of these women, with ample
fortune, sacrificing their independence by marriage. The whole world is
their own, if they but knew it. They command every source of enjoyment
while young, and have all the stereotyped solaces of old age when it
comes upon them; and with poodles, parrots, and parasites, mornings of
scandal and evenings of whist, eke out a very pretty existence."
"Dash the whole with a little religion, Abb," cried Jekyl, laughing,
"and the picture will be tolerably correct."
"She shall not marry Lord Norwood; that, at least, I can answer for,"
said D'Esmonde, not heeding the other.
"It will be difficult to prevent it, Abb," said the other, dryly.
"Easier than you think for. Come, Master Jekyl, assume a serious mood
for once, and pay attention to what I am about to say. This line of life
you lead cannot go on forever. Even were your own great gifts to resist
time and its influences, a new generation will spring up with other
wants and requirements, and another race will come who knew not Joseph.
With all your versatility it will be late to study new models, and
acquire a new tongue. Have you speculated, then, I ask you, on this
contingency?"
"I 've some thoughts of a 'monkery,'" lisped out Jekyl; "if the good
folk could only be persuaded to adopt a little cleanliness."
"Would not marriage suit you better; a rich widow, titled,
well-connected, and good-looking, of fashionable habits, and tastes that
resemble your own?"
"There are difficulties in the case," said Jekyl, calmly.
"State them," rejoined the Abb.
"To begin. There is Lady Hester herself,--for, of course, you mean
her."
"I engage to solve all on that head."
"Then there is the Viscount."
"For him, too, I hold myself responsible."
"Lastly, there is Albert Jekyl, who, however admirably he understands
garon life, might discover that the husband was not among the range of
his characters. As it is, my dear Abb, I lead a very pretty existence.
I am neither bored nor tormented, I never quarrel with anybody, nor is
the rudest man ever discourteous to me. I possess nothing that any one
envies, except that heaven-born disposition to be pleased, of which
nothing can rob me. I dine well, drive in rich equipages, and, if I
liked, might ride the best horses; have at least a dozen Opera-boxes
ready to receive me, and sweeter smiles to welcome me than would become
me to boast of."
"Well, then, my proposal is to give you all these on a life interest
instead of being a tenant-at-will," broke in D'Esmonde.
"And all this out of pure regard for me?" asked Jekyl, with a sly look.
"As a pure matter of bargain," replied D'Esmonde. "Lady Hester has
advanced large sams to the cause in which I am interested. It would be
difficult, perhaps impossible, to repay them. We still want means, and
that ten thousand pounds' legacy would render us immense service at this
moment. Her income can well spare the sacrifice."
"Yes, yes," said Jekyl, musingly; and then looking fondly at his own
image in the glass, he said, "I shall be a dead bargain, after all."
D'Esmonde bit his lip to repress some movement of impatience, and after
a pause said,----
"This matter does not admit of delay. Circumstances will soon require my
presence in England, and with a strong sum at my command; besides--"
"If I understand you aright," said Jekyl, "You are to conduct the whole
negotiations to a successful end, and that I shall have neither a bill
to endorse, nor a duel to fight, throughout the affair."
"You shall be scathless."
"There is another point," said Jekyl, quickly. "How shall I figure in
the newspapers,--Albert Jekyl, Esquire, of where? Have you thought of
that? I wish I had even an uncle a baronet."
"Pooh, pooh!" said D'Esmonde, impatiently. "You marry into the peerage;
that's quite enough."
"Perhaps you 're right," said Jekyl. "All that enumeration of
family connection----'niece to the Chief Justice of Rembouk,' or
'cousin-german to the Vice-Consul at Gumdalloo'--smacks terribly of
'Moses and Son.'"
"We are agreed, then," said the Abb, rising.
"I swear," said Jekyl, rising, and throwing out his hand in the attitude
of the well-known picture of the "Marshals." "The step that I am about
to take will throw its gloom over many a dinner-party, and bring sadness
into many a salon; but I 'll retire at least with dignity, and, like
Napoleon, I'll write my memoirs."
"So far, then, so good," said D'Esmonde; "now, with your leave, I
throw myself on this sofa and snatch an hour's sleep." And ere Jekyl
had arranged the folds of what he called his "sable pelisse" as a
covering, the Abb was in deep slumber.
CHAPTER XXV. PRIESTCRAFT.
With less than two hours of sleep, D'Esmonde arose refreshed and ready
for the day. Jekyl was not awake as the priest quitted his quarters,
and, repairing to his own lodgings, dressed himself with more than
usual care. Without any of the foppery of the Abb, there was a studied
elegance in every detail of his costume, and as he stepped into the
carriage which awaited him, many turned their looks of admiration at the
handsome priest.
"To the Crocetto," said he, and away they went.
It was already so early that few persons were about as they drove into
the court of the palace, and drew up at a private door. Here D'Esmonde
got out and ascended the stairs.
"Ah, Monsignore!" said a young man, somewhat smartly Attired in a
dressing-gown and velvet cap. "He did not return here last night."
"Indeed!" said the Abb, pondering.
"He dismissed the carriage at the Pitti, so that in all likelihood he
passed the night at the palace."
"Most probably," said D'Esmonde, with a bland smile; And then, with a
courteous "Good-morning," he returned to his carriage.
"Where to, Signore?" asked the driver.
"Towards the Duomo," said he. But scarcely had the man turned the second
corner, than he said, "To the 'Moskova,' Prince Midchekoffs villa."
"We 're turning our back to it, Signore. It's on the hill of Fiesole."
D'Esmonde nodded, but said no more. Although scarcely a league from
the city, the way occupied a considerable time, being one continued and
steep ascent. The Abb was, however, too deeply engaged with his own
thoughts to bestow attention on the pace they journeyed, or the scene
around. He was far from being insensible to the influence of the
picturesque or the beautiful; but now other and weightier considerations
completely engrossed his mind, nor was he aware how the moments passed
till the carriage came to a stop.
"The Prince is absent, sir, in Lombardy," said a gruff-looking porter
from within the gate.
D'Esmonde descended, and whispered some words between the bars.
"But my orders----my orders!" said the man, in a tone of deference.
"They would be peremptory against any other than me," said D'Esmonde,
calmly; and, after a few seconds' pause, the man unlocked the gate, and
the carriage passed in.
"To the back entrance," called out D'Esmonde. And they drove into
a spacious courtyard, where a number of men were engaged in washing
carriages, cleaning horses, and all the other duties of the stable. One
large and cumbrous vehicle, loaded with all the varied "accessories" of
the road, and fortified by many a precaution against the accidents of
the way, stood prominent. It was covered with stains and splashes,
and bore unmistakable evidence of a long Journey. A courier, with
a red-brown beard descending to his breast, was busy in locking and
unlocking the boxes, as if in search of some missing article.
"How heavy the roads are in the north!" said D'Esmonde, addressing him
in German.
The man touched his cap in a half-sullen civility, and muttered an
assent.
"I once made the same journey myself, in winter," resumed the Abb,
"and I remembered thinking that no man undergoes such real hardship as
a courier. Sixteen, seventeen, ay, twenty days and nights of continued
exposure to cold and snows, and yet obliged to have all his faculties
on full stretch the whole time, to remember every post station, every
bridge and ferry,--the steep mountain passes, where oxen must be
hired,--the frontiers of provinces, where passports are vised."
"Ay, and when the lazy officials will keep you standing in the deep snow
a full hoar at midnight, while they ring every copeck to see it be good
money."
"That's the true and only metal for a coinage," said D'Esmonde, as he
drew forth a gold Napoleon, and placed it in the other's hand. "Take it,
my worthy fellow," said he; "it's part of a debt I owe to every man who
wears the courier's jacket. Had it not been for one of your cloth, I
'd have been drowned at the ford of Ostrovitsch."
"It's the worst ferry in the Empire," said the courier. "The Emperor
himself had a narrow escape there. The raft is one half too small."
"How many days have you taken on the way?" asked D'Esmonde, carelessly
"Twenty-eight--yesterday would have made the twenty-ninth--but we
arrived before noon."
"Twenty-eight days!" repeated D'Esmonde, pondering.
"Ay, and nights too! But remember that Vradskoi Noteki is three hundred
and eighty versts below St. Petersburg."
"I know it well," said D'Esmonde, "and with a heavily loaded carriage
it's a weary road. How did she bear the journey?" said he, in a low,
scarcely uttered whisper.
"Bear it I----better than I did; and, except when scolding the
postilions for not going twelve versts an hour, in deep snow, she
enjoyed herself the entire way."
D'Esmonde gave a knowing look and a smile, as though to say that he
recognized her thoroughly in the description.
"You know her, then?" asked the courier.
"This many a year," replied the Abb, with a faint sigh.
"She's a rare one," said the man, who grew at each instant more
confidential, "and thinks no more of a gold rouble than many another
would of a copeck. Is it true, as they say, she was once an actress?"
"There are stranger stories than that about her," said D'Esmonde. "But
why has she come alone? How happens it that she is here?"
"That is the secret that none of us can fathom," said the courier. "We
thought there was to have been another, and I believe there is another
in the passport, but it was no affair of mine. I had my orders from the
Prince's own 'intendant,' who bespoke all the relays for the road, and
here we are."
"I will explain all the mystery to you at another time, courier," said
D'Esmonde; "meanwhile, let nothing of what we have been saying escape
you. By the way," added he, half carelessly, "what name did she travel
under?"
"The passport was made out 'Die Grfin von Dalton;' but she has a
Spanish name, for I heard it once from the intendant."
"Was it Lola de Seviglia?"
"That was it. I remember it well."
"We are very old friends indeed!" said the Abb; "and now be cautious;
let none know that we have spoken together, and I can serve your fortune
hereafter."
The German scarcely looked quite satisfied with himself for the
confidence he had been unwittingly led into; "but, after all," thought
he, "the priest knew more than I could tell him;" and so he resumed his
search without further thought of the matter.
As for D'Esmonde, his first care was to inquire for Monsieur de Grasse,
the Prince's chief secretary, with whom he remained closeted for nigh
an hour. It will not be necessary to inflict all the detail of that
interview on the reader; enough that we state its substance to have
been a pressing entreaty on the part of D'Esmonde to be admitted to
an audience of the Prince, as firmly resisted by the secretary, whose
orders were not to admit any one, nor, indeed, acknowledge that his
Highness was then there.
"You must wait upon him at the Crocetto, Monsignore," said De Grasse.
"Your presence here will simply cause the dismissal of those who have
admitted you, and yet never advance your own wishes in the least."
"My business is too urgent, sir, to be combated by reasons so weak as
these," replied D'Esmonde; "nor am I much accustomed to the air of an
antechamber."
"You must yet be aware, Monsignore, that the orders of Prince Midchekoff
are absolute in his own house." The secretary dropped his voice almost
to a whisper as he finished this sentence, for he had just overheard
the Prince speaking to some one without, and could detect his step as he
came along the corridor.
With a look of most meaning entreaty he besought the Abb to keep
silence, while he crept noiselessly over and turned the key. D'Esmonde
uttered an exclamation of anger, and, sweeping past a window, within
which stood a magnificent vase of malachite, he caught the costly object
in the wide folds of his gown, and dashed it to the ground in a thousand
pieces. De Grasse gave a sudden cry of horror, and at the same instant
Midchekoff knocked at the door, and demanded admittance. With faltering
hand the secretary turned the key, and the Prince entered the room,
casting his eyes from D'Esmonde to the floor, where the fragments lay,
and back again to the priest, with a significance that showed how he
interpreted the whole incident. As for the Abb, he looked as coldly
indifferent to the accident as though it were the veriest trifle he had
destroyed.
"I came to have a few moments' interview with you, Prince," said he,
calmly; "can you so far oblige me?"
"I am entirely at your orders, Monsignore," said the Russian, with a
faint smile. "Allow me to conduct you to a chamber in less disorder than
this one."
The Abb bowed, and followed him, not seeming to hear the allusion. And
now, passing through a number of rooms, whose gorgeous furniture
was carefully covered, they reached a small chamber opening upon a
conservatory, where a breakfast-table was already spread.
"I will waste neither your time nor my own, Prince, by an apology for
the hour of this visit, nor the place; my business did not admit of
delay--that will excuse me in your eyes."
The Prince gave a cold bow, but never spoke.
D'Esmonde resumed. "I have heard the news from the camp: Lord Norwood
tells me that the Austrians have fallen back, and with a heavy loss
too."
"Not heavy!" said the Russian, with a smile.
"Enough, however, to raise the hopes and strengthen the courage of the
others. Goito was, at least, a victory." A faint shrug of the shoulders
was the only reply the Prince made, and the Abb went on: "Things are
too critical, Prince, to treat the event slightingly. We cannot answer
either for France or England; still less can we rely on the politicians
of Vienna. A second or a third reverse, and who can say that they will
not treat for a peace, at the cost of half the States of Lombardy. Nay,
sir, I am not speaking without book," added he, more warmly; "I know--I
repeat it----I know that such a negotiation has been entertained,
and that at this moment the Cabinet of England has the matter in its
consideration."
"It may be so," said the Prince, carelessly, as he poured out his
coffee.
"Then there is not a moment to be lost," cried the Abb, impetuously. "A
cession of the Milanais means a Republic of Upper Italy,--the downfall
of the Popedom,--the rule of infidelity over the Peninsula. Are
we--are you prepared for this? Enough has been done to show that
Italian 'unity' is a fiction. Let us complete the lesson by proving that
they cannot meet the Austrian in arms. The present generation, at least,
will not forget the chastisement, if it be but heavy enough."
"We may leave that task to the Imperialists," said the Prince, with a
cold smile.
"I do not think so. I know too much of German sluggishness and apathy.
The reinforcements, that should pour in like a flood, creep lazily
along. The dread of France--the old terror of those wars that once
crushed them--is still uppermost. They know not how far Europe will
permit them to punish a rebellious province; and while they hesitate,
they give time for the growth of that public opinion that will condemn
them."
"Perhaps you are right," said the Russian, as he sipped his coffee
carelessly.
"And if I be," cried D'Esmonde, passionately, "are we to sit tranquilly
here till the ruin overtake us? Will Russia wait till the flame of a
red republic throws its lurid glare over Europe, and even gleam over
the cold waters of the Neva? Is it her wish, or to her benefit, that the
flag of the democrat and the infidel is to float over the Continent?"
"You conjured up the monster yourself, Monsignore. It is for you to
order him back to the depths he came from."
"And we are ready for the task," said the priest. "We fostered this
revolt, because we saw it was better to lop off a diseased limb than to
suffer the gangrene to spread over the entire body; better to cast down
into utter perdition the wild democrats, who but half believed us, than
peril the countless millions of true Catholics. Nay, more, we acted with
your counsel and concurrence. That revolt has already borne its fruits.
Men see no issue to the struggle they are engaged in. The men of
moderation are overborne by the wild clamor of the factionist. Anarchy
is amongst them, and now is our moment to bid the contest cease, and
earn from mankind the glorious epithet of 'peacemaker.' The tide of
victory once turned, see how the mind of Europe will turn with it. Good
wishes are prone to go with the battalions that advance!"
"Good wishes are not too costly a sympathy," said the Russian, coolly.
"It is to that point I am coming, Prince," said the Abb; "nor have
I intruded myself on your privacy to-day merely to discuss the public
opinion of Europe. The whole of this question lies in a narrow compass.
It is time that this struggle should cease,--it is, at least, time that
the tide of conquest should turn. Were Austria free to use her strength,
we might trust the issue to herself; but she is not, and we must help
her. I hold here the means," said he, placing on the table a heavy
pocket-book crammed with letters. "This," said he, taking up one large
sealed packet, "is an autograph from his Holiness, commanding Durando to
halt at the Po, and under no circumstances to cross the frontier.
This," continued he, showing another, "is to Ghirardi, to grant leave of
absence to all officers who desire to return to their homes. This is to
Krasaletzki, to provide for the disbandment of his legion. The King
of Naples waits but for the signal to recall General Pepe and his
contingent, fifteen thousand strong. And now, Prince, there is but one
other voice in Europe we wait for--the Czar's!"
"His Imperial Majesty has ever wished well to the cause of order," said
the Russian, with a studied calm of manner.
"Away with such trifling as this!" said D'Esmonde, passionately; "nor
do not try to impose on me by those courteous generalities that amuse
cabinets. Russia speaks to Western Europe best by her gold. The 'rouble'
can come where the 'Cossack' cannot! There are men with those armies
that comprehend no other argument----whose swords have their price. Our
treasures are exhausted; the sacred vessels of our altars--the golden
ornaments of our shrines--are gone. You alone can aid us at this moment.
It is no barren generosity, Prince! you are combating your Poles more
cheaply beside the Po and the Adige than on the banks of the Vistula!
you are doing more! you are breaking up those ancient alliances of
Europe whose existence excluded you from continental power! you are
buying your freedom to sit down among the rulers of the Old World, and
accustoming the nations of the West to the voice of the Boyard in their
councils! And, greatest of all, you are crushing into annihilation that
spirit of revolt that now rages like a pestilence. But why do I speak
of these things to one like you? you know full well the terms of the
compact Your own handwriting has confessed it."
Midchekoff gave a slight--a very slight--movement of surprise, but never
spoke.
"Yes," continued D'Esmonde, "I have within that pocket-book at this
moment the receipt of Count Grnenburg, the Austrian Secretary-at-War,
for the second instalment of a loan advanced by Prince Midchekoff to the
Imperial Government. I have a copy of the order in council acknowledging
in terms of gratitude the aid, and recommending that the cross of
St. Stephen should be conferred on the illustrious lender. And, less
gracious than these," added he, with sarcastic bitterness, "I have the
record of the Emperor's scruples about according the first-class order
of the Empire to one whose nobility was but left-handed. Were these to
appear to-morrow in the Razionale, is it only your pride as a prince
that would be humbled? Or think you that a single stone would rest upon
another in this gorgeous edifice where we are standing? Who or what
could restrain an infuriated populace from wreaking their vengeance on
the traitor? Who would lift a hand against the pillage of this splendor,
and the desecration of this magnificence? It is not willingly that I
tell you these things, nor had I ever spoken of them if you had but
heard me with fitting attention. I know, too, the price at which they
are uttered. We never can be friends; but that is of small moment Our
cause--ours, I say, for it is yours no less than mine--is above such
consideration."
"How much do you require?" said Midchekoff, as he leaned his arm on the
chimney-piece, and stared calmly at the Abb.
"Ghirardi and his staff demand two hundred thousand francs; Albizi will
be a cheaper bargain. Marionetti and his force will be surrounded, and
retire from Lombardy on parole of not serving during the campaign,----he
only asks enough to emigrate with. Then, there is the Commissary of
the Crociati,--he is quite ready to become his own paymaster. There
are others of inferior rank and pretensions, with whom I shall treat
personally. The press, particularly of England, will be the difficulty;
but its importance is above all price. The public mind must be brought
back, from its sympathy for a people, to regard the rulers more
favorably. Anarchy and misrule must be displayed in their most glaring
colors. The Crociati will do us good service here; their crimes would
sully a holier crusade than this! But I weary you, sir," said the Abb,
stopping suddenly, and observing that Midchekoff, instead of seeming to
listen, was busily occupied in writing.
"Morlache holds bills of mine to this amount," said the Prince, showing
a list of several large sums; "he will place them at your disposal
on your giving a receipt for them. This is an order, also, regarding
certain emeralds I have commissioned him to have mounted in gold. He
need not do so, but will dispose of the gems, as I shall not want them."
A very slight flush here colored his cheek, and he paused as if some
bitter thought had crossed his mind.
D'Esmonde's quick eye read the meaning of the expression, and he said,
"Am I to congratulate your Highness on the approach of a certain happy
event?"
"His Majesty has not deigned to accord me the necessary permission," was
the reply.
"Then I will be bold enough to say I congratulate you," cried D'Esmonde.
"Your alliance should be with a royal house, Prince. Your position in
Europe is exceptional; such should be your marriage. Besides, the day
is not very distant when there must come another dissection of the map
of Europe. There will be new principalities, but wanting heads to rule
them. The world is tired of Coburgs, and would gladly see another name
amongst its royalties."
"I am at the disposal of my Emperor," said Midchekoff, coldly; for
whatever effect the flatteries might produce within, neither his words
nor his looks would betray it, and now by his manner he showed that he
wished the interview over.
"Mademoiselle, then, returns to her family?" asked D'Esmonde.
"To the care of the Count von Auersberg."
"The reputation of having attracted your Highness will be a fortune to
her."
"She has refused a settlement of eighty thousand roubles a year."
"A most princely offer!" cried D'Esmonde.
"His Majesty fixed the sum," said Midchekoff, as coolly as though
talking of an indifferent matter.
D'Esmonde now rose to take his leave, but there was a reluctance in his
manner that showed he was unwilling to go. At last he said, "Does your
Highness intend to return to the camp?"
"The day after to-morrow."
"I ask," said the Abb, "inasmuch as I am hourly in expectation of
hearing from Cardinal Maraffa with reference to a certain decoration
which you should long since have received----"
"Indeed! has his Holiness been pleased to consider me amongst his most
ardent well-wishers?" cried the Prince, interrupting.
"I may be in a position to assure your Highness on that score before
another day elapses. May I hope that you will receive me, even at some
inconvenience, for my time is much occupied just now?"
"Whenever you call, Monsieur l'Abb," was the prompt reply. "If you will
deign to accept this ring as a souvenir of me, it will also serve to
admit you at all hours and in all places to me."
"Your costly gift, Prince," said D'Esmonde, flushing, "has a greater
value in my eyes than all its lustre can express." And with a most
affectionate leave-taking they parted.
"At what hour is the Prince's carriage ordered?" said the Abb, as he
passed through the hall.
"For two o'clock precisely, Monsignore. He is to have an audience at the
Pitti."
"To Florence----and with speed!" said D'Esmonde to his coachman; and
away they drove.
CHAPTER XXVI. THE "MOSKOVA."
The Abb D'Esmonde passed a busy morning. Twice was he closeted with
the President of the Ministry, and once was he received in a lengthy
audience at the "Pitti;" after which he repaired to the house of
Morlache, where he remained till after two o'clock.
"There goes Midchekoff to the Palace," said the Jew, as a handsome
equipage drove past.
"Then it is time for me to be away," said D'Esmonde, rising. "I have
received orders to meet him there. Remember, Morlache, I must have this
sum in gold, ready by the evening; the bills on London can reach me by
post."
"All shall be attended to," said Morlache; and the Abb entered his
carriage once more, giving orders for the Pitti.
When the carriage had passed the first turning, however, D'Esmonde
appeared to have remembered something that till then had escaped him,
and he desired the man to drive round to the San Gallo gate; thence he
directed his way to the narrow road which traverses the valley of the
Mugello, and winds along for miles at the foot of the hill of Fiesole.
Once outside the city, D'Esmonde urged the man to speed, and they drove
for nigh an hour at a rapid pace.
"There is a footpath somewhere hereabouts leads to Fiesole," said
D'Esmonde, springing out, and casting his eyes around. "I have it Remain
here till I come down. I may be absent for an hour or more; but be sure
to wait for me." And so saying, he passed into a vineyard beside the
road, and was soon lost to view.
The pathway was steep and rugged; but D'Esmonde traversed it with an
active step, scarcely seeming to bestow a thought upon its difficulties,
in the deeper preoccupation of his mind. As little did he notice the
peasant greetings that met him, or hear the kindly accents that bade him
"good-day" as he went. If at intervals he stopped in his career, it was
rather to take breath and to recruit vigor for new efforts, than to look
down upon the gorgeous scene that now lay beneath him. For an instant,
however, his thoughts did stray to the objects in view; and as he beheld
the dark towers of a gloomy castellated building, half hid amongst tall
yew-trees, he muttered,----
"Deeper and darker schemes than mine were once enacted there!--and what
fruits have they borne after all? They who convulsed the age they lived
in have never left an impress to ruffle the future, and, for aught that
we know or feel, the Medici might never have lived. And this," cried he,
aloud, "because theirs was a selfish ambition. There is but one cause
whose interests are eternal,--the Church; that glorious creation which
combines power here with triumph hereafter!" His face, as he uttered
the words, was no bad emblem of the nature within,----a high and noble
brow, lit up by the impress of a great ambition, and, beneath, eyes
of changeful and treacherous meaning; while, lower down again, in
the compressed lips and projecting chin might be read the signs of an
unrelenting spirit. Passing along through many a tortuous path, he at
last reached a small private gate which led into the grounds of the
"Moskova." He had to bethink him for a moment of the way which conducted
to the gardens, but he soon remembered the direction, and walked on.
It was the hour when in Italy the whole face of a country, the busiest
streets of a thronged city, are deserted, and a stillness far more
unbroken than that of midnight prevails. The glowing hours of noonday
had brought the "siesta," and not a laborer was to be seen in the
fields.
D'Esmonde found the garden unlocked, and entered. He knew that by
passing directly onward to the "orangery" he could enter the villa by
a small door, which led into the private apartments of the Prince. This
was, however, locked; but the window lay open, and with a spring he
gained the sill and entered the chamber. He knew it well; it was the
little room appropriated by Midchekoff as his private library, simply
furnished, and connected with a still smaller chamber, where, in an
alcove, a species of divan stood, on which it was the rich man's caprice
at times to pass the night Although certain traces showed that the
Prince had been recently there, no letters nor papers lay about;
there was no sign of haste or negligence, nor was anything left to the
accidents of prying eyes or meddling fingers. D'Esmonde opened the door
which conducted into the corridor, and listened; but all was silent He
then sat down to think. The palace--for such, under the name of villa,
it was--was of immense extent, and he could not expect to ramble many
minutes without chancing upon some of the household. His color came
and went, as, in deep agitation, he conceived in turn every possible
project, for he was one whose mind worked with all the violent throes
of some mighty engine; and even when taking counsel with himself, the
alternate impulses of his reason became painful efforts. At last he made
up his resolve, and, entering the inner chamber, he closed the shutters
and drew the curtains; and then, throwing around his shoulders a richly
lined cloak of sable, he rang the bell loudly and violently. This done,
he lay down upon the divan, which, in the darkness of the recess, was in
complete obscurity. He had barely time to draw the folds of the mantle
about him, when a servant entered, with noiseless step, and stood at
a respectful distance, awaiting what he believed to be his master's
orders.
"Send the Sigora," muttered D'Esmonde, with the cloak folded across his
mouth, and then turned on his side. The servant bowed and retired.
D'Esmonde started up, and listened to the retiring footfalls, till they
were lost in distance, and then the strong pulsations of his own heart
seemed to mock their measured pace. "Would the stratagem succeed?"
"Would she come, and come alone?" were the questions which he asked
himself, as his clasped hands were clinched, and his lips quivered in
strong emotion. An unbroken stillness succeeded, so long that, to his
aching senses, it seemed like hours of time. At last a heavy door
was heard to bang; another, too,--now voices might be detected in the
distance; then came footsteps, it seemed, as of several people; and,
lastly, these died away, and he could mark the sweeping sounds of a
female dress coming rapidly along the corridor. The door opened and
closed; she was in the library, and appeared to be waiting. D'Esmonde
gave a low, faint cough; and now, hastily passing on, she entered the
inner chamber, and, with cautious steps traversing the darkened space,
she knelt down beside the couch. D'Esmonde's hand lay half uncovered,
and on this now another hand was gently laid. Not a word was uttered by
either; indeed, their very breathings seemed hushed into stillness.
If the secrets of hearts were open to us, what a history, what a
life-long experience lay in those brief moments! and what a conflict
of passion might be read in those two natures! A slight shudder shook
D'Esmonde's frame at the touch of that hand which so often had been
clasped within his own, long, long ago, and he raised it tenderly, and
pressed it to his lips. Then, passing his other arm around her, so as
to prevent escape, he said, but in a voice barely audible, the one word,
"Lola!"
With a violent effort she tried to disengage herself from his grasp;
and although her struggles were great, not a cry, not a syllable escaped
her. "Hear me, Lola," said D'Esmonde; "hear me with patience and with
calm, if not for my sake, for your own."
"Unhand me, then," said she, in a voice which, though low, was uttered
with all the vehemence of strong emotion. "I am not a prisoner beneath
this roof."
"Not a prisoner, say you?" said D'Esmonde, as he locked the door, and
advanced towards her. "Can there be any bondage compared to this? Does
the world know of any slavery so debasing?"
"Dare to utter such words again, and I will call to my aid those who
will hurl you from that window," said she, in the same subdued accents.
"That priestly robe will be but a poor defence here."
"You'd scarcely benefit by the call, Lola," said D'Esmonde, as he stole
one hand within the folds of his robe.
"Would you kill me?" cried she, growing deathly pale.
"Be calm, and hear me," said the priest, as he pressed her down upon
a seat, and took one directly opposite to her. "It never could be my
purpose, Lola, to have come here either to injure or revile you. I may,
indeed, sorrow over the fall of one whose honorable ambitions might have
soared so high; I may grieve for a ruin that was so causeless; but, save
when anguish may wring from me a word of bitterness, I will not hurt
your ears, Lola. I know everything,--all that has happened; yet have I
to learn who counselled you to this flight."
"Here was my adviser,----here!" said she, pressing her hand firmly
against her side. "My heart, bursting and indignant,----my slighted
affection,----my rejected love! you ask me this,----you, who knew how I
loved him."
For some seconds her emotion overcame her, and, as she covered her face
with her hands, she swayed and rocked from side to side, like one in
acute bodily pain.
"I stooped to tell him all,--how I had thought and dreamed of him; how
followed his footsteps; sought out the haunts that he frequented, and
loved to linger in the places where he had been. I told him, too, of one
night when I had even ventured to seek him in his own chamber, and was
nearly detected by another who chanced to be there; my very dress was
torn in my flight. There was no confession too humiliating for my lips
to utter, nor my pen to trace; and what has been the return? But why do
I speak of these things to one whose heart is sealed against affection,
and whose nature rejects the very name of love? you will be a merciless
judge, Eustace!"
[Illustration: 362]
"Go on; let me hear you out, Lola," said the priest, gently.
"The tale is soon told," rejoined she, hurriedly. "My letter reached him
on the eve of a great battle. The army, it appears, had been marching
for weeks, and suddenly came upon the enemy without expecting it. He
told me so much in about as many words, and said that he was passing
what might, perhaps, prove his last hours of life in replying to me.
'Outnumbered and outmanoeuvred, nothing remains but to sell our lives
dearly, and even in our defeat make the name of Englishmen one of terror
to our enemies.' So he wrote, and so I could have read, with a swelling
but not a breaking heart, had he not added that, for my warm affection,
my whole soul's devotion, he had nothing but his friendship to give in
return; that his heart had long since been another's, and that, although
she never could be his, never in all likelihood know of his affection,
he would die with her name upon his lips, her image in his heart. 'It
matters little,' added he, 'in what channel flow the feelings of one,
where to-morrow, in all likelihood, the course will be dried up forever.
Let me, however, with what may be the last lines I shall ever write,
thank you--nay, bless you--for one passage of your letter, and the
thought of which will nerve my heart in the conflict now so near, and
make me meet my last hour with an unbroken spirit.' The mystery of these
words I never could penetrate, nor have I the slightest clew to their
meaning. But why should I care for them? Enough that I am slighted,
despised, and rejected! This letter came to my hands six weeks ago. I at
once wrote to the Prince Midchekoff, telling him that the woman he was
about to marry loved, and was loved, by another; that she entertained no
feeling towards himself but of dread and terror. I told him, too, that
her very beauty would not withstand the inroads of a sorrow that was
corroding her heart He replied to me, and I wrote again. I was now his
confidante, and he told me all,----how that he had addressed a formal
demand to the Emperor for leave to marry, and how he had taken safe
measures to have his prayer rejected. Then came the tidings of the
Czar's refusal to Madame de Heidendorf, and my triumph; for I told
her, and to her face, that once more we were equals. It was then, stung
by this taunt, that she refused to travel with me, refused to accept the
splendid dowry to which her betrothal entitled her, and demanded to be
restored to her family and friends, poor as she had left them. It was
then that I resolved on this bold step. I had long been learning the
falsehood of what are called friends, and how he who would achieve
fortune must trust to himself alone. Midchekoff might not love me, but
there was much in my power to secure his esteem. My head could be as
fertile in schemes as his own. I had seen much and heard more. The
petty plottings of the Heidendorf and the darker counsels of the Abb
D'Esmonde were all known to me--"
"You did not dare to write my name?" asked the priest, in a slow,
deliberate voice.
"And why should I not?" cried she, haughtily. "Is it fear, or is it
gratitude should hold my hand?"
"You forget the past, Lola, or you had never said these words."
"I remember it but as a troubled dream, which I will not suffer to
darken my waking hours. At last I begin to live, and never till now have
I known the sensation of being above fear."
"You told the Prince, then, of our relations together? You showed him my
letters and your own replies?" said D'Esmonde, as he fixed his dark eyes
upon her.
"All,--all!" said she, with a haughty smile.
"You, perhaps, told him that I had engaged you to write to me of all you
heard or saw at St Petersburg?"
"I said so, in a most unpolished phrase: I called myself a spy."
"You were probably not less candid when designating your friends, Lola,"
said D'Esmonde, with a faint smile. "How, pray, did you name me?"
"It was a better word,----one of cutting reproach, believe me," said
she. "I called you a 'priest,' sir; do you think there is another
epithet that can contain as much?"
"In the overflowing of those frank impulses, Lola, of course you spoke
of Norwood,--of Gerald Acton, I mean, as you may remember him better by
that name. You told the Prince of your marriage to this Englishman,--a
marriage solemnized by myself, and of which I retain the written
evidence."
"With the falsehood that for a brief moment imposed upon myself, I would
not stoop to cheat another! No, Eustace, this may be priestcraft. To
outlive a deception, and then employ it; to tremble at a fallacy first,
and to terrorize by means of it after, is excellent Popery, but most
sorry womanhood!"
"Unhappy, wretched creature!" cried D'Esmonde; "where have you learned
these lessons?--who could have taught you this?"
"You,--and you alone, Eustace. In reading your nature I unread my own
faith. In seeing your falsehood, I learned to believe there was no truth
anywhere. I asked myself, what must be the religion if this man be its
interpreter?"
"Hold,----hold!" cried D'Esmonde, passionately. "It is not to such as
you I can render account of my actions, nor lay bare the secret workings
of my heart. Know this much, however, woman, and ponder over it well;
that if a man like me can make shipwreck of his whole nature, crush
his hopes, and blast his budding affections, the cause that exacts
the sacrifice must needs be holy. Bethink you that my goal is not like
yours. I have not plotted for a life of inglorious ease. I have not
schemed to win a pampered and voluptuous existence. It is not in a
whirlwind of passionate enjoyment I have placed the haven of my hopes.
you see me--as I have ever been--poor, meanly housed, and meanly fed;
not repining at my lot either, not deeming my condition a hard one. Why
am I thus, then? Are the prizes that worldly men contend for above
my reach? Am I the inferior of those who are carrying away the great
rewards of life? Where is the stain of falsehood in all this?"
"Were I to copy the picture and paint myself in the same colors,"
said Lola,----"were I to show what I have stooped to,--a scoff and
a shame!--how I neither faltered at a crime nor trembled before
exposure----all that I might be--what I now am--"
"The mistress of a Prince!" said D'Esmonde, with a contemptuous smile.
"Was it a prouder fortune when my lover was the serge-clad seminarist of
Salamanca?" said she, laughing scornfully.
"I linked you with a higher destiny, Lola," said D'Esmonde,
deliberately.
"Again you refer to this pretended marriage. But I put no faith in your
words; nor, were they even true, should they turn me from my path."
"At least you should confirm your claim to his name and title," said
D'Esmonde. "The rank you will thus attain will but strengthen your
position in the world; and they who would treat contemptuously the
Toridor's daughter will show every courtesy and deference to the English
peeress."
"I will hazard nothing on your advice, priest!" said she, proudly.
"I know you as one who never counselled without a scheme of personal
advantage. This Acton has injured you. You desire his ruin; or, perhaps,
some deep intrigue awaits myself. It matters not; I will not aid you."
"How you misjudge me, Lola!" said he, sorrowfully. "I meant by this act
to have repaired many an unconscious wrong, and to have vindicated
an affection which the troubled years of life have never been able to
efface. Amidst all the cares of great events, when moments are precious
as days of ordinary existence, I have come to offer you this last
reparation. Think well ere you reject it."
"Not for an instant!" cried she, passionately. "Make weaker minds the
tools of your subtle artifices, and leave me to follow my own career."
"I will obey you," said D'Esmonde, with an air of deep humility. "I ask
but one favor. As this meeting is unknown to all, never speak of it to
Midchekoff. My name need never pass your lips, nor shall my presence
again offend you. Adieu forever!"
Whether some passing pang of remorse shot through her heart, or that a
sudden sense of dread came across her, Lola stood unable to reply; and
it was only as he moved away towards the door that she found strength to
say, "Goodbye."
"Let me touch that hand for the last time, Lola," said he, advancing
towards her.
"No, no,--leave me!" cried she, with a sick shudder, and as though his
very approach suggested peril.
D'Esmonde bowed submissively, and passed out. With slow and measured
steps he traversed the alleys of the garden; but once outside the walls,
he hastened his pace. Descending the mountain with rapid strides, he
gained the road where the carriage waited in less than half an hour.
"To the city!" said he; and, throwing himself back in his seat, drew
down the blinds, while, with folded arms and closed eyes, he tasted of
what habit enabled him at any moment to command,--a refreshing sleep.
CHAPTER XXVII. VALEGGIO.
The little village of Valeggio, near the Lago di Guarda, was fixed upon
as the spot where the commissaries of both armies should meet to arrange
on the exchange of prisoners. It stood at about an equal distance from
their headquarters, and, although a poor and insignificant hamlet, was
conveniently situated for the purpose in hand. Soon after daybreak,
the stirring sounds of marching troops awoke the inhabitants, and a
half-squadron of Piedmontese lancers were seen to ride up the narrow
street, and, dismounting, to picket their horses in the little Piazza
of the market. Shortly after these came an equal number of Hungarian
hussars, "Radetzky's Own," who drew up in the square before the church;
each party seeming carefully to avoid even a momentary contact with the
other. Several country carts and wagons lined the street, for a number
of prisoners had arrived the preceding evening, and taken up their
quarters in the village, who might now be seen projecting their pale
faces and bandaged heads from many a casement, and watching with eager
curiosity all that was going forward. About an hour later, an Austrian
General, with his staff, rode in from the Peschiera road, while, almost
at the very instant, a calche with four horses dashed up from the
opposite direction, conveying the Piedmontese "Commissary."
So accurately timed was the arrival, that they both drew up at the
door of the little inn together, and as the one dismounted, the other
alighted from his carriage.
The etiquette of precedence, so easily settled in the ordinary course of
events, becomes a matter of some difficulty at certain moments, and
so the two Generals seemed to feel it, as, while desirous of showing
courtesy, each scrupled at what might seem a compromise of his country's
dignity.
The Austrian officer was a very old man, whose soldierlike air and
dignified deportment recalled the warriors of a past century. The other,
who was slighter and younger, exhibited an air of easy unconcern, rather
smacking of courts than camps, and vouching for a greater familiarity
with salons than with soldier life.
They uncovered and bowed respectfully to each other, and then stood,
each waiting, as it were, for the initiative of the other.
"After you, General," said the younger, at length, and with a manner
which most courteously expressed the deference he felt for age.
"I must beg you to go first, sir," replied the Austrian. "I stand here
on the territory of my master, and I see in you all that demands the
deference due to a guest."
The other smiled slightly, but obeyed without a word; and, ascending the
stairs, was followed by the old General into the little chamber destined
for their conference. Slight and trivial as this incident was, it is
worth mention, as indicating the whole tone of the interview,--one
characterized by a proud insistence on one side, and a certain plastic
deference on the other. The Austrian spoke like one who felt authorized
to dictate his terms; while the Piedmontese seemed ready to acquiesce in
and accept whatever was proffered. The letters which accredited them to
each other lay open on the table; but as this preliminary conversation
had not assumed the formal tone of business, neither seemed to know
the name or title of the other. In fact, it appeared like a part of
the necessary etiquette that they were simply to regard each other as
representatives of two powers, neither caring to know or recognize any
personal claims.
Lists of names were produced on both sides. Master-rolls of regiments,
showing the precise ranks of individuals, and their standing in the
service, all arranged with such care and accuracy as to show that
the conference itself was little more than a formality. A case of
brevet-rank, or the accident of a staff appointment, might now and then
call for a remark or an explanation, but, except at these times, the
matter went on in a mere routine fashion; a mark of a pencil sufficing
to break a captivity, and change the whole fate of a fellow-man!
"Our task is soon ended, sir," said the Austrian, rising at last. "It
would seem that officers on both sides prefer death to captivity in this
war."
"The loss has been very great indeed," said the other. "The peculiar
uniform of your officers, so distinct from their men, has much exposed
them."
"They met their fate honorably, at least, sir; they wore the colors of
their Emperor."
"Very true, General," replied the other, "and I will own to you our
surprise at the fact that there have been no desertions, except from
the ranks. The popular impression was, that many of the Hungarians would
have joined the Italian cause. It was even said whole regiments would
have gone over."
"It was a base calumny upon a faithful people and a brave soldiery,"
said the other. "I will not say that such a falsehood may not have
blinded their eyes against their truth in their national struggle,--the
love of country might easily have been used to a base and treacherous
purpose,--but here, in this conflict, not a man will desert the cause of
the Emperor!" The emotion in which he spoke these words was such that he
was obliged to turn away his face to conceal it.
"Your words have found an illustration amongst the number of our wounded
prisoners, General," said the other--"a young fellow who, it was said,
broke his arrest to join the struggle at Goito, but whose name or rank
we never could find out, for, before being taken, he had torn every mark
of his grade from cuff and collar!"
"You know his regiment, perhaps?"
"It is said to be Prince Paul of Wrtemberg's."
"What is he like,--what may be his age?" asked the General, hastily.
"To pronounce from appearance, he is a mere boy,--brown-haired and
blue-eyed, and wears no moustache."
"Where is he, sir?" asked the old man, with a suppressed emotion.
"In this very village. He was forwarded here last night by a special
order of the Duke of Savoy, who has taken a deep interest in his fate,
and requested that I should take measures, while restoring him, without
exchange, to mention the signal bravery of his conduct."
"The Duke's conduct is worthy of a soldier Prince!" said the General,
with feeling, "and, in my master's name, I beg to thank him."
"The youth is at the temporary hospital, but knows nothing of these
arrangements for his release. Perhaps the tidings will come more
gratefully to his ears from his own countryman."
"It is kindly spoken, sir. May I have the honor of knowing the name of
one who has made this interview so agreeable by his courtesy?"
"My name at this side of the Alps, General, is Count de Valetta; but I
have another and better known designation, before I pronounce which, I
would gladly enlist in my favor whatever I might of yonr good opinion."
"All this sounds like a riddle to me, Signor Conte," said the General,
"and I am but a plain man, little skilled at unravelling a difficulty."
"I am addressing the General Count von Auersberg," said the other.
"Well, sir, it was hearing that you were the officer selected for this
duty that induced me to ask I might be appointed also. I have been most
anxious to meet you, and, in the accidents of a state of war, knew not
how to compass my object."
The old General bowed politely, and waited, with all patience, for
further enlightenment.
"My desire for this meeting. General, proceeds from my wish to exculpate
myself from what may seem to have been an unqualified wrong done to a
member of your family. I am Prince Alexis Midchekoff."
Auersberg started from his chair at the words, and bent a look of angry
indignation at the speaker,--an expression which the Russian bore with
the very calmest unconcern.
"If I am to resume this explanation," said he, coldly, "it must be when
you have reseated yourself, and will condescend to hear me suitably."
"And who is to be my guarantee, sir, that I am not to listen to an
insult?" cried the old General, passionately. "I see before me the man
who has outraged the honor of my house. You know well, sir, the customs
of your nation, and that you had no right to accept a lady's hand in
betrothal without the permission of your Emperor."
"I was certain to obtain it," was the calm answer.
"So certain that it has been refused,----peremptorily, flatly refused."
"Very true, General. The refusal came at my own especial request. Nay,
sir, I need not tell you these words convey no insulting meaning,--but
hear me patiently, before you pronounce. The facts are briefly these. It
came to my knowledge that this young lady's acceptance of me proceeded
entirely from considerations of fortune,--that she had been greatly
influenced by others, and strongly urged to do that which might, at the
sacrifice of herself, benefit her family. These considerations were not
very flattering to me personally; but I should have overlooked them,
trusting to time and fortune for the result, had I not also learnt that
her affections were bestowed upon another,----a young Englishman,
with whom she had been for some time domesticated, whose picture she
possessed, and from whom she had received letters."
"Am I to take this assertion on trust?" cried the General.
"By no means, sir. This is the picture, and here is one of the letters.
I know not if there have been many others, nor can I say whether she has
replied to them. It was enough for me that I discovered I had no claim
on her affection, and that our marriage would bring only misery on both
sides. To have disclosed these facts before the world would of course
have exculpated me, but have injured her. I therefore took what
I deemed a more delicate course, and, by providing for the Imperial
refusal, I solved a difficulty that must otherwise have involved her
in deep reproach." The Prince waited some seconds for the General to
speak; but the old man stood like one stunned and stupefied, unable
to utter a word. At last Midchekoff resumed: "My master fixed a sum of
eighty thousand roubles to which I at once assented, as a settlement on
Mademoiselle de Dalton; but this, I grieve to say, she has peremptorily
rejected."
"Has she----has she done this?" cried the old Count. "Then, by St.
Stephen! she is my own dear child forever; come what may, there is no
disgrace can attach to her."
"I had hoped, sir," said Midchekoff, "that you might have seen this
matter as I did, and that I might have counted on your advocating what
is simply a measure of justice."
"I know little of the extent to which money reparations can atone for
injured feelings or wounded honor. My life has never supplied even a
single lesson on that score. All I see here is, an injury on either
side. Your fault, I think, has been properly expiated; and as for
hers, I want no other justification than what you have told me. Now,
where is she? When may I see her?"
"I had given orders for her return to Vienna, with the intention of
placing her under your charge; but some mistake has occurred, and
her departure has been delayed. A second courier has, however, been
despatched, and ere this she will have left St. Petersburg."
"You have acted well throughout, Prince," said the old General, "and
I shall owe you my gratitude for the remainder of my life; not for the
delicacy of your reserve, still less for the generous character of
your intentions, but because you have shown me that this girl has a
highhearted sense of honor, and is a thorough Dalton." The old man's
eyes filled up with tears, and he had to turn away to hide his emotion.
Midchekoff rose to withdraw, affecting to busy himself with the papers
on the table, while Auersberg was recovering his self-possession. This
did not, however, seem an easy task; for the old General, forgetting
everything save Kate, leaned his head on his hands, and was lost in
thought.
The Prince respected his emotion, and withdrew in silence.
So much was the old General von Auersberg absorbed in his interest for
Kate, that he had not a thought to bestow upon the immediate affairs
before him. It was scarcely a few weeks since he had received a few
lines from herself, telling of the Emperor's refusal, and asking for his
advice. It needed all his long-pledged devotion to monarchy to enable
him to read the lines without an outbreak of passion; and his first
impulse was to seek out the man who had so grossly insulted his house,
and challenge him to single combat. Later reflection showed him that
this would be to arraign the conduct of the Emperor, and to call
in question the judgment of a crowned head. While agitated by these
opposite considerations, there came another and scarcely less sad
epistle to his hand; and if the writer was wanting in those claims to
station and rank which had such hold upon his heart, her touching words
and simple style moved him to emotions that for many a year seemed to
have slept within him.
It was Nelly's account of her father's death, told in her own
unpretending words, and addressed to one whom she recognized as the head
of her house. She dwelt with gratitude on the old Count's kindness, and
said how often her father had recurred to the thought of his protection
and guidance to Frank, when the time should come that would leave him
fatherless. It seemed as if up to this point she had written calmly and
collectedly, expressing herself in respectful distance to one so much
above her. No sooner, however, had she penned Frank's name, than all
this reserve gave way before the gushing torrent of her feelings, and
she proceeded:----
"And oh! sir, is not the hour come when that protection is
needed? Is not my poor brother a prisoner, charged with a
terrible offence--no less than treason to his Emperor? You,
who are yourself a great soldier, can say if such is like to
be the crime of one well born, generous, and noble as Frank,
whose heart ever overflowed to all who served him, and who,
in all the reckless buoyancy of youth, never forgot his
honor. Crafty and designing men--if such there may have been
around him--might possibly have thrown their snares over
him; but no persuasion nor seductions could have made him a
traitor. 'See what the Kaiser has made Count Stephen!' were
some of the last lines he ever wrote to me, 'and, perhaps,
one day, another Dalton will stand as high in the favor of
his master.' His whole heart and soul were in his soldier
life. You, sir, were his guide-star, and, thinking of you,
how could he have dreamed of disloyalty? They tell me that
in troubled times like these, when many have faltered in
their allegiance, such accusations are rarely well inquired
into, and that courts-martial deal peremptorily with the
prisoners; but you will not suffer mv brother to be thus
tried and judged.    You will remember that he is a stranger
in that land, an orphan, a mere boy, too; friendless,--no,
no, not friendless, forgive me the ungracious word; he who
bears your name, and carries in his veins your blood, cannot
be called friendless.. you will say, perhaps, how defend
him?--how reply to charges which will be made with all the
force of witness and circumstance? I answer, hear his own
story of himself; he never told a lie--remember that, Count-
-from his infancy upwards! we, who lived with and about him,
know that he never told a lie! If the accusation be just--
and oh! may God avert this calamity--Frank will say so. He
will tell how and when and why this poison of disaffection
entered his heart; he will trace out his days of temptation
and struggle and fall, without a shadow of concealment; and
if this sad time is to come, even then do not desert him.
Bethink you of his boyhood, his warm, ardent nature, burning
for some field of glorious enterprise, and dazzled by
visions of personal distinction. How could he judge the
knotted questions which agitate the deepest minds of great
thinkers? A mere pretence, a well-painted scene of
oppression or sufferance, might easily enlist the sympathies
of a boy whose impulses have more than once made him bestow
on the passing beggar the little hoardings of weeks. And
yet, with all these, he is not guilty,--I never can believe
that he could be! Oh, sir, you know not, as I know, how
treason in him would be like a living falsehood; how the act
of disloyalty would be the utter denial of all those dreams
of future greatness which, over our humble fireside, were
his world! To serve the Kaiser,--the same gracious master
who had rewarded and ennobled our great kinsman,--to win
honors and distinctions that should rival his; to make our
ancient name hold a high place in the catalogue of
chivalrous soldiers,--these were Frank's ambitions. If you
but knew how we, his sisters, weak and timid girls, seeking
the quiet paths of life, where our insignificance might
easiest be shrouded,--if you knew how we grew to feel the
ardor that glowed in his heart, and actually caught up the
enthusiasm that swelled the young soldier's bosom! you have
seen the world well and long; and, I ask, is this the clay
of which traitors are fashioned? Be a father to him, then,
who has none; and may God let you feel all the happiness a
child's affection can bestow in return! "We are a sad
heritage, Sir Count! for I now must plead for another, not
less a prisoner than my poor brother. Kate is in a durance
which, if more splendid, is sad as his. The ceremony of
betrothal--which, if I am rightly told, is a mere
ceremonial--has consigned her to a distant land and a life
of dreary seclusion. There is no longer a reason for this.
The sacrifice that she was willing to make can now confer no
benefit on him who sleeps in the churchyard. The Prince has
shown towards her a degree of indifference which will well
warrant this breach.    There was no affection on either
side, and it would be but to ratify a falsehood to pledge
fidelity. You alone have influence to effect this. She will
hear your counsels, and follow them with respect, and the
Prince will scarcely oppose what his conduct seems to favor.
This done, Sir Count, let Kate be your daughter; and oh! in
all the glory of your great successes, what have you gained
to compare with this? She loves you already--she has told me
of the affectionate gentleness of your manner, the charm of
your chivalrous sentiments, and a nobility marked by every
word and every gesture. Think, then, of the untaught
devotion of such a child--your own by blood and adoption--
loving, tending, and ministering to you. Think of the proud
beating of your heart as she leans upon your arm, and think
of the happiness, as she throws around your solitary
fireside all the charm of a home! How seldom is it that
generosity doubles itself in its reward, but here it will be
so. You will be loved, and you will be happy. With two such
children, guided by your influence and elevated by your
example, what would be your happiness, and what their
fortune?"
In all these pleadings for those she loved so dearly, no allusion ever
was made by her to her own condition. A few lines at the very end of the
letter were all that referred to herself. They were couched in words of
much humility, excusing herself for the boldness of the appeal she had
made, and apologizing for the hardihood with which it might be said she
had urged her request.
"But you will forgive--you have already forgiven me, Sir
Count," wrote she; "my unlettered style and my trembling
fingers have shown you that this task must have lain near to
my heart, or I had not dared to undertake it. My life has
been spent in a sphere of humble duties and humble
companionship. How easily, then, may I have transgressed the
limits of the deference that should separate us! I can but
answer for my own heart, within which there exists towards
you but the one feeling of devotion--deep and hopeful.
"If in your kindness you should ever bestow a thought upon
me, you will like to know that I am well and happy. Too
lowly in condition, too rude in manners, to share the
fortune of those I love so dearly, I would yet delight to
hear of and from them, to know that they still bear me in
their affection, and think with fondness on poor lame Nelly.
Even the blessing of their presence would not repay me for
the wrong I should do them by my companionship, for I am a
peasant girl as much from choice as nature. Still, the
sister's heart throbs strongly within the coarse bodice,
and, as I sit at my work, Frank and Kate will bear me
company and cheer my solitary hours.
"My humble skill is amply sufficient to supply all my wants,
were they far greater than habit has made them. I live in a
land dear to me by associations of thought and feeling,
surrounded by those of a condition like my own, and who love
and regard me. I am not without my share of duties, too,----
your kindness would not wish more for me. Farewell, then,
Sir Count. Your high-hearted nature has taught you to tread
a lofty path in life, and strive--and with great success--
for the great rewards of merit. It will be a pleasure to you
yet to know that in this country of your adoption there are
humble prizes for humble aspirants, and that one of these
has fallen to the lot of
"Nelly Dalton.
"Any letter addressed 'To the care of Andreas Brennen, Juden
Gasse, Innspruck,' will reach me safely. I need not say with
what gratitude I should receive it."
Such were the lines which reached the old Count's hand on the very day
he set out with his detachment for Vienna. Overcome by shame and sorrow
at what he believed to be Frank Dalton's treason, he had demanded of the
Minister of War his own act of retirement from the army, and for some
months had passed a life of privacy in a little village on the Styrian
frontier. The wide-spread disaffection of the Austrian provinces, the
open revolt of Prague, the more than threatening aspect of Hungary, and
the formidable struggle then going on in Lombardy, had called back into
active life almost all the retired servants of the monarchy. To give way
to private grief at such a moment seemed like an act of disloyalty, and,
throwing off every mere personal consideration, the old soldier repaired
to the capital, and presented himself at the leve of the Archduke
Joseph. He was received with enthusiasm. Covered with years as he was,
no man enjoyed more of the confidence and respect of the soldiery, who
regarded him as one tried and proved by the great wars of the Empire,--a
Colonel of Wagram was both a patriarch and a hero. It was of great
consequence, too, at that precise conjuncture, to rally round the throne
all that were distinguished for fealty and devotion. He was immediately
appointed to the command of a division of the army, and ordered to set
out for Italy.
The complicated nature of the politics of the period, the mixture of
just demand and armed menace, the blending up of fair and reasonable
expectations with impracticable or impossible concessions, had so
disturbed the minds of men that few were able, by their own unaided
judgment, to distinguish on which side lay right and justice; nor was
it easy, from the changeful councils of the monarch, to know whether the
loyalty of to-day might not be pronounced treason to-morrow. Many of
the minor movements of the time--even the great struggle of the
Hungarians--originated in a spontaneous burst of devotion to the
Emperor,--to be afterwards converted by the dark and wily policy of an
unscrupulous leader into open rebellion. No wonder, then, if in such
difficult and embarrassing circumstances, many strayed unconsciously
from the paths of duty,--some misled by specious dreams of nationality,
others from sympathy with what they thought the weaker party; and
others, again, by the force of mere companionship or contact. In this
way few families were to be found where one or more had not joined the
patriotic party, and all the ties of affection were weak in comparison
with the headlong force of popular enthusiasm. The old General von
Auersberg knew nothing of these great changes; no news of them had
reached his retirement; so that when he rejoined the army he was shocked
to see how many had fallen away and deserted from the ancient standard
of the Kaiser. Many a high name and many an ancient title were more than
suspected amongst the Hungarian nobility; while in Italy they who most
largely enjoyed the confidence of the Government were to be found in the
ranks of the insurgents.
It might be supposed that these things would have in some degree
reconciled the old Count to the imputed treason of his nephew, and that
he would have found some consolation at least in the generality of the
misfortune. Not so, however. His mind viewed the matter in a different
light. He was willing to concede much to mistaken feelings of
nationality, and to associations with a time of former independence; but
these motives could have no relation to one who came into the service
as he himself and Frank did,--soldiers by the grace and favor of the
Emperor.
The blot this treason left upon his name was then a sore affliction to
one whose whole aim in life had been to transmit an honorable reputation
and an unshaken fidelity behind him. His reasoning was thus: "We
have no claims of ancient services to the monarchy to adduce,----our
ancestors never proved their devotion to the House of Hapsburg in times
past,--we must be taken for what our own deeds stamp us." With this
decisive judgment he was ready to see Frank delivered before a court,
tried and sentenced, without offering one word in his behalf. "This
done," thought he, "it remains but for me to show that I have made the
only expiation in my power, and paid with my heart's blood for another's
fault."
Such was the resolve with which he crossed the Alps,--a resolve defeated
for the moment by discovering that Frank was no longer a prisoner, but
had made his escape in some unexplained manner on the eventful day of
Goito.
This disappointment, and the still sadder tidings of the Emperor's
withheld permission to Kate's marriage, came to his ears the same
day,--the most sorrowful, perhaps, of his whole life. His honorable fame
as a soldier tarnished, his high ambition for a great alliance dashed by
disappointment, he fell back for consolation upon poor Nelly's letter.
The weak point of his character had ever been a dread of what he called
his Irish cousins; the notion that his successes and supposed wealth
would draw upon him a host of hungry and importunate relatives, eager to
profit by the hard-won honors of his unaided career. And although year
after year rolled on, and no sign was made, nor any token given, that
he was remembered in the land of his forefathers, the terror was still
fresh in his mind; and when at last Peter Dalton's letter reached him,
he read the lines in a torrent of anger,--the accumulation of long years
of anticipation. Nelly's epistle was a complete enigma to him. She was
evidently unprotected, and yet not selfish; she was in the very humblest
circumstances, and never asked for assistance; she was feelingly alive
to every sorrow of her brother and sister, and had not one thought for
her own calamities. What could all this mean?--was it any new phase or
form of supplication, or was it really that there did exist one in the
world whose poverty was above wealth, and whose simple nature was more
exalted than rank or station?
With all these conflicting thoughts, and all the emotions which
succeeded to the various tidings he had heard, the old Count sat
overwhelmed by the cares that pressed upon him; nor was it for some
hours after Midchekoff's departure that he could rally his faculties to
be "up and doing."
The buzz and murmur of voices in an outer room first recalled him
to active thought, and he learned that several officers, recently
exchanged, had come to offer their thanks for his kind intervention. The
duty, which was a mere ceremony, passed over rapidly, and he was once
more alone, when he heard the slow and heavy tread of a foot ascending
the stairs, one by one, stopping at intervals, too, as though the effort
was one of great labor. Like the loud ticking of a clock to the watchful
ears of sickness, there was something in the measured monotony of the
sounds that grated and jarred his irritated nerves, and he called out
harshly:
"Who comes there?"
No answer was returned; and, after a pause of a few seconds, the same
sound recurred.
"Who's there?" cried the old man, louder; and a faint, inaudible attempt
at reply followed.
And now, provoked by the interruption, he arose to see the cause; when
the door slowly opened, and Frank stood before him, pale and bloodless,
with one arm in a sling, and supporting himself on a stick with the
other. His wasted limbs but half filled his clothes; while in his
lustreless eye and quivering lip there seemed the signs of coming death.
With an instinct of kindness, the old General drew out a chair and
pressed the poor boy down upon it. The youth kissed the hand as it
touched him, and then heaved a heavy sigh.
"This exertion was unfit for you, my poor boy," said the Count, kindly.
"They should not have permitted you to leave your bed."
"It was my fault, not theirs, General. I heard that you were about to
leave the village without coming to the hospital, and I thought, as
perhaps----," here his voice faltered, and a gulping fulness of the
throat seemed almost to choke him--"that as, perhaps, we might never
meet again in this world, I ought to make one effort to see you, and
tell you that I am not, nor ever was, a traitor!"
[Illustration: 380]
As though the effort had exhausted all "his strength, his arms dropped
as he said the words; his head fell forward, and he would have fallen to
the ground had not the old General caught him in his arms.
"You are too weak, too ill for all this, my poor fellow." said the
Count, as he held the boy's hand in his own, and gazed affectionately at
him.
"True, ever true," muttered the youth, with half-closed lids.
"I will hear all this when you are better, Frank; when you are strong,
and able to declare it manfully and openly. I will bless you, with my
heart's warmest blessing, for the words that restore us both to fair
fame and honor; but you must not speak more now."
The boy bent his head in token of submission, but never spoke.
"It will be the proudest hour of my life, Frank, when you can throw off
this reproach, and stand forth a thorough Dalton, unshaken in truth and
honor. But, to do this, you must be calm and quiet now,--not speak, nor
even think of these things. You shall remain with me."
Here the boy's tears fell upon the old man's hand. For a second or two
not a word was spoken. At last he went on,----
"Yes; you shall not leave me from this hour. Our fortunes are the same.
With you it remains to show that we are worthy soldiers of our Kaiser."
Frank pressed the old Count's hand upon his heart, as though to call its
very pulses to bear witness to his fealty. This simple action seemed to
have exhausted his last energy, for he now sank back in his chair and
fainted.
The excitement he had gone through appeared to have utterly prostrated
him, for he now lay for hours motionless and unconscious. Except a
heavy sigh at long intervals, he gave no sign of life; and the surgeons,
having exhausted all their resources to stimulate him, gave but faint
hope of his recovery. They who only knew the old Count as the stern
soldier, bold, abrupt, and peremptory, could not conceive by what magic
he had been changed into a mould of almost womanly tenderness. There was
no care he did not bestow on the sick youth. The first surgeons of the
Staff were sent for, and all that skill and affection could suggest were
enlisted in his service. The case, however, was of gloomy presage. It
was the relapse fever after a wound, aggravated by mental causes of deep
influence.
The greatest sympathy was felt for the old Count's position. His
comrades came or sent frequently to him. Kind messages reached him from
quarters wherein once lay all his pride and glory; and a young archduke
came himself to offer his new litter to convey Frank to Verona, where
the Imperial headquarters were stationed. These were the very flatteries
which once Von Auersberg would have prized above all that wealth could
give; these were the kind of recognitions by which he measured his own
career in life, making him to feel where he stood; but now one grief had
so absorbed him he scarcely noticed them. He could not divest his mind,
either, of the thought that the boy's fate was intended as a judgment
on himself for his own cold and ungenerous treatment of him. "I forgot,"
would he say to himself,----"I forgot that he was not a castaway like
myself. I forgot that the youth had been trained up amidst the flow
of affectionate intercourse, loving and beloved, and I compared his
position with my own."
And such was in reality the very error he committed. He believed that by
subjecting Frank to all the hard rubs which once had been his own fate
he was securing the boy's future success; forgetting the while how
widely different were their two natures, and that the affections
which are moulded by habits of family association are very unlike the
temperament of one unfriended and unaided, seeking his fortune with no
other guidance than a bold heart and strong will. The old Count was not
the only one, nor will he be the last, to fall into this mistake; and
it may be as well to take a warning from his error, and learn that for
success in the remote and less trodden paths of life the warm affections
that attach to home and family are sad obstacles.
It was ten days before Frank could be removed, and then he was carried
in a litter, arriving in Verona on the fourth day. From his watchful
cares beside the sick-bed, the old General was now summoned to take part
in the eventful councils of the period. A great and momentous crisis
had arrived, and the whole fate, not only of Austria, but of Europe,
depended on the issue. The successes of the Italian arms had been, up to
this point, if not decisive, at least sufficiently important to make the
result a question of doubt. If the levies contributed by the States of
the Church and Tuscany were insignificant in a warlike point of view,
they were most expressive signs of popular feeling at least. Austria,
besides, was assailed on every flank, with open treason in her capital;
and the troops which might have conquered Lombardy were marching
northward on Prague, or turning eastward towards Hungary. It then became
a grave question whether, even at the cost of the whole Milanais, a
peace should not be at once concluded, and Austria merely stipulate for
certain commercial advantages, and the undisturbed possession of the
Venetian States. If the more dispassionate heads that rule cabinets saw
wisdom in this plan, the warmer and less calculating hearts of soldiers
deemed it a base humiliation. Long accustomed to treat the Italians with
a haughty contempt, they could not endure the thought of recognizing
them as equals, not to say superiors. There were thus two parties in the
Council,----the one eager for a speedy termination of the war, and the
other burning to erase the memory of late defeats, and win back the
fair provinces of their Emperor. To such an extent had this spirit of
discordance at last gone, that the cabinet orders of Vienna were
more than once overruled at headquarters, and the very decrees of
the Government slighted by the commander-in-chief. It was a time of
independent will and personal responsibility; and probably to this
accident is owing the salvation of the Imperial House.
At last, when the sympathies of France and England with the cause of
Italy became more than a mere suspicion, when troops marched southward
towards the Alps, and diplomatic messages traversed Europe, counselling,
in all the ambiguous courtesy of red tape, "wise and reasonable
concessions to the fair demands of a people," the cabinet of Vienna
hastily despatched an envoy to Lombardy, with orders to concert with the
generals, and treat for a peace.
Had a squadron of the enemy dashed through the streets of Verona, they
could not have created one half the dismay that did the arrival of the
calche which conveyed the Imperial Commissioner. The old Field-Marshal
had just returned from a review of the troops, who, as usual when
he appeared, were wild with enthusiasm, when an officer of his staff
announced the presence of the envoy, and in a low whisper added the
object of his mission. A council was speedily called, and Von Auersberg
specially invited to be present and assist in its deliberations.
The discussion lasted several hours; and, however unshaken in hope and
resolute in will the old Marshals of the Empire, they found themselves
no match in argument for the wily civilian, who, displaying before
them the financial embarrassments of the State, showed that war implied
bankruptcy, and that even victory might mean ruin. The great questions
of Imperial policy, which in their zeal they had overlooked, were
strongly pressed upon them; and that public opinion of Europe, which
they had only fancied a bugbear and a mockery, was represented as the
formidable expression of the great family of mankind, on the conduct of
one of its own members. With all this it was no easy task to reconcile a
bold soldier, at the head of a splendid army, to retire from the field,
to confess himself beaten, and to acknowledge defeat, with an assured
sense of victory in his heart The evening closed in, and still they sat
in debate. Some had exchanged opposition for a dogged and cold silence;
others had modified their views to a kind of half-concession; while a
few rallied round their old chief, with a mistaken determination to
have one more dash at the enemy should the peace be ratified on the day
after. It would seem as if the Commissioner had been fully prepared for
every phase of this opposition. He combated every argument in turn, and
addressed himself with readiness to every objection that was offered. At
last, when in a burst of mortification and anger the old Field-Marshal
arose from the table, and declared that, come what might, it should
never be said that he had lost the provinces of his master, the other
stole close beside him, and whispered a few words in his ear. The old
man started; his rugged, weather-beaten face twitched with a short,
convulsive movement, and he threw himself down into a chair, with a
muttered oath on his lips.
There was now a dead silence in the chamber. Every eye was turned
stealthily towards the old General, by whose counsels they were wont to
be guided; but he never spoke a word, and sat with his hands resting on
his sword-hilt, the rattle of the scabbard against the belt, as it shook
beneath his hand, being the only sound heard.
They are dreadful moments in life when men of high and daring courage
see the trust they have long reposed in bold and vigorous measures
rejected, and in its stead wily and crafty counsels adopted and
followed. This was such a moment; and the old warriors, tried in many a
battle-field, scarcely dared to meet each other's eyes, from very shame
and sorrow. It was just then that the sharp, quick trot of horses
was heard from without, and the jingling sound of bells announced a
post-carriage. Scarcely had it stopped, when an aide-de-camp entered,
and whispered a few words to the Field-Marshal.
"No, no," said the old man, peevishly; "we are marching on to dishonor
fast enough. We want no priestly aid to hasten our steps."
The young officer appeared to hesitate, and still lingered in the
chamber.
"It is your friend, the Abb, has arrived," said the General, addressing
the Commissioner; "and I have said we can dispense with his arguments.
He can add little to what you have so ably spoken; and if we are to
depose our arms, let it be at the bidding of our Emperor, and not at the
beck of a priest."
"But D'Esmonde must have come from the south," interposed the civilian;
"he may have some tidings worth hearing."
"Let him come in, then," said the Field-Marshal, abruptly; and the
officer retired.
D'Esmonde had scarcely passed the threshold when his quick, keen glance
around the room revealed to him the nature of their gloomy counsels. A
dogged look of submission sat on every face, and the wily priest read in
their fallen countenances all the bitterness of defeat.
The stern coldness of the reception that met him never abashed the Abb
in the least; and he made his compliments to the principal personages
of the council with a suave dignity the very opposite to their
uncourteous manner. Even when he had completed the little circle of his
attentions, and stood in expectation of a request to be seated, his air
was calm and unembarrassed, although not a word, or even a gesture, gave
the invitation. All felt that this should come from the Field-Marshal
himself, and none dared to usurp the prerogative of his rank. Too deeply
lost in his own brooding thoughts to attend to anything else, the old
General sat still, with his head bent down over the hilt of his sabre.
"His Holiness commissions me to greet you, Herr Feld-Marshal," said the
Abb, in a low, soft voice, "and to say that those ancient medals you
once spoke of shall be speedily transmitted to your palace at Milan."
"My palace at Milan, sir!" exclaimed the old man, fiercely. "When shall
I see that city again? Ask that gentleman yonder, who has just arrived
from Vienna, what the cabinet counsels are; he will tell you the
glorious tidings that the army will read to-morrow in a general order!"
"I have later news than even his!" said the Abb, coolly seating
himself at the table, and placing a roll of papers before him. "Baron
Brockhausen," said he, addressing the Commissioner, "if I mistake not,
left Vienna on the ninth, reached Innspruck the eleventh, stayed there
till the evening of the thirteenth, and only reached here some hours
ago. The Prime Minister, consequently, was unaware that, on the tenth,
General Durando was recalled by the Pope; that on the evening of the
same day Pepe received a similar order from the King of Naples; that
the Tuscan levies and the Polish legion have been remanded; and that
Piedmont stands alone in the contest, with a disorganized army and
divided counsels. These," said he, pointing to the letters before
him,--"these are copies of the documents I refer to, you will see
from these that the right flank of the Piedmontese army is open and
unprotected; that, except the banditti of Rome and Tuscany, there are no
troops between this and Ferrara; and if the reinforcements that are now
halted in the Tyrol be but hurried down, a great and decisive blow may
be dealt at once."
"Bey'm Blitzen! you ought to have been a general of brigade, priest!"
cried the old Field-Marshal, as he clasped his hand in both his own,
and pressed it with delight. "These are the noblest words I have heard
to-day. Gentlemen," said he, rising, "there is little more for a council
to do. You will return at once to your several brigades. Schrann's eight
battalions of infantry, with two of Feld-Jagers, to hold themselves in
readiness to march to-morrow; the Reuse Hussars to form escort to the
light artillery on the Vicenza road; all the other cavalry to take up
position to the right, towards Peschiera."
"This means a renewal of hostilities, then?" said the Commissioner.
"It means that I will win back the provinces of my Emperor. Let him
dispose of them after as he pleases." And so saying, he left the room,
followed by the other officers.
CHAPTER XXVIII. PLOTS, POLITICS, AND PRIESTCRAFT.
It would conduce but little to the business of our story were we to
follow the changeful fortunes of the war, and trace the current of
events which marked that important campaign. The struggle itself is
already well known; the secret history of the contest has yet to be
written. We have hinted at some of the machinations which provoked the
conflict; we have shown the deep game by which Democracy was urged on
to its own destruction; and, by the triumph of Absolutism, the return
of the Church to her ancient rule provided and secured; we have
vaguely shadowed out the dark wiles by which freedom and anarchy were
inseparably confounded, and the cause of liberty was made to seem the
denial of all religion. It would take us too far away from the humble
track of our tale were we to dwell on this theme, or stop to adduce the
various evidences of the truth of our assumption. We pass on, therefore,
and leave D'Esmonde the task of chronicling some of the results of that
memorable period.
The letter, from which we propose to make some extracts was addressed,
like his former one, to his Irish correspondent, and opened with a kind
of thanksgiving over the glorious events of the preceding few weeks,
wherein victory succeeded victory, and the Austrians once again became
the masters of haughty Milan. We pass over the exulting description
the Abb gave of the discord and dissension in the Patriotic ranks; the
reckless charges of treachery made against Carlo Alberto himself, for
not undertaking the defence of a city destitute of everything; and the
violent insubordination of the Lombards as the terrible hour of their
retribution drew nigh. We have not space for his graphic narrative of
the King's escape from Milan, protected by an Austrian escort, against
the murderous assaults of fellow-patriots. These facts are all before
the world; nor would it contribute to their better understanding were we
to adduce the partisan zeal with which the priest detailed them.
"The struggle, you will thus see," wrote he, "is over. The
blasphemer and the democrat have fallen together, and it
will take full a century to rally from the humiliation of
such a defeat. Bethink you, my dear Michel, what that same
century may make the Church, and how, if we be but vigorous
and watchful, every breach in the glorious fortress may be
repaired, every outwork strengthened, every bastion newly
mounted, and her whole garrison refreshed and invigorated.
Without a great convulsion like this we were lost! The
torpor of peace brought with it those habits of thought and
reflection--the sworn enemies of all faith! As governments
grew more popular they learned to rely less on our aid.
The glorious sway of Belief was superseded by direct appeals
to what they called common sense, and imperceptibly, but
irrevocably, the world was being Protestantized. Do not
fancy that my fears have exaggerated this evil. I speak of
what I know thoroughly and well. Above all, do not mistake
me, as though I confounded this wide-spread heresy with what
you see around you in Ireland, those backslidings which you
so aptly called 'soup conversions.'
"By Protestantism, I mean something more dangerous than
Anglicanism, which, by the way, has latterly shown itself
the very reverse of an enemy. The peril I dread is that
spirit of examination and inquiry which, emboldened by the
detection of some trumpery trick, goes on to question the
great dogma of our religion. And here I must say, that these
miracles--as they will call them----have been most ill-
judged and ill-timed. Well adapted as they are to stimulate
faith and warm zeal in remote and unvisited villages, they
are serious errors when they aspire to publicity and
challenge detection. I have done all I could to
discountenance them; but even in the Vatican, my dear
Michel, there are men who fancy we are living in the
sixteenth century. What are you to do with a deafness that
cannot be aroused by the blast of a steam-engine, and which
can sleep undisturbed by the thunder of railroads? Well, let
us be thankful for a little breathing time; the danger from
these heretics is over for the present. And here I would ask
of you to mark how the very same result has taken place
wherever the battle was fought. The Church has been
triumphant everywhere. Is this accident, my dear friend?
Was it mere chance that confounded counsels here, and dealt
out ruin to Ireland also? Why did our policy come to a
successful issue, here, by a dangerous conflict; and, with
you, by abstaining from one? Why, because it was truth--
eternal, immutable truth--for which we struggled. I must say
that if our game called for more active exertions, and
perhaps more personal hazards, yours in Ireland was
admirably devised. There never was a more complete
catastrophe than that into which you betrayed your Mitchells
and Meaghers; and does not the blind credulity of such men
strike you as a special and Divine infliction? I own I think
so. They were, with all their hot blood, and all the glow of
their youth, serious thinkers and calm reasoners. They could
detect the finger of England in every tangled scheme, and
yet they never saw the shadow of your hand as it shook in
derision over them. Yes, Michel, the game was most skilfully
played, and I anticipate largely from it. The curtain thus
falls upon the first act of the drama; let us set about to
prepare for its rising. I am far from saying that many
errors--some of the gravest kind--have not been committed in
the conduct of this affair. More than one grand opportunity
has gone by without profit; and even my suggestion about the
restoration of the States of the Church to their ancient
limits within the Venetian provinces--a demand which Rome
has formerly renewed every year since the treaty of Campo
Formio, and which might now have been pressed with success--
even this was neglected! But what could be done with a
runaway Pope and a scattered Consistory? Your letter, my
dear Michel, is a perfect catechism--all questions! I must
try a reply to some, at least, of its inquiries. You are
anxious about the endowment of the Ursulines, and so am I;
but unfortunately I can tell you little of my progress in
that direction. Lady Hester Onslow would appear to have
fallen into an entanglement of some sort with Lord Norwood;
and although I have in my possession the means of preventing
a marriage with him, or annulling it, if it should take
place, yet the very exercise of this power, on my part,
would as inevitably destroy all my influence over her, and
be thus a mere piece of profitless malice. This, therefore,
is a matter of some difficulty, increased, too, by his hasty
departure from Florence--they say for England; but I have no
clew to his destination, for he left this on the very day I
last wrote to you--the day of my visit to the Moskova--in
which you seem to be so much interested. Strangely enough,
Michel, both this man and the Russian seemed to feel that
they were in the toils, and broke away, rather than hazard
an encounter with me. And they were right, too! For the deep
game of life, there is no teaching like that of the
cloister; and if we be not omnipotent, it is owing to our
weakness of purpose. Hildebrand knew this--Boniface knew it
also; but we have fallen upon poor successors of these great
men!    What might not a great Pope be in the age we live
in!--one whose ambition was commensurate with his mission,
and who had energy and courage for the task before him! Oh!
how I felt this, some nights ago, as I sat closeted with our
present ruler--would you believe it, Michel, he has no
higher guide or example than the weak and kind-hearted Pius
the Seventh? To imitate him is the whole rule of his
faith, and to resemble him, even in his misfortunes, has
become an ambition. How he strung for me the commonplaces of
that good man, as though they had been the distilled
essences of wisdom! Alas! alas! the great heritage of the
Church has not been won by Quaker Popes.
"You ask about myself. All goes well. The die is cast; and
so far, at least, a great point gained. The Austrians saw
the matter in its true light, and with justice perceived
that diplomacy is a war of reprisals. How I glory in the
anticipation of this vengeance upon England, the encourager
and abettor of all the treason against our Faith! How little
do they suspect the storm that is gathering around them; how
tranquilly are they walking over the ground that is to be
earthquaken! The letters and diplomas are all prepared. The
Bull itself is ready; to-morrow, if it were opportune, I
might be proclaimed a prince of the Church and an Archhishop
of an English see! As in every great event of life the
moment is everything, the question is now one of time.
Guardoni--and I look upon him as the shrewdest of the
cardinals--says, 'Wait! our cause is advancing every day in
England; every post brings us tidings of desertions to our
army,--men distinguished in rank, station, or intellect. In
our controversies we have suffered no defeats, while our
moderation has gained us many well-wishers; we have a tone
of general liberality to work upon that is eminently
favorable to a policy meek, lowly, and unpretending.
Therefore, I say, Wait; and do not forfeit such advantages
for the glory of a pageant' Against this it might be urged,
that the hour is come to proclaim our victory; and that it
would be a craven policy not to unfurl our banner above the
walls we have won! I repose less trust in the force of this
reasoning than in another view of the subject; and it is to
the ricochet of our shot, Michel, that I look for the damage
of our enemy. My calculation is this: the bold pretensions
we advance will arouse the passions of the whole island;
meetings and addresses and petitions will abound. All the
rampant insolence of outraged bigotry, all the blatant
denunciations of insulted protestantism, will burst forth
like a torrent. We shall be assailed in pamphlets and
papers; caricatured, hooted, burned in effigy. A wily and
well-conducted opposition on our part will fan and feed this
flame. Some amongst us will assume the moderate tone: invoke
the equality that pertains to every born Briton, and ask for
the mere undisturbed exercise of our faith.   Others, with
greater boldness, will adventure sorties against the enemy,
and thus provoke reply and discussion. To each will be
assigned his suited task. A laboring for the one great
object,--to maintain the national fever at a white heat, to
suffer no interval of calm reflection to come, and to force
upon the Parliament, by the pressure of outward opinion,
some severe or at least some galling act of legislation.
This once accomplished, our game is won, and the great
schism we have so long worked for effected! It will then be
the Government on one side and the Church on the other.
Could you wish for anything better? For myself, I care
little how the campaign be then conducted; the victory must
be our own. I have told you again and again there is no such
policy against England as that of hampering the course of
her justice. It was O'Connell's secret; he had no other; and
he never failed till he attempted something higher. First,
provoke a rash legislation, and then wait for the
discomfiture that will follow it! With all the boasted
working of the great constitution, what a mere trifle
disturbs and disjoints it! Ay, Michel, a rusty nail in the
cylinder will spoil the play of the piston, although the
engine be rated at a thousand horse-power. Such a conflict
with Protestantism is exactly like the effect of a highly
disciplined army taking the field against a mob. With us
all is preconcerted, prearranged, and planned; with them
everything is impulsive, rash, and ill-advised. This
glorious prerogative of private judgment becomes a capital
snare, when measures should be combined and united. Fancy, I
ask of you,--fancy all the splendid errors of their hot
enthusiasm; think of the blunders they will commit on
platform or pulpit; reflect upon the folly and absurdity
that will fill the columns of the public journals, and all
the bigoted balderdash the press will groan under! What
coarse irony, what Billingsgate shall we hear of our Holy
Church,----her saints, her miracles, and her dogmas,--what
foul invectives against her pious women and their lives of
sanctity! And then think of the glorious harvest that will
follow, as we reply to insult by calm reasonings, to bigotry
by words of charity and enlightenment, appealing to the
nation at large for their judgment on which side truth
should lie,--with intolerance, or with Christian meekness
and submission?
"Prepare, then, I say, for the coming day; the great
campaign is about to open, and neither you nor I, Michel,
will live to see the end of the battle. On this side the
Alps, all has happened as we wished. Italian Liberalism is
crushed and defeated. The Piedmontese are driven back within
their frontier, their army beaten, and their finances all
but exhausted, and Austria is again at the head of Northern
Italy. Rome will now be grander and more glorious than ever.
No more truckling to Liberalism, no more faith in the false
prophets of Freedom.   Our gorgeous 'Despotism' will arise
reinvigorated by its trials, and the Church will proclaim
herself the Queen of Europe!
"It is an inestimable advantage to have convinced these meek
and good men here that there is but one road to victory, and
that all alliance with what are called politicians is but a
snare and a delusion.
"The Pope sees this at last, but nothing short of wounded
pride could have taught him the lesson.
"Now to your last query, my dear Michel, and I feel all
gratitude for the warm interest with which you make it.
What is to be done I know not.   I am utterly ignorant of my
parentage, even of my birthplace.   In the admission-book of
Salamanca I stand thus:
'Samuel Eustace, native of Ireland, aged thirteen years and
seven months; stipendiary of the second class.' There lies
my whole history. A certain Mr. Godfrey had paid all the
expenses of my journey from Louvain, and, up to the period
of his death, continued to maintain me.   From Louvain I can
learn nothing.    I was a 'Laic' they believed,----perhaps
No. 134 or 137--they do not know which; and these are but
sorry facts from which to derive the baptismal registry of a
future cardinal. And yet something must be done, and
speedily too. On the question of birth the Sacred College is
peremptory. You will say that there ought to be no
difficulty in devising a genealogy where there are no
adverse claims to conflict; and if I could go over to
Ireland, perhaps the matter might be easy enough. At this
moment, however, my presence here is all-essential, while I
am not without a hope that accident may afford me a clew to
what I seek. A few days ago I was sent for from Malgherra to
attend the dying bed of a young officer, whose illness had
so completely disordered his brain that he forgot every word
of the foreign language he was accustomed to speak, and
could only understand or reply in his native English.
Although I had other and more pressing cases to attend to,
the order coming from an archduke made obedience imperative,
and so I hastened over to Verona, where the sick youth lay.
Conceive my surprise, Michel, to discover that he was the
same Dalton,--the boy whom I have so often adverted to, as
eternally crossing my path in life,--the relative of that
Godfrey who was my early patron. I have already confessed to
you, Michel, that I felt towards this youth in a way for
which my calmest reason could render no account. Gamblers
have often told me of certain antipathies they have
experienced, and that the mere presence of an individual--
one totally unknown to them, perhaps--has been so ominous of
ill-luck that they dare not risk a bet while he remained in
the room. I know you will say that men who pass their lives
in the alternation of hope and fear become the slaves of
every shadow that crosses the imagination, and that they are
sorry pilots to trust to. So they are, Michel; they art
meanly minded, they are sordid, and they are low; their
thoughts never soar above the card or the hazard table; they
are dead to all emotions of family and affection; the very
events that are convulsing the world are less audible to
their ears than the ring of the dice-box; and yet, with all
this--would you believe it?--they are deep in the mysteries
of portents. Their intense study of what we call chance has
taught them to combine and arrange and discipline every atom
and accident that can influence an event. They have their
days of good and evil fortune, and they have their agencies
that sway them to this side or to that. Chemistry shows us
that substances that resemble metals are decomposed by the
influence of light alone,--do not, then, despise the working
of that gleam that darts from a human eye and penetrates
within the very recesses of your brain.
"Be the theory true or false, the phenomena exercise a deep
influence over me, and I have never ceased to regard this
boy as one inextricably interwoven with myself and my own
fortunes; I felt a degree of dread at his contact, which all
my conscious superiority of mind and intellect could not
allay. In vain have I endeavored to reason myself out of
these delusions, but in the realm of imagination reason is
inoperative; as well might a painter try to commit to his
palette the fleeting colors of the rainbow. Shall I own to
you that in moments of illness or depression this terror
magnified itself to giant proportions, and a thousand wild
and incongruous fancies would fill my mind? I bethought me
of involving him in such difficulty that he would no longer
be at large; as a prisoner or an exile, I should never see
him more. Every snare I tried was a failure; the temptations
that were most adapted to his nature he resisted; the wiles
I threw around him he escaped from. Was there not a fate in
all this? Assuredly there was and is, Michel. I cannot tell
you the relief of mind I should feel if this boy had shared
the fate of your patriots, and that the great sea was to
roll between him and Europe forever. Twenty times a day I
think of Dirk Hatteraick's expression with respect to Brown:
'That boy has been a rock ahead of me all through life;' and
be assured that the characters of fiction are often powerful
teachers.
"And now to my narrative. The same note which requested my
visit at Verona begged of me, if I possibly could accomplish
it, to provide some English person who should sit up with
the sick youth and nurse him. I was not sorry to receive
this commission; I wished to learn more about this boy than
the confessional at such a time could teach; and could I
only find a suitable agent, this would not be difficult.
Chance favored me strangely enough. Amongst the prisoners
taken at Ancona I found an Irish fellow, who, it appears,
had taken service in the Piedmontese navy. He had been some
years in America and the West Indies, and from the scattered
remarks that he let fall, I perceived that he was a man of
shrewd and not over-scrupulous nature. He comprehended me in
an instant; and, although I was most guarded in giving my
instructions, the fellow read my intentions at once. This
shrewdness might, in other circumstances, have its
inconveniences, but here it gave me no alarm. I was the
means of his liberation, and were he troublesome, I could
consign him to the prison again,--to the galleys, if needed.
In company with this respectable ally, I set out for the
headquarters. On my arrival I waited on the Count von
Auersberg, in whose house the sick boy lay. This old man,
who is Irish by birth, is more Austrian in nature than the
members of the House of Hapsburg.
I found him fully convinced that the white-coated legions
had reconquered Lombardy by their own unaided valor, and I
left him in the same pleasant delusion. It appeared that a
certain Count von Walstein was enabled to clear young
Dalton's character from all taint of treason, by exhibiting,
in his own correspondence, some letters and documents that
related to the events detailed in Frank's writing, and of
which he could have had no possible knowledge. This avowal
may be a serious thing for Walstein, but rescues the young
Dalton at once, and proves that he was merely the writer of
Ravitzky's sentiments; so that here, again, Michel, he
escapes. Is not this more than strange?
"It was not without anxiety that I passed the threshold of
the sick-chamber; but happily it was darkened, and I soon
saw that the sick youth could never recognize me, were his
senses even unclouded. He lay motionless, and I thought
insensible; but after I spoke to him he rallied a little,
and asked after his father and his sisters. He had not yet
heard that his father was dead; and it was affecting to hear
the attempt he made to vindicate his honor, and show that he
had never been disloyal. By degrees I brought him to talk of
himself. He saw that he was dying, and had no fears of
death; but there seemed as if his conscience was burdened by
some heavy weight, less like guilt than the clew to some
strange and dark affair. The revelation--if it deserved the
name, for it was made in broken sentences--now uttered with
rapid vehemence, now scarcely audible----was of the vaguest
kind. You may imagine, however, the interest I felt in the
narrative as the name Godfrey passed his lips. To know my
anxiety to trace some tie of family to these Godfreys. They
were gentry of ancient blood and good name, and would amply
satisfy the demands of the Sacred College; so that when the
boy spoke of Godfrey, I listened with intense curiosity;
but--shall I own it?--all my practised skill, all my science
of the sick-bed, was unable to tell me what were the
utterings of an unclouded intellect, and what the wild
fitful fancies of fever. I know, for I have repeatedly heard
it from his sister's lips, that this youth has never been in
Ireland, and yet he spoke of the peculiar scenery of a
certain spot just as if he had traversed it yesterday. Mind,
that I am carefully distinguishing between what might be the
impression left by often hearing of a scene from others, and
that which results from personal observation. His was
altogether of the latter kind. As, for instance, when
describing a garden, he mentioned how the wind wafted the
branches of a weeping ash across a window, so as to confuse
the scene that went on within; and then he shuddered
terribly, and, with a low sigh, exclaimed, 'The light went
out after that.' These are not ravings, Michel. This boy
knows something of that dark mystery I have more than once
alluded to in my letters. Could it be that his own father
was in some way implicated in the affair? Bear in mind how
he came to live abroad, and never returned to Ireland. From
all I can learn, the old Dalton was a bold and reckless
character, that would scarcely have stopped at anything.
Assuredly, the son's conscience is heavily burdened! Now,
there is an easy way to test the truth or fallacy of all
this; and herein you must aid me, Michel. I have carefully
noted every word the boy spoke; I have treasured every
syllable that fell from him. If his description of the scene
be correct, the mystery may be unravelled. This you can
speedily ascertain by visiting the spot. It is not more than
twenty miles from you, and about three or four, I believe,
from the little village of Inistioge; it is called Corrig-
O'Neal,--a place of some importance once, but now, as I
hear, a ruin. Go thither, Michel, and tell me correctly all
these several points. First, does the character of the river
scenery suddenly change at this spot, and, from an aspect of
rich and leafy beauty, exhibit only dark and barren
mountains without a tree or a shrub? Is the old manor-house
itself only a short distance from the stream, and backed by
these same gloomy mountains? The house itself, if unaltered,
should be high-peaked in roof, with tall, narrow windows,
and a long terrace in front; an imitation, in fact, of an
old French chteau. These, as you will see, are such facts
as might have been heard from another; but now I come to
some less likely to have been so learned.
"From this boy's wanderings, I collect that there is a
woodland path through these grounds, skirting the river in
some places, and carried along the mountain-side by a track
escarped in the rock itself. If this ever existed, its
traces will still be visible. I am most curious to know this
fact. I can see the profound impression it has made on the
youth's mind, by the various ways in which he recurs to it,
and the deep emotion it always evokes. At times, indeed, his
revelations grow into something like actual descriptions of
an event he had witnessed; as, for instance, last night he
started from his sleep, his brow all covered with
perspiration, and his eyes glaring wildly. 'Hush!' he cried;
'hush! He is crossing the garden, now; there he is at the
door; lie still--lie still.' I tried to induce him to talk
on, but he shuddered timidly, and merely said, 'It's all
over, he has strewn leaves over the spot, let us go away.'
you will perhaps say that I attach undue importance to what
may be the mere outpourings of a fevered intellect, but
there is an intensity in the feeling which accompanies them,
and, moreover, there is a persistence in the way he always
comes back to them, that are not like the transient terrors
that haunt distracted minds. No, Michel, there is a mystery,
and a dreadful one, connected with this vision. Remember!
that the secret of Godfrey's death has never been cleared
up; the breach which separated him from these Daltons was
then at its widest. Dalton's character you are familiar
with; and, although abroad at that time, who can say what
agencies may not have worked for him? Give your serious
consideration to these facts, and tell me what you think.
You know me too well and too long to suppose that I am
actuated by motives of mere curiosity, or simply the desire
to trace the history of a crime. I own to you, that with all
my horror of blood, I scarcely grieve as I witness the
fruitless attempts of English justice to search out the
story of a murder. I feel a sort of satisfaction at the
combat between Saxon dulness and Celtic craft--between the
brute force of the conqueror and the subtle intelligence of
the conquered--that tells me of a time to come when these
relations shall be reversed. Acquit me, therefore, of any
undue zeal for the observance of laws that only remind me of
our slavery. However clear and limpid the stream may look, I
never forget that its source was in foulness! I am impelled
here by a force that my reason cannot account for. My
boyhood was, in some manner, bound up with this Godfrey's
fate. I was fatherless when he died! could he have been my
father? This thought continually recurs to me! Such a
discovery would be of great value to me just now; the
question of legitimacy would be easily got over, as I seek
for none of the benefits of succession. I only want what
will satisfy the Sacred College. My dear Michel, I commit
all this to your care and industry; give me your aid and
your advice. Should it happen that Dalton was involved in
the affair, the secret might have its value. This old field-
marshal's pride of name and family could be turned to good
account.
"I must tell you that since I have overheard this boy's
ravings, I have studiously avoided introducing my Irish
protg into the sickroom. My friend, Paul Meekins, might
be a most inconvenient confidant, and so I shall keep him
under my own eye till some opportunity occurs to dispose of
him. He tells me that his present tastes are all
ecclesiastical.   Do you want a sacristan? if so, he would
be your man. There is no such trusty subordinate as the
fellow with what the French call 'a dark antecedent;' and
this I suspect to be his case.
"I have well wearied you, my dear friend, and yet have I not
told you half of what I feel on this strange matter. I am
little given to tremble at shadows, and still there are
terrors over me that I cannot shake off. Write to me, then,
at once; tell me all that you see, all that you can hear.
Observe well the localities; it will be curious if the boy
be correct. Mark particularly if there be a spot of rising
ground from which the garden is visible, and the windows
that look into it, and see if there be a door out of the
garden at this point.   I could almost map out the scene
from his description.
"I have done, and now, I scarcely know whether I should feel
more relief of heart to know that all this youth has said
were fever wanderings, or words of solemn meaning. It is
strange how tranquilly I can move through the great events
of life, and yet how much a thing like this can shake my
nerve; but I suppose it is ever so, and that we are great or
little as the occasion makes us.
"I have just heard that Lady Hester Onslow has gone over to
Ireland. She will probably be at Corrig-O'Neal. If so, you
can present yourself to her as my old and intimate friend,
and this will afford you an opportunity of examining the
scene at leisure. I enclose you a few lines to serve as an
introduction. Adieu, my dear friend.
"You have often sighed over the obscurity of your position,
and the unambitious life of a parish priest. Believe me, and
from my heart I say it, I would willingly exchange all the
rewards I have won, all that I could ever hope to win, for
one week--one short week--of such calm quiet as breathes
under the thatched roof of your little cottage.
"I leave this for Vienna to-morrow, to thank the minister;
and with good reason, too, since without his assistance the
Pope would have shrunk from the bold policy. Thence I go to
Rome; but within a fortnight I shall be back in Florence,
where I hope to hear from you. If all goes well, we shall
meet soon.--Yours, in much affection,
Mathew D'Esmonde."
As the Abb finished this letter, he turned to look at a short note,
which, having opened and scanned over, he had thrown on the table beside
him. It was from Albert Jekyl, who wrote to inform him that Lord Norwood
had just arrived in Florence from Ireland, where he had left Lady
Hester; that so far as he, Jekyl, could make out, the Viscount had made
an offer of marriage, and been accepted.
"It will be for you, my dear Abb," added he, "to ascertain
this fact positively, as, independently of the long journey
at this inclement season, it would be a very serious injury
to me were it known that I advanced pretensions that were
not responded to. He who has never failed must not risk a
defeat. Pray lose no time in investigating this affair, for
Florence is filling fast, and my future plans will depend on
your reply."
The priest bestowed little attention on the small gossipry that filled
up the page. His eye, however, caught the name of Midchekoff, and he
read,----
"The Prince returned last Tuesday to the Moskova, but no one
has seen him, nor has any one been admitted within the
gates. Of course there are a hundred rumors as to the why
and the wherefore,----some alleging that he has received
orders of 'rclusion,' as they call it, from home, the
Emperor not being quite satisfied with his political
campaign; some, that he has taken up a grudge against the
court here, and shows his spleen in this fashion. But what
shallow reason would this be for a hermit life? and what
legitimate ground of complaint have not we, who, so to say,
possess a vested interest in his truffles and ortolans and
dry champagne? I assure you that such conduct rouses all the
democracy of my nature, and I write these lines with a red
silk cap on my head. After all, the real good he effected
was a kind of reflected light. He crushed little people, and
ground down all their puny efforts at balls, dinners, and
djeuners. He shamed into modest insignificance such a
world of snobbery, and threw an air of ridicule over 'small
early partyism' and 'family dinners.' What a world of
dyspepsia has he thus averted,----what heartburns and
heartburnings!  Oh, little people! little people! ye are a
very dreadful generation, for ye muddy the waters of
society, so that no man can drink thereof.
"Politically, we are calm and reactionary; and whether it be
thrashing has done it, I know not, but some of the Tuscans
are 'Black and Yellow' already. Not that the dear Austrians
promise to make Florence better or pleasanter. They mix
badly with our population. It is as if you threw a spoonful
of 'sauerkraut' into your 'potage  la reine!'  Besides, the
Italians are like the Chinese,----unchanged and
unchangeable,--and they detest the advent of all strangers
who would interfere with their own little, soft, sleepy, and
enervating code of wickedness.
"Pray send me three lines, just to say----Is it to be or
not to be? Rose, the tailor, is persecuting me about a
mocha-brown, for a wedding garment, which certainly would
harmonize well with the prevailing tints of my hair and
eyebrows, but I am too prudent a diplomatist to incur
'extraordinaires' till I be sure of 'my mission.' Therefore
write at once, for such is my confidence in your skill and
ability that I only wait your mandate to launch into kid
gloves and lacquered leather, quite regardless of expense.
"Yours, most devotedly,
"Albert JEKYL.
"I open this to say that Morlache was seen going to the
Moskora last night with two caskets of jewels. Will this
fact throw any light on the mysterious seclusion?"
These last two lines D'Esmonde read over several times; and then,
crashing the note in his hand, he threw it into the fire. Within an hour
after he was on his way to Florence.
CHAPTER XXIX. A SECRET AND A SNARE.
As we draw near to the end of our voyage, we feel all the difficulty of
collecting the scattered vessels of our convoy; and while signalizing
the "clippers" to shorten sail, we are calling on the heavy sailers to
crowd "all their canvas."
The main interest of our story would keep us beside Frank Dalton,
whose fate seemed daily to vacillate,----now threatening gloomily, now
rallying into all the brightness of hope. By slow and cautious journeys
the old Count proceeded to remove him to Vienna, where he expected soon
to-be joined by Kate. Leaving them, then, to pursue their road by steps
far too slow for our impatience, we hasten along with D'Esmonde, as,
with all the speed he could accomplish, he made for Florence.
Occasionally he tried to amuse himself and divert his thoughts by
conversing with Meekins, who accompanied him; but although the man's
shrewdness was above the common, and his knowledge of the world very
considerable, D'Esmonde quickly saw that a thick cloak of reserve
covered the real man on all occasions, and that his true nature lay many
a fathom deep below that smooth surface. The devout respect which he
felt for the Abb might, perhaps, have increased this reserve; for
Meekins was an Irish peasant, and never forgot the deference due to a
priest.
Accustomed to read men at sight, D'Esmonde would give himself no trouble
in deciphering a page which promised little to reward the labor; and
so, after a while, he left his companion to occupy the "box," while he
himself followed his own thoughts alone and undisturbed. Now and then
he would be aroused from his deep reveries by remarking the reverential
piety of the peasants as they passed some holy shrine or some
consecrated altar. Then, indeed, Meekins displayed a fervor so unlike
the careless indifference of the native, that D'Esmonde was led to
reflect upon the difference of their natures, and speculate on how far
this devotion of character was innate in the Irishman, or merely the
result of circumstances.
There was an expression of eager, almost painful meaning, too, in the
man's face as he muttered his prayers, that struck the keen eyes of the
Abb; and he could not avoid saying to himself, "That fellow has a load
upon his heart. Fear, and not hope, is the mainspring of his devotions."
At another moment D'Esmonde might have studied the case as a
philosopher studies a problem,--merely for the exercise it may give his
faculties,--but his own cares were too pressing and too numerous for
more than a passing notice.
The night was falling as they gained the crest of the mountain
over Florence; D'Esmonde stopped the carriage on the hill above the
"Moskova," and gazed steadily for some moments on the spot. The villa,
partly shrouded in trees, was brilliantly illuminated; the lights
gleamed and sparkled through the foliage, and, as he listened, the sound
of rich music came floating on the air.
"This looks little like seclusion," thought he. "These are signs of some
great festivity." As he drew up to the gate, however, he found it closed
and locked. Not a carriage was to be seen. Even the usual lamps were
unlighted, and all appeared deserted and unoccupied. D'Esmonde stood
for a few seconds buried in thought; his emotion was deep and heartfelt;
for, as he grasped the iron bars of the gate, his strong frame shook and
trembled. "True--true!" muttered he to himself in an accent of almost
bursting agony,--"I could not have given thee this, Lola, and for this
alone hadst thou any heart!" He leaned his face against the gate,
and sobbed heavily. "What poison," cried he, in a voice of
bitterness,--"what poison there must be in unholy passion, when it can
move a heart like mine, after years and years of time! To think that not
all the glory of a great cause, all the pride of successful ambition,
striving for rewards the very highest,--all that I possess of power and
influence,--all, all should give way to the grief for a half-forgotten,
unreturned love! How poor a thing the heart is, when we fancy its
desires to be noblest and highest!"
This burst of passionate grief over, he slowly returned to the carriage
and pursued his way to Florence; and, entering the city, he drove for
the house of Racca Morlache. The Jew was not at home, but was to return
by eleven o'clock, at which hour he had ordered supper for a guest and
himself. D'Esmonde lay down on a sofa, and fell asleep. Wearied as he
was, his watchfulness soon detected the approach of footsteps; and,
as he listened, he heard the voice of a stranger in colloquy with the
servant. The door opened at the same time, and Lord Norwood entered.
D'Esmonde only waited for the servant to retire, when he sprang forward
to salute him.
"Oh! I thought you were at the camp, or at Vienna, or somewhere to the
north'ard," said the Viscount, coolly.
"I was so, my Lord; and there I should have remained, if a pressing duty
had not recalled me to Florence."
"You have always so many irons in the fire, Abb, that it requires some
skill to keep them all hot."
"You are right, my Lord; some skill, and some practice too."
"And do you never burn your fingers?" said the other, sarcastically.
"Very rarely, my Lord; for when I meddle with fire, I generally make use
of my friends' hands."
"By Jove, it's not a bad plan!" cried the Viscount, laughing; for,
as the priest well knew, he had a most lively appreciation for every
species of knavery, and entertained real respect for all who practised
it. "You are a very downy cove, Master D'Esmonde," said he, gazing at
him; "and you 'd have made a very shining figure on the Turf, had your
fortune thrown you in that direction."
"Perhaps so, my Lord," said the Abb, carelessly. "My own notion is,
that fair natural gifts are equal to any exigencies ever demanded of us;
and that the man of average talent, if he have only energy and a strong
will, has no superior to dread."
"That may do well enough," said Norwood, rising and pacing the
room,--"that may do well enough in the common occurrences of life, but
it won't do on the Turf, Abb. The fellows are too artful for you there.
There are too many dodges and tricks and windings. No, no, believe
me; nothing has a chance in racing matters, without perfect and safe
'information;' you know what that means."
"It is precisely the same thing in the world at large," said D'Esmonde.
"The very cleverest men rush into embarrassments and involve themselves
in difficulties for which there is no issue, simply for want of what you
call 'information.' Even yourself, my Lord," said he, dropping his voice
to a low and distinct whisper,--"even yourself may discover that you owe
safety to a Popish priest."
"How do you mean? What do you allude to?" cried Norwood, eagerly.
"Sit down here, my Lord. Give me a patient hearing for a few minutes. We
have fortunately a moment of unbroken confidence now; let us profit by
it."
Norwood seated himself beside the priest, without speaking, and, folding
his arms, prepared to hear him calmly.
"My Lord Norwood," said the Abb, "I will not torture you by any
prolixity, nor will I waste your time by any appeal to your forgiveness.
If my own conduct in the affair I am about to relate should not meet
your approval, it is enough that I have satisfied my own conscience."
"Go on--go on," said Norwood, in a tone of almost sarcasm; "I see that
you have injured me, let me hear how and where."
"You shall hear both, my Lord, and briefly too. I have only to invoke
your memory, and the story is told. You remember being at Salamanca,
in the year 18----? you remember, too, a certain ballerina of the Grand
Opera? You had seen her first at Seville--"
"Yes----; yes," broke in Norwood, reddening deeply; "I know what you
mean--the girl was my mistress."
"Stay, my Lord. Do not dishonor yourself; she was your wife,--legally
and formally married to you,--the registry of the act is in existence,
and the priest who performed the ceremony now stands before you."
"By Heaven!" said Norwood, springing to his feet,
"You are a bold fellow to dare this game with me! and to try it in
such a place as this!"
"Ay, my Lord, the river rolls dark and silently beside us," said
D'Esmonde, calmly; "and the Arno has covered up many a more dreadful
deed; but I have no fears,--not one. I am unarmed, in strength I am
certainly not your equal, and yet, I repeat it, my heart assures me that
I stand in no peril."
For an instant Norwood seemed to hesitate how to act. The great veins of
his face and forehead became swollen and knotted, and he breathed with
the rushing sound of severe, restrained passion. At last, as if to guard
himself against any sudden impulse of anger, he walked round and seated
himself at the opposite side of the table.
D'Esmonde resumed as calmly as before: "Yes, my Lord, Lola took care
that everything should be regular and in form; and the names of
Gerald Acton and Lola de Seviglia are inscribed on the records of the
Collegiate Chapel. Two of the witnesses are still living; one of them,
then a poor boy carrying messages for the convent, is now captain in the
Pope's Guard."
"Come, come,----enough of this," cried Norwood, impatiently. "I see
the drift of it all. When the Church interposes her kind offices, the
question resolves itself always into money. How much--how much?"
"You mistake greatly, my Lord; but your error does not offend me. I know
too well how men of your form of belief regard men of mine! I am
not here either to combat a prejudice, or assert a right. I tell you,
therefore, calmly and dispassionately, that no demand is made upon you.
There is no siege laid against you, in person or in purse."
"Then how does the matter concern me, if this girl be alive?--and even
of that I have my doubts--"
"You need have none," said D'Esmonde, interruptingly. "Lady
Norwood-----"
"Stop! By Heaven! if you dare to give her that name, I'll not answer for
myself."
"I call her as she styles herself,----as she is called by all around
her. Yes, my Lord, the shame is as open as gossip and malevolence can
make it. The foreigner is but too glad when he can involve an English
name and title in a reproach that we are prone to cast upon him. A
peeress is a high mark for scandal! Who stoops to ask how or when or
where she became this? Who interposes a charitable word of explanation
or of incredulity? From what you know of life, on what side, think you,
will lie the ingenuity and craft? Whether will the evidence preponderate
to prove her your wife or to exonerate you? At all events, how will
the matter read in England? I speak not of your ruined hopes of an
alliance befitting your high station. This is beyond repairing! But
are you ready to meet the shame and ignominy of the story? Nothing is
too base, nothing too infamous, for an imputation. Will any one, I ask
of you--will any one assert that you are ignorant of all this? Would any
one believe who heard it? Will not the tale be rather circulated with
all its notes and comments? Will not men fill up every blank by the
devices of their own bad ingenuity? Will not some assert that you are a
partner in your own infamy, and that your fingers have touched the price
of your shame?"
"Stop!" cried Norwood. "Another word--one syllable more like this--and,
by the Heaven above us, your lips will never move again!"
"It would be a sorry recompense for my devotion to you, my Lord," said
the Abb, with a profound sigh.
"Devotion!" repeated Norwood, in a voice of insulting sarcasm; "as if
I were to be tricked by this! Keep these artifices for some trembling
devotee, some bedridden or palsied worshipper of saintly relics and holy
legerdemain; I 'm not the stuff for such deceptions!"
"And yet, my Lord, what possible benefit can accrue to myself from this
ungracious task? With all your ingenuity, what personal gain can result
to me?"
"What care I for your motives, sir?" responded Norwood, fiercely. "I
only know that you had never incurred so critical a hazard without an
object. You either seek to exert a menace over me, or to be revenged on
her."
"Alas, my Lord, I see how little hope I should have of vindicating
myself before you. Your estimate of the Papists suggests nothing above
craft and dishonesty. You will not believe that human affections, love
of country, and all the other associations of a home, are strong in
hearts that beat beneath the serge frock of the priest. Still less do
you know the great working principle of our Faith,--the law which binds
us, for every unjust act we have done in life, to make an expiation in
this world. For many a year has my conscience been burdened with this
offence. But for my weak compliance with your request, I should never
have performed this ceremony. Had I been firm, you had been saved.
Nay, in my eagerness to serve you, I only worked your ruin; for, on
confessing to my Superior what I had done, he at once took measures to
ratify the act of marriage, and my rank as a deacon took date from the
day before the ceremony." D'Esmonde seemed not to notice the gesture of
indignation with which Norwood heard these words, but he went on: "It
is, then, to make some requital for this wrong, that I now risk all that
your anger may inflict upon me."
"Where is this woman?" cried Norwood, savagely, and as if impatient at a
vindication for which he felt no interest. "Where is she?"
"She is here, my Lord," said the other, meekly.
"Here? How do you mean? Not in this house?"
"I mean that she is now in Florence."
"What, living openly here?--calling herself by my name?"
"She lives in all the splendor of immense wealth, and as openly as the
protection of Prince Midchekoff----"
"Midchekoff----Midchekoff, did you say?" cried Norwood, in a burst of
passion.
"Yes, my Lord. The haughty Russian exults in the insult that this offers
to the proudest aristocracy of Europe. This is the vengeance he exacts
for the cold disdain he experienced in London, and all that reserve that
met his attempts in English society."
"How came she here?--who sent for her?--who devised this scheme? Tell me
the whole truth, for, by Heaven, if I see you equivocate, you'll never
quit this chamber living!"
"I' ll tell you everything, truthfully and fairly," said the Abb, with
calm dignity; and now in a few words he traced Nina's life, from the
time of her residence under Lady Hester's roof, to the moment of her
return to Florence. He omitted nothing; neither her intimacy with Jekyl
nor her passion for George Onslow. Even to the incident of the torn
dress on the night of the flight, he told all.
Norwood listened with the stern collectedness of one who had nerved
himself for a great effort. Although the blood spurted from his
compressed lips, and the nails of his fingers were buried in his hands,
he uttered never a word. At last, when D'Esmonde paused, he said,----
"And you knew all this?"
"Nothing whatever of it I never chanced to see her at Florence, nor had
I the slightest suspicion of her presence there."
"Lady Hester knew it? Miss Dalton knew it?"
"I suspect not at that time."
"They know it now, then?"
"Who does not? Is not Florence ringing with the story? When has scandal
fallen upon such material for its malevolence? Such dramatis person
as a prince, an English peer, and his peeress, are not of every day's
good fortune!"
"Be cautious how you harp on this theme, priest. In your good zeal to
hammer the metal soft you may chance to crush your own finger."
"I must be frank with you, my Lord, whatever the hazard. He would be a
sorry surgeon who, after giving his patient all the agony of the knife,
stopped short, and left the malady unextirpated."
"Come now, D'Esmonde," said Norwood, as with a strong grasp he drew the
other down on the sofa beside him, "You have your debt to acquit in
this matter as well as myself. I do not seek to know how or why or
upon whom. Your priestly craft need not be called into exercise. I
want nothing of your secrets; I only ask your counsel. That much in our
common cause you cannot refuse me. What shall I do in this affair? No
cant, no hypocritical affectation of Christian forgiveness, none of that
hackneyed advice that you dole out to your devotees; speak freely, and
like a man of the world. What is to be done here?"
"If the marriage admitted of dispute or denial, I should say disavow
it," said the priest "It is too late for this."
"Go on. What next?"
"Then comes the difficulty. To assert your own honor, you must begin by
a recognition of her as your wife. This looks rash, but I see no other
course. You cannot call Midchekoff to a reckoning on any other grounds.
Then comes the question, is such a woman worth fighting for? or must the
only consideration be the fact that she bears your name, and that she is
the Viscountess Norwood in every society she can enter? How is this to
be borne? The stricter code of England rejects such claimants altogether
from its circle; but on the Continent they are everywhere. Will it be
possible for you to live under this open shame?"
"Your advice is, then,----shoot him!" said Norwood; and he bent his eyes
fixedly on the priest as he spoke. "It is my own notion, also. If the
choice were open to me, D'Esmonde, I 'd rather have exacted the payment
of this debt from Onslow; I hated the fellow from my very heart. Not
that I owe this Russian any good will. We have more than once been on
the verge of a quarrel. It was not my fault if it went no further.
They say, too, that he has no taste for these things. If so, one must
stimulate his appetite, that's all!--eh, D'Esmonde? Your countrymen
seldom need such provocations?"
"We have our faults, my Lord; but this is scarcely amongst their
number."
"You're right, D'Esmonde," said the other, pursuing his former line
of thought. "It's no petty penalty to exact from a fellow with fifty
thousand a year! I almost fancy I should have been a coward myself at
such a price!"
"You 'll have some difficulty in obtaining access to him, my Lord,"
remarked the Abb. "He lives in strict privacy, and refuses admission to
every one."
"But a letter will reach him?"
"It may, or it may not; besides, it may come to hand, and yet never be
acknowledged."
"What is to be done, then?"
"I 'll think over it, before we separate. I 'll try and suggest
something. But here comes Morlache; and now be cautious. Not a word to
show that you are ill at ease." The warning was scarcely spoken, when
the Jew entered.
Morlache knew D'Esmonde too well to be surprised at seeing him anywhere
or at any moment He saluted him, therefore, as though they had met the
very day before, and the party sat down to supper, in all the seeming
ease of unburdened minds.
They chatted over the politics of Italy, and the change that had come
over Florence since the last time they had sat together in that chamber.
"It was a noisy scene, that night," said Morlache; "but the streets are
quiet enough now."
"Quiet as a corpse," said Norwood, sternly. "You had no other nostrum
for tranquillity but to extinguish life."
"What you regard as death, my Lord," said the Abb, "is only a trance.
Italy will rise grander and more powerful than ever. One element alone
has survived through all the convulsive throes, and all the changing
fortunes of this land,--the Papacy. The terrible wars of rival cities
and states, the more bloody conquests of ambitious houses, leave not a
trace behind them; but Rome holds on her proud way, and, like the great
river of the poet, 'Labitur et labetur in omne volubilis oevum. '"
"To which I beg, in a less classical quotation, to rejoin, 'Confound
your politics,'" cried Norwood, laughing. "Come, Morlache, let us
turn to a humbler theme. Who have you got here; who are coming for the
winter?"
"Say, rather, my Lord, who are going away; for there is a general flight
from Florence. All what hotel folk call good families are hastening off
to Rome and Naples."
"What's the meaning of this, then?"
"It is not very difficult, perhaps, to explain," said the Jew; "luxuries
are only the creations of mere circumstance. The rarity of one land
may be the very satiety of another; and the iced-punch that tastes so
exquisite at Calcutta would be but sorry tipple at Coppermine River.
Hence you will see, my Lord, that the English who come here for
wickedness find the place too bad for them. There is no zest to their
vice; they shock nobody, they outrage nothing,--in fact, they are only
as bad as their neighbors."
"I suppose it's neither better nor worse than I remember it these dozen
years and more?" said Norwood.
"Probably not, my Lord, in fact; but, in outward appearance, it has
assuredly degenerated. People behave badly everywhere, but this is the
only city in Europe where it is deemed right to do so."
"Since when have you taken up the trade of moralist, Master Morlache?"
said Norwood, with a sneer.
"I 'll answer that question," broke in D'Esmonde. "Since the exchange on
England has fallen to forty-three and a half, Morlache sees his clients
diminish, and is consequently as angry with vice as he had been with its
opposite, if the same result had come to pass."
"I own," said the Jew, with a sneer, "the present order of things is far
more profitable to the confessional than to the comptoir."
"That's the truth, I've no doubt of it," broke in Norwood, laughing. "A
low tariff has given a great impulse to the trade of wickedness."
"Taking your own illustration, my Lord, we are 'Protectionists,'" said
D'Esmonde; "whereas you Protestants are the 'Free-traders' in vice."
"A plague on both your houses, say I," cried Norwood, yawning.
"So, then, Morlache, neither you nor I would find this a desirable
residence?"
"I fear it will not repay either of us, my Lord," said the Jew, with a
sly look.
"The world is growing wonderfully wide awake," said Norwood. "When I
entered life, any fellow with a neat hand at billiards, a fair knowledge
of cart or short whist, good whiskers, and a well-cut waistcoat,
might have eked out a pretty existence without any risk, and very little
exertion. But see what the march of intelligence has done! There 's
not an Eton boy, not an unfledged 'sub' in a marching regiment, not an
unpaid attach at a small court could n't compete with you now in any of
these high acquirements. I do not fret myself usually about what is to
come after my time; but I really wonder how the next generation will
get on at all."
"Civilization moves like the pendulum, my Lord," said D'Esmonde; "the
next swing will be retrograde. And, by the way, that reminds me of
Russia, and Russia of Prince Midchekoff. Is it true that he is recalled,
Morlache?"
"Not that I know. That report is always circulated when there are no
dinners at the villa. Just as Marshal Soult is said to have won or lost
the battle of Toulouse according to the momentary estimation he is held
in."
"You'll hear for certain, my Lord," said D'Esmonde, addressing Norwood;
"You are going up there to-night?"
Norwood muttered an assent, and waited to see how this sally was to end.
"Ah! you are going there to-night," repeated Morlache, in some surprise.
"Are you one of the privileged, then?"
"Of course he is," interposed D'Esmonde, authoritatively.
"Will you do me a very great favor, then, my Lord?" said Morlache,
----"which is to take charge of this small casket. I promised to take
it myself; but it is so late now, and I am so wearied, that I shall feel
much bound to you for the service."
"You can easily acquit the debt of obligation, Morlache," said
D'Esmonde; "for my Lord was just asking me, before you came in, if he
could take the liberty of begging the loan of your carriage to take him
up to the Moskova. You are aware that it would not be quite proper to
take a hired carriage, just now, up to the villa; that, as the Prince
affects to be absent----"
"To be sure," broke in Morlache. "I am but too happy to accommodate your
Lordship. Your precaution was both delicate and well thought of. Indeed,
I greatly doubt that they would admit a fiacre at all."
"I suppose I should have had to walk from the gate," said Norwood, who
now saw the gist of the Abb's stratagem.
"Morlache's old gray is a passport that requires no visa," said
D'Esmonde. "You 'll meet neither let nor hindrance with him in front of
you. You may parody the great statesman's peroration, and say, 'Where
the King cannot enter, he can.' Such is it to be a banker's horse!"
Norwood heard little or nothing of this remark. Deeply sunk in his own
thoughts, he arose abruptly from the table.
"You are not going away, my Lord? You are surely not deserting that
flask of Marcobrunner that we have only tasted?"
But Norwood never heard the words, and continued to follow his own train
of reflection. Then, bending over D'Esmonde, he said, "In case we should
require to cross the frontier at Lavenza, must we have passports?"
"Nothing of the kind. There is no police, no inquiry whatever."
"Good-bye, then. If you should not hear from, you will hear of me,
Abb. There are a few things which, in the event of accident, I will
jot down in writing. You 'll look to them for me. Good-evening, or
good-morning,--I scarcely know which." And, with all the habitual
indolence of his lounging manner, he departed.
D'Esmonde stood for a few seconds silent, and then said, "Is the noble
Viscount deep in your books?"
"Deeper than I wish him to be," said the Jew.
"Have no fears on that account. He 'll soon acquit all his debts," said
the other. "Good-night, Morlache." And with this abrupt leave-taking he
withdrew.
CHAPTER XXX. A SAD EXIT.
The French Secretary of Legation was just going to bed as his servant
handed him a card from Lord Norwood, with a few words scribbled in
pencil.
"Yes, by all means. Tell my Lord to come in," said he; and Norwood
entered.
"You remember an old pledge you once made me," said the Viscount,
smiling. "I have come to claim it."
"Diantre! the case must be pressing that would not wait till
daylight."
"So it is; and so you will agree with me in thinking it when I tell you
all," said Norwood. "The first point is, may I reckon upon you?"
"Of course; my word is sacred."
"Secondly, have you pistols that you can depend upon? Mine have been
stopped at Milan by the police."
"They are Jacquard's best," said the Frenchman; "and in your hand
ought not to disgrace their maker."
"Dress, then, and come along with me. This affair must be disposed of
quickly."
"I'm at your orders," said the Frenchman, gayly. "I suppose you will be
kind enough to tell me something more as we go along."
Norwood nodded an assent, and sat down before the fire and crossed his
arms on his breast.
"Was it a quarrel at play?" asked the Frenchman, after an interval of
silence.
"No!" was the abrupt reply.
"All the better. It is the only affair of this kind I cannot endure. Is
there a woman in it?"
"Yes."
"Ah! I perceive," said the other, with a laugh. "A married woman?"
"Yes."
"And who is this happy husband, this time?" asked he, flippantly.
"I am," replied Norwood, in a low and solemn voice.
"You! you! I never thought--never suspected you of being married,
Norwood. Pray be a little more explicit. Let me hear the whole story."
"Later on, not now. I want to think of something else at this moment Are
your pistols fine in the trigger?"
"Excessively so; a fly would almost suffice to move them. Is he
English?"
"No."
"Not a countryman of my own, I hope?"
"No. It is Midchekoff, the Russian."
"Diantre! what a mark to shoot at! But they tell me that he never does
go out,--that he refuses this kind of thing."
"He shall not do so this time," said Norwood, with a vehement energy of
manner.
"Well, I 'm ready now; but I must say that I should like to hear
something of what we are about."
"There will be ample time for all as we go along. We shall drive to the
villa. It is necessary to obtain an interview with himself. This done,
I will give the provocation, showing that you are ready and in waiting;
there can be no delay."
"But he will need a friend?"
"He must take one of his secretaries,----his valet if he prefer it I 'll
give no time for evasive negotiation."
"I cannot be a party to an affair like this, Norwood. Whatever the wrong
you seek to avenge, this is not the mode to do it."
"Say so at once, then," said Norwood, rising. "Tell me that you gave a
rash promise, and are sorry for it Better the refusal now than when it
be too late to retract."
"You mistake me; I have no wish to unsay one single word I ever spoke to
you. I only ask for such an explanation as I have a right to demand."
"You shall know everything; pray spare me telling it twice over. There
is no use in opening one's wound till he comes to the surgeon. Enough
now, that I tell you this man owes me a full and fair reparation for a
great wrong; I am equally determined on exacting it. If this does not
satisfy you, step into the carriage and you shall hear the whole story.
I can tell it, perhaps, when we are rattling along over the stones in
the dark." And so saying, he sat down and leaned his head on the table,
as though he would not be disturbed. The Frenchman went on with
his dressing, rapidly; and at last, pronouncing himself ready, they
descended the stairs together in silence, and entered the carriage.
As they drove on, Norwood never spoke; and his companion, respecting
perhaps the occasion of his silence, did not utter a word. At last they
arrived at the summit of the hill, and looked down upon the city, over
which the gray tints of coming day were breaking. The great Duomo and
the Palazzo Vecchio lay in massive shadow, and it was only at intervals
along the Arno that a flickering gleam of cold light fell. The scene, in
all its calm and stillness, was grand and solemn.
"How unlike the Florence of sun and bright sky, how unlike the brilliant
city of dissipation and pleasure!" said Norwood; "and so it is with
individuals: we are just what light and shadow make us! Now listen to
me." He then related the whole story of his first meeting with Lola,
down to the moment of D'Esmonde's revelation. "I know well," said he,
"there may be a dozen ways to look on the affair besides that which I
have chosen. I might dispute the marriage; I might disavow the whole
proceeding; I might, naturally enough, leave such a woman to her
fate,--she never could be anything to me; but I cannot relinquish the
opportunity of a reckoning with this Russian. The insolence of his
wealth gives all the venom to this outrage, and I 'll shoot him! All the
splendor of his riches can avail him but little now. And, except some
more gold upon his coffin, and a richer pall to cover it, he has no
advantage over me, ruined and beggared as I am. As to my scores with the
world at large, I am about quits. They cheated me when I was a
young, unsuspecting boy, trusting and believing every one. I repaid
them, as my own time came. Men understand this thoroughly, but women
never do. The moment you cease to be their dupe, they hate you. As to
my debts, they gave me little trouble when living, they 're not likely
to disturb my rest in the churchyard; and as for friends, there is not
one alive to whom I could send a last word of affection; and yet--you'll
scarcely believe it--with all this I 'd like to live; although if you
ask me why, I couldn't tell it Perhaps it is this," cried he, after a
pause; "the yelping pack that cried me down in my absence will do so now
without fear or restraint The stories of me that once were whispered
will now be told aloud. Slander and calumny can go abroad without a
dread of consequences. But even that is a poor thing to live for!"
The Frenchman's philosophy had taught him but few sympathies with
such gloomy ideas, and he tried in every way to rally his friend; but
Norwood's mind was full of very different sorrows from those he had
dwelt upon. It was the canker of a disappointed, abortive life was
eating into his heart A fair fortune squandered, a noble name tarnished,
a high position sacrificed, and now an ignominious quarrel to close his
career,--these were the reflections which, far more embittering than all
his words, now tortured and agonized him.
"Come," said he, suddenly, "we had better move forward. It is getting
nigh daybreak, and our Prince will soon be retiring to his room."
They now drove rapidly on for some time, and at last reached the gate,
where the porter, at once recognizing Mor-lache's carriage and livery,
admitted them without a word.
"You 'll have to wait for me here, Count," said Norwood, when they
stopped at the door. "I 'll contrive not to keep you long; but this part
of the matter I must do alone." The bell had scarcely done ringing when
the door was opened. "The Prince is still at table?" said Norwood, half
in assertion, half in inquiry; and then, with a gesture to the servant
to show the way, he overawed all scruples about admitting him. "Is he
alone?" said the Viscount, as they went along.
"No, sir. The Countess is with him."
"Say that a person on most pressing business is here, and must speak
with him at once."
"The Prince always requires the name, sir. I dare not address him
without it."
"Say that I am come from Morlache's,----that I have something to
deliver into his own hands."
Norwood placed the casket on the table as he spoke. The servant retired,
and speedily returned, requesting Norwood to follow him. As the door was
flung open, Norwood heard voices; he stopped and hesitated. Either an
impulse of passion or some change of purpose worked within him; for,
as he stood, he grasped the edge of the door, and swayed to and fro for
some seconds.
"Let him come out,--let him come here," cried he, in a loud voice.
A low murmur of persons speaking was heard within, and suddenly the
rustling sound of a female dress was followed by the bang of a door; and
then Norwood entered, and, closing the door, locked it behind him.
The grating sound of the key made the Russian turn his head suddenly
around, and his eyes met Norwood's.
"What! my Lord Norwood!" cried he, in amazement. "They never told me--"
"If they had, in all likelihood I should not have been admitted," was
the stern reply.
"I must own it is an honor for which I was scarcely prepared, my Lord,"
said the other.
"You never spoke more truly, sir," said Norwood. "Men like yourself
fancy that their solvency in matters of money implies as much in all the
various relations of life, and that, as they know not what a dun means,
they are to enjoy an equal immunity from every demand of honor."
"As you are evidently speaking under some strange misapprehension, my
Lord, I hesitate about accepting your words in any offensive sense."
"You said you were unprepared for my visit, sir, and I believe you,
as you will be, doubtless, unprepared for the object of it Prince
Midchekoff, I have come here to request your company across the
Tuscan frontier; the matter is of sufficient importance to warrant the
inconvenience. You will take any or as many of your household as you
please, but you shall accompany me from this spot Come, sir, your air of
easy indifference is for once mistimed. You see before you a man whose
utmost effort can scarcely repress the passion that stirs within him.
Neither your coolness nor your cowardice--for the quality goes by either
name--can avail you here. I must and I will have reparation."
"Until I am aware of the injury,--until you tell me how or in what I
have wronged you--"
"How shall I teach you a lesson of honor; sir," cried Norwood, boiling
over with rage, "so that you may comprehend, even for a moment, the
feeling of a gentleman? You cannot affect ignorance as to who and what
is the woman that sat there. You need not drive me to the indignity of
calling her my wife! You know it well, and you knew all the disgrace you
were heaping on a class who rejected your intimacy. None of this mock
surprise, sir! If you compel me to it, I 'll fling open that door, call
all your household around you, and before them I 'll insult you, so that
even your serf-blood will rebel against the outrage."
"This is madness,----downright insanity, my Lord," said Midchekoff,
rising and moving towards the bell.
"Not so, sir," said Norwood, interposing. "My passion is now mastered.
You shall not escape on that pretence. There are my pistols; only one of
them is loaded; take your choice, for I see that outside of this room I
shall seek in vain for satisfaction."
"This would be a murder."
"It shall be, by Heaven, if you delay!" cried Norwood. "I have the right
and the will to shoot you like a dog. If there be no honor, is there
not even some manhood in your heart? Take your weapon; you hesitate
still,--take that, then!" And he struck him with his open hand across
the face.
[Illustration: 419]
Midchekoff snatched the pistol convulsively, and, placing the muzzle on
Norwood's breast, fired. With a wild cry he staggered and fell dead upon
the floor. The Prince flung open the door, and rang the bell violently.
In a moment the room was filled with servants. "Send Jocasse here,"
said Midchekoff; and his chief secretary entered in all haste and
trepidation. "This is an affair for the police, Jocasse," said the
Prince, coolly. "Send for the brigadier, and let him come to my room."
"Suicide shows a great manque de savoir vivre," said Haggerstone, as
the news of the event was circulated through Florence. And the mot
survived the memory of its victim.
CHAPTER XXXI. THE SUMMONS.
They who only knew Vienna in its days of splendor and magnificence could
scarcely have recognized that city as it appeared on the conclusion of
the great revolt which had just convulsed the Empire. The great walls
were riddled with shot and shell; vast breaches in them opened out a
view of even more dreadful ruin within; streets choked up with fallen
houses, and wide squares encumbered with blocks of masonry and blackened
timbers. The terrible traces of barricade struggles still remained; but
more significant than all these was the downcast, sorrow-struck look of
a population once known as the gayest and most light-hearted of Europe.
The air of suffering and poverty extended to everything. No signs of the
once luxury and wealth of that rich nobility. Not an equipage was to
be seen! The passing and repassing of troops gave the only movement
observable in the streets. Strong guards and patrols marched past, with
all the precaution and preparation of a state of war. The dragoons sat
in their saddles, carbine in hand, as if but waiting for a signal to
engage; while, in the half-defiant stare of the populace might be read
the spirit of men who had not yet resigned themselves to defeat.
Most of the shops were closed, and, even of those still open, the
display of wares was scanty and miserable; rather seeming as if the
effort were made to conciliate the favor of the Government than with
any hope of gain. The cafs were deserted, except by the military; and
they--far from indulging the jocund mirth and laughter which was their
wont--were now serious and anxious-looking, regarding the passers-by
with a distrustful glance, and seeming as though they felt that the
interval was less peace than an armistice.
Cannon were in position on the Stephan's Platz and the Graben, and the
gunners stood ready, as if on parade. Officers of the staff, too, and
orderlies rode hastily to and fro, showing that no rash reliance was
placed on the quietude of the capital, and that the hour of conflict, if
it were to come, should not find them unprepared. In vain the stranger
might have sought for that more than feudal splendor which once was the
type of this brilliant city! The gorgeous liveries of the Bohemian,
or the more tasteful grandeur of the Magyar noble were no longer to be
seen. The varied costumes of the Banat and the Wallach, which gave such
character to many a rude equipage, the barbaric finery, which recalled
the old struggles with the Crescent, which marked the rank of some
border chieftain, was gone. Vienna presented nothing but its troops of
soldiers, and its mournful, sad-looking population, moving listlessly
about, or standing in groups to gaze on the disastrous ruins of their
once proud city.
The "Ambassador Street," where formerly the armorial shields of every
reigning house of Europe were wont to be displayed, was now almost
untenanted.
With some the Imperial Government was at open war; with others
estrangement and coldness prevailed; while some, again, were represented
by officials of inferior rank,--all signs of troubled and precarious
times, when kings no longer knew what future awaited them!
It was here, formerly, that the most brilliant society of the capital
was to be found; here, every night, the carriages were seen to throng,
and the whole street glow with the glare of light from brilliant
salons, or the red flame of the torches borne by the running footmen.
The proud aristocracy of every land here met; and names that recalled
the great achievements of generals and statesmen were heard in every
announcement that resounded along those corridors. But a few of these
palaces were now occupied; and for the most part were the quarters of
the generals of the army. In front of one of the largest, at whose
gate two sentinels stood, the street was littered with straw; while the
closed shutters and drawn curtains showed that sickness and suffering
were busy within. The frequent arrivals, and the passing and repassing
of messengers evinced the interest the sufferer's fate excited; and
amongst those who dismounted at the corner of the street, and with
cautious steps approached the door, more than one member of the Imperial
house was to be seen. He whose fortune inspired all these tokens of
regard was no great or illustrious general, no proud and distinguished
statesman; he was simply a young officer of hussars,--a gallant
soldier, whose fidelity had been proved under the most trying
circumstances,----our old acquaintance, Frank Dalton. Relapse after
relapse had reduced his strength to the very verge of debility, and each
day threatened to be his last Worn down by pain and suffering, the young
soldier bore a look of calm and even happy meaning. His character for
loyalty had been not only vindicated by his blood; but, through the
aid of Walstein, it was shown that he could have known nothing of the
conspiracy with which he was charged. Thus re-established in fair fame,
he saw himself the object of every care that affection could bestow.
The old Count seldom quitted him; Kate never left his bedside. Every
attention of kindness, every suggestion of love was bestowed upon him;
and a sick-bed was made the scene of more touching happiness than he had
ever known in the proudest hours of his health and vigor. Could he
have seen his dear Nelly beside him, he had no more to wish for! To die
without pressing her to his heart, without acknowledging all that
he owed to her good counsels, was now his only sorrow; and if in the
stillness of the sick-room tears would flow heavily along his cheek, and
drop, one by one, on his pillow, this was their secret source.
The Count had himself written to Nelly. Kate, too, had despatched a
letter, telling of Frank's dangerous condition, and entreating her
presence; but no reply had been returned, and they already began to fear
that some mishap had occurred, and were obliged to frame all manner
of excuses for her absence. Meanwhile, as his strength declined, his
impatience increased; and his first question, as day broke, and his last
at night, were, "What tidings of Nelly?" All his faults and errors lay
like a load upon his heart, till he could pour out the confession to
his dear sister. The post-hour of each morning was a moment of intense
anxiety to him; and the blank look which met his eager glance was the
signal for a depression that weighed down his heart during the day. From
long dwelling on this source of sorrow, his mind grew painfully acute
as to all that bore upon it; and sometimes he fancied that his uncle and
Kate knew some dreadful fact of poor Nelly, and feared to communicate
it. More than once had it occurred to him that she was dead,--that she
had sunk, broken-hearted and deserted. He did not dare to whisper this
suspicion, but he tried to insinuate his fears about her in a hundred
ways. To his sickly fancy their frankness seemed dissimulation, and
the very grief they displayed he read as the misery of an unrevealed
calamity.
Kate, with all a woman's quickness, saw what was passing in his mind,
and tried her utmost to combat it; but all in vain. To no purpose did
she open her whole heart before him, telling of her own sad history and
its disappointments. In vain did she point to a bright future, when,
strong and in spirits, Frank should accompany her in search of Nelly,
through every glen and valley of the Tyrol. The impression of some
concealment was more powerful than all these, and he but heard them as
tales invented to amuse a sick-bed. The morbid sensibility of illness
gave a significance to every trivial incident, and Kate dared not
whisper in his presence, nor even exchange a look with another, without
exciting a whole flood of doubt and suspicion in his mind.
To allay, so far as might be, these disordered terrors, they assumed
the utmost frankness in all intercourse with him, and even took pains to
exhibit an undisguised freedom on every occasion.
The letters which arrived by each morning's post were always opened in
his presence, and his prying, eager glances showed that the precaution
was not unneeded.
"What is that?" cried he, suddenly, as Kate, after reading the address
of a letter, hastily threw it on the table, and covered it with others.
"Let me see that, Kate. Who is it for?"
"It bears your name," said she, anxiously, "and has an Irish postmark;
but the hand is not known to me."
The youth took the letter in his hand, and sat gazing on it for some
minutes together.
"No," said he, at length, "I do not remember to have seen the writing
before. Read it, Kate."
She broke the seal, and at once exclaimed, "It is from Dr. Grounsell,
Frank,--a very dear and kind friend."
She ran her eyes rapidly over the lines as she spoke, and twice her
color came and went, and her hand trembled as it held the paper.
"You have bad news for me?" said the boy, with a slow, but firm
utterance; "but so that it be not of Nelly, I can bear anything!"
"It is not of Nelly," said Kate, in a tremulous voice.
"Then let me hear it," said he, calmly.
She tried to read, but the effort was beyond her strength; and although
her lips moved, no sound issued from them. At last she gained sufficient
strength to say, "It would agitate you too much, my dear brother, to
hear this now. Let us wait for a day or two, till you are stronger, and
better able to think about it."
"I have told you already, that if it be not of Nelly, I can hear it with
indifference. Read on, then, Kate."
"The meaning of it is this, Frank," cried she, hastily. "There was a
fearful crime committed some years back in Ireland,--a relative of ours,
named Godfrey, was murdered."
"Yes--yes--I know it. Go on," said he, eagerly.
"The circumstances have never come to light, and now, it would appear,
some efforts are being made to connect our name with this dreadful act;
and--and--in fact, Frank, Dr. Grounsell wishes to learn from you where
we were residing at the period in question; and if you be possessed of
any letters or papers which could show the relations existing between
our family and Mr. Godfrey."
"You must let me read this for myself, Kate," said Frank, calmly, taking
the letter from her hands; "and now leave me for a while."
With trembling steps and a sinking heart the young girl retired, to pass
hours of intense anxiety in her chamber. At last came a servant to say
that her brother desired to see her.
"I must set out for Ireland, Kate," said the sick youth, as he arose
from his chair.
"For Ireland!" cried she, gazing with terror at his wasted and worn
figure.
"A long journey, dearest, but I shall have strength for it, if you 'll
be my companion!"
"Never to leave you, Frank," cried she; and fell sobbing into his arms.
CHAPTER XXXII. INISTIOGE.
Rich as Ireland is in picturesque river scenery, we know nothing
more beautiful than the valley through which the Nore flows between
Thomastown and New Ross. The gently sloping meadows, backed by deep
woods, and dotted with cheerful farm-houses, gradually give way to a
bolder landscape as you descend the stream and enter a dark gorge, whose
high beetling sides throw their solemn shade over the river, receding at
last to form a kind of amphitheatre wherein stands the little village of
Inistioge.
More like a continental than an Irish hamlet, the cottages are built
around a wide open space planted with tall elms and traversed by many
a footpath; and here, of a summer night, are to be seen the villagers
seated or strolling about in pleasant converse,--a scene of rural peace
and happiness such as rarely is to be met with in our land of trial and
struggle. Did our time or space admit of it, we would gladly loiter in
that pleasant spot, gazing from that graceful bridge on the ivy-clad
towers, the tall and stately abbey, or the rich woods of that proud
demesne, which in every tint of foliage encircles the picture.
That "vale and winding river" were scenes of some of our boyhood's
happiest hours, and even years--those stern teachers--have not
obliterated the memory! Our task is not, however, with these
recollections, and we would now ask our reader to stand with us beneath
the shadow of the tall elms, while the little village is locked in
slumber.
It is past midnight,----all is still and tranquil; a faint moonlight
flickers through the leaves, and plays a fitful gleam upon the river.
One man alone is abroad, and he is seen to traverse the bridge with
uncertain steps, stopping at moments as if to listen, and then resuming
his solitary watch. A light, the only one in the village, twinkles
from a window of the little inn, and the door lies open, for in his
impatience he has quitted his chamber to walk abroad in the night air.
As the hours wear on, his anxiety seems to increase, and he starts and
pauses at every sound of the wind through the trees, and every cadence
of the rushing river. At last he hears the tramp of a horse,--he
bends down to listen,--it comes nearer and nearer, and in his feverish
impatience he hastens in the direction of the coming noise.
"Is that you, Michel?" he cries, in an eager accent.
"Yes, D'Esmonde, it is!" replies a voice; and the next moment the
horseman has dismounted at his side.
"What have I not suffered since you left this, Michel!" said D'Esmonde,
as he rested his forehead on the other's shoulder. "There is not an
image of terror my mind has not conjured up. Shame, ignominy, ruin, were
all before me; and had you stayed much longer away, my brain could not
have borne it."
"But, D'Esmonde, my friend--"
"Nay, nay, do not reason with me; what I feel--what I suffer--has no
relation to the calm influences of reason. I alone can pilot myself
through the rocks and quicksands of this channel. Tell me of your
mission--how has it fared?"
"Less well than I hoped for," said the other, slowly.
"I thought as much," replied D'Esmonde, in a tone of deep dejection.
"You saw him?"
"Yes, our interview lasted nigh an hour. He received me coldly,
but courteously, and entered into the question with a kind of calm
acquiescence that at first gave me good encouragement."
"To end in disappointment!" cried D'Esmonde, bitterly; and the other
made no reply. "Go on, Michel," said the Abb, after a pause; "tell me
all."
"I began," resumed the other, "by a brief reference to Godfrey's murder,
and the impenetrable mystery in which, up to this hour, it would appear
to be veiled. I related all that you had told me of the relationship
between him and the Daltons, and the causes which had broken off their
friendship. With these he seemed conversant, though I am unable to say
whether he knew more or less than what I was communicating. I dwelt as
long and as forcibly as I deemed safe on the character and habits of old
Dalton, hinting at his reckless, unprincipled career, and the wild and
lawless notions he entertained on every subject. To my great surprise,
and I confess to my discomfiture, he stopped me short by saying,----
"'You would imply, then, that he was the guilty man.'
"'You go too fast, Mr. Grounsell,' said I, calmly; 'I have come to
confer and take counsel with you, not to form rash or hasty notions on a
matter of such deep gravity. If the circumstances I shall lay before you
possess the same importance in your eyes that they do in mine, it may
be that your own conclusions will be even more than suspicious.' I
then entered upon the story of Meekins, and how a comrade of his, an
Irishman, called Noonan, confessed to him that he was the murderer of
Mr. Godfrey; that he had never known him, nor had any intercourse with
him; but was employed for the act by old Dalton, who was then residing
at Bruges. This Noonan, who was possessed of several letters of
Dalton's, had joined a Genoese vessel, fitted out for the slave-trade,
and was killed in action. Meekins had frequent conversations with him
on the subject of the murder, and, although a stranger from another
country, knew every detail of the scene and locality perfectly from
description.
"'Meekins is still living?' asked Dr. Grounsell.
"'Living, and now here,' replied I; at which he gave a start of
surprise, and, I think, of alarm.
"'Is he ready to substantiate his statement on oath?' said he.
"'That he could do so, I have no doubt,' replied I; 'that he will, or
that he ought, is perhaps a matter for calm reflection.'
"'How do you mean?' said he, hastily. 'If what he alleges be true, can
there be any hesitation as to its publicity?'
"'On that there may be grave doubts, sir,' said I. 'They whom the law
could have held responsible are already gone before another judgment
seat. Their guilt or innocence has been proven where deception or error
exist not! It is only their blameless descendants that could now pay
the penalty of their crime; and it may well be matter for consideration
whether they should be exposed to the world's shame, to expiate that
wherein they had no share----'
"'Do you yourself believe this man's story?' asked he, abruptly.
"'I see no reason to discredit it,' was my answer. 'There are moments
when doubt is more difficult than belief, and this is one of them. He
has never varied in his narrative,--he tells it to-day as he told it
yesterday,--he details family circumstances that defy invention, and
mentions events and incidents that all tally with facts.'
"'Where was he himself at the time of the murder?'
"'In South America,' he says. 'He had joined one of those patriot
expeditions which sailed from Ireland to join Bolivar.'
"'This he can prove, of course?' observed he, shrewdly.
"'I conclude he can,' replied I; 'it never occurred to me to question
it.'
"There was an interval after this, in which neither of us spoke; at last
he said, 'May I ask how you became acquainted with this man--Meekins?'
"'Through a brother clergyman, who was the means of saving his life
abroad.'
"'And the intention is,' rejoined he, in a slow and deliberate voice,
'that we should, while believing this man's statement, keep it secret?
Would not that amount to a very grave offence,--the compromise of a
felony?'
"I hesitated as he said this, not knowing well which way the discussion
might turn; at last I replied, 'Meekins might refuse his evidence,--he
might deny that he had ever made these revelations.'
"'In other words,' said he, 'he prefers to sell his testimony for a
better price than a court of justice would pay for it.'
"'You do not suppose that I could be a party to----'
"'Nay, nay,' cried he, interrupting me, 'not on such grounds as these;
but I can well conceive your feeling strongly interested for the
blameless and unhappy children. The only question is, how far such
sympathies can be indulged against the direct claims of justice.'
"There was a dispassionate calmness in the tone he spoke this, that
disarmed my suspicions, D'Esmonde; and it was only when I had left him
and was on my way back here, that I perceived what may, perhaps, have
been a very great error; for I at once proceeded to lay before him the
course I would counsel, and how, by the employment of a very moderate
sum, this fellow could be induced to emigrate to America, never to
return. After pushing this view with all the force I could, I at last
avowed, as if driven to the confession, that another motive had also its
weight with me, which was, that my friend and brother priest--the same
who rescued Meekins from his fate--was the natural son of Mr. Godfrey,
educated and brought up at his cost, and maintained till the period of
his death with every requisite of rank and station; that Meekins knew
this fact, and would publish it to the world, if provoked to it, and
that thus my friend's position at the court of Rome would be utterly
ruined.
"'He is a Monsignore, then?" asked Grounsell.
'"He is,' replied I, 'and may even yet be more than that.'"
"This was rash, Michel,--this was all imprudence," said D'Esmonde, with
a heavy sigh. "Go on; what said he then?"
"He waited while I told him that we sought for no advantages on the
score of this relationship; that we preferred no claims whatever against
the estate of Mr. Godfrey; that we only sought to bury in oblivion a
great crime, and to prevent the publicity of a great shame.
"'It is your belief, then,' said he, staring me fully in the face, 'that
Dalton was guilty?'
"'From what is before me,' replied I, 'it is hard to reject that
conclusion.'
"'And that this was an act of pure revenge?'
"'Less that, perhaps, than the hope of succeeding to the property
by some will of early date; at least, such is the version Meekins's
informant gave him.'
"'Ay, ay,' said he, 'that would constitute a motive, of course. Your
advice is, then, that we should make terms with this fellow? Is this
also your friend's counsel?'
"'I scarcely can tell you,' replied I 'My friend is not in any sense a
worldly man. His whole thoughts are centred in the cause he serves,
and he could only see good or evil in its working on the Church. If his
cousins--'
"'His cousins!'
"'Yes, the Daltons--for they are such----deem this the fitting course,
he is ready to adopt it. If they counsel differently, I can almost
answer for his compliance.'
"'You can give me time to communicate with Dalton? He is at Vienna.'
"'Yes, if you agree with me in this view of the case, and think that
such will be Dalton's opinion also; otherwise it will be difficult
to secure this fellow's secrecy much longer. He knows that he is in
possession of a deeply important fact; he feels the impunity of his
own position; and to-morrow or next day he may threaten this, that, or
other. In fact, he believes that Lady Hester Onslow herself has no title
to the estate, if he were disposed to reveal all he knows.'
"'Can I see him?' asked Grounsell.
"' Of course you can; but it would be useless. He would affect an utter
ignorance of everything, and deny all knowledge of what we have been
talking.'
"'You will give me some hours to think over this?' asked he, after a
pause.
"'I had rather that you could come to a quicker resolve,' said I; 'the
fellow's manner is menacing and obtrusive. I have perhaps too long
delayed this visit to you; and should he suspect that we are hesitating,
he may go before a magistrate, and make his deposition before we are
aware of it.'
"'You shall hear from me this evening, sir. Where shall I address my
note?'
"'The Rev. Michel Cahill--the Inn, at Inistioge,' replied I. And so we
parted."
"We must leave this at once, Michel," said D'Esmonde, after a brief
interval of silence. "Grounsell may possibly come over here himself. He
must not see me; still less must he meet with Meekins. We have gone too
fast here,--much too fast."
"But you told me that we had not a moment to lose."
"Nor have we, Michel; but it is as great an error to overrun your game
as to lag behind the scent. I distrust this doctor."
"So do I, D'Esmonde. But what can he do?"
"We must quit this place," said the other, not heeding the question.
"There is a small wayside public, called the 'Rore,' about five miles
away. We can wait there for a day, at least I almost wish that we had
never embarked in this, Michel," said he, thoughtfully. "I am seldom
faint-hearted, but I feel I know not what of coming peril. You know well
that this fellow Meekins is not to be depended on. When he drinks, he
would reveal any and everything. I myself cannot determine whether to
credit or reject his testimony. His insolence at one moment, his
slavish, abject terror at another, puzzle and confound me."
"You have been too long an absentee from Ireland, D'Esmonde, or they
would present no difficulties to your judgment. At every visit I make to
our county jail I meet with the self-same natures, torn, as it were,
by opposite influences,--the passions of this world, and the terrors of
that to come."
"Without the confessional, who could read them!" exclaimed D'Esmonde.
"How true that is!" cried the other. "What false interpretations, what
mistaken views, are taken of them! And so is it,--we, who alone know the
channel, are never to be the pilots!"
"Say not so," broke in D'Esmonde, proudly. "We are, and we shall be!
Ours will be the guidance, not alone of them, but of those who rule
them. Distrust what you will, Michel, be faint-hearted how you may, but
never despair of the glorious Church. Her triumph is already assured.
Look at Austria, at Spain, at all Northern Italy. Look at Protestant
Prussia, trembling for the fate of her Rhine provinces. Look at England
herself, vacillating between the game of conciliation and the perils
of her unlimited bigotry. Where are we not victorious? Ours is the only
despotism that ever smote two-handed,--crushing a monarchy here, and
a people there,--proclaiming divine right, or asserting the human
inheritance of freedom! Whose banner but ours ever bore the double
insignia of rule and obedience?--ours, the great Faith, equal to every
condition of mankind and to every age and every people? Never, never
despair of it!"
D'Esmonde sat down, and covered his face with his hands; and when he
arose, his pale features and bloodless lips showed the strong reaction
from a paroxysm of intense passion.
"Let us leave this, Michel," said he, in a broken voice. "The little
inn I speak of is not too distant for a walk, and if we start at once we
shall reach it before daybreak. While you awake Meekins, and arrange
all within, I will stroll slowly on before." And, thus saying, D'Esmonde
moved away, leaving the others to follow.
D'Esmonde was more than commonly thoughtful, even to depression. He had
been but a few days in Ireland, but every hour of that time had revealed
some new disappointment to him. There was all that he could wish of
religious zeal, there was devotion and faith without limit amongst the
people; but there was no unity of action, no combination of purpose,
amongst those who led them. Discursive and rash efforts of individuals
were suffered to disturb well-laid measures and reveal long-meditated
plans. Vain and frivolous controversies in newspapers, petty wars of
petty localities, wasted energies, and distracted counsels. There
was none of that organization, that stern discipline, which at Rome
regulated every step, and ordained every movement of their mighty host.
"This," muttered he to himself, "is an army without field-officers.
Their guerilla notions must be henceforth exchanged for habits of
military obedience. Little think they that their future General is now
the solitary pedestrian of a lonely road at midnight." The recurrence
to himself and his own fortunes was one of those spells which seemed to
possess an almost magical influence over him. From long dwelling on the
theme, he had grown to believe that he was destined by Heaven for
the advancement, if not the actual triumph, of the great cause of the
Church; and that he, whose origin was obscure and ignoble, could now sit
down at the council of the Princes of the Faith, and be heard, as one
whose words were commands, was always sufficient evidence that he
was reserved by fate for high achievements. Under the spell of this
conviction he soon rallied from his late dejection, and his uplifted
head and proud gait now showed the ambitious workings of his heart.
"Ay," cried he, aloud, "the first Prince of the Church who for above a
century has dared them to defiance! That is a proud thought, and well
may nerve the spirit that conceives it to courageous action."
CHAPTER XXXIII. THE MANOR-HOUSE OF CORRIG-O'NEAL.
While we leave, for a brief space, the Abb D'Esmonde to pursue his
road, we turn once more to the peaceful scene wherein we found him.
Mayhap there be in this dalliance something of that fond regret, that
sorrowful lingering with which a traveller halts to look down upon a
view he may never see again! Yes, dear reader, we already feel that
the hour of our separation draws nigh, when we shall no more be
fellow-journeyers, and we would fain loiter on this pleasant spot, to
tarry even a few moments longer in your company.
Passing downwards beneath that graceful bridge, which with a rare
felicity seems to heighten, and not to impair, the effect of the scene,
the river glides along between the rich wooded hills of a handsome
demesne, and where, with the most consummate taste, every tint of
foliage and every character of verdure has been cultivated to heighten
the charm of the landscape. The spray-like larch, the wide-leaved
sycamore, the solemn pine, the silver-trunked birch, all blending
their various hues into one harmonious whole,--the very perfection of a
woodland picture. As if reluctant to leave so fair a scene, the stream
winds and turns in a hundred bendings--now forming little embayments
among the jutting rocks, and now, listlessly loitering, it dallies with
the gnarled trunks of some giant beech that bends into the flood.
Emerging from these embowering woods, the river enters a new and totally
different tract of country,--the hills, bare of trees, are higher,
almost mountainous in character, with outlines fantastic and rugged.
These, it is said, were once wooded too; they present, however, little
remains of forest, save here and there a low oak scrub. The sudden
change from the leafy groves, ringing with many a "wood note wild," to
the dreary silence of the dark region, is complete as you approach the
foot of a tall mountain, at whose base the river seems arrested, and
is in reality obliged by a sudden bend to seek another channel. This
is Corrig-O'Neal; and here, in a little amphitheatre, surrounded by
mountains of lesser size, stood the ancient manor of which mention has
been more than once made in these pages.
It is but a short time back and there stood there an ancient house,
whose character, half quaint, half noble, might have made it seem a
French chteau; the tall, high-pitched roof, pierced with many a window;
the richly ornamented chimneys, the long terrace, with its grotesque
statues, and the intricate traceries of the old gate itself, all
evidencing a taste not native to our land. The very stiff and formal
avenue of lime-trees that led direct to the door had reference to a
style of landscape-gardening more consonant with foreign notions, even
without the fountains, which, with various strange groups of allegorical
meaning, threw their tiny jets among the drooping flowers. At the back
of the house lay a large garden, or rather what constituted both garden
and orchard; for although near the windows trim flower-beds and neatly
gravelled walks were seen, with rare and blossoming plants, as you
advanced, the turf usurped the place of the cultivated ground, and the
apple, the pear, and the damson formed a dense, almost impenetrable
shade.
Even on the brightest day in spring, when the light played and danced
upon the shining river, with blossoming cherry-trees, and yellow
crocuses in the grass, and fair soft daffodils along the water's edge,
smiling like timid beauties, when the gay May-fly skimmed the rippling
stream, and the strong trout splashed up to seize him,--even then, with
life and light and motion all around, there was an air of sadness on
this spot,--a dreary gloom, that fell upon the spirits less like sudden
grief than as the memory of some old and almost forgotten sorrow. The
frowning aspect of that stern mountain, which gave its name to the
place, and which, in its rugged front, showed little touch of time or
season, seemed to impress a mournful character on the scene. However it
was, few passed the spot without feeling its influence, nor is it likely
that now, when scarcely a trace of its once inhabited home remains, its
aspect is more cheering.
In a dark wainscoted room of this gloomy abode, and on a raw and dreary
day, our old acquaintance, Lady Hester, sat, vainly endeavoring between
the fire and the screen to keep herself warm, while shawls, muffs, and
mantles were heaped in most picturesque confusion around her. A French
novel and a Blenheim spaniel lay at her feet, a scarce-begun piece of
embroidery stood at one side of her, and an untasted cup of coffee on a
small table at the other. Pale, and perhaps seeming still more so from
the effect of her deep mourning, she lay back in her chair, and, with
half-closed lids and folded arms, appeared as if courting sleep--or at
least unconsciousness.
She had lain thus for above half an hour, when a slight rustling
noise--a sound so slight as to be scarcely audible----caught her
attention, and, without raising her head, she asked in a faint tone,----
"Is there any one there?"
"Yes, my Lady. It is Lisa," replied her maid, coming stealthily forward,
till she stood close behind her chair. "Put some of that thing----peat,
turf, or whatever it is----on the fire, child. Has the post arrived?"
"No, my Lady; they say that the floods have detained the mails, and that
they will be fully twelve hours late."
"Of course they will," sighed she; "and if there should be anything for
me, they will be carried away."
"I hope not, my Lady."
"What's the use of your hoping about it, child? or, if you must hope,
let it be for something worth while. Hope that we may get away from this
miserable place,----that we may once more visit a land where there
are sunshine and flowers, and live where it repays one for the bore of
life."
"I 'm sure I do hope it with all my heart, my Lady."
"Of course you do, child. Even you must feel the barbarism of this
wretched country. Have those things arrived from Dublin yet?"
"Yes, my Lady; but you never could wear them. The bonnet is a great
unwieldy thing, nearly as big and quite as heavy as a Life-Guardsman's
helmet; and the mantle is precisely like a hearth-rug with sleeves to
it. They are specially commended to your Ladyship's notice, as being all
of Irish manufacture."
"What need to say so?" sighed Lady Hester. "Does not every lock on every
door, every scissors that will not cut, every tongs that will not hold,
every parasol that turns upside down, every carriage that jolts, and
every shoe that pinches you, proclaim its nationality?"
"Dr. Grounsell says, my Lady, that all the fault lies in the wealthier
classes, who prefer everything to native industry."
"Dr. Grounsell's a fool, Lisa. Nothing shall ever persuade me that
Valenciennes and Brussels are not preferable to that ornament for
fireplaces and fauteuils called Limerick lace, and Genoa velvet a
more becoming wear than the O'Connell frieze. But have done with this
discussion; you have already put me out of temper by the mention of that
odious man's name."
"I at least saved your Ladyship from seeing him this morning."
"How so? Has he been here?"
"Twice already, my Lady; and threatens another visit He says that he has
something very important to communicate, and his pockets were stuffed
with papers."
"Oh, dear me! how I dread him and his parchments! Those terrible details
by which people discover how little is bequeathed to them, and how
securely it is tied up against every possibility of enjoying it. I 'd
rather be a negro slave on a coffee plantation than a widow with what is
called a 'high-principled trustee' over my fortune."
"There he comes again, my Lady; see how fast he is galloping up the
avenue."
"Why will that pony never stumble? Amiable and worthy folk break their
necks every day of the week,--fathers of families and unbeneficed
clergymen. Assurance companies should certainly deal lightly with crusty
old bachelors and disagreeable people, for they bear charmed lives."
"Am I to admit him, my Lady?" asked the maid, moving towards the door.
"Yes--no--I really cannot--but perhaps I must. It is only putting off
the evil day. Yes, Lisa, let him come in; but mind that you tell him I
am very poorly--that I have had a wretched night, and am quite unfit
for any unpleasant news, or, indeed, for anything like what he calls
business. Oh dear! oh dear! the very thought of parchment will make me
hate sheep to the last hour of my life; and I have come to detest the
very sight of my own name, from signing 'Hester Onslow' so often."
It must be said, there was at least no hypocrisy in her Ladyship's
lamentations; if the cause of them was not all-sufficient, the effects
were to the full what she averred, and she was, or believed herself to
be, the most miserable of women. Sir Stafford's will had bequeathed
to her his Irish property, on the condition of her residing upon it at
least six months every two years, a clause whose cruelty she--with
or without reason we know not--attributed to the suggestion of Dr.
Grounsell. To secure eighteen months of unlimited liberty, she was
undergoing her captivity in what, it must be acknowledged, was a spirit
the reverse of that the testator intended. So far from taking any
interest in the country, its people, or its prospects, she only saw
in it a dreary imprisonment, saddened by bad weather, bad spirits, and
solitude. Nor were her griefs all causeless. Her position was greatly
fallen from the possession of a fortune almost without bounds to the
changeful vicissitudes of an Irish property. Norwood's dreadful death,
wrapped in all the mystery which involved it, shocked her deeply,
although, in reality, the event relieved her from a bondage she had long
felt to be insupportable; and lastly, the Romanism in which she had,
so to say, invested all her "loose capital" of zeal and enthusiasm,
had become a terrible disappointment. The gorgeous splendor of Italian
Popery found a miserable representative in Irish Catholicism. The meanly
built Irish chapel, with its humble congregation, was a sorry exchange
for the architectural grandeur and costly assemblage gathered within the
Duomo of Florence, or beneath the fretted roof of "St. John of Lateran."
In all the sublimity of pealing music, of full-toned choirs, of incense
floating up into realms of dim distance, there were but the nasal
sing-song of a parish priest, and the discordant twang of a dirty
acolyte! And what an interval separated their vulgar manners of the
village curate from the polished addresses of the Roman cardinal! How
unlike the blended pretension and cringing slavery of the one was to
the high-bred bearing and courtly urbanity of the other. A visit from
"Father John" was an actual infliction. To receive his Eminence was not
only an honor but a sincere pleasure. Who, like him, to discuss every
topic of the world and its fashionable inhabitants, touching every
incident with a suave mellowness of remark that, like the light through
a stained-glass window, warmed, while it softened, that which it fell
upon? Who could throw over the frailties of fashion such a graceful
cloak of meek forgiveness, that it seemed actually worth while to sin
to be pardoned with such affection? All the pomp and circumstance of
Romanism, as seen in its own capital, associated with rank, splendor,
high dignity, and names illustrious in story, form a strong contrast
to its vulgar pretensions in Ireland. It is so essentially allied to
ceremonial and display, that when these degenerate into poverty and
meanness, the effect produced is always bordering on the ludicrous.
Such, at least, became the feeling of Lady Hester as she witnessed those
travesties of grandeur, the originals of which had left her awe-stricken
and amazed.
Shorn of fortune, deprived of all the illusions which her newly adopted
creed had thrown around her, uncheered by that crowd of flatterers which
used to form her circle, is it any wonder if her spirits and her temper
gave way, and that she fancied herself the very type of misery and
desertion? The last solace of such minds is in the pity they bestow upon
themselves; and here she certainly excelled, and upon no occasion more
forcibly than when receiving a visit from Dr. Grounsell.
"Dr. Grounsell, my Lady," said a servant; and, at the words, that
gentleman entered.
A heavy greatcoat, with numerous capes, a low-crowned glazed hat, and a
pair of old-fashioned "Hessians," into which his trousers were tucked,
showed that he had not stooped to any artifices of toilet to win favor
with her Ladyship. As she bowed slightly to him, she lifted her glass to
her eye, and then dropped it suddenly with a gentle simper, as though to
say that another glance would have perilled her gravity.
"Winter has set in early, madam," said he, approaching the fire, "and
with unusual severity. The poor are great sufferers this year."
"I 'm sure I agree with you," sighed Lady Hester. "I never endured such
cold before!"
"I spoke of the 'poor,' madam," retorted he, abruptly.
"Well, sir, has any one a better right to respond in their name than I
have? Look around you, see where I am living, and how, and then answer
me!"
"Madam," said Grounsell, sternly, and fixing his eyes steadily on her as
he spoke, "I have ridden for two hours of this morning over part of that
tract which is your estate. I have visited more than a dozen--I will not
call them houses, but hovels. There was fever in some, ague in others,
and want, utter want, in all; and yet I never heard one of the sufferers
select himself as the special mark of misfortune, but rather allude to
his misery as part of that common calamity to which flesh is heir. 'God
help the poor!' was the prayer, and they would have felt ashamed to have
invoked the blessing on themselves alone."
"I must say that if you have been to see people with typhus, and perhaps
small-pox, it shows very little consideration to come and visit me
immediately after, sir."
Grounsell's face grew purple, but with a great effort he repressed the
reply that was on his lips, and was silent.
"Of course, then, these poor creatures can pay nothing, sir?"
"Nothing, madam."
"Che bella cosa! an Irish property!" cried she, with a scornful laugh;
"and if I mistake not, sir, it was to your kind intervention and
influence that I am indebted for this singular mark of my husband's
affection?"
"Quite true, madam. I had supposed it to be possible----Just
possible--that, by connecting your personal interest with duties, you
might be reclaimed from a life of frivolity and idleness to an existence
of active and happy utility, and this without any flattering estimate of
your qualities, madam."
"Oh, sir, this is a very needless protest," said she, bowing and
smiling.
"I repeat, madam, that, without any flattering estimate of your
qualities, I saw quite enough to convince me that kindness and
benevolence were just as easy to you as their opposites."
"Why, you have become a courtier, sir," said she, with a smile of sly
malice.
"I 'm sorry for it, madam; I 'd as soon be mistaken for a hairdresser
or a dancing-master. But to return. Whether I was correct or not in my
theory would appear to be of little moment; another, and more pressing
view of the case, usurping all our interests, which is no less, madam,
than your actual right and title to this estate at all."
Lady Hester leaned forward in her chair as he said this, and in a low
but unshaken voice replied, "Do I understand you aright, sir, that the
title to this property is contested?"
"Not yet, madam; there is no claim set up as yet; but there is every
likelihood that there will be such. Rumors have gradually grown into
open discussions; threatening notices have been sent to me by post, and
stories which at first I had deemed vague and valueless have assumed a
degree of importance from the details by which they were accompanied. In
fact, madam, without any clew to the nature or direct drift of the plot,
I can yet see that a formidable scheme is being contrived, the great
agent of which is to be menace."
"Oh dear, what a relief it would be to me were I quite certain of all
this!" exclaimed Lady Hester, with a deep sigh.
"What a relief? Did you say what a relief, madam?" cried Grounsell, in
amazement.
"Yes, sir, that was precisely the word I used."
"Then I must have blundered most confoundedly, madam, in my effort to
explain myself. I was endeavoring to show you that your claim to the
estate might be disputed!"
"Very well, sir, I perfectly understood you."
"You did, eh? you perceive that you might possibly lose the property,
and you acquiesce calmly--"
"Nay, more, sir; I rejoice sincerely at the very thought of it."
"Well, then, upon my----eh? May the devil--I beg pardon, madam, but
this is really such a riddle to me that I must confess my inability to
unravel it."
"Shall I aid you, sir?" said Lady Hester, with an easy smile on her
features. "When bequeathing this estate to me, Sir Stafford expressly
provided, that if from any political convulsion Ireland should be
separated from her union with Great Britain, or if by course of law a
substantial claim was established to the property by another, that I
should be recompensed for the loss by an income of equal amount derived
from the estate of his son, George Onslow, at whose discretion it lay
to allocate any portion of his inheritance he deemed suitable for the
purpose."
"All true, madam, quite true," broke in Grounsell; "and the
Solicitor-General's opinion is that the provision is perfectly
nugatory,--not worth sixpence. It has not one single tie of obligation,
and, from its vagueness, is totally inoperative."
"In law, sir, it may be all that you say," replied Lady Hester, calmly;
"but I have yet to learn that this is the appeal to which Captain Onslow
would submit it."
Grounsell stared at her; and for the first time in all his life he
thought her handsome. That his own features revealed the admiration
he felt was also plain enough, and Lady Hester was very far from being
insensible to the tribute.
"So that, madam," cried he, at length, "You prefer insecurity to
certainty."
"Say rather, sir, that I have more confidence in the honorable
sentiments of an English gentleman than I have in the solvency of a poor
and wretched peasantry. Up to this very hour I have known nothing except
the claims upon myself. I don't like the climate; and I am certain the
neighbors do not like me,--in fact, I have neither the youth nor the
enterprise suited to a new country."
"Why, good heavens, madam, it isn't New Zealand we're in!" cried
Grounsell, angrily.
"Perhaps not," sighed she, languidly; "but it is just as strange to
me."
"I see, madam," said Grounsell, rising, "my plan was a bad one. A wing
in the Borghese Palace, a spacious apartment of the Corsini, on the
Arno, or even the first floor of the Moncenigo, at Venice, would have
been a happier choice than a gloomy old mansion on the banks of an Irish
river."
"Oh, do not speak of it, sir!" cried she, enthusiastically. "Do not
remind me of starry skies and the deep blue Adriatic in this land of
cloud and fog, where even the rain is 'dirty water.' Pray make the very
weakest defence of my claim to this inheritance. I only ask to march out
with my baggage, and do not even stipulate for the honors of war. Let me
have George's address."
"You 'll not need it, madam; he will be here within a few days. He has
been promoted to a majority for his conduct in the field, and returns to
England covered with praise and honors."
"What delightful news, Dr. Grounsell; you are actually charming this
morning!" The doctor bowed stiffly at the compliment, and she went
on: "I often thought that you could be amiable if you would only let
yourself; but, like the Cardinal Gualterino, you took up the character
of Bear, and 'Bear' you would be at all times and seasons; and then
those horrid coats, that you would persist in wearing,--how you ever got
them of that odious brown, I can't think; they must have dyed the wool
to order,--not but that I think your shoes were worst of all."
Grounsell understood too well the wordy absurdity with which her
Ladyship, on the least excitement, was accustomed to launch forth,
quite forgetful of all the impertinence into which it betrayed her. He
therefore neither interposed a remark, nor seemed in any way conscious
of her observation; but coldly waiting till she had concluded, he said,
----
"Some other of your Ladyship's friends are also expected in this
neighborhood,--the Daltons!"
"What--my dear Kate?"
"Yes; Miss Kate Dalton, accompanied by her brother and uncle. I have
just been to order apartments for them in the hotel at Kilkenny."
"But they must come here. I shall insist upon it, doctor. This is a
point on which I will accept no refusal."
"The occasion which calls them to Ireland, madam, and of which you shall
hear all, hereafter, would totally preclude such an arrangement."
"More mystery, sir?" exclaimed she.
"Another side of the same one, madam," rejoined he, dryly.
"What delightful news, to think I shall see my dearest Kate again! I
am dying to know all about Russia, and if the ladies do wear pearls
in morning toilette, and whether turquoises are only seen in fans and
parasol handles. What splendor she must have seen!"
"Humph!" said Grounsell, with a short shrug of the shoulders.
"Oh, I know you despise all these things, and you hate caviare. Then I
want to know about the Prince; why the match was broken off; and from
what cause she refused that great settlement,--some thousand roubles.
How much is a rouble, by the way, doctor?"
"I really cannot tell you, madam," said he, bluntly, who saw that she
was once more "wide a-field."
"She'll tell me all herself, and everything about Russia. I want to hear
about the knout, and the malachite, and that queer habit of gambling
before dinner is announced. I 'm sure I should like St Petersburg. And
the brother, what is he like?"
"I only know, madam, that he is a great invalid, not yet recovered from
his wounds!"
"How interesting! He was in the patriot army, was he not?"
"He fought for the Emperor, madam; pray make no mistake in that sense."
"Oh dear! how difficult it is to remember all these things; and yet I
knew it perfectly when I was at Florence,--all about the Kaiser-Jagers,
and the Crociati, and the Croats, and the rest of them. It was the
Crociati, or the Croats--I forget which--eat little children. It 's
perfectly true; Guardarelli, when he was a prisoner, saw an infant
roasting for Radetzky's own table."
"I would beg of you, madam, not to mention this fact to the
Field-Marshal, Miss Kate Dalton's uncle."
"Oh, of course not; and I trust he will not expect that we could provide
him with such delicacies here. Now, doctor, how shall we amuse these
people? what can we do?"
"Remember, first of all, madam, that their visit to Ireland is not an
excursion of pleasure----"
"Oh, I can perfectly conceive that!" interrupted she, with a look of
irony.
"I was about to remark that an affair of deep importance was the cause
of their journey--"
"More business!" broke she in again. "After all, then, I suppose I am
not much more miserable than the rest of the world. Everybody would seem
to have what you call 'affairs of importance.'"
"Upon my word, madam, you have made me totally forget mine, then,"
said Grounsell, jumping up from his seat, and looking at his watch. "I
came here prepared to make certain explanations, and ask your opinion
on certain points. It is now two o'clock, and I have not even opened the
matter in hand."
Lady Hester laughed heartily at his distress, and continued to enjoy her
mirth as he packed up his scattered papers, buttoned his greatcoat, and
hurried away, without even the ceremony of a leave-taking.
CHAPTER XXXIV. "THE RORE."
D'Esmonde and his friend Michel sat beside the fire in a small parlor
of the wayside public-house called "The Rore." They were both thoughtful
and silent, and in their moody looks might be read the signs of brooding
care. As for the Abb, anxiety seemed to have worn him like sickness;
for his jaws were sunk and hollow, while around his eyes deep circles of
a dusky purple were strongly marked.
It was not without reason that they were thus moved; since Meekins, who
hitherto rarely or never ventured abroad, had, on that morning, gone
to the fair of Graigue, a village some few miles away, where he was
recognized by a farmer----an old man named Lenahan--as the steward of
the late Mr. Godfrey. It was to no purpose that he assumed all the airs
of a stranger to the country, and asked various questions about the
gentry and the people. The old farmer watched him long and closely, and
went home fully satisfied that he had seen Black Sam,--the popular name
by which he was known on the estate. In his capacity of bailiff, Black
Sam had been most unpopular in the country. Many hardships were traced
to his counsels; and it was currently believed that Mr. Godfrey would
never have proceeded harshly against a tenant except under his advice.
This character, together with his mysterious disappearance after the
murder, were quite sufficient, in peasant estimation, to connect him
with the crime; and no sooner had Lenahan communicated his discovery
to his friends, than they, one and all, counselled him to go up to the
doctor--as Grounsell was called on the property--and ask his advice.
The moment Grounsell heard that the suspected man called himself
Meekins, he issued a warrant for his arrest; and so promptly was it
executed that he was taken on that very evening as he was returning to
"The Rore." The tidings only reached the little inn after nightfall, and
it was in gloomy confabulation over them that the two priests were now
seated. The countryman who had brought the news was present when the
police arrested Sam, and was twice called back into the parlor as
D'Esmonde questioned him on the circumstance.
It was after a long interval of silence that the Abb for the third time
summoned the peasant before him.
"You have not told me under what name they arrested him. Was it
Meekins?"
"The Sergeant said, 'you call yourself Meekins, my good man?' and the
other said, 'Why not?' 'Oh, no reason in life,' says the Sergeant; 'but
you must come with us,--that 's all.' 'Have you a warrant for what you
're doing?' says he. 'Ay,' says the polis; 'you broke yer bail----'"
"Yes, yes," broke in D'Esmonde, "You mentioned all that already. And
Meekins showed no fear on being taken?"
"No more than your Reverence does this minute. Indeed, I never see a man
take it so easy. 'Mind what you 're doing,' says he; 'for, though I 'm a
poor man, I have strong friends that won't see me wronged.' And then he
said something about one 'Father Matthew;' but whether it was you, or
that other clergyman there, I don't know."
"They took him to Thomastown?"
"No, your Reverence,--to Kilkenny."
"That will do, my good man," said D'Esmonde, with a nod of his head;
and then, as the door closed behind him, added, "You see, Michel, I was
right in my fears of this doctor. The evasive terms of his note, too,
confirmed my suspicions,--that 'desire for further time in a matter of
such great difficulty.' We have thrown him on the scent, and he is now
in full cry after the game. Shame upon us!--shame! that such as he can
foil us at our own weapons. I see his plan clearly enough. He is either
in possession of some secret fact of this man's early life, which can be
employed as a menace to extort a confession from him, or he is about to
work on him by bribery. Now, as to the former, I am perfectly at ease.
What I, with every agency of the Church, have failed to elicit, I can
safely defy the layman's craft to detect. As to the effect of a bribe, I
am far from being so certain."
"And in either case the result concerns you but little," said Cahill.
"The fellow has nothing in his power against you."
"Nothing," said D'Esmonde. "I never left myself in the hands of such
as he! It will, of course, be disagreeable to me that our intercourse
should be made public. The Orange press will know how to connect our
intimacy with a thousand schemes and subtleties that I never dreamed of;
and, more offensive still, the assumed relationship to Mr. Godfrey will
afford a fruitful theme for sneer and sarcasm. I foresee it all, my good
Michel; and, worst of all, I perceive how this publicity will mar higher
and nobler objects. The Sacred College will never make a prince of the
Church of one whose name has been sullied by the slang of journalism.
These are the dangers to be averted here. You must contrive to see this
man at once,--to assure him of our interest and protection, if he be
but discreet and careful. He may safely deny all knowledge of the
circumstances to which we alluded. We are the only persons to whom
he made these revelations. He has only to assume an ignorance of
everything. Impress this upon him, Michel; for if they can involve him
in a narrative, be it ever so slight or vague, these lawyers exercise a
kind of magic power in what is called cross-examination, and can detect
a secret fact by tests as fine as those by which the chemist discovers
a grain of poison. Would that I could see him myself! but this might be
imprudent."
[Illustration: 452]
"Trust all to me, D'Esmonde; and believe me, that with men like him
habit has taught me better how to deal than you, with all your higher
skill, could accomplish. I will contrive to see him to-night, or early
to-morrow. The under-turnkey was from my own parish, and I can make my
visit as if to him."
"How humiliating is it," cried D'Esmonde, rising and pacing the
room,--"how humiliating to think that incidents like these are to sway
and influence us in our road through life; but so it is, the great
faults that men commit are less dangerous than are imprudent intimacies
and ill-judged associations. It is not on the high bluff or the bold
headland that the craft is shipwrecked, but on some small sunken
rock,--some miserable reef beneath the waves! Could we but be 'penny
wise' in morals, Michel, how rich we should be in knowledge of life! I
never needed this fellow,--never wanted his aid in any way! The unhappy
mention of Godfrey's name--the spell that in some shape or other has
worked on my heart through life--first gave him an interest in my eyes;
and so, bit by bit, I have come to be associated with him, till--would
you believe it?--I cannot separate myself from him. Has it ever occurred
to you, Michel, that the Evil One sometimes works his ends by infusing
into the nature of some chance intimate that species of temptation by
which courageous men are so easily seduced,--I mean that love of
hazard, that playing with fire, so intoxicating in its excitement? I am
convinced that to me no bait could be so irresistible. Tell me that
the earth is mined, and you invest it with a charm that all the verdure
of 'Araby the Blest' could never give it! I love to handle steel when
the lightning is playing; not, mark me, from any contempt of life, far
less in any spirit of blasphemous defiance, but simply for the glorious
sentiment of peril. Be assured that when all other excitements pall upon
the mind, this one survives in all its plenitude, and, as the poet says
of avarice, becomes a good 'old gentlemanly vice.'"
"You will come along with me, D'Esmonde?" said the other, whose thoughts
were concentrated on the business before him.
"Yes, Michel, I am as yet unknown here; and it may be, too, that this
Meekins might wish to see me. We must take good care, while we avoid
any public notice, that this fellow should not think himself deserted by
us."
"The very point on which I was reflecting, D'Esmonde. We can talk over
this as we go along."
As the two priests affected to be engaged on a kind of mission to
collect subscriptions for some sacred purpose, their appearance or
departure excited no feeling of astonishment, and the landlord of "The
Bore" saw them prepare to set out without expressing the least surprise.
The little "low-backed car," the common conveyance of the people at
fair and market, was soon at the door; and, seated in this, and well
protected against the weather by rugs and blankets, they began their
journey.
"This is but a sorry substitute for the scarlet-panelled coach of the
Cardinal, D'Esmonde," said his companion, smiling.
A low, faint sigh was all the answer the other made, and so they went
their way in silence.
The day broke drearily and sad-looking; a thin, cold rain was falling,
and, from the leaden sky above to the damp earth beneath, all was gloomy
and depressing. The peasantry they passed on the road were poor-looking
and meanly clad; the houses on the wayside were all miserable to
a degree; and while his companion slept, D'Esmonde was deep in his
contemplation of these signs of poverty.
"No," said he, at last, as if summing up the passing reflections in
his own mind, "this country is not ripe for the great changes we are
preparing. The gorgeous splendor of the Church would but mock this
misery. The rich robe of the Cardinal would be but an insult to the
ragged coat of the peasant. England must be our field. Ireland must be
content with a missionary priesthood. Italy, indeed, has poverty, but
there is an intoxication in the life of that land which defies it. The
sun, the sky, the blue water, the vineyards, the groves of olive, and
the fig--the lightheadedness that comes of an existence where no fears
invade--no gloomy to-morrow has ever threatened. These are the elements
to baffle all the cares of narrow fortune, and hence the gifts which
make men true believers! In climates such as this men brood and think
and ponder. Uncheered from without, they turn within, and then come
doubts and hesitations,--the fatal craving to know that which they may
not! Of a truth these regions of the north are but ill suited to our
glorious faith, and Protestantism must shun the sun as she does the
light of reason itself."
"What! are you preaching, D'Esmonde?" cried his friend, waking up at
the energetic tone of the Abbe's voice. "Do you fancy yourself in the
pulpit? But here we are, close to the town. We had better dismount now,
and proceed on foot."
Having dismissed their humble equipage, the two friends walked briskly
along, and entered the city, which, even at this early hour, was filling
for its weekly market.
D'Esmonde took up his quarters at once at a small inn close by the
castle gate, and the priest Cahill immediately proceeded to the jail.
He found no difficulty in obtaining access to his acquaintance the
under-turnkey, but, to his disappointment, all approach to Meekins was
strictly interdicted. "The magistrates were here," said the
turnkey, "till past midnight with him, and that English agent of the
Corrig-O'Neal estate was along with them. What took place, I cannot even
guess, for it was done in secret. I only overheard one of the gentlemen
remark, as he passed out, 'That fellow is too deep for us all; we 'll
make nothing of him.'"
Cahill questioned the man closely as to what the arrest related, and
whether he had heard of any allegation against Meekins; but he knew
nothing whatever, save that he had broken his bail some years before.
The strictest watch was enjoined over the prisoner, and all intercourse
from without rigidly denied. To the priest's inquiries about Meekins
himself, the turnkey replied by saying that he had never seen any man
with fewer signs of fear or trepidation. "Whatever they have against
him," added he, "he's either innocent, or he defies them to prove him
guilty."
Cahill's entreaties were all insufficient to make the turnkey disobey
his orders. Indeed, he showed that the matter was one of as much
difficulty as danger, the chief jailer being specially interested in the
case by some observation of one of the justices.
"You can at least carry a message for me?" said the priest, at last.
"It's just as much as I dare do," replied the other.
"You incur no risk whatever so far," continued Cahill "The poor man is
my sacristan, and I am deeply interested for him. I only heard of his
being arrested last night, and you see I 've lost no time in coming to
see after him. Tell him this. Tell him that I was here at daybreak, and
that I 'll do my best to get leave to speak with him daring the day.
Tell him, moreover, that, if I shouldn't succeed in this, not to be
down-hearted, for that we--a friend of mine and myself----will not
desert him nor see him wronged. And, above all, tell him to say nothing
whatever to the magistrates. Mind me well,--not a syllable of any kind."
"I mistake him greatly," said the turnkey, "or he 's the man to take a
hint quick enough, particularly if it's for his own benefit."
"And so it is,--his own, and no other's," rejoined the priest. "If he
but follow this advice, I 'll answer for his being liberated before the
week ends. Say, also, that I 'd send him some money, but that it might
draw suspicion on him; and for the present it is better to be cautious."
Before Cahill left the prison, he reiterated all his injunctions as to
caution, and the turnkey faithfully pledged himself to enforce them on
the prisoner.
"I will come again this evening," said the priest, "and you can tell me
what he says; for, as he has no friend but myself, I must not forsake
him."
As Cahill gained the street, a heavy travelling-carriage, whose
lumbering build bespoke a foreign origin, passed by with four posters,
and, sweeping across the market-place, drew up at the chief inn of the
town. The priest, in idle curiosity, mingled with the lounging crowd
that immediately gathered around the strange-looking equipage, where
appliances for strength and comfort seemed blended, in total disregard
to all facilities for motion. A bustling courier, with all the
officiousness of his craft, speedily opened the door and banged down
the steps, and a very tall old man, in what appeared to be an undress
military frock, descended, and then assisted a young lady to alight.
This done, they both gave their arm to a young man, whose wasted form
and uncertain step bespoke long and severe illness. Supporting him at
either side, they assisted him up the steps into the hall, while the
bystanders amused themselves in criticising the foreigners, for such
their look and dress declared them.
"The ould fellow with a white beard over his lip is a Roosian or a
Proosian," cried one, who aspired to no small skill in continental
nationalities.
"Faix! the daughter takes the shine out of them all," cried another.
"She's a fine crayture!"
"The brother was a handsome man before he had that sickness," observed a
third. "'Tis no use of his legs he has!"
[Illustration: 459]
These frank commentaries on the new arrivals were suddenly interrupted
by the appearance of the old man on the steps of the hall door, where he
stood gazing down the street, and totally unconscious of the notice he
was attracting.
"What's that building yonder?" cried he, to the waiter at his side, and
his accent, as he spoke, betrayed a foreign tongue. "The Town Hall!--ah,
to be sure, I remember it now; and, if I be not much mistaken, there
is----at least there was--an old rickety stair to a great loft overhead,
where a strange fellow lived, who made masks for the theatre--what's
this his name was?" The bystanders listened to these reminiscences in
silent astonishment, but unable to supply the missing clew to memory.
"Are none of you old enough to remember Jack Ruth, the huntsman?" cried
he, aloud.
"I have heard my father talk of him," said a middle-aged man, "if it was
the same that galloped down the mountain of Corrig-O'Neal and swam the
river at the foot of it."
"The very man," broke in the stranger. "Two of the dogs, but not a
man, dared to follow! I have seen some bold feats since that day, but I
scarcely think I have ever witnessed a more dashing exploit. If old Jack
has left any of his name and race behind him," said he, turning to the
waiter, "say that there's one here would like to see him;" and with this
he re-entered the inn.
"Who is this gentleman that knows the country so well?" asked the
priest..
"Count Dalton von Auersberg, sir," replied the courier. "His whole
thoughts are about Ireland now, though I believe he has not been here
for upwards of sixty years."
"Dalton!" muttered the priest to himself; "what can have brought them to
Ireland? D'Esmonde must be told of this at once!" And he pushed through
the crowd and hastened back to the little inn.
The Abb was engaged in writing as Cahill entered the room.
"Have you seen him, Michel?" cried he, eagerly, as he raised his head'
from the table.
"No. Admission is strictly denied--"
"I thought it would be so--I suspected what the game would be. This
Grounsell means to turn the tables, and practise upon us the menace
that was meant for him. I foresee all that he intends, but I'll foil
him! I have written here to Wallace, the Queen's Counsel, to come down
here at once. This charge against old Dalton, in hands like his, may
become a most formidable accusation."
"I have not told you that these Daltons have arrived here--"
"What! Of whom do you speak?"
"The old Count von Dalton, with a niece and nephew."
D'Esmonde sprang from his seat, stood for some seconds, stood still and
silent.
"This is certain, Michel? you know this to be true?"
"I saw the old General myself, and heard him talk with the waiter."
"The combat will, then, be a close one," muttered D'Esmonde. "Grounsell
has done this, and it shall cost them dearly. Mark me, Michel--all that
the rack and the thumb-screw were to our ancestors, the system of
a modern trial realizes in our day. There never was a torture, the
invention of man's cruelty, as terrible as cross-examination! I care
not that this Dalton should have been as innocent as you are of this
crime,--it matters little if his guiltlessness appear from the very
outset. Give me but two days of searching inquiry into his life, his
habits, and his ways. Let me follow him to his fireside, in his poverty,
and lay bare all the little straits and contrivances by which he eked
out existence, and maintained a fair exterior. Let me show them to the
world, as I can show them, with penury within, and pretension without
These disclosures cannot be suppressed as irrelevant,--they are the
alleged motives of the crime. The family that sacrifices a child to a
hateful alliance----that sells to Austrian bondage the blood of an only
son--and consigns to menial labor a maimed and sickly girl, might well
have gone a step further in crime."
"D'Esmonde! D'Esmonde!" cried the other, as he pressed him down into a
seat, and took his hand between his own, "these are not words of calm
reason, but the outpourings of passion." The Abb made no answer, but
his chest heaved and fell, and his breath came with a rushing sound,
while his eyes glared like the orbs of a wild animal.
"You are right, Michel," said he at last, with a faint sigh. "This was
a paroxysm of that hate which, stronger than all my reason, has actuated
me through life. Again and again have I told you that towards these
Daltons I bear a kind of instinctive aversion. These antipathies are
not to be combated,--there are brave men who will shudder if they see a
spider. I have seen a courageous spirit quail before a worm. These are
not caprices, to be laughed at,--they are indications full of pregnant
meaning, could we but read them aright. How my temples throb!--my head
seems splitting. Now leave me, Michel, for a while, and I will try to
take some rest."
CHAPTER XXXV. A TALK OVER BYGONES
It was with a burst of joy that Lady Hester heard the Daltons had
arrived. In the wearisome monotony of her daily life, anything to do,
anywhere to go, any one to see, would have been esteemed boons of great
price; what delight, then, was it to meet those with whom she could
converse of "bygone times" and other lands!--"that dear Kate," whom she
really liked as well as it was in her nature to love anything, from whom
she now anticipated so much of that gossip, technically called "news,"
and into whose confiding heart she longed to pour out her own private
woes!
The meeting was indeed affectionate on both sides; and, as Lady Hester
was in her most gracious of moods, Frank thought her the very type of
amiability, and the old Count pronounced her manners fit for the high
ordeal of Vienna itself. Perhaps our reader will be grateful if we leave
to his imagination all the changeful moods of grief and joy, surprise,
regret, and ecstasy, with which her Ladyship questioned and listened
to Kate Dalton's stories; throwing out, from time to time, little
reflections of her own, as though incidentally, to show how much wiser
years had made her. There are people who ever regard the misfortunes of
others as mere key-notes to elicit their own sufferings; and thus, when
Kate spoke of Russia, Lady Hester quoted Ireland. Frank's sufferings
reminded her of her own "nerves;" and poor Nelly's unknown fate was
precisely "the condition of obscurity to which Sir Stafford's cruel will
had consigned herself."
Kate's mind was very far from being at ease, and yet it was with no mean
pleasure she found herself seated beside Lady Hester, talking over the
past with all that varying emotion which themes of pleasure and sadness
call up. Who has not enjoyed the delight of such moments, when, living
again bygone days, we laugh or sigh over incidents wherein once as
actors we had moved and felt? If time has dimmed our perceptions of
pleasure, it has also softened down resentments and allayed asperities.
We can afford to forgive so much, and we feel, also, so confident of
others' forgiveness, and if regrets do steal over us that these things
have passed away forever, there yet lurks the flattering thought that we
have grown wiser than we then were. So is it the autobiographies of the
fireside are pleasant histories, whose vanities are all pardonable, and
whose trifling is never ungraceful! Memory throws such a softened light
on the picture, that even bores become sufferable, and we extract a
passing laugh from the most tiresome of our quondam "afflictives."
Had her Ladyship been less occupied with herself and her own emotions,
she could not have failed to notice the agitation under which Kate
suffered at many of her chance remarks. The levity, too, with which she
discussed her betrothal to Midchekoff almost offended her. The truth
was, Kate had half forgotten the reckless, unthinking style of her
friend's conversation, and it required a little practice and training to
grow accustomed to it again.
"Yes, my dear," she went on, "I have had such trouble to persuade people
that it was no marriage at all, but a kind of engagement; and when that
horrid Emperor would n't give his consent, of course there was an end
of it you may be sure, my sweet child, I never believed one syllable of
that vile creature's story about George's picture; but somehow it
has got abroad, and that odious Heidendorf goes about repeating it
everywhere. I knew well that you never cared for poor dear George!
Indeed, I told him as much when he was quite full of admiration for you.
It is so stupid in men! their vanity makes them always believe that,
if they persist--just persevere--in their attachment, the woman will
at last succumb. Now, we have a better sense of these things, and
actually adore the man that shows indifference to us,--at least, I am
sure that I do. Such letters as the poor boy keeps writing about you!
And about five months ago, when he was so badly wounded, and did not
expect to recover, he actually made his will, and left you all he had
in the world. Oh dear!" said she, with a heavy sigh, "they have generous
moments, these men, but they never last; and, by the way, I must ask
your advice--though I already guess what it will be--about a
certain friend of ours, who has had what I really must call the
presumption--for, after all, Kate, I think you 'll agree with me it is a
very great presumption,----is it not, dear?"
"Until you tell me a little more," replied Kate, with a sigh, "I can
scarcely answer."
"Well, it's Mr. Jekyl--you remember, that little man that used to be so
useful at Florence; not but he has very pretty manners, and a great deal
of tact in society. His letters, too, are inimitably droll. I'll show
you some of them."
"Oh! then you are in correspondence with him?" said Kate, slyly.
"Yes; that is, he writes to me--and I--I sometimes send him a short
note. In fact, it was the Abb D'Esmonde induced me to think of it at
all; and I was bored here, and so unhappy, and so lonely."
"I perceive," said Kate; "but I trust that there is nothing
positive,----nothing like an engagement?"
"And why, dear?--whence these cautious scruples?" said Lady Hester,
almost peevishly.
"Simply because he is very unworthy of you," said Kate, bluntly, and
blushing deep at her own hardihood.
"Oh, I'm quite sure of that," said Lady Hester, casting down her eyes.
"I know--I feel that I am mistaken and misunderstood. The world has
always judged me unfairly! you alone, dearest, ever comprehended me; and
even you could not guess of what I am capable! If you were to read my
journal--if you were just to see what sufferings I have gone through!
And then that terrible shock! though, I must say, D'Esmonde's mode of
communicating it was delicacy itself. A very strange man that Abb
is, Kate. He now and then talks in a way that makes one suspect his
affections are or have been engaged."
"I always believed him too deeply immersed in other cares."
"Oh, what a short-sighted judgment, child! These are the minds that
always feel most! I know this by myself--daring the last two years
especially! When I think what I have gone through! The fate, not
alone of Italy, but of Europe, of the world, I may say, discussed
and determined at our fireside! Yes, Kate, I assure you, so it was.
D'Esmonde referred many points to me, saying 'that the keener perception
of a female mind must be our pilot here.' Of course, I felt all the
responsibility, but never, never was I agitated. How often have I
held the destiny of the Imperial House in my hands! How little do they
suspect what they owe to my forbearance! But these are not themes to
interest you, dearest, and, of course, your prejudices are all Austrian.
I must say, Kate, 'the uncle' is charming! Just that kind of dear old
creature so graceful for a young woman to lean upon; and I love his
long white moustache! His French, too, is admirable,----that Madame
de Svign turn of expression, so unlike modern flippancy, and so
respectful to women!"
"I hope you like Frank!" said Kate, with artless eagerness in her look.
"He 's wonderfully good-looking without seeming to know it; but, of
course, one cannot expect that to last, Kate."
"Oh! you cannot think how handsome he was before this illness; and then
he is so gentle and affectionate."
"There--there, child, you must not make me fall in love with him, for
you know all my sympathies are Italian; and, having embroidered that
beautiful banner for the 'Legion of Hope'--pretty name, is it not?--I
never could tolerate the 'Barbari.'"
"Pray do not call them such to my uncle," said Kate, smiling.
"Never fear, dearest. I 'm in the habit of meeting all kinds of horrid
people without ever offending a prejudice; and, besides, I am bent on
making a conquest of 'Mon Oncle;' he is precisely the species of adorer
I like best. I hope he does not take snuff."
Kate laughed, as she shook her head in sign of negative.
From this Lady Hester diverged to all manner of reflections about the
future,--as to whether she ought or ought not to know Midchekoff when
she met him; if the villa of La Rocca were really Kate's, or hers, or
the property of somebody else; who was Jekyl's father, or if he ever had
such an appendage; in what part of the Tyrol Nelly was then sojourning;
was it possible she was married to the dwarf, and ashamed to confess
it?--and a vast variety of similar speculations, equally marked by
a bold indifference as to probability, and a total disregard to the
feelings of her companion. Kate was, then, far from displeased when a
messenger came to say that the General was alone in the drawing-room,
and would esteem it a favor if the ladies would join him.
"How do you mean, alone?" asked Lady Hester. "Where is Mr. Dalton?"
"Dr. Grounsell came for him, my Lady, and took him away in a carriage."
"Poor Frank, he is quite unequal to such fatigue," exclaimed Kate.
"It is like that horrid doctor. His cruelties to me have been something
incredible; at the same time, there's not a creature on my estate he
does not sympathize with! you 'll see how it will be, dearest; he'll
take your dear brother somewhere where there's a fever, or perhaps the
plague--for I believe they have it here; and in his delicate state
he's sure to catch it and die! Mark my words, dearest Kate, and see if
they'll not come true." And with this reassuring speech she slipped her
arm within her companion's and moved out of the room.
It may be conjectured that it was not without weighty reasons Grounsell
induced Frank, weary and exhausted as he was, to leave his home and
accompany him on a cold and dreary night to the city jail. Although
declining to enter upon the question before a third party, no sooner
were they alone together than the doctor proceeded to an explanation.
Meekins, who it appeared showed the greatest indifference at first, had,
as the day wore on, grown restless and impatient. This irritability was
increased by the want of his accustomed stimulant of drink, in which,
latterly, he had indulged freely, and it was in such a mood he asked for
pen and paper, and wrote a few lines to request that young Mr. Dalton
would visit him. Grounsell, who made a point to watch the prisoner from
hour to hour, no sooner heard this, than he hastened off to the inn with
the intelligence.
"There is not a moment to be lost," said he. "This fellow, from all that
I can learn, is but the tool of others, who are bent on bringing before
the world the whole story of this terrible crime. A priest, named
Cahill, and who for some time back has been loitering about the
neighborhood, was at the jail this morning before daybreak. Later on, he
posted a letter for Dublin, the address of which I was enabled to see.
It was to the eminent lawyer in criminal cases, Mr. Wallace.
"That some great attack is in preparation, I have, then, no doubt; the
only question is, whether the object be to extort money by threats of
publicity, or is there some deep feeling of revenge against your name
and family?
"The jailer, who is in my interest, gives me the most accurate detail
of the prisoner's conduct, and, although I am fully prepared to expect
every species of duplicity and deceit from a fellow of this stamp, yet
it is not impossible that, seeing himself to a certain extent in our
power, he may be disposed to desert to our ranks.
"He asks you to come alone, and of course you must comply. Whatever be
the subject of his revelations, be most guarded in the way you receive
them. Avow utter ignorance of everything, and give him reasons to
suppose that your great object here is to prevent the exposure and
disgrace of a public trial. This may make him demand higher terms; but
at the same time he will be thrown upon fuller explanations to warrant
them. In fact, you must temper your manner between a conscious power
over the fellow, and an amicable desire to treat with him.
"He has heard, within the last half-hour, that he has been recognized
here by a former acquaintance, whose account of him includes many
circumstances of deep suspicion. It may have been this fact has induced
him to write to you. This you will easily discover in his manner. But
here we are at the gates, and once more, I say, be cautions and guarded
in everything.
"Well, Mr. Gray," said Grounsell to the jailer, "You see we have
not delayed very long. Ill as he is, Mr. Dalton has accepted this
invitation."
"And he has done well, sir," replied the Jailer. "The man's bearing
is greatly changed since morning; some panic has evidently seized him.
There's no saying how long this temper may last; but you are quite right
to profit by it while there is yet time."
"Is he low and depressed, then?"
"Terribly so, sir. He asked a while ago if any one had called to see
him. Of course we guessed whom he meant, and said that a priest had been
at the jail that morning, but only to learn the charge under which he
was apprehended. He was much mortified on being told that the priest
neither expressed a wish to see nor speak with him."
Grounsell gave a significant glance towards Frank, who now followed the
jailer to the prisoner's cell.
"He's crying, sir; don't you hear him?" whispered the jailer to Frank,
as they stood outside the door. "You could n't have a more favorable
moment." And, thus saying, he rattled the heavy bunch of keys, in order
to give the prisoner token of his approach; and then, throwing open the
door, called out, "Here's the gentleman you asked for, Meekins; see that
you don't keep him long in this cold place, for he is not very well."
Frank had but time to reach the little settle on which he sat down, when
the door was closed, and he was alone with the prisoner.
CHAPTER XXXVI. THE JAIL.
Frank Dalton was in no wise prepared for the quiet and easy
self-possession with which Meekins, after asking pardon for the liberty
of his note, took a seat in front of him. Smoothing down his short and
glossy black hair with his hand, he seemed to wait for Frank to open the
conversation; and while there was nothing of insolence in his manner,
there was an assured calmness, far more distressing to a young and
nervous invalid.
"You wished to see me, Meekins," said Frank, at last. "What can I do for
you?"
The man bent slightly forward on his chair, and, fixing his keen
and penetrating eyes, continued steadily to stare at him for several
seconds.
"You 're too young and too generous to have a double in you," said
he, after a long pause, in which it seemed as if he were scanning the
other's nature; "and before we say any more, just tell me one thing. Did
any one advise you to come here to-night?"
"Yes," said Frank, boldly.
"It was that doctor; the man they call the agent,--wasn't it?"
"Yes," replied the youth, in the same tone.
"Now, what has he against me?--what charge does he lay to me?"
"I know nothing about it," said Frank; "but if our interview is only to
consist in an examination of myself, the sooner it ends the better."
"Don't you see what I'm at, sir?--don't you perceive that I only want to
know your honor's feeling towards me, and whether what I 'm to say is
to be laid up in your heart, or taken down in writing and made into an
indictment."
"My feeling towards you is easily told. If you be an honest man, and
have any need of me, I 'll stand by you; if you be not an honest
man, but the dishonesty only affects myself and my interests, show me
anything that can warrant it, and I 'm ready to forgive you."
The prisoner hung down his head, and for some minutes seemed deeply
immersed in reflection.
"Mr. Dalton," said he, drawing his chair closer to the bed, "I 'll make
this business very short, and we need n't be wasting our time talking
over what is honesty and what is roguery,--things every man has his own
notions about, and that depend far more upon what he has in his pocket
than what he feels in his heart I can do you a good turn; you can do
me another. The service I can render you will make you a rich man, and
put you at the head of your family, where you ought to be. All I ask
in return is a free discharge from this jail, and money enough to go
to America. There never was a better bargain for you! As for myself, I
could make more of my secret if I liked; more, both in money--and--and
in other ways."
As he said these last few words, his cheek grew scarlet and his eyes
seemed to glisten.
"I scarcely understand you," said Frank. "Do you mean--"
"I 'll tell you what I mean, and so plainly that you can't mistake me.
I 'll make you what you have good right to be,----the 'Dalton of
Corrig-O'Neal,' the ould place, that was in your mother's family for
hundreds of years back. It is n't taking service in a foreign land you
need be, but an Irish gentleman, living on his own lawful estate."
"And for this you ask--"
"Just what I told you,--an open door and two hundred pounds down," said
the fellow, with a rough boldness that was close on insolence. "I've
told you already that if I only wanted a good bargain there 's others
would give more; but that's not what I 'm looking for. I 'm an old man,"
added he, in a softened voice, "and who knows when I may be called away
to the long account!" Then suddenly, as it were correcting himself for a
weak admission, he went on, more firmly, "That's neither here nor
there; the matter is just this: Will you pay the trifle I ask, for three
thousand a year, if it is n't more?"
"I must first of all consult with some friend--"
"There! that's enough. You 've said it now! Mr. Dalton, I 've done with
you forever," said the fellow, rising and walking to the window.
"You have not heard me out," said Frank, calmly. "It may be that I have
no right to make such a compact; it may be that by such a bargain I
should be compromising the just claims of the law, not to vindicate my
own rights alone, but to seek an expiation for a dreadful murder!"
"I tell you again, sir," said the fellow, with the same sternness as
before,----"I tell you again, sir, that I've done with you forever. The
devil a day you 'll ever pass under that same roof of Corrig-O'Neal as
the master of it; and if you wish me to swear it, by the great----"
"Stop!" cried Frank, authoritatively. "You have either told me too
much or too little, my good man; do not let your passion hurry you into
greater peril."
"What do you mean by that?" cried the other, turning fiercely round, and
bending over the back of the chair, with a look of menace. "What do you
mean by too much or too little?"
"This has lasted quite long enough," said Frank, rising slowly from
the bed. "I foresee little benefit to either of us from protracting it
further."
"You think you have me now, Mr. Dalton," said Meekins, with a sardonic
grin, as he placed his back against the door of the cell. "You think you
know enough, now, as if I wasn't joking all the while. Sure what do I
know of your family or your estate except what another man told me?
Sure I've no power to get back your property for you. I 'm a poor man,
without a friend in the world,"--here his voice trembled and his cheek
grew paler; "it is n't thinking of this life I am at all, but what's
before me in the next!"
"Let me pass out," said Frank, calmly.
"Of course I will, sir; I won't hinder you," said the other, but still
not moving from the spot. "You said awhile ago that I told you too much
or too little. Just tell me what that means before you go."
"Move aside, sir," said Frank, sternly.
"Not till you answer my question. Don't think you're back with your
white-coated slaves again, where a man can be flogged to death for a
look! I 'm your equal here, though I am in prison. Maybe, if you provoke
me to it, I 'd show myself more than your equal!" There was a menace
in the tone of these last words that could not be mistaken, and Frank
quickly lifted his hand to his breast; but, quick as was the gesture,
the other was too speedy for him, and caught his arm before he could
seize the pistol. Just at this critical moment the key was heard to turn
in the lock, and the heavy door was slowly opened. "There, take my arm,
sir," said Meekins, slipping his hand beneath Frank's; "You 're far too
weak to walk alone."
CHAPTER XXXVII. A FENCING-MATCH.
"You came in time,--in the very nick, Mr. Gray," said Frank, with a
quiet smile. "My friend here and I had said all that we had to say to
each other."
"Maybe you'd come again; maybe you'd give me five minutes another time?"
whispered Meekins, submissively, in Frank's ear.
"I think not," said Frank, with an easy significance in his look;
"perhaps, on reflection, you'll find that I have come once too often!"
And with these words he left the cell, and, in silent meditation,
returned to his companion.
"The fellow's voice was loud and menacing when I came to the door," said
Gray, as they walked along.
"Yes, he grew excited just at that moment; he is evidently a passionate
man," was Frank's reply; and he relapsed into his former reserve.
Grounsell, who at first waited with most exemplary patience for Frank
to narrate the substance of his interview, at last grew weary of his
reserve, and asked him what had occurred between them.
Frank paid no attention to the question, but sat with his head resting
on his hand, and evidently deep in thought. At last he said slowly,----
"Can you tell me the exact date of Mr. Godfrey's murder?"
"To the day,--almost to the hour," replied Grounsell. Taking out his
pocket-book, he read, "It was on a Friday, the 11th of November, in the
year 18----."
"Great God!" cried Frank, grasping the other's arm, while his whole
frame shook with a strong convulsion. "Was it, then, on that night?"
"Yes," said the other, "the murder took place at night. The body, when
discovered the next morning, was perfectly cold."
"Then that was it!" cried Frank, wildly. "It was then----when the
light was put out----when he crossed the garden----when he opened the
wicket--"
A burst of hysteric laughter broke from him, and muttering, "I saw it,
----I saw it all," he fell back fainting into Grounsell's arms.
All the doctor's care and judicious treatment were insufficient to
recall the youth to himself. His nervous system, shattered and broken by
long illness, was evidently unequal to the burden of the emotions he was
suffering under, and before he reached the hotel his mind was wandering
away in all the incoherency of actual madness.
Next to the unhappy youth himself, Grounsell's case was the most
pitiable. Unable to account for the terrible consequences of the scene
whose events were a secret to himself, he felt all the responsibility
of a calamity he had been instrumental in producing. From Frank it was
utterly hopeless to look for any explanation; already his brain was
filled with wild images of war and battle, mingled with broken memories
of a scene which none around his bed could recognize. In his distraction
Grounsell hurried to the jail to see and interrogate Meekins. Agitated
and distracted as he was, all his prudent reserve and calm forethought
were completely forgotten. He saw himself the cause of a dreadful
affliction, and already cured in his heart the wiles and snares in
which he was engaged. "If this boy's reason be lost forever, I, and I
only, am in fault," he went on repeating as he drove in mad haste back
to the prison.
In a few and scarcely coherent words he explained to Gray his wish to
see the prisoner, and although apprised that he had already gone to
rest, he persisted strongly, and was at length admitted into his cell.
Meekins started at the sound of the opening door, and called out
gruffly, "Who's there?"
"It's your friend," said Grounsell, who had already determined on any
sacrifice of his policy which should give him the hope of aiding Frank.
"My friend!" said Meekins, with a dry laugh. "Since when, sir?"
"Since I have begun to believe I may have wronged you, Meekins," said
Grounsell, seating himself at the bedside.
"I see, sir," rejoined the other, slowly; "I see it all. Mr. Dalton has
told you what passed between us, and you are wiser than he was."
"He has not told me everything, Meekins,--at least, not so fully and
clearly as I wish. I want you, therefore, to go over it all again for
me, omitting nothing that was said on either side."
"Ay," said the prisoner, dryly, "I see. Now, what did Mr. Dalton say to
you? I 'm curious to know; I 'd like to hear how he spoke of me."
"As of one who was well disposed to serve him, Meekins," said Grounsell,
hesitatingly, and in some confusion.
"Yes, to be sure," said the fellow, with a keen glance beneath his
gathering brows. "And he told you, too, that we parted good friends,--at
least, as much so as a poor man like myself could be to a born gentleman
like him."
"That he did," cried Grounsell, eagerly; "and young Mr. Dalton is not
the man to think the worse of your friendship because you are not his
equal in rank."
"I see,--I believe I see it all," said Meekins, with the same
sententious slowness as before. "Now look, doctor," added he, fixing
a cold and steady stare on the other's features, "it is late in the
night,--not far from twelve o'clock,--and I ask you, would n't it be
better for you to be asleep in your bed, and leave me to rest quietly in
mine, rather than be fencing--ay, fencing here--with one another, trying
who is the deepest? Just answer me that, sir."
"You want to offend me," said Grounsell, rising.
"No, sir; but it would be offending yourself to suppose that it was
worth your while to deceive the like of me,--a poor, helpless man,
without a friend in the world."
"I own I don't understand you, Meekins," said Grounsell, reseating
himself.
"There's nothing so easy, sir, if you want to do it If Mr. Dalton told
you what passed between us to-night, you know what advice you gave him;
and if he did not tell you, faix! neither will I--that's all. He knows
what I have in my power. He was fool enough not to take me at my word.
Maybe I would n't be in the same mind again."
"Come, come," said Grounsell, good-humoredly, "this is not spoken like
yourself. It can be no object with you to injure a young gentleman who
never harmed you; and if, in serving him, you can serve yourself, the
part will be both more sensible and more honorable."
"Well, then," said Meekins, calmly, "I can serve him; and now comes
the other question, 'What will he do for me?'"
"What do you require from him?"
"To leave this place at once,--before morning," said the other,
earnestly. "I don't want to see them that might make me change my mind;
to be on board of a ship at Waterford, and away out of Ireland forever,
with three hundred pounds,--I said two, but I 'll want three,--and for
that--for that "--here he hesitated some seconds,--"for that I 'll do
what I promised."
"And this business will never be spoken of more."
"Eh! what?" cried Meekins, starting.
"I mean that when your terms are complied with, what security have we
that you 'll not disclose this secret hereafter?"
Meekins slowly repeated the other's words twice over to himself, as if
to weigh every syllable of them, and then a sudden flashing of his dark
eyes showed that he had caught what he suspected was their meaning.
"Exactly so; I was coming to that," cried he. "We 'll take an oath on
the Gospel,--Mr. Frank Dalton and myself,--that never, while there's
breath in our bodies, will we ever speak to man or mortal about this
matter. I know a born gentleman would n't perjure himself, and, as for
me, I 'll swear in any way, and before any one, that your two selves
appoint."
"Then there's this priest," said Grounsell, doubtingly. "You have
already told him a great deal about this business."
"If he has n't me to the fore to prove what I said, he can do nothing;
and as to the will, he never heard of it."
"The will!" exclaimed Grounsell, with an involuntary burst of surprise;
and, brief as it was, it yet revealed a whole world of dissimulation to
the acute mind of the prisoner.
"So, doctor," said the fellow, slowly, "I was right after all. You
were only fencing with me."
"What do you mean?" cried Grounsell.
"I mean just this: that young Dalton never told you one word that passed
between us; that you came here to pump me, and find out all I knew;
that, cute as you are, there 's them that's equal to you, and that you
'll go back as wise as you came."
"What's the meaning of this change, Meekins?"
"It well becomes you, a gentleman, and a justice of the peace, to come
to the cell of a prisoner, in the dead of the night, and try to worm
out of him what you want for evidence. Won't it be a fine thing to tell
before a jury the offers you made me this night! Now, mind me, doctor,
and pay attention to my words. This is twice you tried to trick me, for
it was you sent that young man here. We 've done with each other now;
and may the flesh rot off my bones, like a bit of burned leather, if I
ever trust you again!"
There was an insolent defiance in the way these words were uttered, that
told Grounsell all hope of negotiation was gone; and the unhappy doctor
sat overwhelmed by the weight of his own incapacity and unskilfulness.
"There, now, sir, leave me alone. To-morrow I 'll find out if a man
is to be treated in this way. If I 'm not discharged out of this jail
before nine o'clock, I 'll know why, and you 'll never forget it,
the longest day you live."
Crestfallen and dispirited, Grounsell retired from the cell and returned
to the inn.
CHAPTER XXXVIII. A STEP IN VAIN.
Grounsell lost no time in summoning to his aid Mr. Hipsley, one of
the leading members of the Irish bar; but while he awaited his coming,
difficulties gathered around him from every side. Lenahan, the old
farmer, who was at first so positive about the identity of the prisoner,
began to express some doubts and hesitations on the subject "It was so
many years back since he had seen him, that it was possible he might
be mistaken;" and, in fact, he laid far more stress on the fashion of a
certain fustian jacket that the man used to wear than on any marks and
signs of personal resemblance.
The bold defiance of Meekins, and his insolent threats to expose the
Daltons to the world, assailed the poor doctor in various ways; and
although far from feeling insensible to the shame of figuring on a
trial, as having terrorized over a prisoner, the greater ruin that
impended on his friends absorbed all his sorrows.
Had he been the evil genius of the family, he could scarcely have
attained a greater degree of unpopularity. Frank's illness--for since
the night at the jail his mind had not ceased to wander--was, in Kate's
estimation, solely attributable to Grounsell's interference, all the
more unpardonable because inexplicable. Lady Hester regarded him as
the disturber of all social relations, who, for some private ends, was
involving everybody in lawsuits; and the old Count had most natural
misgivings about a man who, having assumed the sole direction of a
delicate affair, now confessed himself utterly unable to see the way
before him.
To such an extent had mortification and defeat reduced the unhappy
doctor, that when Hipsley arrived he was quite unable to give anything
like a coherent statement of the case, or lay before the astute lawyer
the points whereon he desired guidance and direction. Meanwhile the
enemy were in a state of active and most menacing preparation. Meekins,
discharged from jail, was living at an inn in the town, surrounded by a
strong staff of barristers, whose rank and standing plainly showed that
abundant pecuniary resources supplied every agency of battle.
Numerous witnesses were said to have been summoned to give their
evidence, and the rumor ran that the most ardent votary of private
scandal would be satiated with the tales and traits of domestic life the
investigation would expose to the world.
Hipsley, who with practised tact soon saw the game about to be played,
in vain asked Grounsell for some explanation of its meaning. There was a
degree of malignity in all the proceedings which could only be accounted
for on the supposition of a long-nourished revenge. How was he to
understand this? Alas! poor Grounsell knew nothing, and remembered
nothing. Stray fragments of conversation and scattered passages of
bygone scenes were jumbled up incoherently in his brain, and it was easy
to perceive that a very little was wanting to reduce his mind to the
helpless condition of Frank Dalton's.
The charge of a conspiracy to murder his relative, brought against a
gentleman of fortune and position, was an accusation well calculated to
excite the most painful feelings of public curiosity, and such was now
openly avowed to be the allegation about to be brought to issue; and,
however repugnant to credulity the bare assertion might appear at first,
the rumor was artfully associated with a strong array of threatening
circumstances. Every trivial coldness or misunderstanding between Dalton
and his brother-in-law, Godfrey, were now remembered and revived.
All the harsh phrases by which old Peter used to speak of the other's
character and conduct--Dalton's constant use of the expression, "What's
the use of his money; will he ever enjoy it?"--was now cited as but too
significant of a dreadful purpose; and, in a word, the public, with
a casuistry which we often see, was rather pleased to credit what it
flattered its own ingenuity to combine and arrange. Dalton was well
known to have been a passionate, headstrong man, violent in his
resentments, although ready to forgive and forget injuries the moment
after. This temper, and his departure for the Continent, from which
he never returned, were all the substantial facts on which the whole
superstructure was raised.
If Hipsley saw that the array of evidence was far from bringing guilt
home to Dalton, he also perceived that the exposure alone would be a
terrible blow to the suffering family. The very nature of the attack
evinced a deep and hidden vengeance. To avert this dreadful infliction
seemed, then, his first duty, and he endeavored by every means in his
power to ascertain who was the great instigator of the proceeding, in
which it was easy to see Meekins was but a subordinate. The name of
Father Cahill had twice or thrice been mentioned by Grounsell, but with
a vagueness of which little advantage could be taken. Still, even with
so faint a clew, Hipsley was fain to be content, and after several days'
ineffectual search, he at last discovered that this priest, in company
with another, was residing at the little inn of "The Rore."
Having communicated his plan to the old General, who but half assented
to the idea of negotiating with the enemy, Hipsley set out for
"The Rore," after a long day of fatiguing labor. "An inaccurate and
insufficient indictment," repeated the lawyer to himself; "the old and
hackneyed resource to balk the prurient curiosity of the public, and cut
off the scent when the gossiping pack are in full cry,--this is all
that we have now left to us. We must go into court; the only thing is to
leave it as soon as we are able."
It was not till he was within half a mile of the little inn that Hipsley
saw all the difficulty of what he was engaged in; for in what way or on
what pretext was he to address Cahill in the matter, or by what right
connect him with the proceedings? The hardihood by which he had often
suggested to a witness what he wanted to elicit, stood his part now, and
he boldly passed the threshold, and asked for Father Cahill. Mistaking
him for the chief counsel on the other side, the landlord bowed
obsequiously, and, without further parley, introduced him into the room
where D'Esmonde and Cahill were then sitting.
"I see, gentlemen," said Hipsley, bowing politely to each, "that I
am not the person you expected; but may I be permitted to enjoy an
advantage which good fortune has given me, and ask of you a few moments'
conversation? I am the counsel engaged by Mr. Dalton, in the case which
on Tuesday next is to be brought to trial; and having learned from Mr.
Grounsell that I might communicate with you in all freedom and candor,
I have come to see if something cannot be done to rescue the honor of
a family from the shame of publicity, and the obloquy that attends the
exposure of a criminal court."
D'Esmonde took up a book as Hipsley began this address, and affected to
be too deeply engaged in his reading to pay the least attention to what
went forward; while Cahill remained standing, as if to intimate to the
stranger the propriety of a very brief interruption.
"You must have mistaken the person you are addressing, sir," said the
priest, calmly. "My name is Cahill."
"Precisely, sir; and to the Reverend Mr. Cahill I desire to speak. It is
about ten days or a fortnight since you called on Dr. Grounsell with
a proposition for the settlement of this affair. I am not sufficiently
conversant with the details of what passed to say on which side the
obstacle stood,--whether he was indisposed to concede enough, or that
you demanded too much. I only know that the negotiation was abortive,
and it is now with the hope of resuming the discussion--"
"Too late, sir,--too late," said the priest, peremptorily, while a very
slight but decisive motion of D'Esmonde's brows gave him encouragement
to be bold. "I did, it is true, take the step you allude to; a variety
of considerations had their influence over me. I felt interested about
the poor man Meekins, and was naturally anxious to screen from
the consequences of shame a very old and honored family of the
country--" Here he hesitated, for a warning glance from the Abb
recalled him to caution.
"And you were about to allude to that more delicate part of the affair
which relates to Mr. Godfrey's son, sir?" interposed Hipsley, while
by an unmistakable gesture he showed his consciousness of D'Esmonde's
presence.
"I find, sir," said Cahill, coldly, "that we are gradually involving
ourselves in the very discussion I have already declined to engage in.
It is not here, nor by us, this cause must be determined. It would be
hard to persuade me that you should even counsel an interference with
the course of public justice."
"You are quite right, sir, in your estimate of me," said Hipsley,
bowing; "nor should I do so if I saw anything in this case but needless
exposure and great cruelty towards those who must necessarily be
guiltless, without one single good end obtained, except you could so
deem the gratification of public scandal by the harrowing tale of family
misfortune. Bear with me one moment more," said he, as a gesture of
impatience from Cahill showed that he wished an end of the interview.
"I will concede what I have no right to concede, and what I am in a
position to refute thoroughly,----the guilt of the party implicated;
upon whom will the punishment fall? on the aged uncle, a brave and
honored soldier, without the shadow of stain on his fair fame; on a
young and beautiful girl, whose life has already compassed more real
sorrow than old men like myself have ever known in all their career; and
on a youth, now stretched upon his sick-bed, and for whom humanity would
rather wish death itself than to come back into a world he must shrink
from with shame."
"'Filius peccatoris exardebit in crimine patris,'----the son of the
sinful man shall burn out in his father's shame! "--said D'Esmonde,
reading aloud from the volume in his hand.
Hipsley almost started at the solemnity with which these awful words
were uttered, and stood for a few seconds gazing on the pale and
thoughtful face which was still bent over the book.
"My mission has then failed!" said the lawyer, regretfully. "I am sorry
it should be so."
A cold bow was the only reply Cahill returned to this speech, and the
other slowly withdrew, and took his way back to Kilkenny, the solemn and
terrible denunciation still ringing in his ears as he went.
CHAPTER XXXIX. THE COURT-HOUSE OF KILKENNY.
The character of crime in Ireland has preserved for some years back a
most terrible consistency. The story of every murder is the same.
The same secret vengeance; the same imputed wrong; the same dreadful
sentence issued from a dark and bloody tribunal; the victim alone is
changed, but all the rest is unaltered; and we read, over and over
again, of the last agonies on the high-road and in the noonday, till,
sated and wearied, we grow into a terrible indifference as to guilt, and
talk of the "wild justice of the people" as though amongst the natural
causes which shorten human life. If this be so, and to its truth we
call to witness those who in every neighborhood have seen some fearful
event--happening, as it were, at their very doors--deplored today,
almost forgotten to-morrow; and while such is the case, the public mind
is painfully sensitive as to the details of any guilt attended with
new and unaccustomed agencies. In fact, with all the terrible catalogue
before us,' we should be far from inferring a great degree of guiltiness
to a people in whom we see infinitely more of misguided energies and
depraved passions than of that nature whose sordid incentives to
crime constitute the bad of other countries. We are not, in this, the
apologist for murder. God forbid that we should ever be supposed to
palliate, by even a word, those brutal assassinations which make every
man blush to call himself an Irishman! We would only be understood as
saying that these crimes, dark, fearful, and frequent as they are, do
not argue the same hopeless debasement of our population as the less
organized guilt of other countries; and inasmuch as the vengeance even
of the savage is a nobler instinct than the highwayman's passion for
gain, so we cherish a hope that the time is not distant when the peasant
shall tear out of his heart the damnable delusion of vindication by
blood, when he will learn a manly fortitude under calamity, a generous
trust in those above him, and, better again, a freeman's consciousness
that the law will vindicate him against injury, and that we live in
an age when the great are powerless to do wrong, unless when their
inhumanity be screened behind the darker shadow of the murder that
avenges it! Then, indeed, we have no sympathy for all the sufferings of
want, or all the miseries of fever; then, we forget the dreary hovel,
the famished children, the palsy of age, and the hopeless cry of
starving infancy,--we have neither eyes nor ears but for the sights and
sounds of murder!
We have said that amidst all the frequency of crime there is no country
of Europe where any case of guilt accompanied by new agencies or
attended by any unusual circumstances is sure to excite so great and
widespread interest. The very fact of an accusation involving any one in
rank above the starving cottier is looked upon as almost incredible,
and far from feeling sensibility dulled by the ordinary recurrence of
bloodshed, the crime becomes associated in our minds with but one class,
and as originating in one theme.
We have gradually been led away by these thoughts from the remark which
first suggested them, and now we turn again to the fact, that the city
of Kilkenny became a scene of the most intense anxiety as the morning
of that eventful trial dawned. Visitors poured in from the neighboring
counties, and even from Dublin. The case had been widely commented on
by the press; and although with every reserve as regarded the accused, a
most painful impression against old Mr. Dalton had spread on all sides.
Most of his own contemporaries had died; of the few who remained,
they were very old men, fast sinking into imbecility, and only vaguely
recollecting "Wild Peter" as one who would have stopped at nothing. The
new generation, then, received the impressions of the man thus unjustly;
nor were their opinions more lenient that they lived in an age which no
longer tolerated the excesses of the one that preceded it. Gossip, too,
had circulated its innumerable incidents on all the personages of this
strange drama; and from the venerable Count Stephen down to the informer
Meekins, every character was now before the world.
That the Daltons had come hundreds of miles, and had offered immense
sums of money to suppress the exposure, was among the commonest rumors
of the time, and that the failure of this attempt was now the cause of
the young man's illness and probable death. Meekins's character received
many commentaries and explanations. Some alleged that he was animated by
an old grudge against the family, never to be forgiven. Others said that
it was to some incident of the war abroad that he owed his hatred to
young Dalton; and, lastly, it was rumored that, having some connection
with the conspiracy, he was anxious to wipe his conscience of the guilt
before he took on him the orders of some lay society, whose vows he
professed. All these mysterious and shadowy circumstances tended to
heighten the interest of the coming event, and the city was crowded
in every part by strangers, who not only filled the Court-house, but
thronged the street in front, and even occupied the windows and roofs of
the opposite houses.
From daylight the seats were taken in the galleries of the Court; the
most distinguished of the neighboring gentry were all gathered there,
while in the seats behind the bench were ranged several members of the
peerage, who had travelled long distances to be present. To the left of
the presiding judge sat Count Stephen, calm, stern, and motionless, as
if on parade. If many of the ceremonials of the court and the general
aspect of the assemblage were new and strange to his eyes, nothing in
his bearing or manner bespoke surprise or astonishment. As little, too,
did he seem aware of the gaze of that crowded assembly, who, until the
interest of the trial called their attention away, never ceased to stare
steadfastly at him.
At the corner of the gallery facing the jury-box D'Esmonde and Cahill
were seated. The Abb, dressed with peculiar care, and wearing the blue
silk collar of an order over his white cravat, was recognized by the
crowd beneath as a personage of rank and consideration, which, indeed,
his exalted and handsome features appeared well to corroborate. He
sustained the strong stare of the assemblage with a calm but haughty
self-possession, like one well accustomed to the public eye, and who
felt no shrinking from the gaze of a multitude. Already the rumor ran
that he was an official high in the household of the Pope, and many
strange conjectures were hazarded on the meaning of his presence at the
trial.
To all the buzz of voices, and the swaying, surging motion of a vast
crowd, there succeeded a dead silence and tranquillity, when the judges
took their seats on the bench. The ordinary details were all gone
through with accustomed formality, the jury sworn, and the indictment
read aloud by the clerk of the crown, whose rapid enunciation and
monotonous voice took nothing from the novelty of the statement that was
yet to be made by counsel. At length Mr. Wallace rose, and now curiosity
was excited to the utmost. In slow and measured phrase he began by
bespeaking the patient and careful attention of the jury to the case
before them. He told them that it was a rare event in the annals of
criminal law to arraign one who was already gone before the greatest of
all tribunals; but that such cases had occurred, and it was deemed of
great importance, not alone to the cause of truth and justice, that
these investigations should be made, but that a strong moral might be
read, in the remarkable train of incidents by which these discoveries
were elicited, and men were taught to see the hand of Providence in
events which, to unthinking minds, had seemed purely accidental and
fortuitous. After dwelling for some time on this theme, he went on to
state the great difficulty and embarrassment of his own position, called
upon as he was to arraign less the guilty man than his blameless and
innocent descendants, and to ask for the penalties of the law on those
who had not themselves transgressed it.
"I do not merely speak here," said he, "of the open shame and disgrace
the course of this trial will proclaim--I do not simply allude to the
painful exposure you will be obliged to witness--I speak of the heavy
condemnation with which the law of public opinion visits the family of
a felon, making all contact with them a reproach, and denying them even
its sympathy. These would be weighty considerations if the course of
justice had not far higher and more important claims, not the least
among which is the assertion to the world at large that guilt is never
expiated without punishment, and that the law is inflexible in its
denunciation of crime."
He then entered upon a narrative of the case, beginning with an account
of the Dalton family, and the marriage which connected them with the
Godfreys. He described most minutely the traits of character which
separated the two men and rendered them uncompanionable one to the
other. Of Godfrey he spoke calmly and without exaggeration; but when
his task concerned Peter Dalton, he drew the picture of a reckless,
passionate, and unprincipled man, in the strongest colors, reminding the
jury that it was all-important to carry with them through the case this
view of his character, as explaining and even justifying many of the
acts he was charged with. "You will," said he, "perceive much to blame
in him, but also much to pity, and even where you condemn deeply, you
will deplore the unhappy combination of events which perverted what may
have been a noble nature, and degraded by crime what was meant to have
adorned virtue! From the evidence I shall produce before you will be
seen the nature of the intimacy between these two men, so strikingly
unlike in every trait of character, and although this be but the
testimony of one who heard it himself from another, we shall find a
strong corroboration of all in the consistency of the narrative and the
occasional allusion to facts provable from other sources. We shall
then show you how the inordinate demands of Dalton, stimulated by the
necessity of his circumstances, led to a breach with his brother-in-law,
and subsequently to his departure for the Continent; and, lastly,
we mean to place before you the extraordinary revelation made to the
witness Meekins, by his comrade William Noonan, who, while incriminating
himself, exhibited Dalton as the contriver of the scheme by which the
murder was effected.
"It would be manifestly impossible, in a case like this, when from the
very outset the greatest secrecy was observed and over whose mystery
years have accumulated clouds of difficulty, to afford that clear and
precise line of evidence which in a recent event might naturally be
looked for. But you will learn enough, and more than enough, to
satisfy your minds on every point Meekins shall be subjected to any
cross-examination my learned brother may desire, and I only ask for him
so much of your confidence as a plain unvarying statement warrants. He
is a stranger in this country; and although it has been rumored,
from his resemblance to a man formerly known here, that he has been
recognized, we shall show you that for upwards of thirty years he has
been in foreign countries, and while he understands that his parents
were originally from the south of Ireland, he believes himself to have
been born in America. These facts will at once disabuse your minds
of the suspicion that he can have been actuated by any malicious or
revengeful feelings towards the Daltons. We shall, also, show that the
most strenuous efforts have been made to suppress his testimony; and
while it may be painful to exhibit one charged with the administration
of justice as having plotted to subvert or distort it, we shall
produce on the witness-table the individual who himself made these very
overtures of corruption."
A long and minute narrative followed--every step of the conspiracy was
detailed--from the first communication of Dalton with Noonan, to the
fatal moment of the murder. Noonan's own subsequent confession to
Meekins was then related, and lastly the singular accident by which
Meekins came in contact with the Abb d'Esmonde, and was led to a
revelation of the whole occurrence. The lawyer at last sat down, and
as he did so, a low murmuring sound ran through the crowded assemblage,
whose mournful cadence bespoke the painful acquiescence in the statement
they had heard. More than one eager and sympathizing look was turned to
where the old Count sat; but his calm, stern features were passive
and immovable as ever; and although he listened with attention to the
address of the advocate, not a semblance of emotion could be detected in
his manner.
Meekins was now called to the witness-box, and as he made his way
through the crowd, and ascended the table, the most intense curiosity
to see him was displayed. Well dressed, and with a manner of decent and
respectful quietude, he slowly mounted the stairs, and saluted the
bench and jury. Although an old man, he was hale and stout-looking,
his massive broad forehead and clear gray eye showing a character of
temperament well able to offer resistance to time.
There was an apparent frankness and simplicity about him that favorably
impressed the court, and he gave his evidence with that blended
confidence and caution which never fails to have its effect on a jury.
He owned, too, that he once speculated on using the secret for his own
advantage, and extorting a considerable sum from old Dalton's fears, but
that on second thoughts he had decided on abandoning this notion, and
resolved to let the mystery die with him. The accidental circumstance of
meeting with the Abb D'Esmonde, at Venice, changed this determination,
and it was while under the religious teachings of this good priest that
he came to the conviction of his sad duty. His evidence occupied several
hours, and it was late in the afternoon when the cross-examination
began.
Nothing within the reach of a crafty lawyer was left undone. All that
practised skill and penetration could accomplish was exhibited, but the
testimony was unshaken in every important point; and save when pushing
the witness as to his own early life and habits, not a single admission
could be extorted to his discredit. But even here his careless easy
manner rescued him; and when he alleged that he never very well knew
where he was born, or who were his parents, nor had he any very great
misgivings about having served on board a slaver, and "even worse," the
jury only smiled at what seemed the frank indifference of an old sailor.
Noonan had given him a few scraps of Mr. Dalton's writing. He had lost
most of them, he said; but of those which remained, although unsigned,
the authenticity was easily established. Old Peter's handwriting was
familiar to many, and several witnesses swore to their being genuine. In
other respects, they were of little importance. One alone bore any real
significance, and it was the concluding passage of a letter, and ran
thus: "So that if I 'm driven to it at last, Godfrey himself is more to
blame than me." Vague as this menacing sentence was, it bore too home
upon the allegations of the witness not to produce a strong effect,
nor could any dexterity of the counsel succeed in obliterating its
impression.
Seeing that the counsel for the prosecution had not elicited the
testimony he promised, respecting the attempted subornation of Meekins,
the defence rashly adventured upon that dangerous ground, and too late
discovered his error, for the witness detailed various conversations
between Grounsell and himself, and gave with terrible effect a scene
that he swore had occurred between young Dalton and him in the jail.
It was in vain to remind the jury that he who alone could refute this
evidence was stretched on a bed of sickness. The effect was already
made.
When questioned as to the reasons Dalton might have had for conspiring
against his brother-in-law, he confessed that Noonan only knew that
Godfrey had refused him all assistance, and that he believed that after
his death he, Dalton, would inherit the property. His own impression
was, however, that it was more vengeance than anything else. The Daltons
were living in great poverty abroad; there was scarcely a privation
which they had not experienced; and the embittering stings of their
misery were adduced as the mainspring of old Peter's guilt. This
allusion to the private life of the Dalton family was eagerly seized on
by Mr. Wallace, who now "begged to ascertain certain facts on a subject
which, but for his learned brother's initiative, he would have shrunk
from exhibiting in open court." Meekins could, of course, but give such
details as he had learned from Noonan, but they all described a life
of suffering and meanness,--their contrivances and their straits;
their frequent change of place, as debt accumulated over them; their
borrowings and their bills; and, lastly, the boastful pretexts they
constantly brought forward on the rank of their uncle, Count Dalton, as
a guarantee of their solvency and respectability. So unexpected was the
transition to the mention of this name, that the whole assembly suddenly
turned their eyes to where the old General sat, mute and stern; but the
look he returned might well have abashed them, so haughty and daring was
its insolence.
Apparently to show the knowledge possessed by the witness on matters of
private detail,--but, in reality, to afford an occasion for dilating on
a painful subject,--the whole history of the family was raked up, and
all the sad story of Nelly's toil and Kate's menial duties paraded
in open court, wound up, at last, with what was called young Frank's
enlistment "as a common soldier of the Austrian army."
The greater interests of the trial were all forgotten in these materials
for gossip, and the curiosity of the listeners was excited to its
highest pitch when he came to tell of that mingled misery and ambition,
that pride of name, and shameless disregard of duty, which he described
as characterizing them; nor was the craving appetite for scandal half
appeased when the court interrupted the examination, and declared that
it was irrelevant and purposeless.
Meekins at last descended from the table, and Michel Lenahan was called
up. The important fact he had so resolutely sworn to some weeks before
he had already shown a disinclination to confirm, and all that he could
now be brought to admit was, that he had believed Meekins was his old
acquaintance, Black Sam; but the years that had elapsed since he saw him
before, change of dress, and the effect of time on each of them, might
well shake a better memory than his own.
"Jimmy Morris might know him again, my Lord," said he, "for he never
forgot anybody,----but he is n't to the fore."
"I have the happiness to say that he is," said Hipeley. "He has arrived
from Cove, here, this morning. Call James Morris, crier;" and soon
after, a very diminutive old man, with a contracted leg, mounted the
table. He was speedily sworn, and his examination commenced. After a
few questions as to his trade,--he was a tailor,--and where he had
lived latterly, he was asked whether he remembered, amongst his former
acquaintance, a certain bailiff on the Corrig-O'Neal estate, commonly
called Black Sam?
"By coorse I do," said he; "he was always making mischief between Mr.
Godfrey and ould Peter."
"You have not been asked that question, sir." interposed Wallace.
"No, but he shall be by-and-by," cried Hipsley. "Tell me, now, what kind
of a man was this same Black Sam?"
"As cruel a man as ever you seen."
"That is not exactly what I am asking. I want to hear what he was like."
"He was like the greatest villain--"
"I mean, was he short or tall; was he a big man and a strong man, or was
he a little fellow like you or me?"
"Devil a bit like either of us. He 'd bate us both with one hand,--ay,
and that fellow there with the wig that's laughing at us, into the
bargain."
"So, then, he was large and powerful?"
"Yes, that he was."
"Had he anything remarkable about his appearance,----anything that might
easily distinguish him from other men?"
"Tis, maybe, his eyes you mane?"
"What about his eyes, then?"
"They could be lookin' at ye when ye 'd aware they were only lookin' at
the ground; and he 'd a thrick of stopping himself when he was laughing
hearty by drawing the back of his hand over his mouth, this way."
As the witness accompanied these words by a gesture, a low murmur
of astonishment ran through the court, for more than once during the
morning Meekins had been seen to perform the very act described.
"You would probably be able to know him again if you saw him."
"That I would."
"Look around you, now, and tell me if you see him here. No, no, he's
not in the jury-box; still less likely it is that you 'd find him on the
bench."
The witness, neither heeding the remark nor the laughter which followed
it, slowly rose and looked around him.
"Move a little to one side, if ye plase," said he to a member of the
inner bar. "Yes, that's him." And he pointed to Meekins, who, with
crossed arms and lowering frown, stood still and immovable.
The bystanders all fell back at the same instant, and now he remained
isolated in the midst of that crowded scene, every eye bent upon him.
"You 're wearing well, Sam," said the witness, addressing him
familiarly. "Maybe it's the black wig you 'ye on; but you don't look a
day oulder than when I seen you last."
This speech excited the most intense astonishment in the court, and many
now perceived, for the first time, that Meekins did not wear his own
hair.
"Are you positive, then, that this man is Black Sam?"
"I am."
"Are you prepared to swear to it on your solemn oath, taking all the
consequences false evidence will bring down upon you?"
"I am."
"You are quite certain that it's no accidental resemblance, but that
this is the very identical man you knew long ago?"
"I'm certain sure. I'd know him among a thousand; and, be the same
token, he has a mark of a cut on the crown of his head, three inches
long. See, now, if I 'm not right."
Meekins was now ordered to mount the witness-table, and remove his wig.
He was about to say something, but Wallace stopped him and whispered a
few words in his ear.
"I would beg to observe," said the lawyer, "that if an old cicatrix is
to be the essential token of recognition, few men who have lived the
adventurous life of Meekins will escape calumny."
"'T is a mark like the letter V," said Jimmy; "for it was ould Peter
himself gave it him, one night, with a brass candlestick. There it is!"
cried he, triumphantly; "did n't I tell true?"
The crowded galleries creaked under the pressure of the eager
spectators, who now bent forward and gazed on this strong proof of
identification.
"Is there any other mark by which you could remember him?"
"Sure, I know every fayture in his face,--what more d'ye want?"
"Now, when did you see him last,--I mean before this day?"
"The last time I seen him was the mornin' he was taken up."
"How do you mean' taken up'?"
"Taken up by the polis."
"Taken by the police,----for what?"
"About the murder, to be sure."
A thrill of horror pervaded the court as these words were spoken, and
Meekins, whose impassive face had never changed before, became now pale
as death.
"Tell the jury what you saw on the morning you speak of."
"I was at home, work in', when the polis passed by. They asked me where
Black Sam lived; 'Up the road,' says I."
"How far is your house from his?"
"About fifty perches, your honor, in the same boreen, but higher up."
"So that, in going from Mr. Godfrey's to his own home, Sam must have
passed your door?"
"Yes, sir."
"This he did every day,--two or three times,--did n't he?"
"He did, sir."
"Did you usually speak to each other as he went by?"
"Yes, sir; we always would say, 'God save you,' or the like."
"How was he dressed on these occasions?"
"The way he was always dressed,----how would he be?"
"That's exactly what I 'm asking you."
"Faix! he had his coat and breeches, like any other man."
"I see. He had his coat and breeches, like any other man; now, what
color was his coat?"
"It was gray, sir,----blue-gray. I know it well."
"How do you come to know it well?"
"Bekase my own boy, Ned, sir, bought one off the same piece before he
'listed, and I couldn't forget it."
"Where were you the day after the murder, when the policemen came to
take Sam Eustace?"
"I was sitting at my own door, smoking a pipe, and I see the polis
comin', and so I went in and shut the door."
"What was that for? You had no reason to fear them."
"Ayeh!--who knows?--the polis is terrible!"
"Well, after that?"
"Well, when I heard them pass, I opened the door, and then I saw enough.
They were standing at Sam's house; one of them talking to Sam, and the
other two rummaging about, sticking poles into the thatch, and tumbling
oyer the turf in the stack.
"'Isn't this a pretty business?' says Sam, calling out to me. 'The polis
is come to take me off to prison because some one murdered the master.'
'Well, his soul's in glory, anyhow,' says I, and I shut the doore."
"And saw nothing more?"
"Only the polis lading Sam down the boreen betune them."
"He made no resistance, then?"
"Not a bit; he went as quiet as a child. When he was going by the doore,
I remember he said to one of the polis, 'Would it be plazing to ye to
help me wid my coat; for I cut my finger yesterday?'"
"Did n't I say it was with a reaping-hook?" cried Meekins, who, in
all the earnestness of anxiety, followed every word that fell from the
witness.
His counsel sprang to his feet, and pulled him back by the arm; but not
before the unguarded syllables had been heard by every one around. Such
was the sensation now produced, that for several minutes the proceedings
were interrupted, while the counsel conferred in low whispers together,
and all seemed thunderstruck and amazed. Twice Meekins stood forward to
address the court, but on each occasion he was restrained by the counsel
beside him; and it was only by the use of menaces that Wallace succeeded
in enforcing silence on him. "When the moment of cross-examination
arrives," said he to the jury, "I hope to explain every portion of this
seeming difficulty. Have you any further questions to ask the witness?"
"A great many more," said Hipsley. "Now, Morris, attend to me. Sam asked
the police to assist him, as he had cut his hand with a reaping-hook?"
"He did, indeed, sir," said the witness; "and a dreadful cut it was. It
was hard for him to get his hand into the sleeve of the jacket."
"I perceive; he had difficulty in putting on the jacket, but the
policemen helped him?"
"They did, sir; and one of them was hurting him, and Sam called out,
'Take care, take care. It's better to cut the ould sleeve; it's not
worth much, now.'"
"And did they cut it?"
"They did, sir; they ripped it up all the way to the elbow."
"That was a pity, was n't it, to rip up a fine frieze coat like that?"
"Oh, it was n't his coat at all, sir. It was only a flannel jacket he
had for working in."
"So, then, he did not wear the blue-gray frieze like your son's when he
went to jail?"
"No, sir. He wore a jacket."
"Now, why was that?"
"Sorry one o' me knows; but I remember he didn't wear it."
"Did n't I say that I left my coat at the bog, and that I was ashamed
to go in the ould jacket?" screamed out Meekins, whose earnestness was
above all control.
"If this go on, it is impossible that I can continue to conduct this
case, my Lord," said Wallace. "While no attempt has been made to refute
one tittle of the great facts I have mentioned, a system of trick has
been resorted to, by which my client's credit is sought to be impugned.
What care I if he was known by a hundred nicknames? He has told the
court already that he has lived a life of reckless adventure; that he
has sailed under every flag and in every kind of enterprise. Mayhap,
amid his varied characters, he has played that of a land bailiff; nor is
it very strange that he should not wish to parade before the world the
fact of his being arrested, even under a false accusation; for he was
discharged, as he has just told you, two days after."
A large bundle, carefully sealed, was now carried into the court, and
deposited before Mr. Hipsley, who, after a few seconds' consultation
with Grounsell, rose, and addressed the court,----
"My learned friend complains of being surprised; he will, perhaps, have
a better right to be so in a few moments hence. I now demand that this
man be consigned to the dock. These affidavits are all regular, my Lord,
and the evidence I purpose to lay before you will very soon confirm
them."
The judge briefly scanned the papers before him; and, by a gesture, the
command was issued, and Meekins, who never uttered a word, was conducted
within the dock.
"I will merely ask the witness two or three questions more," added
Hipsley, turning towards the jailer, who alone, of all the assembly,
looked on without any wonderment.
"Now, witness, when did you see the prisoner wear the blue-gray coat?
After the death of Mr. Godfrey, I mean."
"I never seen him wear it again," was the answer.
"How could ye?" cried Meekins, in a hoarse voice. "How could ye? I
sailed for America the day after I was set at liberty."
"Be silent, sir," said the prisoner's counsel, who, suffering greatly
from the injury of these interruptions, now assumed a look of angry
impatience; while, with the craft of his calling, he began already to
suspect that a mine was about to be sprung beneath him.
"You have told us," said Hipsley,--and, as he spoke, his words came
with an impressive slowness that made them fall deep into every
heart around,--"You have told us that the coat worn habitually by the
prisoner, up to the day of Mr. Godfrey's murder, you never saw on him
after that day. Is that true?"
"It is, sir."
"You have also said that this coat----part of a piece from which your
son had a coat----was of a peculiar color?"
"It was, sir; and more than that, they had both the same cut, only Sam's
had horn buttons, and my son's was metal."
"Do you think, then, from the circumstances you have just mentioned,
that you could know that coat if you were to see it again?"
A pause followed, and the witness, instead of answering, sat with his
eyes fixed upon the dock, where the prisoner, with both hands grasping
the iron spikes, stood, his glaring eyeballs riveted upon the old man's
face, with an expression of earnestness and terror actually horrible to
witness.
"Look at me, Morris," said Hipsley, "and answer my question. Would you
know this coat again?"
"That is, would you swear to it?" interposed the opposite counsel.
"I believe I would, sir," was the answer.
"You must be sure, my good man. Belief is too vague for us here," said
the prisoner's lawyer.
[Illustration: 498]
"Is this it?" said the solicitor, as, breaking the seals of the parcel
before him, he held up a coat, which, ragged and eaten by worms, seemed
of a far darker color than that described by witness.
The old man took it in his hands and examined it over carefully,
inspecting with all the minute curiosity of age every portion of the
garment The suspense at this moment was terrible; not a syllable was
spoken; not a breath stirred; nothing but the long-drawn respirations
of the prisoner, who, still leaning on the iron railing of the dock,
watched the old man's motions with the most harrowing intensity.
"Let me see it on him," said the witness, at last
"Prisoner, put on that coat," said the judge.
Meekins tried to smile as he proceeded to obey; but the effort was
too much, and the features became fixed into one rigid expression,
resembling the look of hysteric laughter.
"Well, do you know me now?" cried he, in a voice whose every accent rang
with a tone of intimidation and defiance.
"I do," said the witness, boldly. "I 'll swear to that coat, my Lord,
and I 'll prove I 'm right. It was the same stuffing put into both
collars; and if I 'm telling you the truth, it 's a piece of ould
corduroy is in that one there."
The very grave was not more still than the court as the officer of the
jail, taking off the coat, ripped up the collar, and held up in his hand
a small piece of tarnished corduroy.
"My Lord! my Lord! will you let a poor man's life be swore away--"
"Silence, sir,--be still, I say," cried the prisoner's counsel, who
saw the irremediable injury of these passionate appeals. "I am here to
conduct your defence, and I will not be interfered with. Your Lordship
will admit that this proceeding has all the character of surprise. We
were perfectly unprepared for the line my learned friend has taken--"
"Permit me to interrupt the counsel, my Lord. I need scarcely appeal to
this court to vindicate me against any imputation such as the learned
gentleman opposite would apply to me. Your Lordship's venerable
predecessors on that bench have more than once borne witness to
the fairness and even the lenity of the manner in which the crown
prosecutions have been conducted. Any attempt to surprise, any effort to
entrap a prisoner, would be as unworthy of us as it would be impossible
in a court over which you preside. The testimony which the witness has
just given, the extraordinary light his evidence has just shown, was
only made available to ourselves by one of those circumstances in which
we see a manifestation of the terrible judgment of God upon him who
sheds the blood of his fellow-man. Yes, my Lord, if any case can merit
the designation of Providential intervention, it is this one. Every step
of this singular history is marked by this awful characteristic. It is
the nephew of the murdered man by whom the first trace of crime has been
detected. It is by him that we have been enabled to bring the prisoner
into that dock. It is by him that a revelation has been made which,
had it not occurred in our own day and under our own eyes, we should be
disposed to class amongst the creations of fiction. The learned counsel
has told you that these articles of clothing have been produced here by
surprise. This affidavit is the shortest answer to that suspicion. From
this you will see that, early this morning, young Mr. Dalton requested
that two magistrates of the city should be brought to his bedside, to
take down the details of an important declaration. The fever which for
several days back had oppressed him, had abated for the time, and he
was, although weak and low, calm and collected in all his faculties. It
was then, with remarkable accuracy, and in a manner totally free from
agitation, that he made the following singular revelation." The counsel
then recited, at more length than would suit our reader's patience
to follow, the story of Frank's visit to Ireland when a boy, and his
accidental presence in the grounds of Corrig-O'Neal on the very night
of the murder. "At first the magistrates were disposed to regard
this revelation as the mere dream of an erring intellect; but when he
described every feature of the locality, and the most intricate details
of scenery, their opinion was changed; and when at last he designated
the exact spot where he had seen a large bundle buried, it only needed
that this should be confirmed to establish the strict truth of all
he alleged. With every care and precaution Against deception, the
magistrates proceeded to visit the place. They were accompanied by
several persons of character and station, in presence of whom the
examination was made. So accurate was the narrative, that they found the
spot without difficulty, and, on digging down about two feet, they
came upon the articles which you now see before you. These, without any
examination, they at once sealed up in presence of the witnesses, and
here for the first time have they been displayed to view."
As the counsel had reached thus far, the fall of a heavy body resounded
through the court, and the cry was raised that the prisoner had been
seized with a fit.
"No, my Lord," exclaimed the lawyer; "fatigue and weariness alone
have produced this effect. My unhappy client is no more proof against
exhaustion than against slander."
"My Lord! my Lord!" cried the prisoner, as, holding by the spikes of the
dock, he leaned forwards over it, "can't I get justice? Is it my coat--"
"Sit down, sir," said his counsel, angrily; "leave this to me."
"What do you care what becomes of me?" cried the other, rudely. "Where's
Father Cahill? Where's----" At this instant his eyes met those of
D'Esmonde, as, seated in the gallery immediately above him, he watched
the proceedings with an agonizing interest only second to the prisoner's
own. "Oh, look what you've brought me to!" cried he, in an accent of
heart-broken misery; "oh, see where I'm standing now!"
The utterance of these words sent a thrill through the court, and the
judge was obliged to remind the prisoner that he was but endangering his
own safety by these rash interruptions.
"Sure I know it, my Lord; sure I feel it," cried he, sobbing; "but what
help have I? Is there no one to stand by me? You're looking for marks
of blood, ain't ye?" screamed he to the jury, who were now examining the
coat and cap with great attention. "And there it is now,--there it is!"
cried he, wildly, as his eyes detected a folded paper that one of
the jurymen had just taken from the coat-pocket "What could I get by
it?--sure the will could n't do me any harm."
"This is a will, my Lord," said the foreman, handing the document down
to the bench. "It is dated, too, on the very-night before Mr. Godfrey's
death."
The judge quickly scanned the contents, and then passed it over to Mr.
Hipsley, who, glancing his eyes over it, exclaimed, "If we wanted any
further evidence to exculpate the memory of Mr. Dalton, it is here.
By this will, signed, sealed, and witnessed in all form, Mr. Godfrey
bequeathed to his brother-in-law his whole estate of Corrig-O'Neal, and,
with the exception of some trifling legacies, names him heir to all he
is possessed of."
"Let me out of this,--leave me free!" shouted the prisoner, whose
eyeballs now glared with the red glow of madness. "What brought me into
your schemes and plots?--why did I ever come here? Oh, my Lord, don't
see a poor man come to harm that has no friends. Bad luck to them here
and hereafter, the same Daltons! It was ould Peter turned me out upon
the world, and Godfrey was no better. Oh, my Lord! oh, gentlemen! if ye
knew what druv me to it,--but I did n't do it,--I never said I did. I'll
die innocent!"
These words were uttered with a wild volubility, and, when over, the
prisoner crouched down in the dock, and buried his face in his hands.
From that instant he never spoke a word. The trial was prolonged till
late into the night; a commission was sworn and sent to the inn, to
examine young Dalton and interrogate him on every point. All that skill
and address could do were exerted by the counsel for the defence; but,
as the case proceeded, the various facts only tended to strengthen and
corroborate each other, and long before the jury retired their verdict
was certain.
"Guilty, my Lord!" And, well known and anticipated as the words were,
they were heard in all that solemn awe their terrible import conveys.
The words seemed to rouse the prisoner from his state; for, as if with
a convulsive effort, he sprang to his legs, and advanced to the front
of the dock. To the dreadful question of the Judge, as to what he had to
say, why sentence of death should not be pronounced upon him, he made
no answer; and his wild gaze and astonished features showed an almost
unconsciousness of all around him. From this state of stupor he soon
rallied, and, grasping the iron spikes with his hands, he protruded his
head and shoulders over the dock, while he carried his eyes over the
assembled crowd, till at last they lighted on the spot where Cahill and
D'Esmonde were seated,--the former pale and anxious-looking, the latter
with his head buried in his hands. The prisoner nodded with an insolent
air of familiarity to the priest, and muttered a few broken words in
Irish. Again was the terrible demand made by the Judge; and now the
prisoner turned his face towards the bench, and stood as if reflecting
on his reply.
"Go on," cried he at last, in a tone of rude defiance; and the judge,
in all the passionless dignity of his high station, calmly reviewed the
evidence in the case, and gave his full concurrence to the verdict of
the jury.
"I cannot conclude," said he, solemnly, "without adverting to that
extraordinary combination of events by which this crime, after a long
lapse of years, has been brought home to its guilty author. The evidence
you have heard to-day from Mr. Dalton--the singular corroboration of
each particular stated by him in the very existence of the will, which
so strongly refutes the motive alleged against the late Mr. Dalton--were
all necessary links of the great chain of proof; and yet all these might
have existed in vain were it not for another agency, too eventful to
be called an accident; I allude to the circumstance by which this man
became acquainted with one who was himself peculiarly interested in an
fathoming the mystery of this murder; I mean the Abb D'Esmonde. The
name of this gentleman has been more than once alluded to in this trial;
but he has not been brought before you, nor was there any need that he
should be. Now the Abb, so far from connecting the prisoner with
the crime, believed him to be the agency by which it might have been
fastened on others; and to this end he devoted himself with every zeal
to the inquiry. Here, then, amidst all the remarkable coincidences of
this case, we find the very strangest of all; for this same Abb,--the
accidental means of rescuing the prisoner from death at Venice, and who
is the chief agent in now bringing him to punishment here,--this Abb is
himself the natural son of the late Mr. Godfrey. Sent when a mere boy to
St. Omer and Louvain to be educated for the Roman Catholic priesthood,
he was afterwards transferred to Salamanca, where he graduated, and took
deacon's orders. Without any other clew to his parentage than the vague
lines of admission in the conventual registry, the checks for money
signed and forwarded by Mr. Godfrey, this gentleman had risen by his
great talents to a high and conspicuous station before he addressed
himself to the search after his family. I have no right to pursue this
theme further; nor had I alluded to it at all, save as illustrating
in so remarkable a manner that direct and unmistakable impress of the
working of Providence in this case, showing how, amidst all the strange
chaos of a time of revolution and anarchy, when governments were
crumbling, and nations rending asunder, this one blood-spot--the foul
deed of murder----should cry aloud for retribution, and, by a succession
of the least likely incidents, bring the guilty man to justice."
After a careful review of all the testimony against the prisoner, the
conclusiveness of which left no room for a doubt, he told him to abandon
all hope of a pardon in this world, concluding, in the terrible words of
the law, by the sentence of death,----
"You, Samuel Eustace, will be taken from the bar of this court to
the place from whence you came, the jail, and thence to the place of
execution, there to be hung by the neck till you are dead--"
"Can I see my priest,----may the priest come to me?" cried the prisoner,
fiercely; for not even the appalling solemnity of the moment could
repress the savage energy of his nature.
"Miserable man," said the judge, in a faltering accent, "I beseech you
to employ well the few minutes that remain to you in this world, and
carry not into the next that spirit of defiance by which you would brave
an earthly judgment-seat. And may God have mercy on your soul!"
CHAPTER XL. THE RETRIBUTION.
The sudden flash of intelligence by which young Frank was enabled to
connect the almost forgotten incidents of boyhood with the date and
the other circumstances of the murder, had very nearly proved fatal to
himself. His brain was little able to resist the influence of all these
conflicting emotions; and for some days his faculties wandered away in
the wildest and most incoherent fancies. It was only on the very morning
of the trial that he became self-possessed and collected. Then it was
that he could calmly remember every detail of that fatal night, and see
their bearing on the mysterious subject of the trial. At first Grounsell
listened to his story as a mere raving; but when Frank described with
minute accuracy the appearance of the spot--the old orchard, the stone
stair that descended into the garden, and the little door which opened
into the wood,--he became eagerly excited; and, anxious to proceed with
every guarantee of caution, he summoned two other magistrates to the
bedside to hear the narrative. We have already seen the event which
followed that revelation, and by which the guilt of the murderer was
established.
From hour to hour, as the trial proceeded, Frank received tidings from
the court-house. The excitement, far from injuring, seemed to rally and
re-invigorate him; and although the painful exposure of their domestic
circumstances was cautiously slurred over to his ears, it was plain to
see the indignant passion with which he heard of Nelly and Kate being
dragged before the public eye. It was, indeed, a day of deep and
terrible emotion, and when evening came he sank into the heavy sleep
of actual exhaustion. While nothing was heard in the sick-room save the
long-drawn breathings of the sleeper, the drawing-rooms of the hotel
were crowded with the gentry of the neighborhood, all eager to see and
welcome the Dalton's home again. If the old were pleased to meet with
the veteran Count Stephen, the younger were no less delighted with even
such casual glimpses as they caught of Kate, in the few moments she
could spare from her brother's bedside. As for Lady Hester, such a
torrent of sensations, such a perfect avalanche of emotion, was perfect
ecstasy; perhaps not the least agreeable feeling being the assurance
that she no longer possessed any right or title to Corrig-O'Neal, and
was literally unprovided for in the world.
"One detests things by halves," said she; "but to be utterly ruined is
quite charming."
The country visitors were not a little surprised at the unfeigned
sincerity of her enjoyment, and still more, perhaps, at the warm
cordiality of her manner towards them,--she who, till now, had declined
all proffers of acquaintanceship, and seemed determined to shun them.
Consigning to her care all the duties of receiving the crowd of
visitors, which old Count Stephen was but too happy to see, Kate only
ventured for a few minutes at a time to enter the drawing-room. It was
while hastening back from one of these brief intervals that she heard
her name spoken in a low but distinct voice. She turned round, and saw a
man, closely enveloped in a large cloak, beside her.
"It is I, Miss Dalton,--the Abb D'Esmonde," said he. "May I speak with
your brother?"
Kate could hardly answer him from terror. All the scenes in which she
had seen him figure rose before her view, and the man was, to her eyes,
the very embodiment of peril.
"My brother is too ill, sir, to receive you," said she. "In a few days
hence--"
"It will then be too late, Miss Dalton," said he, mournfully. "The very
seconds as they pass, now, are as days to one who stands on the brink of
eternity."
"Is there anything which I could communicate to him myself? for I am
fearful of what might agitate or excite him."
"If it most be so," said he, sighing, and as if speaking to himself.
"But could you not trust me to say a few words? I will be most
cautious."
"If, then,' to-morrow--"
"To-morrow! It must be now,--at this very instant!" cried he, eagerly.
"The life of one who is unfit to go hence depends upon it." Then, taking
her hand, he continued: "I have drawn up a few lines, in shape of a
petition for mercy to this wretched man. They must be in London by
to-morrow night, to permit of a reprieve before Saturday. Your brother's
signature is all-essential. For this I wished to see him, and to know
if he has any acquaintanceship with persons in power which could aid the
project. You see how short the time is; all depends upon minutes.
The Secretary of State can suspend the execution, and in the delay a
commutation of the sentence may be obtained."
"Oh, give it to me!" cried she, eagerly. And, snatching the paper from
his hands, she hurried into the chamber.
Frank Dalton was awake, but in all the languor of great debility. He
scarcely listened to his sister, till he heard her pronounce the name of
the Abb D'Esmonde.
"Is he here, Kate?--is he here?" cried he, eagerly.
"Yes, and most anxious to see and speak with you."
"Then let him come in, Kate. Nay, nay, it will not agitate me."
Kate noiselessly retired, and, beckoning the Abb to come forward, she
left the room, and closed the door.
D'Esmonde approached the sick-bed with a cautious, almost timid air, and
seated himself on a chair, without speaking.
"So, then, we are cousins, I find," said Frank, stretching out his
wasted hand towards him. "They tell me you are a Godfrey, Abb?"
D'Esmonde pressed his hand in token of assent, but did not utter a word.
"I have no wish--I do not know if I have the right----to stand between
you and your father's inheritance. If I am destined to arise from this
sick-bed, the world is open to me, and I am not afraid to encounter it.
Let us be friends, then, D'Esmonde, in all candor and frankness."
"Willingly,--most willingly. There need be but one rivalry between us,"
said D*Esmonde, with a voice of deep feeling,--"in the struggle who
shall best serve the other. Had we known of this before; had I suspected
how our efforts might have been combined and united; had I but imagined
you as my ally, and not my--But these are too exciting themes to talk
upon. You are not equal to them."
"Not so; it is in such moments that I feel a touch of health and vigor
once again. Go on, I beseech you."
"I will speak of that which more immediately concerns us," said the
Abb. "This wretched man stands for execution on Saturday. Let us try
to save him. His guilt must have already had its expiation in years
of remorse and suffering. Here is a petition I have drawn up to the
Secretary of State. It has been signed by several of the jury who
tried the cause. We want your name also to it Such a commutation as may
sentence him to exile is all that we pray for."
"Give me the pen; I 'll sign it at once."
"There,--in that space," said the' Abb, pointing with his finger. "How
your hand trembles! This cannot be like your usual writing."
"Let me confirm it by my seal, then. You'll find it on the table
yonder."
D'Esmonde melted the wax, and stood beside him, while the youth pressed
down the seal.
"Even that," said the Abb, "might be disputed. There 's some one
passing in the corridor; let him hear you acknowledge it as your act and
hand." And, so saying, he hastened to the door, and made a sign to the
waiter to come in. "Mr. Dalton desires you to witness his signature,"
said he to the man.
"I acknowledge this as mine," said Frank, already half exhausted by the
unaccustomed exertion.
"Your name, there, as witnessing it," whispered D'Esmonde; and the
waiter added his signature.
"Have you hope of success, Abb?" said Frank, faintly.
"Hope never fails me," replied D'Esmonde, in a voice of bold and
assured tone. "It is the only capital that humble men like myself
possess; but we can draw upon it without limit. The fate of riches is
often ruins, but there is no bankruptcy in hope. Time presses now," said
he, as if suddenly remembering himself; "I must see to this at once.
When may I come again?"
"Whenever you like. I have much to say to you. I cannot tell you now how
strangely you are mixed up in my fancy--it is but fancy, after all--with
several scenes of terrible interest."
"What!--how do you mean?" said D'Esmonde, turning hastily about
"I scarcely know where to begin, or how to separate truth from its
counterfeit Your image is before me, at times and in places where you
could not have been. Ay, even in the very crash and tumult of battle, as
I remember once at Varenna, beside the Lake of Como. I could have sworn
to have seen you cheering on the peasants to the attack."
"What strange tricks imagination will play upon us!" broke in D'smonde;
but his voice faltered, and his pale cheek grew paler as he said the
words.
"Then, again, in the Babli Palace at Milan, where I was brought as
a prisoner, I saw you leave the council-chamber arm-in-arm with an
Austrian Archduke. When I say I saw you, I mean as I now see you
here,--more palpable to my eyes than when you sat beside my sick-bed at
Verona."
"Dreams,----dreams," said D'Esmonde. "Such illusions bespeak a mind
broken by sickness. Forget them, Dalton, if you would train your
thoughts to higher uses." And, so saying, in a tone of pride, the Abb
bowed, and passed out.
As D'Esmonde passed out into the street, Cahill joined him.
"Well," cried the latter, "is it done?"
"Yes, Michel," was the answer; "signed, and sealed, and witnessed in
all form. By this document I am recognized as a member of his family,
inheriting that which I shall never claim. No," cried he, with
exultation of voice and manner, "I want none of their possessions; I ask
but to be accounted of their race and name; and yet the time may come
when these conditions shall be reversed, and they who would scarcely own
me to-day may plot and scheme to trace our relationship. Now for Rome.
To-night--this very night--I set out. With this evidence of my station
and fortune there can be no longer any obstacle. The struggle is past;
now to enjoy the victory!"
"You will see him before you go, D'Esmonde? A few minutes is all he
asks."
"Why should I? What bond is there between us now? The tie is loosened
forever; besides, he deceived us, Michel,----deceived us in everything."
"Be it so," said the other; "but remember that it is the last prayer of
one under sentence of death,--the last wish of one who will soon have
passed away hence."
"Why should I go to hear the agonizing entreaties for a mercy that
cannot be granted,--the harrowing remorse of a guilty nature?"
"Do not refuse him, D'Esmonde. He clings to this object with a fixed
purpose that turns his mind from every thought that should become the
hour. In vain I speak to him of the short interval between him and
the grave. He neither hears nor heeds me. His only question is, 'Is he
coming,----will he come tome?'"
"To lose minutes, when every one of them is priceless, to waste emotions
when my heart is already racked and tortured,----why should I do this?"
cried D'Esmonde, peevishly.
"Do not refuse me, D'Esmonde," said Cahill, passionately. "I despair
of recalling the miserable man to the thought of his eternal peril till
this wish be satisfied."
"Be it so, then," said the Abb, proudly; and he walked along beside his
friend in silence.
They traversed the streets without a word spoken. Already D'Esmonde
had assumed an air of reserve which seemed to mark the distance between
himself and his companion; the thoughtful gravity of his look savored no
less of pride than reflection. In such wise did Cahill read his manner,
and by a cautious deference appear to accept the new conditions of their
intimacy.
"The prisoner has not uttered a word since you were here, sir," said
the jailer, as they entered the gate. "He shows the greatest anxiety
whenever the door opens; but, as if disappointed at not seeing whom he
expected, relapses at once into his silent reserve."
"You see that he still expects you," whispered Cahill to the Abb; and
the other assented with a faint nod of the head.
"No, sir; this way," said the jailer; "he is now in the condemned cell."
And, so saying, he led the way along the corridor.
By the faint light of a small lamp, fixed high up in the wall, they
could just detect the figure of a man, as he sat crouched on the low
settle-bed, his head resting on his arms as they were crossed over his
knees. He never moved as the grating sound of the heavy door jarred on
the stillness, but sat still and motionless.
"The Abb D'Esmonde has come to see you, Eustace," said the jailer,
tapping him on the shoulder. "Wake up, man, and speak to him."
The prisoner lifted his head and made an effort to say something; but
though his lips moved, there came no sounds from them. At last, with
an effort that was almost convulsive, he pointed to the door, and said,
"Alone--alone!"
"He wants to speak with you alone, sir," whispered the jailer, "and so
we will retire."
D'Esmonde could not see them leave the cell without a sense of
fear,--less the dread of any personal injury than the strange terror
so inseparable to any close communion with one convicted of a dreadful
crime,--and he actually shuddered as the massive door was banged to.
"You are cold, sir!" said the prisoner, in a hollow, sepulchral voice.
"No, it was not cold!" replied D'Esmonde.
"I can guess what it was, then!" said the other, with an energy to which
passion seemed to contribute. "But I 'll not keep you long here. Sit
down, sir. You must sit beside me, for there is no other seat than the
settle-bed. But there is nobody here to see the great Abb D'Esmonde
side by side with a murderer."
"Wretched man," said D'Esmonde, passionately, "by what fatality did you
rush upon your fate? Why did you ever return to this country?"
"It is to tell you that--ay, that very thing--I asked you to come here
to-night," said the prisoner, with a firm, full voice. "I came here
for you--just so--for you yourself, There, there," continued he,
naughtily, "don't look as if I wanted to trick you. Is it here. Is it
now, that a lie would sarve me? Listen to me, and don't stop me, for I
want to turn my thoughts to something else when this is off my heart.
Listen to me. Very soon after you saved me at Venice, I knew all about
you; who you were, and what you were planning,--ay, deep as you thought
yourself, I read every scheme in you, and opened every letter you wrote
or received. You don't believe me. Shall I give you a proof? Did you
accept eight bills for money Morlache the Jew sent you, from Florence,
in March last? Did Cardinal Antinori write to say that the Bull that
named you cardinal must have your birth set forth as noble? Did the
Austrian Field-Marshal send you the cross of St. Joseph, and did you not
return it, as to wear it would unmask you to the Italians?"
"What if all this were true?" said D'Esmonde, proudly. "Is it to one
like you I am to render account for my actions? What is it to you if--"
"What is it to me?" cried the other, fiercely,----"what is it to me?
Isn't it everything? Isn't it what brought me here, and what in three
days more will bring me to the gallows? I tell you again, I saw what you
were bent on, and I knew you 'd succeed,--ay, that I did. If it was good
blood you wanted to be a cardinal, I was the only one could help you."
"You knew the secret of my birth, then?" cried D'Esmonde, in deep
earnestness. "You could prove my descent from the Godfreys?"
"No! but I could destroy the only evidence against it," said the other,
in a deep, guttural voice. "I could tear out of the parish registry the
only leaf that could betray you; and it was for that I came back here;
and it was for that I 'm now here. And I did do it. I broke into the
vestry of the chapel at midnight, and I tore out the page, and I have
it here, in my hand, this minute. There was a copy of this same paper
at the college at Louvain, but I stole that, too; for I went as porter
there, just to get an opportunity to take it,--that one I destroyed."
"But whence this interest in my fortunes?" said D'Esmonde, half proudly,
for he was still slow to believe all that he heard.
"The paper will tell you that," said the other, slowly unfolding it, and
flattening it out on his knee. "This is the certificate of your baptism!
Wait--stop a minute," cried he, catching D'Esmonde's arm, as, in his
impatience, he tried to seize the paper. "This piece of paper is the
proof of who you are, and, moreover, the only proof that will soon exist
to show it."
"Give it to me--let me see it!" cried D'Esmonde, eagerly. "Why have you
withheld till this time what might have spared me anxious days and weary
nights; and by what right have you mixed yourself up with my fortunes?"
"By what right is it--by what right?" cried the other, in a voice which
passion rendered harsh and discordant. "Is that what you want to know?"
And, as he spoke, he bent down and fixed his eyes on the Abb with a
stern stare. "You want to know what right I have," said he, and his face
became almost convulsed with passion. "There's my right--read that!"
cried he, holding out the paper before D'Esmonde's eyes. "There's your
birth proved and certified: 'Matthew, son of Samuel and Mary Eustace,
of Ballykinnon, baptized by me this 10th day of April, 18----. Joseph
Barry, P.P.' There's the copy of your admission into the convent, and
here's the superior's receipt for the first quarter's payment as a
probationer. Do you know who you are now? or do you still ask me what
right I have to meddle in your affairs?"
"And you--and you--you--" cried D'Esmonde, gasping.
"I am your father. Ay, you can hear the words here, and needn't start
at the sound of them. We're in the condemned cell of a jail, and
nobody near us. You are my son. Mr. Godfrey paid for you as a student
till--till--But it's all over now. I never meant you to know the truth;
but a lie would n't serve you any longer. Oh, Matthew, Matthew!" cried
he--and of a sudden his voice changed, and softened to accents of almost
choking sorrow--"haven't you one word for me?--one word of affection for
him that you brought to this, and who forgives you for it?--one word,
even to call me your own father?" He fell at the other's feet, and
clasped his arms around his knees as he spoke, but the appeal was
unheard.
[Illustration: 514]
Pale as a corpse, with his head slightly thrown forward, and his eyes
wildly staring before him, D'Esmonde sat, perfectly motionless. At last
the muscles of his mouth fashioned themselves into a ghastly smile,
a look of mockery so dreadful to gaze upon that the prisoner,
terror-stricken at the sight, rushed to the door, and beat loudly
against it, as he screamed for help. It was opened on the instant, and
the Jailer, followed by two others, entered.
"He's ill; his reverence is taken bad," said the old man, while he
trembled from head to foot with agitation.
"What's this paper? What is he clutching in his hands?" cried the
jailer.
D'Esmonde started at the words. For the first time a gleam of
intelligence shot over his features, and as suddenly he bent a look of
withering hate on the speaker; and then, with a passionate vehemence
that told of a frantic brain, he tore the paper into fragments, and,
with a wild yell, as if of triumph, he fell senseless on the ground.
When they lifted him up, his features were calm, but passionless, his
eye was vacant, and his lips slightly parted. An expression of weariness
and exhaustion, rather than of actual pain, pervaded the face. He never
spoke again. The lamp of intellect was extinguished forever, and not
even a flicker or a spark remained to cheer the darkness within him.
Hopeless and helpless idiotcy was ever after the lot of one whose mind,
once stored with the most lofty ambitions, never scrupled, at any cost,
to attain its object. And he whose proud aspirings soared to the very
grandest of earthly prizes, who gave his counsel among princes, now
lives on, bereft of mind and intelligence, without consciousness of the
past, or a hope for the future.
CHAPTER XLI. THE END
With the sad episode which closes our last chapter we would fain let
fall the curtain on this history. Very few words will now suffice to
complete the narrative of those with whom we have so long sojourned. The
discovery which revealed the murder of Mr. Godfrey restored Frank Dalton
to the home and fortune of his family; and although the trying scenes
through which he had passed made deep and dangerous inroads on his
health, youth and hope, and the watchful care of Kate, restored him;
and, after the lapse of some weeks, he was enabled to be about once
more, recalling to the recollection of many the handsome figure and
manly bearing of his father.
For many a year before, Corrig-O'Neal had not seen such a party beneath
its roof, nor had those gloomy old walls echoed to such sounds as now
were heard within them. In addition to Lady Hester, George Onslow, now
a colonel, was the guest of the Daltons. Scarcely arrived in England,
he quitted London at the moment when the tidings of his gallant
achievements had made him the hero of the day, and hurried to see her
who, through every change of his fortunes, had been the dearest object
of his heart.
What tender reproaches, what heart-warm confessions, did those old woods
hear, as, side by side, the lovers walked along, revealing the secret
sorrows of the past, and recalling each incident which once had cheered
with hope or shadowed with despair. But it is not in such company we
would play the "eavesdropper," nor watch for the changeful blushes of
that soft cheek where tears of joy and grief are mingled. Neither would
we care to accompany Grounsell, as with deeds and bonds, codicils and
conveyances, he actually hunted poor Frank from place to place, urgently
impressing on him the necessity for those "business habits," the
sad neglect of which had been the ruin of all the Daltons. As little
inducement is there to follow Lady Hester, whose restless activity
was interfering with every one and everything, taking the most lively
Interest in the property the very moment it ceased to be her own, and
devoted to all the charities which no longer could lay claim to being
duties.
Pleasanter, perhaps, would it be to follow the old Count, as he
sauntered alone for hours, trying to trace out in the long-forgotten
scenes the stories of his boyhood. What pleasant reveries they
were!--what glorious compensations for all the tumultuous passages of an
eventful life! And so he felt them! And so he recognized with grateful
heart the happy destiny which had befallen him, to close his days where
he had begun them--in the midst of his own--loving and beloved.
And yet with such scenes and emotions we must not dally. Story-tellers,
like Mother Carey's chickens, have no sympathies with sunny skies and
soft airs,--their province is amidst the hurricane and the storm. In
truth, too, it is the very essence of tranquil enjoyment that it must be
left to the imagination of each to conceive.
But one care weighed on all, and that was the absence of poor Nelly.
Why was she not amongst them, to see their happiness, and heighten its
enjoyment by all the benevolence of her kindly nature? It was true
they were relieved of all anxiety regarding her by a letter which had
followed them from Vienna, and which told how she had arrived in that
city a few days after they had left it.
"I stood," she said, "looking at the great palace where they
told me Count Stephen lived, and could not bring myself to
think it was not a dream that such as I should have
business there!
"I sat down on the steps of a church in front of it, and
gazed for hours long at the great door through which you
must have passed so often, and the windows which doubtless
you stood at--perhaps thinking of poor Nelly! At last came
Hanserl to say that he had obtained leave to see the palace;
and oh, how my heart beat at the words,--for there was pride
as well as humiliation in the thought,--and so we went in,
and, crossing the great court, ascended the wide staircase.
How beautiful it all was, those marble statues,--the rich
frescos of the ceilings,--the gorgeous lamps, all emblazoned
with armorial emblems; and yet I thought less of these than
the polished steps which your feet had trodden, and which I
could have kissed for your sake.
"I had not imagined so much magnificence. You will smile,
perhaps, at my simplicity, but so did not that kind old
soldier with the wooden leg, who took such pains to show us
everything. He was evidently pleased to witness our admiring
wonder, and actually laughed at Hanserl's enthusiasm for all
those bright scimitars and shields of Turkish make, the
horse-tailed banners, and other emblems of Austrian victory;
while I stole away silently into a little chamber all hung
with blue damask, over the mantelpiece of which was a
portrait of our own dear Frank. How I felt that the room was
yours, Kate,--how my heart told me each object you had
touched,--and how they all became to my delighted senses
like precious relics, revealing stores of affection laid up
in your bosom, and showing a wealth of love I was not
conscious of till then. Oh, no, dearest sister, I never
knew, till then, how things without life themselves can be
the links between beating hearts! I looked everywhere for a
portrait of yourself, and it was only by asking the old
corporal that I succeeded in finding it. 'The Grfin's
picture is in the Field-Marshal's own room,' said he, with
pride, and led the way towards it. Oh, Kate, how beautiful--
nay, it is Nelly, your own stern Nelly, who never flattered
you herself nor could bear others to do so--it is Nelly, the
same Nelly, unchanged, save in being less trustful, less
impulsive, less forgiving than you knew her, and she tells
you that at sight of such loveliness she stood wonderstruck
and fascinated. Had you been really then before me, such as
the picture represented, I had not dared to approach you;
there was that of nobility and grandeur that had appalled my
poor peasant heart, unused to the glitter of diamonds and
the queenly air of high-born beauty; but, as I gazed on the
likeness, long and steadily, this expression faded away,
and, as though the lineaments were changing, I thought the
eyes grew softer; they seemed to moisten, the lips trembled,
the bosom heaved and fell, and it was you-----you! as I
had pressed you to my heart a thousand times--my own! my
own! I know not what foolish words I may have uttered, nor
to what excess my rapture carried me, but I was weeping
bitterly as they led me away,--ay, bitterly, Kate; for such
ecstasy as I felt finds its true vent in sorrow! But now I
am happy once more,--happy that I have seen you and dear
Frank,--happy that each of us in life has trodden the path
that best became him! and so I came away, with many a
lingering look, and many a backward glance, at what I was
never to see again.
"Here, in my mountain home, once more I can sit, alone,
and think of you for days. You wander through all my
thoughts, the characters of endless stories, in every
imaginable vicissitude, and with every change of fortune;
but throughout all, Kate--good and beautiful--truthful too,
as you ever were. There, my tears have blotted out what I
tried to say, nor dare I trust myself with more. My school
children are already coming through the vineyard; I hear
their song,--it was your own long ago:----
'Da sind die Tge lang gennch, Da sind die Nachte milde.'
"Good-bye, good-bye, my sister--my dear sister.
"N. D. Meran."
"Oh, let us hasten thither at once!" cried Kate, in rapture. "Oh, dear
uncle, let us away to Meran."
"Not till after Tuesday, Kate," whispered George, passionately; and the
words covered her cheeks with blushes as she heard them.
The reader knows now all that we care to tell him. Time was when
story-tellers wound up with a kind wish that, "if they were not happy,
that you and I may be." Nor am I quite certain that we are wiser in our
vocation than when those words were in vogue.
We are not vain enough to suppose that we have inspired an interest for
any of those characters who have supported the minor parts of our drama.
Should such good fortune have happily attended us, let us say, once for
all, that Messrs. Haggerstone, Jekyl, and Purvis yet survive; that the
Ricketts family are in excellent health, autograph gathering and duke
courting, poetizing and painting, and pilfering, with all the ardor of
youth, untouched by years and unrestrained by conscience. Lady Hester,
too, is again living abroad, and, after trying three new changes
of religion, is in treaty with a Heidelberg professor for a
"spick-and-span" new faith, which will transcend everything hitherto
known, and make even Mormonism ashamed of itself.
As for Prince Midchekoff, he and my Lady Norwood are the delight of
a foreign city which shall be nameless, and their receptions nightly
crowded by all the fashionable celebrities and distinguished visitors of
that favored region.
THE END.
