Project Gutenberg's Davenport Dunn, Volume 1 (of 2), by Charles James LeverThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: Davenport Dunn, Volume 1 (of 2)A Man Of Our DayAuthor: Charles James LeverIllustrator: Phiz.Release Date: May 11, 2010 [EBook #32341]Last Updated: February 27, 2018Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVENPORT DUNN, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***Produced by David WidgerDAVENPORT DUNNA MAN OF OUR DAYBy Charles Lever,With Illustrations By "Phiz."Volume One of TwoLondon: Chapman And Hall1862.DAVENPORT DUNN, A MAN OF THE DAY.CHAPTER I. HYDROPATHIC ACQUAINTANCES.We are at Como, on the lake--that spot so beloved of opera dancers--theday-dream of prima donnas--the Elysium of retired barytones! And withwhat reason should this be the Paradise of all who have lived andsighed, and warbled and pirouetted, within the charmed circle of thefootlights? The crystal waters mirroring every cliff and crag withintense distinctness; the vegetation variegated to the very verge ofextravagance; orange-trees overloaded with fruit; arbutus only toomuch bespangled with red berries; villas, more coquettish than everscene-painter conceived, with vistas of rooms within, all redolent ofluxury; terraces, and statues, and vases, and fountains, and marblebalconies, steeped in a thousand balmy odours, make up a picturewhich well may fascinate those whose ideal of beauty is formed of suchgorgeous groupings. There is something of unreality in the brilliantcolouring and variety of the scene suggesting the notion, that at anymoment the tenor may emerge, velvet mantle and all, from the copsebefore you; or a prima donna, in all the dishevelment of her back hair,rush madly to your feet. There is not a portal from which an angryfather may not issue; not a shady walk that might not be trod by anincensed basso!The rustic bridges seem made for the tiny feet of short-petticoateddamsels, daintily tripping, with white-napkin covered baskets, to softmusic; and every bench appears but waiting for that wearied old peasant,in blue stockings, a staff, and a leather belt, that has vented histiresomeness in the same spot for the last half century. Who wonders, ifthe distracted Princess of "the scene" should love a picture thatrecalls the most enthusiastic triumphs of her success? Why should not theretired "Feri" like to wander at will through a more enchanting gardenthan ever she pirouetted in?Conspicuous amongst the places where these stage-like elements aboundis the Villa d'Este; situated in a little bay, with two juttingpromontories to guard it, the ground offers every possible variety ofsurface and elevation. From the very edge of the calm lake, terracerises above terrace, clad with all that is rich and beautiful invegetation; rocks, and waterfalls, and ruins, and statues abound.Everything that money could buy, and bad taste suggest, are there heapedwith a profusion that is actually confounding. Every stone stair leadsto some new surprise; every table-land opens some fresh and astonishingprospect. Incongruous, inharmonious, tea-gardenish as it is, there isstill a charm in the spot which no efforts of the vilest taste seemable to eradicate. The vines will cluster in graceful groupings; theoranges will glow in gorgeous contrast to their dark mantle of leaves;water will leap with its own spontaneous gladness, and fall in diamondshowers over a grassy carpet no emerald ever rivalled; and, more thanall, the beautiful lake itself will reflect the picture, with suchsoftened effects of light and shadow, that all the perversions of humaningenuity are totally lost in the transmission.This same Villa d'Este was once the scene of a sad drama; but it isnot to this era in its history we desire now to direct our reader'sattention, but to a period much later, when no longer the home ofan exiled Princess, or the retreat where shame and sorrow abandonedthemselves to every excess, its changed fortune had converted it into anestablishment for the water cure!The prevailing zeal of our day is to simplify everything, even to thingswhich will not admit of simplicity. What with our local athenums, ourmechanics' institutes, our lecturing lords and discoursing baronets, wehave done a great deal. Science has been popularised, remote geographiesmade familiar, complex machinery explained, mysterious inscriptionsrendered intelligible. How could it be expected that in the generalenthusiasm for useful knowledge medicine should escape, or that itssecrets should be exempt from a scrutiny that has spared nothing? Hencehave sprung up those various sects in the curative art which, professingto treat rationally and openly what hitherto has been shrouded inmysticism and deception, have multiplied themselves into grape cures,milk cures, and water cures, and Heaven knows how many other strangedevices "to cheat the ills that flesh is heir to."We are not going to quarrel with any of these new religions; we forgivethem much for the simple service they have done, in withdrawing theirfollowers from the confined air, the laborious life, the dreary toil,or the drearier dissipation of cities, to the fresh and invigoratingbreezes, the cheerful quietude, and the simple pleasures of a countryexistence.We care little for the regimen or the ritual, be it lentils or asses'milk, Tyrol grapes, or pure water, so that it be administered on thebreezy mountain side, or in the healthful air of some lofty "Plateau"away from the cares, the ambitions, the strife, and the jar-rings of theactive world, with no seductions of dissipation, neither the prolongedstimulants, nor the late hours of fashion.It was a good thought, too, to press the picturesque into the serviceof health, and show the world what benefits may flow, even to nervesand muscles, from elevated thoughts and refined pleasures. All thisis, however, purely digressionary, since we are more concerned with thesocial than the medical aspects of Hydropathy, and so we come back atonce to Como. The sun has just risen, on a fresh morning in autumn,over the tall mountain east of the lake, making the whole western shore,where the Villa d'Este stands, all a-glitter with his rays. Every rock,and crag, and promontory are picked out with a sharp distinctness, everywindow is a-blaze, and streams of light shoot into many a grove andcopse, as though glad to pierce their way into cool spots where thenoonday sun himself can never enter. On the opposite shore, a dim andmysterious shadow wraps every object, faint outlines of tower and palaceloom through the darkness, and a strange hazy depth encloses the wholescene. Such is the stillness, however, that the opening of a casement,or the plash of a stone in the water, is heard across the lake,and voices come from the mysterious gloom with an effect almostpreternaturally striking.On a terrace high up above the lake, sheltered with leafy fig-trees andprickly pears, there walks a gentleman, sniffing the morning air, andevidently bent on inhaling health at every pore.Nothing in his appearance indicates the invalid; every gesture, as hemoves, rather displays a conscious sense of health and vigour. Somewhatabove the middle size, compactly but not heavily built, it is verydifficult to guess his years; for though his hair and the large whiskerswhich meet beneath his chin are perfectly white, his clear blue eyes andregular teeth show no signs of age. Singularly enough, it is his dressthat gives the clue to this mystery. His tightly-fitting frock, hisbell-shaped hat, and his shapely trousers, all tell of a fashionantecedent to our loosely-hanging vestments and uncared-for garments;for the Viscount Lackington was a lord in waiting to the "FirstGentleman" in Europe at a time when Paletots were unknown, and Jim Crowshad not been imagined.Early as was the hour, his dress was perfect in all its details, and theaccurate folds of his immaculate cravat, and the spotless brilliancyof his boots, would have done credit to Bond-street in days whenBond-street cherished such glories. Let our modern critics sneer as theywill at the dandyism of that day, the gentleman of the time was a verydistinctive individual, and, in the subdued colour of his habiliments,their studious simplicity, and, above all, their unvarying uniformity,utterly defied all the attempts of spurious imitators.Our story opens only a few years back, and Lord Lackington was thenone of the very few who perpetuated the traditions in costume of thatcelebrated period; but he did so with such unerring accuracy, that menactually wondered where those marvellously shaped hats were made, or howthose creaseless coats were ever fashioned. Even to the perfume ofhis handkerchief, the faintest and most evanescent of odours, all weremysteries that none could penetrate.As he surveyed the landscape through his double eye-glass, he smiledgraciously and blandly, and gently inclined his head, as though to say,"Very prettily done, water and mountains. I'm quite satisfied with you,trees; you please me very much indeed! Trickle away little fountain--thepicture is the better for it." His Lordship had soon, however, otherobjects to engage his attention than the inanimate constituents of thescene. The spot which he had selected for his point of view was usuallytraversed, in their morning walks, by the other residents of the "Cure,"and this circumstance permitted him to receive the homage of suchearly risers as were fain to couple with their pursuit of health therecognition of a great man.Like poverty, hydropathy makes us acquainted with strange associates.The present establishment was too recently formed to have acquired anyvery distinctive celebrity, but it was sufficiently crowded. There was agreat number of third-rate Italians from the Lombard towns and cities,a sprinkling of inferior French, a few English, a stray American or so,and an Irish family, on their way to Italy, sojourning here rather foreconomy than health, and fancying that they were acquiring habits andmanners that would serve them through their winter's campaign.The first figure which emerged upon the plateau was that of a manswathed in great-coat, cap, and worsted wrappers, that it was difficultto guess what he could be. He came forward at a shambling trot, and wasabout to pass on without looking aside, when Lord Lackington called out,"Ah! Spicer, have you got off that eleven pounds yet?" "No, my Lord,but very near it. I'm seven stone ten, and at seven eight I'm allright.""Push along, then, and don't lose your training," said his Lordship,dismissing him with a bland wave of the hand. And the other made anattempt at a salutation, and passed on."Madame la Marquise, your servant. You ascend these mountain steeps likea chamois!"This compliment was addressed to a little, very fat old lady, who camesnorting along like a grampus."Benedetto Dottore!" cried she. "He will have it that I must go up tothe stone cross yonder every morning before breakfast, and I know Ishall burst a blood-vessel yet in the attempt."A chair, with a mass of horse-clothing and furs, surmounted by a littleyellow wizened face, was next borne by, to which Lord Lackington bowedcourteously, saying, "Your Excellency improves at every hour."His Excellency gave a brief nod and a little faint smile, swallowed amouthful from a silver flask presented by his servant, and disappeared."Ah! the fair syren sisters! what a charming vision!" said his Lordship,as two bright-cheeked, laughing-eyed girls bounced upon the terrace inall the high-hearted enjoyment of good health and good spirits."Molly, for shame!" cried what seemed the elder, a damsel of aboutnineteen, as the younger, holding out her dress with both hands,performed a kind of minuet curtsey to the Viscount, to which heresponded with a bow that might have done credit to Versailles."Perfectly done--grace and elegance itself. The foot a little--a verylittle more in advance.""Just because you want to look at it," cried she, laughing. "Molly,Molly!" exclaimed the other, rebukingly. "Let him deny it if he can,Lucy," retorted she. "But here's papa."And as she spoke, a square-built, short, florid man, fanning his baldhead with a straw hat, puffed his way forward."My Lord, I'm your most obaydient!" said he, with a very unmistakablyIrish enunciation. "O'Reilly, I'm delighted to see you. These charminggirls of yours have just put me in good humour with the whole creation.What a lovely spot this is; how beautiful!"Though his Lordship's arm and outstretched hand directed attention tothe scenery, his eyes never wandered from the pretty features of thelaughing girl beside him.[Illustration:  028]"It's like Banthry!" said Mr. O'Reilly--"it's the very ditto ofBanthry.""Indeed!" exclaimed my Lord, still pursuing his scrutiny."Only Banthry's bigger and wider. Indeed, I may say finer.""Nothing, in my estimation, can exceed this!" said his Lordship, witha distinctive smile, addressed to the young lady."I'm glad you think so," said she, with a merry laugh. And then, with apirouette, she sprang up the steep steps on the rocky path before her,and disappeared, her sister as quickly following, leaving Mr. O'Reillyalone with his Lordship."What heaps of money she laid out here," exclaimed O'Reilly, as helooked at the labyrinth of mad ruins, and rustic bridges, and hanginggardens on every side of him."Large sums--very large indeed!" said my Lord, whose thoughts wereevidently on some other track."Pure waste--nothing else; the place never could pay. Vines andfig-trees, indeed--I'd rather see a crop of oats."."I have a weakness for the picturesque, I must own," said my Lord, ashis eye still followed the retreating figures of the girls."Well, I like a waterfall; and, indeed, I like a summer-house myself,"said O'Reilly, as though confessing to a similar trait on his own part."This is the first time you have been abroad, O'Reilly?" said hisLordship, to turn the subject of the conversation."Yes, my Lord, my first, and, with God's blessing, my last, too! WhenI lost Mrs. O'Reilly, two years ago, of a complaint that beat all thedoctors--""Ah, yes, you mentioned that to me; very singular indeed!""For it wasn't in the heart itself, my Lord, but in the bag that houldsit.""Oh yes, I remember the explanation perfectly; so you thought you'd justcome abroad for a little distraction.""Distraction indeed! 'tis the very word for it," broke in Mr. O'Reilly,eagerly. "My head is bewildered between the lingo and the money, andthey keep telling me, 'You'll get used to it, papa, darling--you'll bequite at home yet.' But how is that ever possible?""Still, for your charming girls' sake," said my Lord, caressinghis whiskers and adjusting his neckcloth, as if for immediatecaptivation--"or their sake, O'Reilly, you've done perfectly right!""Well, I'm glad your Lordship says so. 'Tis nobody ought to knowbetter!" said he, with a heavy sigh."They really deserve every cultivation. All the advantagesthat--that--that sort of thing can bestow!"And his Lordship smiled benignly, as though offering his own aid to theeducational system."What they said to me was this," said O'Reilly, dropping his voice to atone of the most confiding secrecy: "'Don't be keeping them down herein Mary's Abbey, but take them where they'll see life. You can givethem forty thousand pounds between them, Tim O'Reilly, and with that andtheir own good looks---'""Beauty, O'Reilly---downright loveliness," broke in my Lord."Well, indeed, they are handsome," said O'Reilly, with an honestsatisfaction, "and that's exactly why I thought the advice was good.'Take them abroad,' they said; 'take them into Germany and Italy--butmore especially Italy'--for they say there's nothing like Italy forfinishing young ladies.""That is certainly the general impression!" said his Lordship with thebarest imaginable motion of his nether lip."And here we are, but where we're going afterwards, and what welldo when we're there, that thief of a Courier we have may know, but Idon't.""So that you gave up business, O'Reilly, and resigned yourself freely toa life of ease," said my Lord, with a smile that seemed to approve theproject."Yes, indeed, my Lord; but whether it's to be a life of pleasure, Idon't know. I was in the provision trade thirty-eight years, and do youknow I miss the pigs greatly.""Every man has a hankering of that sort. Old cosmopolite as I am, I haveevery now and then my longing for that window at Brookes's, and thatsnug dinner-room at Boodle's.""Yes, my Lord," said O'Reilly, who hadn't the faintest conceptionwhether these localities were not situated in China."Ah, Twining, never thought to see you here," called out his Lordship toa singularly tall man, who came forward with such awkward contortions oflegs and arms, as actually to suggest the notion that he was strugglingagainst somebody. Mr. O'Reilly modestly stole away while the friendswere shaking hands, and we take the same opportunity to, present the newarrival to our reader.Mr. Adderley Twining was a gentleman of good family and very largefortune, whose especial pleasure it was to pass off to the world for agay, light-hearted, careless creature, of small means, and most lavishliberality. To be, in fact, perpetually struggling between a mostgenerous temperament and a narrow purse. His cordiality was extreme, hispoliteness unbounded; and as he was most profuse in his pledges forthe present and his promises for the future, he attained to a degree ofpopularity which to his own estimation was immense. This was, in fact,the one sole self-deception of his very crafty nature, and the beliefthat he was a universal favourite was the solitary mistake of thisshrewd intelligence. Although a married man, there was so constantlysome "difficulty" or other--these were his own words--about Lady Grace,that they seldom were seen together; but he spoke of her when absent interms of the most fervent affection, but whose health, or spirits, ortastes, or engagements unhappily denied her the happiness of travellingalong with him. Whenever it chanced that they were together, he scarcelymentioned her."And what breeze of fortune has wafted you here, Twining?" said hisLordship, delighted to chance upon a native of his own world."Health, my Lord,--health," said he, with one of his ready laughs, asthough everything he said or thought had some comic side in it thatamused him, "and a touch of economy too, my Lord.""What humbug all that is, Twining. Who the deuce is so well off asyourself?" said Lord Lackington, with all that peculiar bitterness withwhich an embarrassed man listens to the grumblings of a wealthy one."Only too happy, my Lord--rejoiced if you were right. Capital news forme, eh?--excellent news!" And he slapped his lean legs with his longthin fingers, and laughed immoderately."Come, come, we all know that--besides a devilish good thing of yourown--you got the Wrexley estate, and old Poole's Dorsetshire property.Hang me if I ever open a newspaper without reading that you aresomebody's residuary legatee.""I assure you, solemnly, my Lord, I am actually hard up, pressed formoney, downright inconvenienced." And he laughed again, as though itwere uncommonly droll."Stuff--nonsense!" said my Lord, angrily, for he really was losingtemper; and to change the topic he curtly asked, "And where do you meanto pass the winter?""In Florence, my Lord, or Naples. We have a little den in both places."The "den" in Florence was a sumptuous palace on the Arno. Its brother atNaples was a royal villa near Posilippo."Why not Rome? Lady Lackington and myself mean to try Rome.""Ah, all very well for you, my Lord, but for people of small fortune--"There was that in the expression of his Lordship's face that toldTwining this vein might be followed too far, and so he stopped in time,and laughed away pleasantly."Spicer tells me," resumed Lord Lackington, "that Florence is quitedeserted; nothing but a kind of second and third rate set of people gothere. Is that so?""Excellent people, capital society, great fun!" said Twining, in a burstof merriment."Spicer calls them 'Snobs,' and he ought to know.""So he ought indeed, my Lord--no one better. Admirably observed, andvery just.""He's in training again for that race that never comes off," said hisLordship. "The first time I ever saw him--it was at Leamington--and hewas performing the same farce, with hot baths and blankets, and jottingdown imaginary bets in a small note-book.""How good--capital! Your Lordship has him perfectly--you know himthoroughly--great fun! Spicer, excellent creature!""How those fellows live is a great mystery to me. You chance upon themeverywhere, in Baden or Aix in summer, in Paris or Vienna during thewinter. Now, if they were amusing rogues, like that fellow I met at yourhouse in Hampshire--""Oh, Stockley, my Lord; rare fellow, quite a genius!" laughed Twining."Just so--Stockley; one would have them just to help over the boredom ofa country house; but this creature Spicer is as devoid of amusing gifts,as tiresome, and as worn out, as if he owned ten thousand a year.""How good, by Jove!" cried Twining, in ecstasy. And he slapped his gauntlimbs and threw his long arms wildly about in a transport of delight."And who are here, Twining--any of our set?" "Not a soul, my Lord; theplace isn't known yet, that's the reason I came here--so quiet and socheap, make your own terms with them."Good fun--excellent!""I came to meet a man of business," said his Lordship, with a strongemphasis on the pronoun. "He couldn't prolong his journey farther south,and so we agreed to rendezvous here.""I have a little affair also to transact--a mere trifle, a nothing,in fact--with a lawyer, who promises to meet me here by the end of themonth, so that we have just time to take our baths, drink the waters,and all that sort of thing, while we are waiting."And he rubbed his hands, and laughed away again."What a boon for my wife to learn that Lady Grace is here! She wasgetting so hipped with the place--not so much the place as the odiouspeople--that I suspect she'd have left me to wait for Dunn all alone.""Dunn! Dunn! not Davenport Dunn?" exclaimed Twining."The very man--do you know him?""To be sure, he's the fellow I'm waiting for. Capital fun, isn't it?"And he slapped his legs again, while he repeated the name of Dunn overand over again."I want to know something about this same Mr. Dunn," said LordLackington, confidentially."So do I; like it of all things," cried Twining. "Cleverfellow-wonderful fellow--up to everything--acquainted with everybody.Great fun!""He occupies a very distinguished position in Ireland, I fancy," saidhis Lordship, with such a marked stress on the locality as to show thatsuch did not constitute an imperial reputation."Yes, yes, man of the day there; do what he likes; verypopular--immensely popular!" said Twining, as he laughed on."So that you know no more of him than his public repute---no more than Iknow myself," said his Lordship."Not so much as your Lordship, I'm certain," said Twining, as thoughit would have been unbecoming in him to do so; "in fact, my businesstransactions are such mere nothings, that it's quite a kindness on hispart to undertake them--trifles, no more!"And Twining almost hugged himself in the ecstasy which his last wordssuggested."Mine," said Lord Lackington, haughtily, "are of consequence enoughto fetch him hither--a good thousand miles away from England; but he ispretty certain of its being well worth his while, to come.""Quite convinced of that--could swear it," said Twining, eagerly."Here are a mob of insufferable bores," said his Lordship, testily, as anumber of people were heard approaching, for somehow--it is not easyto say exactly why--he had got into a train of thought that scorned toworry him, and was not disposed to meet strangers; and so, with a briefgesture of good-by to Twining, he turned into a path and disappeared.Twining looked after him for a second or two, and then slapping hislegs, he muttered, pleasantly, "What fun!" and took the road towards thehouse.CHAPTER II. HOW TWO "FINE LADIES" PASS THE MORNING.In a room of moderate size, whose furniture was partly composed ofbygone finery and some articles of modern comfort--a kind of compromisebetween a Royal residence and a Hydropathic establishment--sat twoladies at an open window, which looked out upon a small terrace abovethe lake. The view before them could scarcely have been surpassed inEurope. Enclosed, as in a frame, between the snow-clad Alps and thewooded mountains of the Brianca, lay the lake, its shores one successionof beautiful villas, whose gardens descended to the very water. Althoughthe sun was high, the great mountains threw the shadows half way acrossthe lake; and in the dim depth of shade, tower and crag, battlement andprecipice, were strangely intermixed, giving to the picture a mysteriousgrandeur that contrasted strongly with the bright reality of theopposite shore, where fruit and flowers, gay tapestries from casements,and floating banners, added colour to the scene.Large white-sailed boats stole peacefully along, loaded, half-mast high,with water-melons and garden stores; the golden produce glittering inthe sun, and glowing in the scarcely rippled water beneath them, whilethe low chant of the boatmen floated softly and lazily through theair--meet sounds in a scene where all seemed steeped in a voluptuousrepose.The two ladies whom we have mentioned were not impassioned spectators ofthe scene. Whenever their eyes ranged over it, no new brilliancy awokein them, no higher colour tinged their cheek. One was somewhat advancedin life, but with many traces of beauty, and an air which denoted alifelong habit of homage and deference.There was that in her easy, lounging attitude, and the splendour ofher dress, which seemed to intimate that Lady Lackington would stillbe graceful, and even extravagant, though there were none to admire thegrace or be dazzled by the costliness. Her companion, though severalyears younger, looked, from the effects of delicate health and asuffering disposition, almost of her own age. She, too, was handsome;but it was a beauty which so much depended on tint and colour, that herdays of indisposition left her almost bereft of good looks. All abouther, her low, soft voice, her heavily raised eyelids, her fair andblue-veined hands, the very carriage of her head, pensively thrownforwards, were so many protestations of one who asked for sympathy andcompassion; and who, whether with reason or without, firmly believedherself the most unhappy creature in existence.If there was no great similarity of disposition to unite them, there wasa bond fully as strong. They were both English of the same order, bothborn and bred up in a ritual that dictates its own notions of good orbad, of right and wrong, of well-bred and vulgar, of riches and poverty.Given any person in society, or any one event of their lives, and thesetwo ladies' opinion upon either would have been certain to harmoniseand agree. The world for them had but one aspect; for the simple reason,that they had always seen it from the one same point of view. They hadnot often met; they had seen very little of each other for years; butthe freemasonry of class supplied all the place of affection, and theywere as fond and as confiding as though they were sisters."I must say," said the Viscountess, in a tone full of reprobation, "thatis shocking--actually shameful; and, in your place, I'd not endureit!""I have become so habituated to sorrow," sighed Lady Grace"That you will sink under it at last, my dear, if this man's crueltiesbe not put an end to. You really must allow me to speak to Lackington.""It wouldn't be of the slightest service, I assure you. In the firstplace, he is so plausible, he'd persuade any one that there was nothingto complain of, that he lived up to his fortune, that his means wereactually crippled; and secondly, he'd give such pledges for the future,such promises, that it would be downright rudeness to throw a doubt ontheir sincerity.""Why did you marry him, my dear?" said Lady Lackington, with a littlesigh."I married him to vex Ridout; we had a quarrel at that fte atChiswick, you remember, Tollertin's fte. Ridout was poor, and felthis poverty. I don't believe I treated his scruples quite fairly. Iknow I owned to him that I had no contempt for riches--that I thoughtBelgrave-square, and the Opera, and Diamonds, and a smart Equipage, allvery commendable things: and Jack said, 'Then, there's your man.Twining has twenty thousand a year.' 'But, he has not asked me,' saidI, laughing. Ridout turned away without a word. Half an hour later, Mr.Adderley Twining formally proposed for my hand, and was accepted.""And Jack Ridout is now the Marquis of Allerton," said Lady Lackington."I know it!" said the other, bitterly."With nigh forty thousand a year.""I know it!" cried she, again."And the handsomest house and the finest park in England."The other burst into tears, and hid her face between her hands."There's a fate in these things, my dear," said Lady Lackington, witha slight paleness creeping over her cheek. "That's all we can say aboutthem.""What have you done with that sweet place in Hampshire?""Dingley? It is let to Lord Mauley.""And you had a house in St. James's-square.""It is Burridge's Hotel, now."Lady Lackington fanned her swarthy face for some seconds, and then said,"And how did you come here?""We saw--that is, Twining saw--an advertisement of this newestablishment in the Galignani. We had just arrived at Lige, whenhe discovered a vetturino returning to Milan with an empty carriage;he accordingly bargained with him to take us on here--I forget forwhat sum--so that we left our own carriage, and half my luggage, at thePavilion Hotel, and set off on our three weeks' journey. We have beenthree weeks all but two days on the road! My maid of course refused totravel in this fashion, and went back to Paris. Courcel, his own man,rebelled too, which Twining, I must say, seemed overjoyed at, and gavehim such a character for honesty in consequence, as he never could havehoped for; and so we came on, with George the footman, and a Belgiancreature I picked up at the hotel, who, except to tear out my hair whenshe brushes it, and bruise me whenever she hooks a dress, has really noother gift under heaven.""And you actually came all this way by vetturino?"Lady Grace nodded a sad assent, and sighed deeply."What does he mean by it, my dear? The man must have some deep,insidious design in all this;--don't you think so?""I think to myself, sometimes," replied she, sorrowfully. And now theireyes met, and they remained looking steadily at each other for someseconds. Whatever Lady Grace's secret thoughts, or whatever the darkpiercing orbs of her companion served to intimate, true is it that sheblushed till her cheek became crimson; and as she arose, and walked outupon the terrace, her neck was a-flame with the emotion."He never married?" said Lady Lackington."No!" said Lady Grace, without turning her head. And there was a silenceon both sides.Oh dear! how much of the real story of our lives passes withoutexpression--how much of the secret mechanism of our hearts moves withouta sound in the machinery!"Poor fellow!" said Lady Lackington, at last, "his lot is just as sad asyour own. I mean," added she, "that he feels it so."There was no answer, and she resumed. "Not but men generally treatthese things lightly enough. They have their clubs, and their Housesof Parliament, and their shooting. Are you ill, dearest?" cried she, asLady Grace tottered feebly back and sauk into a chair."No," said she, in a faint voice, "I'm only tired!" And there was aninexpressible melancholy in the tone as she spoke it."And I'm tired too!" said Lady Lackington, drearily. "There is a tyrannyin the routine of these places quite insupportable--the hours, thediscipline, the diet, and, worse than all, the dreadful people one meetswith." Though Lady Grace did not seem very attentive, this was a themethe speaker loved to improve, and so she proceeded to discuss the houseand its inhabitants in all freedom. French, Russians, and Italians--allwere passed in review, and very smartly criticised, till she arrived at"those atrocious O'Reillys, that my Lord will persist in threatening topresent to me. Now one knows horrid people when they are very rich, orvery well versed in some speculation or other--mines, or railroads,or the like--and when their advice is so much actual money in yourpocket--just, for instance, as my Lord knows that Mr. Davenport Dunn--""Oh! he's a great ally of Mr. Twining; at least, I have heard his name ahundred times in connexion with business matters.""You never saw him?""No.""Nor I, but once; but I confess to have some curiosity to know him. Theytell me he can do anything he pleases with each House of Parliament,and has no inconsiderable influence in a sphere yet higher. It is quitecertain that the old Duke of Wycombe's affairs were all set to rights byhis agency, and Lady Muddleton's divorce bill was passed by his means."The word "divorce" seemed to rally Lady Grace from her fit of musing,and she said, "Is that certain?""Julia herself says so, that's all. He got a bill, or an act, or clause,or whatever you call it, inserted, by which she succeeded in her suit,and she is now as free--as free----""As I am not!" broke in Lady Grace, with a sad effort at a smile."To be sure, there is a little scandal in the matter, too. They say thatold Lord Brookdale was very 'soft' himself in that quarter.""The Chancellor!" exclaimed Lady Grace."And why not, dear? You remember the old refrain, 'No age, nostation'--what is it?--and the next line goes--'To sovereign beautymankind bends the knee.' Julia is rather proud of the triumph herself;she says it is like a victory in China, where the danger is very littleand the spoils considerable!""Mr. Spicer, my Lady," said a servant, entering, "wishes to know if yourLadyship will receive him.""Not this morning; say I'm engaged at present Tell him--But perhaps youhave no objection--shall we have him in?""Just as you please. I don't know him."Lady Lackington whispered a word or two, and then added aloud, "And onealways finds them 'useful,' my dear!"Mr. Spicer, when denuded of top-coat, cap, and woollen wrapper, as wesaw him last, was a slightly made man, middle-sized, and middle-aged,with an air sufficiently gentlemanlike to pass muster in any ordinaryassemblage. To borrow an illustration from the pursuits he was versedin, he bore the same relation to a man of fashion that a "weed" doesto a "winner of the Derby"--that is to say, to an uneducated eye, therewould have seemed some resemblance; and just as the "weed" counterfeitsthe racer in a certain loose awkwardness of stride and an ungainly showof power, so did he appear to have certain characteristics of a classthat he merely mixed with on sufferance, and imitated in some easy"externals." The language of any profession is, however, a greatleveller; and whether the cant be of the "House," Westminster Hall, theCollege of Physicians, the Mess Table, or the "Turf," it is exceedinglydifficult at first blush to distinguish the real practitioner from themere pretender. Now, Spicer was what is called a Gentleman Rider, and hehad all the slang of his craft, which is, more or less, the slang of menwho move in a very different sphere.As great landed proprietors of ambitious tendencies will bestow aqualification to sit in Parliament upon some man of towering abilitiesand small fortune, so did certain celebrities of the Turf confera similar social qualification on Spicer; and by enabling him to"associate with the world," empower themselves to utilise his talentsand make use of his capabilities. In this great Parliament of the Field,therefore, Spicer sat; and though for a very small and obscure borough,yet he had his place, and was "ready when wanted.""How d'ye do, Spicer?" said Lady Lackington, arranging the folds of herdress as he came forward, and intimating by the action that he was notto delude himself into any expectation of touching her hand. "My Lordtold me you were here."Spicer bowed, and muttered, and looked, as though he were waiting to beformally presented to the other lady in company; but Lady Lackingtonhad not the most remote intention of bestowing on him such a mark ofrecognition, and merely answered the mute appeal of his features by adry "Won't you sit down?"And Mr. Spicer did sit down, and of a verity his position denoted noexcess of ease or enjoyment. It was not that he did not attempt toappear perfectly at home, that he did not assume an attitude of the verycalmest self-possession, maybe he even passed somewhat the frontier ofthe lackadaisical territory he assumed, for he slapped his boot with hiswhip in a jaunty affectation of indifference."Pray, don't do that!" said Lady Lackington; "it worries one!"He desisted, and a very awkward silence of some seconds ensued; atlength she said, "There was something or other I wanted to ask youabout; you can't help me to it, can you?""I'm afraid not, my Lady. Was it anything about sporting matters?""No, no; but now that you remind me, all that information you gave meabout Glaucus was wrong, he came in 'a bad third.' My Lord laughed at mefor losing my money on him, and said he was the worst horse of the lot.""Very sorry to differ with his Lordship," said Spicer, deferentially,"but he was the favourite up to Tuesday evening, when Scott declaredthat he'd win with Big the Market. I then tried to get four to one onFlycatcher, to square your book, but the stable was nobbled.""Did you ever hear such jargon, my dear?" said Lady Lackington. "Youdon't understand one syllable of it, I'm certain."Spicer smirked and made a slight approach to a bow, as though even thisreference to him would serve for an introduction; but Lady Grace met theadvance with a haughty stare and a look, that said, as plainly as anywords, "At your peril, Sir!"[Illustration:  044]"Well, one thing is certain!" said Lady Lackington, "nothing that youpredicted turned out afterwards. Glaucus was beaten, and I lost my threehundred pounds--only fancy, dearest, three hundred pounds, with whichone could do so many things! I wanted it in fifty ways, and I nevercontemplated leaving it with the legs at Newmarket.""Not the legs, I assure you, my Lady--not the legs. I made your bookwith Colonel Stamford and Gore Middleton--""As if I cared who won it!" said she, haughtily."I never knew that you tempted fortune in this fashion!" said LadyGrace, languidly."I do so very rarely, my dear. I think Mining Shares are better, orGuatemala State Bonds. I realised very handsomely indeed upon them twoyears ago. To be sure it was Dunn that gave me the hint: he dined withus at the Htel de Windsor, and I asked him to pay a small sum for meto Hore's people, and when I counted the money out to him, he said, 'Whynot buy in some of those Guanaxualo shares; they'll be up to--' I forgetwhat he said--'before a month. Let Storr wait, and you'll pay him infull.' And he was quite right, aas I told you. I realised about eighthundred pounds on my venture.""If Glaucus had won, my Lady--""Don't tell me what I should have gained," broke she in. "It onlyprovokes one the more, and above all, Spicer, no more information, Idetest 'information.' And now, what was it I had to say to you; reallyyour memory would seem to be failing you completely. What could itbe?""It couldn't be that roan filly----""Of course it couldn't. I really must endeavour to persuade you thatmy thoughts occasionally stray beyond the stable. By the way, you soldthose grey carriage-horses for nothing. You always told me they were thehandsomest pair in London, and yet you say I'm exceedingly lucky to getone hundred and eighty pounds for them.""You forget, my Lady, that Bloomfield was a roarer----""Well, you really are in a tormenting mood this morning, Spicer. Justbethink you, now, if there's anything more you have to say, disagreeableand unpleasant, and say it at once; you have made lady Grace quiteill----""No, only tired!" sighed her friend, with a melancholy smile."Now I remember," cried Lady Lackington, "it was about that house atFlorence. I don't think we shall pass any time there, but in case weshould, I should like that Zapponi palace, with the large terrace on theArno, and there must be no one on the ground-floor, mind that; and I'llnot give more than I gave formerly--perhaps not so much. But, above all,remember, that if we decide to go on to Rome, that I'm not bound to itin the least, and he must new-carpet that large drawing-room, and I musthave the little boudoir hung in blue, with muslin over it, not pink.Pink is odious, except in a dressing-room. You will yourself look tothe stables; they require considerable alteration, and there's somethingabout the dining-room--what was it?--Lord Lackington will remember it.But perhaps I have given you as many directions as your head will bear.""I almost think so too, my Lady," muttered he, with a half-dogged look."And be sure, Spicer, that we have that cook--Antoine--if we should wanthim. Don't let him take a place till we decide where we shall stop.""You are aware that he insists on a hundred and fifty francs a month,and his wine.""I should like to know what good you are, if I am to negotiate withthese creatures myself!" said she, haughtily. "I must say, Lady Gracewill suspect that I have rather overrated your little talents, Spicer."And Lady Grace gave a smile that might mean any amount of approval ordepreciation required. "I shall not want that saddle now, and you mustmake that man take it back again.""But I fear, my Lady----""There, don't be tiresome! What is that odious bell? Oh, it's the dinnerof these creatures. You dine at the table d'hte, I think, so pray don'tlet us keep you. You can drop in to-morrow. Let me see, about two, orhalf-past. Good-by--good-by."And so Mr. Spicer retired. The bow Lady Grace vouchsafed being inreality addressed rather to one of the figures on her fan than tohimself."One gets a habit of these kind of people," said Lady Lackington, as thedoor closed after him; "but really it is a bad habit.""I think so too," said Lady Grace, languidly."To be sure, there are now and then occasions when you can't employexactly a servant. There are petty negotiations which require a certaindelicacy of treatment, and there, they are useful. Besides," saidshe, with a half-sneering laugh, "there's a fashion in them, and, likeBlenheim spaniels, every one must have one, and the smaller the better!""Monsignore Clifford my Lady, to know if you receive," said a servant,entering."Oh, certainly. I'm charmed, my dear Grace, to present to you the mostagreeable man of all Rome. He is English, but 'went over,' as they callit, and is now high in the Pope's favour."These words, hurriedly uttered as they were, had been scarcely spokenwhen the visitor entered the room. He was a tall, handsome man, of aboutfive-and-thirty, dressed in deep black, and wearing a light blue ribbonacross his white neckcloth. He advanced with all the ease of goodbreeding, and taking Lady Lackington's hand, he kissed the tips of herfingers with the polished grace of a courtier.After a formal presentation to Lady Grace, he took a seat between thetwo ladies."I am come on, for me, a sad errand, my Lady," said he, in a voiceof peculiar depth and sweetness, in which the very slightest trace of aforeign accent was detectable--"it is to say good-by!""You quite shock me, Monsignore. I always hoped you were here for ourown time.""I believed and wished it also, my Lady; but I have received aperemptory order to return to Rome. His Holiness desires to see me atonce. There is some intention, I understand, of naming me as the Nuncioat Florence. Of course this is a secret as yet." And he turned to eachof the ladies in succession."Oh, that would be charming--at least for any one happy enough tofix their residence there, and my friend Lady Grace is one of thefortunate."Monsignore bowed in gratitude to the compliment, but contrived, as hebent his head, to throw a covert glance at his future neighbour, withthe result of which he did not seem displeased."I must of course, then, send you back those interesting books, which Ihave only in part read?""By no means, my Lady; they are yours, if you will honour me byaccepting them. If the subject did not forbid the epithet, I should callthem trifles.""Monsignore insists on my reading the 'Controversy,' dear Lady Grace;but how I am to continue my studies without his guidance------""We can correspond, my Lady," quickly broke in the other. "You canstate to me whatever doubts--difficulties, perhaps, were, the betterword--occur to you; I shall be but too happy and too proud to offer youthe solution; and if my Lady Grace Twining would condescend to accept mein the same capacity--."She bowed blandly, and he went on."There is a little tract here, by the Cardinal Balbi--'Flowers of St.Joseph' is the title. The style is simple but touching--'the invitation'scarcely to be resisted.""I think you told me I should like the Cardinal personally," broke inLady Lackington."His Eminence is charming, my Lady--such goodness, such gentleness, andso much of the very highest order of conversational agreeability.""Monsignore is so polite as to promise us introductions at Rome,"continued she, addressing Lady Grace, "and amongst those, too, who arenever approached by our countrymen.""The Alterini, the Fornisari, the Balbetti," proudly repeatedMonsignore."All ultra-exclusives, you understand," whispered Lady Lacking-ton toher friend, "who wouldn't tolerate the English.""How charming!" ejaculated Lady Grace, with a languid enthusiasm."The Roman nobility," continued Lady Lackington, "stands proudlyforward, as the only society in Europe to which the travelling Englishcannot obtain access.""They have other prejudices, my Lady--if I may so dare to callsentiments inspired by higher influences--than those which usuallysway society. These prejudices are all in favour of such as regard ourChurch, if not with the devotion of true followers, at least with therespect and veneration that rightfully attach to the first-born ofChristianity.""Yes," said Lady Lackington, as, though not knowing very well towhat, she gave her assent, and then added, "I own to you I have alwaysexperienced a sort of awe--a sense of--what shall I call it?""Devotion, my Lady," blandly murmured Monsignore, while his eyes wereturned on her with a paraphrase of the sentiment."Just so. I have always felt it on entering one of your churches--thesolemn stillness, the gloomy indistinctness, the softened tints, theswelling notes of the organ--you know what I mean.""And when such emotions are etherialised, when, rising above materialinfluences, they are associated with thoughts of what is alonethought-worthy, with hopes of what alone dignifies hope, imagine, then,the blessed beatitude, the heavenly ecstasy they inspire."Monsignore had now warmed to his work, and very ingeniously sketchedout the advantages of a creed that accommodated itself so beautifullyto every temperament--that gave so much and yet exacted so little--thatpoisoned no pleasures--discouraged no indulgences--but left everyenjoyment open with its price attached to it, just as objects areticketed in a bazaar. He had much to say, too, of its soothingconsolations--its devices to alleviate sorrow and cheataffliction--while such was its sympathy for poor suffering humanity,that even the very caprices of temper--the mere whims of fancieddepression--were not deemed unworthy of its pious care.It is doubtful whether these ladies would have accorded to a divine oftheir own persuasion the same degree of favour and attention that theynow bestowed on Monsignore Clifford. Perhaps his manner in discussingcertain belongings of his Church was more entertaining; perhaps, too--wehint it with deference--that there was something like a forbiddenpleasure in thus trespassing into the domain of Rome. His light andplayful style was, however, a fascination amply sufficient to accountfor the interest he excited. If he dwelt but passingly on the dogmas ofhis Church, he was eloquently diffuse on its millinery. Copes, stoles,and vestments he revelled in; and there was a picturesque splendour inhis description of ceremonial that left the best-"effects" of the operafar behind. How gloriously, too, did he expatiate on the beauty of theMadonna, the costliness of her gems, and the brilliancy of her diadem!How incidentally did he display a rapturous veneration for loveliness,and a very pretty taste in dress! In a word, as they both confessed, "hewas charming.'' There was a downy softness in his enthusiasm, a senseof repose even in his very insistence, peculiarly pleasant to those wholike to have their sensations, like their perfumes, as weak and as faintas possible."There is a tact and delicacy about these men from which our peoplemight take a lesson," said Lady Lackington, as the door closed afterhim."Very true," sighed Lady Grace; "ours are really dreadful."CHAPTER III. A FATHER AND A DAUGHTER.A DREARY evening late in October, a cold thin rain falling, and alow wailing wind sighing through the headless branches of the trees inMerrion Square, made Dublin seem as sad-looking and deserted as need be.The principal inhabitants had not yet returned to their homes forthe winter, and the houses wore that melancholy look of vacancy anddesertion so strikingly depressing. One sound alone woke the echoesin that silence; it was a loud knocking at the door of a large andpretentious mansion in the middle of the north side of the square. Twopersons had been standing at the door for a considerable time, and byevery effort of knocker and bell endeavoring to obtain admittance. Oneof these was a tall, erect man of about fifty, whose appearance but tooplainly indicated that most painful of all struggles between poverty anda certain pretension. White-seamed and threadbare as was his coat,he wore it buttoned to the top with a sort of military smartness, hisshabby hat was set on with a kind of jaunty air, and his bushy whiskers,combed and frizzed out with care, seemed a species of protest againstbeing thought as humble as certain details of dress might bespeakhim. At his side stood a young girl, so like him that a mere glanceproclaimed her to be his daughter; and although in her appearance, also,narrow means stood confessed, there was an unmistakable something in hercalm, quiet features and her patient expression that declared she boreher lot with a noble and high-hearted courage."One trial more, Bella, and I 'll give it up," cried he, angrily, as,seizing the knocker, he shook the strong door with the rapping, whilehe jingled the bell with equal violence. "If they don't come now, it isbecause they 've seen who it is, or, maybe----""There, see, papa, there's a window opening above," said the girl,stepping out into the rain as she spoke."What d' ye mean,--do ye want to break in the door?" cried a harshvoice, as the wizened, hag-like face of a very dirty old woman appearedfrom the third story."I want to know if Mr. Davenport Dunn is at home," cried the man."He is not; he 's abroad,--in France.""When is he expected back?" asked he again."Maybe in a week, maybe in three weeks.""Have any letters come for Mr. Kellett--Captain Kel-lett?" said he,quickly correcting himself."No!"And a bang of the window, as the head was withdrawn, finished thecolloquy."That's pretty conclusive, any way, Bella," said he, with an attempt tolaugh. "I suppose there's no use in staying here longer. Poor child,"added he, as he watched her preparations against the storm, "you 'll bewet to the skin! I think we must take a car,--eh, Bella? I will takea car." And he put an emphasis on the word that sounded like a firmresolve."No, no, papa; neither of us ever feared rain.""And, by George! it can't spoil our clothes, Bella," said he, laughingwith a degree of jocularity that sounded astonishing, even to himself;for he quickly added, "But I will have a car; wait a moment here,under the porch, and I 'll get one."And before she could interpose a word, he was off and away, at a speedthat showed the vigor of a younger man."It won't do, Bella," he said, as he came back again; "there's only onefellow on the stand, and he 'll not go under half a crown. I pushedhim hard for one-and-sixpence, but he 'd not hear of it, and so Ithought--that was, I knew well--you would be angry with me.""Of course, papa; it would be mere waste of money," said she, hastily."An hour's walk,--at most, an hour and a half,--and there's an end of itAnd now let us set out, for it is growing late."There were few in the street as they passed along; a stray creature orso, houseless and ragged, shuffled onward; an odd loiterer stood forshelter in an archway, or a chance passer-by, with ample coat andumbrella, seemed to defy the pelting storm, while cold and dripping theyplodded along in silence."That's old Barrington's house, Bella," said he, as they passed a largeand dreary-looking mansion at the corner of the square; "many's thepleasant evening I spent in it."She muttered something, but inaudibly, and they went on as before."I wonder what 's going on here to-day. It was Sir Dyke Morris used tolive here when I knew it" And he stopped at an open door, where a floodof light poured forth into the street "That's the Bishop of Derry,Bella, that's just gone in. There's a dinner-party there to-day,"whispered he, as, half reluctant to go, he still peered into the hall.She drew him gently forward, and he seemed to have fallen into a revery,as he muttered at intervals,--"Great times--fine times--plenty of money--and fellows that knew how tospend it!"Drearily plashing onward through wind and rain, their frail clothessoaked through, they seldom interchanged a word."Lord Drogheda lived there, Bella," said he, stopping short at the doorof a splendidly illuminated hotel; "and I remember the time I was asfree and welcome in it as in my own house. My head used to be full ofthe strange things that happened there once. Brown, and Barry Fox, andTisdall, and the rest of us, were wild chaps! Faith, my darling, itwas n't for Mr. Davenport Dunn I cared in those times, or the like ofhim. Davenport Dunn, indeed!""It is strange that he has not written to us," said the girl, in a lowvoice."Not a bit strange; it's small trouble he takes about us. I'll bet afive-pound note--I mean, I'll lay sixpence," said he, correcting himselfwith some confusion,--"that since he left this he never as much asbestowed a thought on us. When he got me that beggarly place in theCustom House, he thought he 'd done with me out and out. Sixty pounds ayear! God be with the time I gave Peter Harris, the butler, just doublethe money!"As they talked thus, they gained the outskirts of the city, andgradually left the lamps and the well-lighted shops behind. Theirway now led along a dreary road by the sea-side, towards the littlebathing-village of Clontarf, beyond which, in a sequestered spot calledthe Green Lanes, their humble home stood. It was a long and melancholywalk; the sorrowful sounds of the sea beating on the shingly strandmingling with the dreary plashing of the rain; while farther out, acontinuous roar as the waves rolled over the "North Bull," added all theterrors of storm to the miseries of the night."The winter is setting in early," said Kellett "I think I never saw aseverer night.""A sad time for poor fellows out at sea!" said the girl, as she turnedher head towards the dreary waste of cloud and water now commingled intoone."'T is exactly like our own life, out there," cried he: "a littleglimpse of light glimmering every now and then through the gloom,but yet not enough to cheer the heart and give courage; but all blackdarkness on every side.""There will come a daybreak at last," said the girl, assuredly."Faith! I sometimes despair about it in our own case," said he, sighingdrearily. "To think of what I was once, and what I am now! buffetedabout and ill used by a set of scoundrels that I 'd not have suffered tosit down in my kitchen. Keep that rag of a shawl across your chest; you'll be destroyed entirely, Bella.""We'll soon be within shelter now, and nothing the worse for thisweather, either of us," replied she, almost gayly. "Over and overagain have you told me what severe seasons you have braved in thehunting-field; and, after all, papa, one can surely endure as much forduty as in pursuit of pleasure,--not to say that our little cottagenever looks more homelike than after a night like this.""It's snug enough for a thing of the kind," murmured he, halfreluctantly."And Betty will have such a nice fire for us, and we shall be ascomfortable and as happy as though it were a fine house, and weourselves fine folk to live in it.""The Kelletts of Kellett's Court, and no better blood in Ireland," saidhe, sternly. "It was in the same house my grandfather, Morgan Kellett,entertained the Duke of Portland, the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland; andthis day, as I stand here, there isn't a chap in the Castle-yard wouldtouch his hat to me!""And what need have we of them, papa? Will not our pride of good bloodteach us other lessons than repining? Can't we show the world that agentleman born bears his altered fortunes with dignity?""Ye're right, Bella; that's the very thing they must acknowledge. Thereis n't a day passes that I don't make the clerks in the 'Long Room' feelthe difference between us. 'No liberties, no familiarities, my lads,' Isay,--'keep your distance; for, though my coat is threadbare, and myhat none of the best, the man inside there is Paul Kellett ofKellett's Court.' And if they ask where that is, I say, 'Look at theGazetteer,'--it's mighty few of them has their names there: 'Kellett'sCourt, the ancient seat of the Kellett family, was originally built byStrongbow, Earl of Pembroke.'""Well, here we are, papa, in a more humble home; but you'll see howcheery it will be."And so saying, she pushed open a little wicket, and, passing through asmall garden, gained the door of a little one-storied cottage, almostburied in honeysuckle."Yes, Betty, wet through!" said she, laughing, as the old woman heldup her hands in horror; "but get papa his slippers and that warmdressing-gown, and I 'll be back in a minute.""Arrah! why didn't you take a car for her?" said the old woman, withthat familiarity which old and tried service warrants. "Sure the childwill get her death from this!""She wouldn't let me; she insisted on walking on her feet.""Ayeh, ayeh!" mattered the crone, as she placed his slippers on thefender, "sure ye oughtn't to mind her. She'd get a fever rather thancost you a shilling. Look at the shoes she's wearin'.""By the good day! you'll drive me mad, clean mad!" cried he, savagely."Don't you know in your heart that we have n't got it? Devil a rapfarthing; that we're as poor as a church mouse; that if it wasn't forthis beggarly place----""Now, Betty," cried the girl, entering,--"now for our tea, and thatdelicious potato-cake that I see browning there before the fire."Poorly, even meanly dressed as she was, there was in her that gentlelook, and graceful, quiet bearing that relieved the sombre aspect of aroom which spoke but too plainly of narrow fortune; and as her fatherlooked at her, the traces of recent displeasure passed from his face,and her eyes brightened up, while he said,--"You bring a blessing with the very sound of your voice, darling." Andhe kissed her twice as he spoke."It is so comfortable to be here, and so snug," said she, seatingherself at his side, "and to know that to-morrow is Sunday, and that wehave our holiday, each of us. Come, papa, confess this little room andits bright fire are very cheery! And I have got a newspaper for you. Itold Mrs. Hawksey there was nothing such a treat to you as a newspaper,and she gave me one.""Ah! the 'Trumpet of Liberty,'" said he, opening it. "We'll have itafter tea, Bella. Is there anything about our own county in it,--Cork, Imean?""I have not looked in it yet; but we 'll go through it honestly, papa,for I know how conscientious you are not to lose a paragraph.""'T is that same makes a man agreeable in society. You know everythingif you read the papers,--accidents and marriages, the rate of themoney-market, the state of the crops, who is dining with the Queen, andwho is skating on the Serpentine, who is ruined at Newmarket, and whodrowned at sea, and then all about the play-houses and the wonderfulpanoramas; so that, let conversation turn how it will, you 're ready forit, and that 's the reason, Bella, you must go through every bit of it.It's like hunting, and the very field perhaps you don't try is just theone you 'd find a fox in!""Well, you 'll see. I 'll beat every cover for you!" said she, laughing;"and Mrs. Hawksey desires to have it back, for there is something aboutthe Alderman having said or done--I don't know what or where.""How I hate the very name of an Alderman!" said Kellett, peevishly;"regular vagabonds, with gilt coaches and red cloaks, running aboutprating of taxes and the pipe-water! The devil a thing I feel harder tobear in my poverty than to think you 're a visiting governess in anAlderman's family. Paul Kellett's daughter a visiting governess!""And very proud am I to be thought equal to the charge," said she,resolutely; "not to say how grateful to you for having enabled me toundertake it.""Myself in the Customs is nothing; that I'd put up with. Many a reducedgentleman did the same. Sam Crozier was a marker at a billiard-table inTralee, and Ennis Magrath was an overseer on the very road he usedto drive his four-in-hand. 'Many a time,' says he, 'I cursed thatfresh-broken stone, but I never thought I 'd be measuring it!' 'T is theEncumbered Court has brought us all down, Bella, and there's no disgracein being ruined with thousands of others. Just begin with the sales ofestates, and tell us who is next for sentence. God forgive me, but Ifeel a kind of pleasure in hearing that we 're all swamped together."The girl smiled as though the remark were merely uttered in levity anddeserved no more serious notice; but a faint sigh, which she could notrepress, betrayed the sorrow with which she had heard it.She opened the paper and glanced at its contents. They were as variedand multifarious as are usually to be found in weekly "channels ofinformation." What struck her, however, most was the fact that, turnwhere she would, the name of Davenport Dunn was ever conspicuous. Salesof property displayed him as the chief creditor or petitioner; charitiesparaded him as the first among the benevolent; Joint-stock companiesexhibited him as their managing director; mines, and railroads, andtelegraph companies, harbor committees, and boards of all kinds, gavehim the honors of large type; while in the fashionable intelligence fromabroad, his arrivals and departures were duly chronicled, and a letterof our own correspondent from Venice communicated the details of afarewell dinner given him, with a "Lord" in the chair, by a number ofthose who had so frequently partaken of his splendid hospitalities whilehe resided in that city."Well--well--well!" said Kellett, with a pause between eachexclamation, "this is more than I can bear. Old Jerry Dunn's son,--thebrat of a boy I remember in the Charter' School! He used to be sent atChristmas time up to Ely Place, when my father was in town, to get fiveshillings for a Christmas-box; and I mind well the day he was asked tostay and dine with my sister Matty and myself, and he taught us a newgame with six little bits of sticks; how we were to do something, Iforget what,--but I know how it ended,--he won every sixpence we had.Matty had half a guinea in gold and some tenpenny pieces, and I had, Ithink, about fifteen shillings, and sorrow a rap he left us; and, worsestill, I mortgaged my school maps, and got a severe thrashing for havinglost them from Old White in Jervas Street; and poor Matty's dollwas confiscated in the same way, and carried off with a debt ofthree-and-fourpence on her head. God forgive him, but he gave us asorrowful night, for we cried till daybreak.""And did you like him as a playfellow?" asked she."Now, that's the strangest thing of all," said Kellett, smiling."Neither Matty nor myself liked him; but he got a kind of influence overus that was downright fascination. No matter what we thought of doingbefore he came, when he once set foot in the room everything followedhis dictation. It was n't that he was overbearing or tyrannical inthe least; just as little could you say that he was insinuating ornattering; but somehow, by a kind of instinct, we fell into his ways,and worked out all his suggestions just as if we were mere agents of hiswill. Resistance or opposition we never dreamed of while he was present;but after he was gone away, once or twice there came the thought thatthere was something very like slavery in all this submission, and webegan to concert how we might throw off the yoke."'I won't play toll-bar any more,' said I, resolutely; 'all mypocket-money is sure to go before it is over.'"'And I,' said Matty, 'won't have poor "Mopsy" tried for a murder again;every time she's hanged, some of the wax comes off her neck.'""We encouraged each other vigorously in these resolves; but before hewas half an hour in the house 'Mopsy' had undergone the last sentenceof the law, and I was insolvent.""What a clever rogue he must have been!" said Bella, laughing."Was n't he clever!" exclaimed Kellett. "You could not say how,--nobodycould say how,--but he saw everything the moment he came into a newplace, and marked every one's face, and knew, besides, the impression hemade on them, just as if he was familiar with them for years.""Did you continue to associate with him as you grew up?" asked she."No; we only knew each other as children. There was a distressingthing--a very distressing thing--occurred one day; I'm sure to this veryhour I think of it with sorrow and shame, for I can't believe he hadany blame in it. We were playing in a room next my father's study,and running every now and then into the study; and there was anold-fashioned penknife--a family relic, with a long bloodstonehandle--lying on the table; and when the play was over, and Davy, as wecalled him, had gone home, this was missing. There was a search madefor it high and low, for my father set great value on it. It was hisgreat-great-grandmother's, I believe; at all events, no one ever seteyes on it afterwards, and nothing would persuade my father but thatDavy stole it! Of course he never told us that he thought so, but theservant did, and Matty and myself cried two nights and a day over it,and got really sick."I remember well; I was working by myself in the garden, Matty wasill and in bed, when I saw a tall old man, dressed like a countryshopkeeper, shown into the back parlor, where my father was sitting.There was a bit of the window open, and I could hear that high wordswere passing between them, and, as I thought, my father getting theworst of it; for the old fellow kept repeating, 'You 'll rue it, MisterKellett,--you 'll rue it yet!' And then my father said, 'Give him a goodhorsewhipping, Dunn; take my advice, and you 'll spare yourself somesorrow, and save him from even worse hereafter.' I 'll never forget theold fellow's face as he turned to leave the room. 'Davy will live to payyou off for this,' said he; 'and if you 're not to the fore, it willbe your children, or your children's children, will have to 'quit thedebt!'"We never saw Davy from that hour; indeed, we were strictly forbiddenever to utter his name; and it was only when alone together, that Mattyand I would venture to talk of him, and cry over--and many a time wedid--the happy days when we had him for our playfellow. There was aspecies of martyrdom now, too, in his fate, that endeared him the moreto our memories; every play he had invented, every spot he was fond of,every toy he liked, were hallowed to our minds like relics. At last poorMatty and I could bear it no longer, and we sat down and wrote a longletter to Davy, assuring him of our fullest confidence in his honor,and our broken-heartedness at separation from him. We inveighedstoutly against parental tyranny, and declared ourselves ready for openrebellion, if he, that was never deficient in a device, could only pointout the road. We bribed a stable-boy, with all our conjoined resourcesof pocket-money, to convey the epistle, and it came back next morningto my father, enclosed in one from Davy himself, stating that he couldnever countenance acts of disobedience, or be any party to a systemby which children should deceive their parents. I was sent off to aboarding-school the same week, and poor Matty committed to the charge ofMiss Morse, a vinegar-faced old maid, that poisoned the eight best yearsof her life!""And when did you next hear of him?""Of Davy? Let me see; the next time I heard of him was when he attemptedto enter college as a sizar, and failed. Somebody or other mentionedit at Kellett's Court, and said that old Dunn was half out of his mind,insisting that some injustice was dealt out to his son, and vowing he 'dget the member for somewhere to bring the matter before Parliament.Davy was wiser, however; he persuaded his father that, by agitating thequestion, they would only give notoriety to what, if left alone, wouldspeedily be forgotten; and Davy was right I don't think there's threemen now in the kingdom that remember one word about the sizarship, or,if they do, that would be influenced by it in any dealings they mighthave with Mr. Davenport Dunn.""What career did he adopt after that?""He became a tutor, I think, in Lord Glengariff's family. There wassome scandal about him there,--I forget it now,--and then he went offto America, and spent some years there, and in Jamaica, where he wasemployed as an overseer, I think; but I can't remember it all. My ownknowledge of him next was seeing the name 'D. Dunn, solicitor,' on aneat brass-plate in Tralee, and hearing that he was a very acute fellowin election contests, and well up to dealing with the priests.""And now he has made a large fortune?""I believe you well; he's the richest man in Ireland. There's scarce acounty he has n't got property in. There's not a town, nor a borough,where he has n't some influence, and in every class, too,--gentry,clergy, shopkeepers, people: he has them all with him, and nobody seemsto know how he does it.""Pretty much, I suppose, as he used to manage Aunt Matty and yourselflong ago," said she, laughingly."Well, indeed, I suppose so," said he, with a half sigh; "and if it be,all I can say is, they 'll be puzzled to find out his secret. He's thedeepest fellow I ever heard or read of; for there he stands to-day,without name, family, blood, or station, higher than those that had themall,--able to do more than them; and, what's stranger still, thoughtmore about in England than the best man amongst us.""You have given me quite an interest about him, papa; tell me, what ishe like?""He's as tall as myself, but not so strongly built; indeed, he'sslightly round-shouldered; he is dark in the complexion, and has theblackest hair and whiskers I ever saw, and rather good-looking thanotherwise,--a calm, cold, patient-looking face you'd call it; he speaksvery little, but his voice is soft and low and deliberate, just like onethat would n't throw away a word; and he never moves his hands or arms,but lets them hang down heavily at either side.""And his eyes? Tell me of his eyes?""They 're big, black, sleepy-looking eyes, seldom looking up, and nevergrowing a bit brighter by anything that he says or hears about him.Indeed, any one seeing him for the first time would say, 'There's a manwhose thoughts are many a mile away; he is n't minding what's going onabout him here.' But that is not the case; there is n't a look, a stir,nor a gesture that he does n't remark. There 's not a chair drawn closerto another, not a glance interchanged, that he has n't noticed; and I've heard it said, 'Many would n't open a letter before him, he's sosure to guess the contents from just reading the countenance.'""The world is always prone to exaggerate such gifts," said she, calmly."So it may be, dear, but I don't fancy it could do so here. He's one ofthose men that, if he had been born to high station, would be a greatpolitician or a great general. You see that, somehow, without any efforton his part, things come up just as he wished them. I believe, afterall," said he, with a heavy sigh, "it's just luck! Whatever one man putshis hand to in this world goes on right and smoothly, and another hasevery mishap and misfortune that can befall him. He may strive, andtoil, and fret his brains over it, but devil a good it is. If he is bornto ill luck, it will stick to him.""It's not a very cheery philosophy!" said she, gently."I suppose not, dear; but what is very cheery in this life, when youcome to find it out? Is n't it nothing but disappointment and vexation?"Partly to rally him out of this vein of depression, and partly frommotives of curiosity, she once more adverted to Dunn, and asked how ithappened that they crossed each other again in life."He's what they call 'carrying the sale' of Kellett's Court, my dear.You know we 're in the Encumbered Estates now; and Dunn represents LordLackington and others that hold the mortgages over us. The property wasup for sale in November, then in May last, and was taken down by Dunn'sorder. I never knew why. It was then, however, he got me this thing inthe Revenue,--this beggarly place of sixty-five pounds a year; and toldme, through his man Hanks,--for I never met himself about it,--thathe 'd take care my interests were not overlooked. After that the Courtsclosed, and he went abroad; and that's all there's between us, or,indeed, likely to be between us; for he never wrote me as much as oneline since he went away, nor noticed any one of my letters, though Isent him four, or, indeed, I believe, five.""What a strange man this must be!" said she, musingly. "Is it supposedthat he has formed any close attachments? Are his friends devoted tohim?""Attachments,--friendships! faith, I'm inclined to think it's littletime he'd waste on one or the other. Why, child, if what we hear betrue, he goes through the work of ten men every day of his life.""Is he married?" asked she, after a pause."No; there was some story about a disappointment he met early in life.When he was at Lord Glengariff's, I think, he fell in love with one ofthe daughters, or she with him,--I never knew it rightly,--but it endedin his being sent away; and they say he never got over it. Just as ifDavenport Dunn was a likely man either to fall in love or cherishthe memory of a first passion! I wish you saw him, Bella," said he,laughing, "and the notion would certainly amuse you.""But still men of his stamp have felt--ay, and inspired--the strongestpassions. I remember reading once--" "Reading, my darling,--reading isone thing, seeing or knowing is another. The fellows that write thesethings must invent what is n't likely,--what is nigh impossible,--ornobody would read it What we see of a man or woman in a book is just theexact reverse of what we 'll ever find in real life."The girl could easily have replied to this assertion; indeed, the answerwas almost on her lips, when she restrained herself, and, hanging downher head, fell into a musing fit.CHAPTER IV. ONE WHO WOULD BE A "SHARP FELLOW."One of the chief, perhaps the greatest, pleasures which Kellett's humblelot still secured him, was a long country walk of a Sunday in companywith one who had been his friend in more prosperous times. A reducedgentleman like himself, Annesley Beecher could only go abroad on thisone day in the week, and thus by the pressure of adverse fortune werethey thrown more closely together.Although by no means a favorite with Bella, she was far too consideratefor her father, and too mindful of the few enjoyments that remained tohim, ever to interpose her real opinion. She therefore limited herselfto silence, as old Kellett would pronounce some glowing eulogy ofhis friend, calling him "good" and "amiable" and "kind-hearted,"and extolling, as little short of miraculous, "the spirits he had,considering all he went through." But he would add, "He was always thesame, and that's the reason everybody liked him,--everybody, that is,almost everybody!" And he would steal a sly glance at his daughter, halfimploringly, as though to say, "How long are you to sit in that smallminority?"Whether the weather would permit of Beecher's coming out to see them,whether he 'd be able to "stay and take his bit of dinner with them,"were subjects of as great anxiety to poor Kellett each succeedingSunday morning as though there ever had been a solitary exception tothe wished-for occurrence; and Bella would never destroy the pleasureof anticipation by the slightest hint that might impair the value heattached to the event."There's so many trying to get him," he would say; "they pester his lifeout with invitations,--the Chancellor and Lord Killybegs and the Bishopof Drumsna always asking him to name his day; but he 'd rather come outand take his bit of roast mutton with ourselves, and his glass of punchafter it, than he 'd eat venison and drink claret with the best of them.There's not a table in Dublin, from the Castle down, that would n'tbe proud of his company; and why not?" He would pause after uttering achallenge of this sort; and then, as his daughter would show no signs ofacceptance, he would mutter on, "A real gentleman born and bred, and howanybody can mislike him is more than I am really able to comprehend!"These little grumblings, which never produced more than a smile fromBella, were a kind of weekly homily which poor Kellett liked to deliver,and he felt, when he had uttered it, as one who had paid a just tributeto worth and virtue.[Illustration: 066]"There's Beecher already, by Jove!" cried Kellett, as he sprang upfrom the breakfast-table to open the little wicket which the other wasvainly endeavoring to unhasp. "How early he is!"Let us take the opportunity to present him to our readers,--a duty themore imperative, since, to all outward semblance at least, he wouldappear little to warrant the flattering estimate his friend so latelybestowed upon him. About four or five-and-thirty, somewhat above themiddle size, and with all the air and bearing of a man of fashion,Beecher had the gay, easy, light-hearted look of one with whom the worldwent habitually well; and when it did not, more was the shame of thesaid world! since a better, nobler, more generous fellow than himselfnever existed; and this he knew, however others might ungraciouslyhold an opposite opinion. There was not the slightest detail in hisdress that could warrant the supposition of narrow fortune: his coatand his waistcoat, of one color and stuff, were faultless in make; themassive watch-chain that festooned across his chest in the last mode;his thick walking-boots the perfection of that compromise betweenstrength and elegance so popular in our day; even to his cane, whosehead was of massive gold, with his arms embossed,--all bespoke acertain affluence and abundance, the more assured from the absence ofostentation.His hat was slightly, very slightly, set on one side,--a piece of"tigerism" pardonable, perhaps, as it displayed the rich brown curls ofvery silky hair, which he had disposed with consummate skill beforehis glass ere he issued forth. His large, full blue eyes, his handsomemouth, and a certain gentleness in his look generally, were what hehimself would have called the "odds in his favor;" and very hard itwould indeed have been at first sight to form an estimate in any wayunfavorable to him. Bean Beecher, as he was called once, had been deemedthe best-looking fellow about town, and when he entered the LifeGuards, almost twenty years before the time we now present him, had beenreckoned the handsomest man and best rider in the regiment. Brother ofLord Lackington, but not by the same mother, he had inaugurated that newschool of dandyism which succeeded to the Brummell period, and soughtfame and notoriety by splendor and extravagance rather than by thefastidious and personal elegance that characterized the former era. Inthis way Lord Lackington and his brother were constantly contrasted; andalthough each had their followers, it was generally admitted that theywere both regarded as admirable types of style and fashion. Boodle'swould have preferred the Peer, the Guards' Club and all Tattersall'shave voted for the Honorable Annesley Beecher.Beecher started in life with all the advantages and disadvantages whichattach to the position of a younger son of a noble family. On theone side he had good connections, a sure status in society, and easyadmission into club life; on the other, lay the counterbalancing fact ofthe very slender fortune which usually falls to the lot of the youngerborn. The sum, in his case, barely sufficed to carry him through hisminority, so that the day he came of age he had not a shilling in theworld. Most men open their career in life with some one ambition orother in their hearts. Some aspire to military glory and the fame ofa great general, some yearn after political eminence, and fashion tothemselves the triumphs of successful statesmanship. There are lessergoals in the walks of the learned professions which have each theirvotaries; and sanguine spirits there are who found, in imagination,distant colonies beyond the sea, or lead lives of adventure in exploringunvisited and unknown regions. Annesley Beecher had no sympathy withany of these. The one great and absorbing wish of his heart was to be a"sharp fellow;" one who in all the dealings and traffic of life was sureto get the upper hand of his adversary, who in every trial where craftwas the master, and in whatever situation wherein cunning performed apart, was certain to come out with the creditable reputation of being,"for a gentleman, the downiest cove to be met with anywhere."This unhappy bent was owing to the circumstance of his being earlythrown amongst men who, having nothing but their wits to depend upon,had turned these same wits to very discreditable purposes. He became,it is needless to say, their easy dupe; and when utterly bereft ofthe small patrimony which he once possessed, was admitted as an humblebrother of the honorable guild who had despoiled him.Men select their walk in life either from the consciousness of certainqualities likely to obtain success, or by some overweening admiration ofthose already eminent in it. It was this latter decided Beecher's taste.Never was there one who cherished such profound respect for a craftyfellow, for all other intellectual superiorities he could limit hisesteem: for a rogue, his veneration was unbounded. From the manthat invented a bubble company, to him who could turn the king atcart--from the gifted individual who could puff up shares to anexorbitant value, to the no less fine intelligence that could "makeeverything safe on the Derby," he venerated them all. His earlyexperiences had been unhappy ones, and so constantly had he foundhimself duped and "done" on every hand, that he ended by believing thathonesty was a pure myth; the nearest approach to the quality being acertain kind of fidelity to one's "pall," as he would have called it,and an unwillingness to put "your own friend in the hole," while therewere so many others available for that pleasant destiny. This littleflickering flame of principle, this farthing candle of good feeling, wasthe solitary light that illuminated the gloom of his character.He had joined the regiment Kellett formerly belonged to at Malta, afew weeks before the other had sold out, and having met accidentally inIreland, they had renewed the acquaintance, stimulated by that strangesympathy which attracts to each other those whose narrow circumstanceswould seem, in some shape or other, the effects of a cruelty practisedon them by the world. Kellett was rather flattered by the recognition ofhim who recalled the brighter hours of his life, while he entertaineda kind of admiration for the worldly wit and cleverness of one who, intalk at least, was a match for the "shrewdest fellow going." Beecherliked the society of a man who thus looked up to him, and who couldlisten unweariedly to his innumerable plans for amassing wealth andfortune, all of which only needed some little preliminary aid--somemiserable thousand or two to start with--to make them as "rich asRothschild."Never was there such a Tantalus view of life as he couldpicture,--stores of gold, mines of unbounded wealth,--immense stakesto be won here, rouge et noir banks to be broke there,--all actuallycraving to be appropriated, if one only had a little of that shiningmetal which, like the water thrown down in a pump, is the needfulpreliminary to securing a supply of the fluid afterwards.The imaginative faculty plays a great part in the existence of thereduced gentleman! Kellett actually revelled in the gorgeous visionsthis friend could conjure up. There was that amount of plausibility inhis reasonings that satisfied scruple as to practicability, and made himregard Beecher as the most extraordinary instance of a grand financialgenius lost to the world,--a great Chancellor of the Exchequer born todevise budgets in obscurity!Bella took a very different measure of him: she read him with all awoman's nicest appreciation, and knew him thoroughly; she saw, however,how much his society pleased her father, how their Sunday strollstogether rallied him from the dreary depression the week was sure toleave behind it, and how these harmless visions of imaginary prosperityserved to cheer the gloom of actual poverty. She, therefore, concealedso much as she could of her own opinion, and received Beecher ascordially as she was able."Ah, Paul, my boy, how goes it? Miss Kellett, how d'ye do?" saidBeecher, with that easy air and pleasant smile that well became him. "Ithought by starting early I should just catch you at breakfast, while Ialso took another hour out of my Sunday,--the one day the law mercifullybestows on such poor devils as myself,--ha, ha, ba!" And he laughedheartily, as though insolvency was as droll a thing as could be."You bear up well, anyhow, Beecher," said Kellett, admiringly."What's the odds so long as you're happy!" cried the other, gayly."Never say die. They take it out in fifty per cent, but they can't workthe oracle against our good spirits, eh, Kellett? The mens sana incorpore,--what d'ye call him, my lad?--that's the real thing.""Indeed, I suppose it is!" said Kellett, not very clear as to what heconcurred in."There are few fellows, let me tell you, would be as light-hearted as Iam, with four writs and a judge's warrant hanging over them,--eh, MissBella, what do you say to that?" said Beecher.She smiled half sadly and said nothing."Ask John Scott,--ask Bicknell Morris, or any of the 'Legs' youlike,--if there's a man of them all ever bore up like me. 'Beecher'sa bar of iron,' they 'll tell you; 'that fellow can bear any amount ofhammering.' and maybe I have n't had it! And all Lackington's fault!""That's the worst of all!" said Kellett, who had listened to the sameaccusation in the self-same words at least a hundred times before."Lackington is the greatest fool going! He does n't see the advantage ofpushing his family influence. He might have had me in for 'Mallow.'Grog Davis said to him one day, 'Look now, my Lord, Annesley is the besthorse in your stable, if you 'd only stand to win on him, he is!' ButLackington would not hear of it. He thinks me a flat! You won't believeit, but he does!""Faith! he's wrong there," said Kellett, with all the emphasis ofsincerity."I rather suspect he is, Master Kellett. I was trained in anotherschool,--brought up amongst fellows would skin a cat, by Jove! What Isay is, let A. B. have a chance,--just let him in once, and see if hewon't do the thing!""Do you wish to be in Parliament, Mr. Beecher?" asked Bella, with asmile of half-repressed drollery."Of course I do. First, there's the protection,--no bad thing as timesgo; then it would be uncommon strange if I could n't 'tool the coachinto the yard' safely. They 'd have to give me a devilish good thing.You 'd see what a thorn I 'd be in their sides. Ask Grog Davis what kindof fellow I am; he 'll tell you if I 'm easily put down. But Lackingtonis a fool; he can't see the road before him!""You reckon, then, on being a debater!" said she, quietly."A little of everything, Miss Bella," said he, laughing; "like themodern painters, not particular for a shade or two. I 'd not go wastingmy time with that old Tory lot,--they're all worked ont, aged andweighted, as John Scott would call them--I'd go in with the younguns,--the Manchester two-year-olds, universal--what d'ye call it?--andvote by ballot. They 're the fellows have 'the tin,' by Jove! theyhave.""Then I scarcely see how Lord Lackington would advance his familyinfluence by promoting your views," said she, again."To be sure he would. It would be the safest hedge in the world for him.He 'd square his book by it, and stand to win, no matter what horsecame in. Besides, why should they buy me, if I was n't against them? Youdon't nobble the horse in your own stable,--eh, Kellett, old boy?""You're a wonderful fellow, Beecher!" said Kellett, in a most honestadmiration of his friend."If they'd only give me a chance, Paul,--just one chance!"It was not very easy to see what blot in the game of life he purposed tohimself to "hit" when he used this expression, "if they only give me achance;" vague and indistinct as it was, still for many a year had itserved him as a beacon of hope. A shadow vision of creditors "done,"horses "nobbled," awkward testimonies "squared," a millenary periodof bills easily discounted, with an indulgent Angel presiding over theBankrupt Court,--these and like blessings doubtless all flitted beforehim as the fruits of that same "chance" which destiny held yet in storefor him.Hope is a generous fairy; she deigns to sit beside the humblestfiresides,--she will linger even in the damp cell of the prison, orrest her wings on the wave-tossed raft of the shipwrecked, and in suchmission is she thrice blessed! But by what strange caprice does shevisit the hearts of men like this? Perhaps it is that the very spirit ofher ministering is to despair of nothing.We are by no means sure that our reader will take the same pleasure thatKellett did in Beecher's society, and therefore we shall spare himthe narrative of their walk. They strolled along for hours, now by theshingly shore, on which the waves swept smoothly, now inland, throughleafy lanes and narrow roads, freckled with patchy sunlight. The day wascalm and still,--one of those solemn autumnal days which lend to scenerya something of sadness in their unvarying quiet. Although so near agreat city, the roads were little travelled, and they sauntered forhours scarcely meeting any one.Wherever the smoke rose above the tall beech-trees, wherever theornamented porch of some lone cottage peeped through the copse, or thehandsome entrance-gate proclaimed the well-to-do owner of some luxuriousabode, Kellett would stop to tell who it was lived there,--the wealthymerchant, the affluent banker, the alderman or city dignitary, who hadamassed his fortune by this or that pursuit. Through all his storiesthere ran the vein of depreciation, which the once landed proprietorcherished towards the men who were the "first of their name." He wassure to remember some trait of their humble beginnings in life,--howthis one had come up barefooted to Dublin fifty years before; how thathad held horses in the street for hire. It was strange, but scarcelyone escaped some commentary of this kind; not that there was a sparkof ill-nature in the man, but that he experienced a species ofself-consolation in thinking that in all his narrow fortune he hadclaims of kindred and connection which none of them could compete with.Beecher's thoughts took, meanwhile, a different course; whenever notawakened to interest by some trait of their sharpness or cunning, towhich he listened with avidity, he revelled in the idea of their wealth,as a thing of which they might be despoiled: "Wouldn't that fellow takeshares in some impossible speculation?--Couldn't the other be inducedto buy some thousand pounds' worth of valueless scrip?--Would this onekindly permit himself to 'be cleared out' at hazard?--Might that one bepersuaded to lose a round sum at cart?"And thus did they view life, with widely different sympathies, it istrue, but yet in a spirit that made them companionable to each other.One "grew his facts," like raw material which the other manufacturedinto those curious wares by which he amused his fancy. Poverty is astronger bond than many believe it; when men begin to confess it to eachother, they take something very like an oath of fidelity."By the way," said Beecher, as he bade his friend good night, "you toldme you knew Dunn--Davenport Dunn?""To be sure I do,--know him well.""Couldn't you introduce me to him? That's a fellow might be able toassist me. I 'm certain he could give me a chance; eh, Kellett?""Well; I expect him back in Ireland every day. I was asking after him nolater than yesterday; but he's still away.""When he comes back, however, you can mention me, of course; he'll knowwho I am.""I'll do it with pleasure. Good-night, Beecher,--goodnight; and Ihope"--this was soliloquy as he turned back towards the door,--"I hopeDunn will do more for you than he ever has for me! or, faith, it's notworth while to make the acquaintance."Bella retired to her room early, and Kellett sat moodily alone by hisfire. Like a great many other "embarrassed gentlemen," he was draggingon life amidst all the expedients of loans, bonds, and mortgages, whenthe bill for sale of the encumbered estates became the law of the land.What with the legal difficulties of dispossessing him, what with thechangeful fortunes of a good harvest, or money a little more plentifulin the market, he might have gone on to the last in this fashion, andended his days where he began them, in the old house of his fathers,when suddenly this new and unexpected stroke of legislation cut shortall his resources at once, and left him actually a beggar on the world.The panic created at the first moment by a law that seemed little shortof confiscation, the large amount of landed property thus suddenlythrown into the market, the prejudice against Irish investment sostrongly entertained by the moneyed classes in England, all tendedvastly to depreciate the value of those estates which came first forsale; and many were sold at prices scarcely exceeding four or five yearsof their rental. An accidental disturbance in the neighborhood, somepetty outrage in the locality, was enough to depreciate the value;and purchasers actually fancied themselves engaged in speculationsso hazardous that nothing short of the most tempting advantages wouldrequite them for their risk.One of the very first estates for sale was Kellett's Court. The chargeson the property were immense, the accumulated debts of three generationsof spendthrifts; the first charge, however, was but comparatively small,and yet even this was not covered by the proceeds of the sale. A housethat had cost nearly forty thousand pounds, standing on its own demesne,surrounded by an estate yielding upwards of three thousand a year, wasknocked down for fifteen thousand four hundred pounds.Kellett was advised to appeal against this sale on various grounds: hewas in possession of an offer of more than double for the same propertyin times less prosperous; he could show a variety of grounds--surpriseand others--to invalidate the ruinous contract; and it was then that heonce again, after a whole life, found himself in contact with DavenportDunn, the attorney for many parties whose interests were compromised inthe sale. By no possible accident could the property be sold at such aprice as would leave any surplus to himself; but he hoped, indeed he wastold, that he would be favorably considered by those whose interest hewas defending; and this last throw for fortune was now the subject ofhis dreary thoughts.There was, too, another anxiety, and a nearer one, pressing on hisheart. Kellett had a son,--a fine, frank, open-hearted young fellow, whohad grown up to manhood, little dreaming that he would ever be called onto labor for his own support. The idle lounging habits of a countrylife had indisposed him to all study, so that even his effort toenter college was met by a failure, and he was turned back on thevery threshold of the University. Jack Kellett went home, vowing he 'dnevermore trouble his head about Homer and Lucian, and he kept his word;he took to his gun and his pointers with renewed vigor, waiting untilsuch time as he might obtain his gazette to a regiment on service. Hisfather had succeeded in securing a promise of such an appointment, but,unhappily, the reply only arrived on the very week that Kellett's Courtwas sold, and an order from the Horse Guards to lodge the purchase-moneyof his commission came at the very hour when they were irretrievablyruined.Jack disappeared the next morning, and the day following brought aletter, stating that he had enlisted in the "Rifles," and was off to theCrimea. Old Kellett concealed the sorrow that smote him for the loss ofhis boy, by affecting indignation at being thus deserted. So artfullydid he dress up this self-deception that Bella was left in doubt as towhether or not some terrible scene had not occurred between the fatherand son before he left the house. In a tone that she never ventured todispute, he forbade her to allude to Jack before him; and thus didhe treasure up this grief for himself alone and his own lonely hours,cheating his sorrow by the ingenious devices of that constraint he wasthus obliged to practise on himself. Like a vast number of men with whomthe world has gone hardly, he liked to brood over his misfortunes,and magnify them to himself. In this way he opened a little bank ofcompassion that answered every draft he drew on it. Over and over tohimself--like a miser revelling over his hoarded wealth--did he countall the hardships of his destiny. He loved thus to hug his misery insolitude, while he whispered to his heart, "You are a courageous fellow,Paul Kellett; there are not many who could carry your cheerful face, orwalk with a head as high as you do to-day. The man that owned Kellett'sCourt, and was one of the first in his county, living in a poor cottage,with sixty pounds a year!--that's the test of what stuff a man's madeof. Show me another man in Ireland could do it! Show me one that couldmeet the world as uncomplainingly, and all the while never cease to bewhat he was born,--a gentleman." This was the philosophy he practised;this the lesson he taught; this the paean he chanted in his own heartThe various extremities to which he might--being anything other thanwhat he was--have been tempted, the excesses he might have fallen into,the low associates he might have kept, the base habits he might havecontracted, all the possible and impossible contingencies that mighthave befallen him, and all his difficulties therein, formed a littlefiction world that he gloried to lose himself in contemplating.It is not often that selfishness can take a form so blameless; nor is italways that self-deception can be so harmless. In this indulgence we nowleave him.CHAPTER V. THE WORLD'S CHANGES.While Mr. Davenport Dunn's residence was in Merrion Square, his houseof business was in Henrietta Street,--one of those roomy old mansionswhich, before the days of the Union, lodged the aristocracy of Ireland,but which have now fallen into utter neglect and decay. Far morespacious in extent, and more ornate in decoration, than anything modernDublin can boast, they remain, in their massive doors of darkmahogany, their richly stuccoed ceilings, and their handsome marblechimney-pieces, the last witnesses of a period when Dublin was a realmetropolis.From the spacious dinner-room below to the attics above, all this vastedifice was now converted into offices, and members of Mr. Dunn's staffwere located even in the building at the rear, where the stables oncehad stood. Nothing can so briefly convey the varied occupations of hislife as a glance at some of the inscriptions which figured on thedifferent doors: "Inland Navigation Office," "Grand Munster JunctionDrainage," "Compressed Fuel Company," "Reclaimed Lands," "EncumberedEstates," "Coast Fishery," "Copper and Cobalt Mining Association,""Refuge Harbor Company," "Slate and Marble Quarries," "Tyrawley andErris Bank of Deposit," "Silver and Lead Mines." These were but a few ofthe innumerable "associations," "companies," and "industrialspeculations" which denoted the cares and employments of that busy head.Indeed, the altered fortunes of that great mansion itself presented nobad type of the changed destinies of the land. Here, once, was the abodeof only too splendid hospitality, of all that refined courtesy andpolished manners could contribute to make society as fascinating as itwas brilliant Here were wit and beauty, and a high, chivalrous tone ofmanners, blended, it is true, with wildest extravagance and a generallevity of thought, that imparted to intercourse the glowing tints of anorgy; and in their stead were now the active signs of industry, all themeans by which wealth is amassed and great fortunes acquired, everyresource of the country explored, every natural advantage consulted anddeveloped,--the mountains, the valleys, the rivers, the sea-coasts, thevast tracts of bog and moss, the various mines and quarries, theproducts once deemed valueless, the districts formerly abandoned asirreclaimable, all brought out into strong light, and all investigatedin a spirit which hitherto had been unknown to Ireland. What a changewas here, and what necessities must have been the fate of those who hadso altered all their habits and modes of thought as to conform to asystem so widely different from all they had hitherto followed! It waslike re-colonizing an empire, so subversive were all the innovations ofwhat had preceded them."Eh, Barton, we used to trip up these stairs more flippantly once on atime," said a very handsome old man, whose well-powdered hair and queuewere rather novelties in modern appearance, to a feeble figure who,assisted by his servant, was slowly toiling his way upwards."How d' ye do, Glengariff?" said the other, with a weak smile. "So weused; and they were better days in every sense of the word.""Not a doubt of it," said the other. "Is that your destination?" And hepointed to a door inscribed with the title "Encumbered Estates.""Ay!" said Barton, sighing."It 's mine, too, I 'm sorry to say," cried Lord Glengariff; "as Isuppose, erelong, it will be that of every country gentleman in theland!""We might have known it must come to this!" muttered the other, in aweak voice."I don't think so," broke in his Lordship, quickly. "I see no occasionat all for what amounts to an act of confiscation; why not give ustime to settle with our creditors? Why not leave us to deal with ourencumbrances in our own way? The whole thing is a regular politicalswindle, Barton; they wanted a new gentry that could be more easilymanaged than the old fellows, who had no station, no rank, but rightready to buy both one and the other by supporting--""Can I be of any service to your Lordship?" interrupted a veryover-dressed and much-gold-chained man, of about forty, with a greatdevelopment of chest, set off to advantage by a very pretentiouswaistcoat."Ah, Hankes! is Dunn come back yet?" asked Lord Glengariff."No, my Lord; we expect him on Saturday. The telegraph is dated St.Cloud, where he is stopping with the Emperor."Glengariff gave Barton a slight pinch in the arm, and a look of intensemeaning at the words."Nothing has been done in that matter of mine?" said Barton, feebly."Jonas Barton is the name," added he, coloring at the necessity ofannouncing himself."Jonas Barton, of Curryglass House?""Yes, that's it.""Sold yesterday, under the Court, sir--for, let me see--" And he openeda small memorandum-book. "Griffith's valuation," muttered he between histeeth, "was rather better than the Commissioner's,--yes, sir, they gota bargain of that property yesterday; it went for twenty-two thousandsix hundred--""Great God, sir; the whole estate?""The whole estate; there is a tithe-rent charge--""There, there, don't you see he does not hear you?" said LordGlengariff, angrily. "Have you no room where he can sit down for halfan hour or so?" And so saying, he assisted the servant to carry the nowlifeless form into a small chamber beside them. The sick man ralliedsoon, and as quickly remembered where he was."This is bad news, Glengariff," said he, with a sickly effort at asmile. "Have you heard who was the buyer?""No, no; what does it matter? Take my arm and get out of this place.Where are you stopping in town? Can I set you down?" said the other, inhurry and confusion."I'm with my son-in-law at Ely Place; he is to call for me here, so youcan leave me, my dear friend, for I see you are impatient to get away."Lord Glengariff pressed his hand cordially, and descended the stairs farmore rapidly than he had mounted them."Lord Glengariff,--one word, my Lord," cried Mr. Hankes, hastening afterhim, and just catching him at the door."Not now, sir,--not now," said Lord Glengariff."I beg a thousand pardons, my Lord, but Mr. Dunn writes me peremptorilyto say that it cannot be effected--""Not raise the money, did you say?" asked he, growing suddenly pale."Not in the manner he proposed, my Lord. If you will allow me toexplain--""Come over to my hotel. I am at Bilton's," said Lord Glengariff. "Callon me there in an hour." And so saying, he got into his carriage anddrove off.In the large drawing-room of the hotel sat a lady working, andoccasionally reading a book which lay open before her. She was tall andthin, finely featured, and though now entered upon that period of lifewhen every line and every tint confess the ravage of time, was stillhandsome. This was Lady Augusta Arden, Lord Glengariff's only unmarrieddaughter, the very type of her father in temperament as well asappearance."By George! it is confiscation. It is the inauguration of that Communismthe French speak of," cried Lord Glengariff, as he entered the room."There 's poor Barton of Curryglass, one of the oldest names in hiscounty, sold out, and for nothing,--absolutely nothing. No man shallpersuade me that this is just or equitable; no man shall tell me thatthe Legislature shall step in and decide at any moment how I am to dealwith my creditors.""I never heard of that Burton.""I said Barton,--not Burton; a man whose estate used to be called fivethousand a year," said he, angrily. "There he is now, turned out on theworld. I verily believe he has n't a guinea left! And what is all thisfor? To raise up in the country a set of spurious gentry,--fellows thatwere never heard of, whose names are only known over shop-boards,--asif the people should be better treated or more kindly dealt with by themthan by us, their natural protectors! By George! if Ireland should swarmwith Davenport Dunns, I 'd call it a sorry exchange for the good bloodshe had lost in exterminating her old gentry.""Has he come back?" asked Lady Augusta, as she bent her head more deeplyover her work, and her cheeks grew a shade more red."No; he's dining with royalties, and driving about in princely carriageson the Continent Seeing what the pleasures of his intimacy have cost ushere at home, I'd say that these great personages ought to look sharp,or, by George! he'll sell them out, as he has done us." He laughed abitter laugh at his jest, but his daughter did not join in the emotion."I scarcely think it fair," said she, at length, "to connect Mr. Dunnwith a legislation which he is only called upon to execute.""With all my heart. Acquit him as much as you will; but, for my part,I feel very little tenderness for the hand that accomplishes the lastfunctions of the law against me. These fellows have displayed a zeal andan alacrity in their work that shows how they relish the sport. Afterall," said he, after a pause, "this Dunn is neither better nor worsethan the rest of them, and in one respect he has the advantage overthem,--he has not forgotten himself quite so much as the others. To besure, we knew him in his very humblest fortunes, Augusta; he was meekenough then."She stooped to pick up her work, which had fallen, and her neck and facewere crimson as she resumed it."Wonderful little anticipation had he then of the man he was to becomeone of these days. Do you know, Augusta, that they say he is actuallyworth two millions?--two millions!"She never spoke; and after an interval Lord Glengariff burst out into astrange laugh."You 'd scarcely guess what I was laughing at, Augusta. I was justremembering the wretched hole he used to sleep in. It was a downrightshame to put him there over the stable, but the cottage was under repairat the time, and there was no help for it. 'I can accommodate myselfanywhere, my Lord,' he said. Egad, he has contrived to fulfil theprediction in a very different sense. Just fancy--two millionssterling!"It was precisely what Lady Augusta was doing at the moment, though,perhaps, not quite in the spirit his Lordship suspected."Suppose even one half of it be true, with a million of money atcommand, what can't a man have nowadays?"And so they both fell a-thinking of all that same great amount of richescould buy,--what of power, respect, rank, flattery, political influence,fine acquaintance, fine diamonds, and fine dinners."If he play his cards well, he might be a peer," thought my Lord."If he be as ambitious as he ought to be, he might aspire to a peer'sdaughter," was the lady's reflection."He has failed in my negotiation, however," said Lord Glengariff,peevishly; "at least, Hankes just told me that it can't be done. Idetest that fellow Hankes. It shows great want of tact in Dunn havingsuch a man in his employment,--a vulgar, self-sufficient, over-dressedfellow, who can't help being familiar out of his own self-satisfaction.Now, Dunn himself knows his place. Don't you think so?"She muttered something not very intelligible, but which sounded likeconcurrence."Yes," he resumed, "Dunn does not forget himself,--at least, with me."And to judge from the carriage of his head as he spoke, and the air withwhich he earned the pinch of snuff to his nose, he had not yet despairedof seeing the world come back to the traditions which once had made itworth living in."I am willing to give him every credit for his propriety of conduct,Augusta," added he, in a still more lofty tone; "for we live in timeswhen really wealth and worldly prosperity have more than their rightfulsupremacy, and such men as Dunn are made the marks of an adulation thatis actually an outrage,--an outrage upon us!"And the last little monosyllable was uttered with an emphasis of intensesignificance.Just as his Lordship had rounded his peroration, the servant presentedhim with a small three-cornered note. He opened it and read,--"My Lord,--I think the bearer of this, T. Driscoll, might possiblydo what you wish for; and I send him, since I am sure that a personalinterview with your Lordship would be more efficacious than anynegotiation."By your Lordship's most obedient to command,"Simpson Hankes.""Is the person who brought this below?" asked Lord Glengariff."Yes, my Lord; he is waiting for the answer.""Show him into my dressing-room."Mr. Terence Driscoll was accordingly introduced into that sanctum;and while he employs his few spare moments in curious and criticalexamination of the various gold and silver objects which contribute tohis Lordship's toilet, and wonderingly snuffs at essences and odors ofwhose existence he had never dreamed, let us take the opportunity of alittle examination of himself. He was a short, fat old man, with avery round red face, whose jovial expression was rather heightened thanmarred by a tremendous squint; for the eyes kept in incessant play andmovement, which intimated a restless drollery that his full, capaciousmouth well responded to. In dress and general appearance he belonged tothe class of the comfortable farmer, and his massive silver watch-chainand huge seal displayed a consciousness of his well-to-do condition inlife."Are you Mr. Driscoll?" said Lord Glengariff, as he looked at the letterto prompt him to the name. "Pray take a seat!""Yes, my Lord, I 'm that poor creature Terry Driscoll; the neighborscall me Tearin' Terry, but that 's all past and gone, Heaven be praised!It was a fever I had, my Lord, and my rayson wandered, and I did manya thing that desthroyed me entirely; I tore up the lease of my house,I tore up Peter Driscoll's, my uncle's, will; ay, and worse than all, Itore up all my front teeth!"And, in evidence of this feat of dentistry, Mr. Driscoll gave a grinthat exposed his bare gums to view."Good heavens, how shocking!" exclaimed Lord Glen-gariff, though, notimpossibly, the expression was extorted by the sight rather than thehistory of the calamity."Shocking indeed, my Lord,--that's the name for it!" said Terry,sighing; "but ye see I was n't compos when I did it. I thought they werea set of blackguards that I could n't root out of the land,--squattersthat would n't pay sixpence, nor do a day's work. That was the delusionthat was upon me!""I hold here a letter from Mr. Hankes," said his Lordship, pompously,and in a tone that was meant to recall Mr. Driscoll from the personalnarrative he had entered upon with such evident self-satisfaction. "Hementions you as one likely--that is to say--one in a position--a person,in fact--""Yes, my Lord, yes," interrupted Terry, with a grin of unboundedacquiescence."And adds," continued his Lordship, "your desire to communicatepersonally with myself." The words were very few and not veryremarkable, and yet Lord Glengariff contrived to throw into them anamount of significance really great. They seemed to say, "Bethink theewell, Terry Driscoll, of the good fortune that this day has befallenthee. Thy boldness has been crowned with success, and there thou sittestnow, being the poor worm that thou art, in converse with one who wears acoronet."And so, indeed, in all abject humility, did Mr. Driscoll appear to feelthe situation. He drew his feet closer together, and stole his hands upthe wide sleeves of his coat, as though endeavoring to diminish, as faras might be, his corporeal presence.His Lordship saw that enough had been done for subjection, and blandlyadded, "And I could have no objection to the interview; none whatever.""It's too good you are, my Lord; too good and too gracious to the likeof me," said Terry, barely raising his eyes to throw a glance of mingledshame and drollery on his Lordship; "but I come by rayson of what Mr.Hankes tould me, that it was a trifle of a loan,--a small matter ofmoney your Lordship was wantin' just at this moment.""I prefer doing these kind of things through my solicitors. I knownothing of business, sir, absolutely nothing," said his Lordship,haughtily. "The present case, however, might form an exception. The sumI require is, as you justly remark, a mere trifle, and the occasion isnot worthy of legal interference.""Yes, my Lord," chimed in Driscoll, who had a most provoking habit ofemploying the affirmative in all situations."I suppose he mentioned to you the amount?" asked his Lordship, quickly."No, indeed, my Lord; all he said was, 'Terry,' says he, 'go over toBilton's Hotel with this note, and ask for Lord Glengariff. He wants alittle ready cash,' says he, 'and I tould him you 're a likely man toget it for him. It's too small a matter for us here,' says he, 'to bebothered about.'""He had n't the insolence to make use of these words towards me!"said Lord Glengariff, growing almost purple with passion."Faix, I 'm afeard he had, my Lord," said Terry, looking down; "but I'm sure he never meant any harm in it; 't was only as much as to say,'There, Terry, there 's something for you; you 're a poor strugglin'man, and are well plazed to turn a penny in a small way. If you canaccommodate my Lord there,' says he, 'he 'll not forget it to you.'"The conclusion of this speech was far more satisfactory to his Lordshipthan its commencement seemed to promise; and Lord Glengariff smiled halfgraciously as he said, "I 'm not in the habit of neglecting those whoserve me.""Yes, my Lord," said Driscoll, again."I may safely say that any influence I possess has always been exercisedin favor of those who have been, so to say, supporters of my family."Had his Lordship uttered a sentiment of the most exalted andself-denying import, he could not have assumed a prouder air than whenhe had finished these words. "And now, Mr. Driscoll, to business. I wantfive thousand pounds--"A long, low whistle from Terry, as he threw up both his hands in theair, abruptly stopped his Lordship."What do you mean? Does the sum appear so tremendous, sir?""Five thousand! Where would I get it? Five thousand pounds? By themortial man! your Lordship might as well ax me for five millions. Ithought it was a hundred; or, maybe, a hundred and fifty; or, at theoutside, two hundred pounds, just to take you over to London for whatthey call the sayson, or to cut a figure at Paris; but, five thousand!By my conscience, that's the price of an estate nowadays!""It is upon estated property I intend to raise this loan, sir," said hisLordship, angrily."Not Cushnacreena, my Lord?" asked Terry, eagerly."No, sir; that is secured by settlement.""Nor Ballyrennin?""No; the townland of Ballyrennin is, in a manner, tied up.""Tory's Mill, maybe?" inquired Terry, with more eagerness."Well, sir," said his Lordship, drawing himself up, "I must reallymake you my compliments upon the very accurate knowledge you appear topossess about my estate. Since what period, may I venture to ask, haveyou conceived this warm interest in my behalf?""The way of it was this, my Lord," said Driscoll, drawing his chaircloser, and dropping his voice to a low, confidential tone. "After I hadthe fever,--the fever and ague I told you about,--I got up out of bedthe poor crayture you see me, not able to think of anything, or do ahand's turn for myself, but just a burden on my friends or anybody thatwould keep me. Well, I tried all manner of ways to make myself useful,and I used to go errands here and there over the country for any onethat wanted to know what land was to be sold, where there was a lotof good sheep, who had a drove of bullocks or a fancy bull; and, justgetting into the habit of it, I larned a trifle of what was doing in thethree counties, so that the people call me 'Terry's Almanack,'--that'sthe name they gave me, better than Tearin' Terry, anyhow! At all events,I got a taste for finding out the secrets of all the great families;and, to be sure, if I only had the memory, I'd know a great deal, but myhead is like a cullender, and everything runs out as fast as you put itin. That's how it is, my Lord, and no lie in it." And Terry wiped hisforehead and heaved a heavy sigh, like a man who had just accomplished avery arduous task."So, then, I begin to understand how Hankes sent you over here to me,"said his Lordship."Yes, my Lord," muttered Terry, with a bow."I had been under the impression--the erroneous impression--that youwere yourself prepared to advance this small sum.""Me! Terry Driscoll lend five thousand pounds! Arrah, look at me, myLord,--just take a glance at me, and you 'll see how likely it is I 'dhave as many shillings! 'T was only by rayson of being always about--onthe tramp, as they call it--that Mr. Hankes thought I could be of use toyour Lordship. 'Go over,' says he, 'and just tell him who and what youare.' There it is now!"Lord Glengariff made no reply, but slowly walked the room in deepmeditation; a passing feeling of pity for the poor fellow before him hadovercome any irritation his own disappointment had occasioned, and forthe moment the bent of his mind was compassionate."Well, Driscoll," said he, at length, "I don't exactly see how you canserve me in this matter.""Yes, my Lord," said Terry, with a pleasant leer of his restless eyes."I say I don't perceive that you can contribute in any way to theobject I have in view," said his Lordship, half peevish at being, as hethought, misapprehended. "Hankes ought to have known as much himself.""Yes, my Lord," chimed in Terry."And you may tell him so from me. He is totally unfitted for hissituation, and I am only surprised that Dunn, shrewd fellow that he is,should have ever placed a man of this stamp in a position of such trust.The first requisite in such a man is to understand the deference he owesto us."There was an emphasis on the last monosyllable that pretty clearlyannounced how little share Terry Driscoll enjoyed in this co-partnery."That because I have a momentary occasion for a small sum of readymoney, he should send over to confer with me a half-witted--I mean a manonly half recovered from a fever--a poor fellow still suffering from--""Yes, my Lord," interposed Terry, as he laid his hand on his forehead intoken of the seat of his calamity."It is too gross,--it is outrageous,--but Dunn shall hear of it,--Dunnshall deal with this fellow when he comes back. I 'm sorry for you,Driscoll,--very sorry indeed; it is a sad bereavement, and though youare not exactly a case for an asylum,--perhaps, indeed, you might haveobjections to an asylum--""Yes, my Lord.""Well, in that case private friends are, I opine--private friends--andthe kind sympathies of those who have known you--eh, don't you thinkso?""Yes, my Lord.""That is the sensible view to take of it. I am glad you see it in thisway. It shows that you really exercise a correct judgment,--a verywise discretion in your case,--and for a man in your situation--yourpainful situation--you see things in their true light.""Yes, my Lord." And this time the eyes rolled with a most peculiarexpression."If you should relapse, however,--if, say, former symptoms were tothreaten again,--remember that I am on the committee, or a governor, orsomething or other, of one of these institutions, and I might be ofuse to you. Remember that, Driscoll." And with a wave of his hand hisLordship dismissed Terry, who, after a series of respectful obeisances,gained the door and disappeared.CHAPTER VI. SYBELLA KELLETT.When change of fortune had reduced the Kelletts so low that Sybella wasdriven to become a daily governess, her hard fate had exacted from herabout the very heaviest of all sacrifices. It was not, indeed, the lifeof unceasing toil,--dreary and monotonous as such toil is,--it was notthe humility of a station for which the world affords not one solitaryprotection,--these were not what she dreaded; as little was it thejarring sense of dependence daily and hourly imposed. No, she hadcourage and a high determination to confront each and all of these. Thegreat source of her suffering was in the loss of that calm and unbrokenquiet to which the retired habits of a remote country-house had so longaccustomed her. With scarcely anything which could be called a societynear them, so reduced in means as to be unable to receive visitors athome, Kellett's Court had been for many years a lonely house. The dayssucceeded each other with such similarity that time was unfelt, seasonscame and went, and years rolled on unconsciously. No sights nor soundsof the great world without invaded these retired precincts. Of themighty events which convulsed the politics of states,--of the greatissues that engaged men's minds throughout Europe,--they heardabsolutely nothing. The passing story of some little incident of cottierlife represented to them all that they had of news; and thus time glidednoiselessly along, till they came to feel a sense of happiness in thatsame unbroken round of life.They who have experienced the measured tread of a conventualexistence--where the same incidents daily recur at the same periods,where no events from without obtrude, where the passions and theambitions and cares of mankind have so little of reality to the mindthat they fail to impress with any meaning--are well aware that in thepeaceful calm of spirit thus acquired there is a sense of happiness,which is not the less real that it wears the semblance of seriousness,almost of sadness.In all that pertained to a sombre monotony, Kellett's Court was aconvent. The tall mountains to the back, the deep woods to the front,seemed barriers against the world without; and there was a silence anda stillness about the spot as though it were some lone island in a vastsea, where no voyagers ever touched, no traveller ever landed. This sameisolation, strong in its own sense of security, was the charm of theplace, investing it with a kind of romance, and imparting to Sybella'sown life a something of storied interest. The very few books the housecontained she had read and re-read till she knew them almost by heart.They were lives of voyagers,--hardy men of enterprise and daring, whohad pushed their fortunes in far-away lands,--or else sketches of lifeand adventure in distant countries.The annals of these sea-rovers were full of all the fascination of whichgorgeous scenery and stirring incident form the charm. There were landssuch as no painter's genius ever fancied, verdure and flowers of morethan fairy brilliancy, gold and gems of splendor that rivalled Aladdin'scave, strange customs, and curious observances mingled with deeds ofwildest daring, making up a succession of pictures wherein the mindalternated between the voluptuous repose of tropical enjoyment and thehair-breadth 'scapes of buccaneering existence. The great men whosegenius planned, and whose courage achieved, these enterprises, formedfor her a sort of hero-worship. Their rough virtues, their splendidhospitality, their lion-hearted defiance of danger, were strong appealsto her sympathy, while in their devoted loyalty she found a species ofchivalry that elevated them in her esteem. Woman-like, too, she inclinedto make success the true test of greatness, and glorified to herselfthose bold spirits who never halted nor turned aside when on theirroad to victory. The splendid self-dependence of such men as Drake andDampier struck her as the noblest attribute of mankind; that resolutetrust in their own stout hearts imparted to them a degree of interestalmost devotional; and over and over did she bethink her what a gloriousdestiny it would have been to have had a life associated and bound upwith some such man as one of these. The very contest and controversy hisactions would have evoked, heightened the illusion, and there savoredof heroism in sharing a fame that flung down its proud defiance to theworld.Estrangement from the world often imparts to the stories of the past, oreven to the characters of fiction, a degree of interest which, by thoseengaged in the actual work of life, is only accorded to their friends orrelatives; and thus, to this young girl in her isolation, such names asRaleigh and Cavendish--such characters as Cromwell, Lorenzo de' Medici,and Napoleon--stood forth before her in all the attributes of well-knownindividuals. To have so far soared above the ordinary accidents of lifeas to live in an atmosphere above all other men,--to have seen the worldand its ways from an eminence that gave wider scope to vision and moreplay to speculation,--to have meditated over the destinies ofmankind from the height of a station that gave control over theiractions,--seemed so glorious a privilege that the blemishes and even thecrimes of men so gifted were merged in the greatness of the mighty taskthey had imposed upon themselves; and thus was it that she claimedfor these an exemption from the judgments that had visited lessdistinguished wrong-doers most heavily. "How can I, or such as I am,pronounce upon one like this man? What knowledge have I of the conflictwaged within his deep intelligence? How can I fathom the ocean of histhoughts, or even guess at the difficulties that have opposed, thedoubts that have beset him? I can but vaguely fashion to myself theend and object of his journey; how, then, shall I criticise the road bywhich he travels, the halts he makes, the devious turnings and windingshe seems to fall into?" In such plausibilities she merged every scrupleas to those she had deified to her own mind. "Their ways are not ourways," said she; "their natures are as little our natures."From all the dreamland of these speculations was she suddenly and rudelybrought to face the battle of life itself, an humble soldier in theranks. No longer to dwell in secret converse with the mighty spiritswho had swayed their fellow-men, she was now to enter upon that pathof daily drudgery whose direst infliction was the contact with thatwork-o'-day world wherewith she had few sympathies.Mrs. Hawkshaw had read her advertisement in a morning paper, and sentfor her to call upon her. Now Mrs. Hawkshaw was an alderman's lady, wholived in a fine house, and had fine clothes and fine servants and fineplate, and everything, in short, fine about her but a fine husband, forhe was a rough, homespun, good-natured sort of man, who cared little foranything save a stocking-factory he owned at Balbriggan, and the stormyincidents that usually shook the "livery" he belonged to.There were six little Hawkshaws to be governed and geographied andcatechised, and civilized in all the various forms by which untaughthumanity is prepared for the future work of life; there were rudimentsof variously colored knowledge to be imparted, habits instilled, andtempers controlled, by one who, though she brought to her task themost sincere desire to succeed, was yet deep in a world of her ownthoughts,--far lost in the mazy intricacies of her own fancies. Thatpoor Miss Kellett, therefore, should pass for a very simple-minded, goodcreature, quite unfit for her occupation, was natural enough; and thatMrs. Hawkshaw should "take her into training" was almost an equallynatural consequence."She seems to be always like one in a dream, my dear," said Mrs.Hawkshaw to her husband. "The children do exactly as they please; theyplay all false, and she never corrects them; they draw landscapes intheir copy-books, and she says, 'Very nicely done, darlings.'""Her misfortunes are preying upon her, perhaps.""Misfortunes! why, they have been in poverty this many a year. Mybrother Terry tells me that the Kelletts had n't above two hundred ayear, and that latterly they lost even this.""Well, it is a come-down in the world, anyhow," said Hawkshaw, sighing,"and I must say she bears it well.""If she only feels it as little as she appears to do everything else,the sacrifice doesn't cost her much," said the lady, tartly. "I told hershe was to come here last Sunday and take charge of the children; shenever came; and when I questioned her as to the reason, she only smiledand said, 'She never thought of it; in fact, she was too happy to bealone on that day to think of anything.' And here she comes now, nearlyan hour late." And, as she spoke, a weary step ascended the steps to thedoor, and an uncertain, faltering hand raised the knocker."It is nigh eleven o'clock, Miss Kellett," said Mrs. Hawkshaw, as shemet her on the stairs."Indeed--I am so sorry--I must have forgotten--I don't think I knew thehour," said the other, stammeringly."Your hour is ten, Miss Kellett.""I think so.""How is your father, Miss Kellett?" asked the alderman, abruptly, andnot sorry to interpose at the juncture."He is well, sir, and seems very happy," said she, gratefully, while hereyes lighted up with pleasure."Give him my regards," said Hawkshaw, good-naturedly, and passed downthe stairs; while his wife coldly added,--"The children are waiting for you," and disappeared.With what determined energy did she address herself now to hertask,--how resolutely devote her whole mind to her duty. She read andheard and corrected and amended with all the intense anxiety of oneeager to discharge her trust honestly and well. She did her very utmostto bring her faculties to bear upon every detail of her task; and itwas only when one of the girls asked who was he whose name she hadbeen writing over and over again in her copy-book, that she forgot herself-imposed restraint, and in a fervor of delight at the question,replied, "I 'll tell you, Mary, who Savonarola was."In all the vigor of true narrative power, the especial gift of thoseminds where the play of fancy is only the adornment of the reasoningfaculty, she gave a rapid sketch of the prophet priest, his zeal, hiscourage, and his martyrdom; with that captivating fascination which isthe firstborn of true enthusiasm, she awakened their interest so deeplythat they listened to all she said as to a romance whose hero had wontheir sympathies, and even dimly followed her as she told them thatsuch men as this stood out from time to time in the world's historylike great beacons blazing on a rocky eminence, to guide and warn theirfellow-men. That in their own age characters of this stamp were eitherundervalued or actually depreciated and condemned, was but the commonlot of humanity; their own great destinies raised them very often abovethe sympathies of ordinary life, and men caught eagerly at the blemishesof those so vastly greater than themselves,--hence all the disesteemthey met with from contemporaries."And are there none like this now, Miss Bella?" asked one of the girls;"or is it that in our country such are not to be met with?""They are of every land and of every age; ay, and of every station!Country, time, birth have no prerogative. At one moment the great lightof the earth has been the noblest born in his nation, at another apeasant,--miles apart in all the accidents of fortune, brothers by thestamp which makes genius a tie of family. To-morrow you shall hear ofone, the noblest-hearted man in all England, and yet whose daily toilwas the vulgar life of an exciseman. This great man's nature is known tous, teaching men a higher lesson than all that his genius has bequeathedus."In the willingness with which they listened to her, Bella found freshsupport for her enthusiasm. If, therefore, there was this solace to theirksome nature of her task, it rendered that task itself more and morewearisome and distasteful. Her round of duty led her amongst many whodid not care for these things; some heard them with apathy, others witheven mockery. How often does it happen in life that feelings which iffreely expanded had spread themselves broadly over the objects of theworld, become by repression compressed into principles!This was the case with her; the more opposition thwarted, the moreresolutely was she bent on carrying out her notions. All her readingtended to this direction, all her speculation, all her thought."There must be men amongst us even now," said she, "to whom this greatprerogative of guidance is given; superior minds who feel the greatnessof their mission, and, perhaps, know how necessary it is to veil theirvery ascendancy, that they may exercise it more safely and more widely.What concession may they not be making to vulgar prejudice, whatsubmission to this or that ordinance of society? How many a deviouspath must they tread to reach that goal that the world will not let themstrive for more directly; and, worse than all, through what a sea ofmisrepresentation, and even calumny, must they wade? How mustthey endure the odious imputations of selfishness, of pride, ofhard-heartedness, nay, perhaps, of even crime? And all this without therecognition of as much as one who knows their purpose and acknowledgestheir desert."CHAPTER VII. AN ARRIVAL AT MIDNIGHT.Night had just closed in over the Lake of Como; and if the characterof the scene in daylight had been such as to suggest ideas of dramaticeffect, still more was this the case as darkness wrapped the wholelandscape, leaving the great Alps barely traceable against the starrysky, while faintly glimmering lights dotted the dark shores from villaand palace, and soft sounds of music floated lazily on the night air,only broken by the plashing stroke of some gondolier as he stole acrossthe lake.The Villa d'Este was a-glitter with light. The great saloon which openedon the water blazed with lamps; the terraces were illuminated withmany-colored lanterns; solitary candles glimmered from the windowsof many a lonely chamber; and even through the dark copses and leafyparterres some lamp twinkled, to show the path to those who preferredthe scented night air to the crowded and brilliant assemblage withindoors. The votaries of hydropathy are rarely victims of gravemalady. They are generally either the exhausted sons and daughters offashionable dissipation, the worn-out denizens of great cities, orthe tired slaves of exciting professions,--the men of politics, ofliterature, or of law. To such as these, a life of easy indolence, theabsence of all constraint, the freedom which comes of mixing with asociety where not one face is known to them, are the chief charms; and,with that, the privilege of condescending to amusements and intimaciesof which, in their more regular course of life, they had not evenstooped to partake. To English people this latter element was noinconsiderable feature of pleasure. Strictly defined as all the ranks ofsociety are in their own country,--marshalled in classes so rigidly thatnone may move out of the place to which birth has assigned him,--theyfeel a certain expansion in this novel liberty, perhaps the one solenew sensation of which their natures are susceptible. It was in theenjoyment of this freedom that a considerable party were now assembledin the great saloons of the villa. There were Russians and Austriansof high rank, conspicuous for their quiet and stately courtesy; a noisyFrenchman or two; a few pale, thoughtful-looking Italians, men whosenoble foreheads seem to promise so much, but whose actual lives appearto evidence so little; a crowd of Americans, as distinctive and asmarked as though theirs had been a nationality stamped with centuries oftransmission; and, lastly, there were the English, already presentedto our reader in an early chapter,--Lady Lackington and her friend LadyGrace,--having, in a caprice of a moment, descended to see "what thewhole thing was like."[Illustration: 98]"No presentations, my Lord, none whatever," said Lady Lackington, asshe arranged the folds of her dress, on assuming a very distinguishedposition in the room. "We have only come for a few minutes, and don'tmean to make acquaintances.""Who is the little pale woman with the turquoise ornaments?" asked LadyGrace."The Princess Labanoff," said his Lordship, blandly bowing."Not she who was suspected of having poisoned--""The same.""I should like to know her. And the man,--who is that tall, dark man,with the high forehead?""Glumthal, the great Frankfort millionnaire.""Oh, present him, by all means. Let us have him here," said LadyLackington, eagerly. "What does that little man mean by smirking in thatfashion,--who is he?" asked she, as Mr. O'Reilly passed and repassedbefore her, making some horrible grimaces that he intended to haverepresented as fascinations."On no account, my Lord," said Lady Lackington, as though replying to alook of entreaty from his Lordship."But you 'd really be amused," said he, smiling. "It is about the bestbit of low comedy--""I detest low comedy.""The father of your fair friends, is it not?" asked Lady Grace,languidly."Yes. Twining admires them vastly," said his Lordship, half maliciously."If I might venture--""Oh dear, no; not to me," said Lady Grace, shuddering. "I have littletolerance for what are called characters. You may present your Hebrewfriend, if you like.""He's going to dance with the Princess; and there goes Twining, with oneof my beauties, I declare," said Lord Lackington. "I say, Spicer, whatis that dark lot, near the door?""American trotters, my Lord; just come over.""You know them, don't you?""I met them yesterday at dinner, and shall be delighted to introduceyour Lordship. Indeed, they asked me if you were not the Lord that wasso intimate with the Prince of Wales.""How stupid! They might have known, even without the aid of a Peerage,that I was a schoolboy when the Prince was a grown man. The tall girl isgood-looking; what's her name?""She's the daughter of the Honorable Leonidas Shinbone, that's all Iknow,--rather a belle at Saratoga, I fancy.""Very dreadful!" sighed Lady Grace, fanning herself; "they do make sucha mess of what might be very pretty toilette. You could n't tell her,perhaps, that her front hair is dressed for the back of the head.""No, sir; I never play at cards," said Lord Lackington, stiffly, as anAmerican gentleman offered him a pack to draw from."Only a little bluff or a small party of poker," said the stranger, "forquarter dollars, or milder, if you like it."A cold bow of refusal was the reply."I told you he was the Lord," said a friend, in a drawling accent "Helooks as if he 'd 'mow us all down like grass.'"Dr. Lanfranchi, the director of the establishment, here interposed, and,by a few words, induced the Americans to retire and leave the othersunmolested."Thank you, doctor," said Lady Lackington, in acknowledgment; "your tactis always considerate,--always prompt.""These things never happen in the season, my Lady," said he, with a veryslight foreign accentuation of the words. "It is only at times like thisthat people--very excellent and amiable people, doubtless--""Oh, to be sure they are," interrupted she, impatiently; "but let usspeak of something else. Is that your clairvoyant Princess yonder?""Yes, my Lady; she has just revealed to us what was doing at the Crimea.She says that two of the English advanced batteries have slackened theirfire for want of ammunition, and that a deserter was telling Todleben ofthe reason at the moment She is en rapport with her sister, who is nowat Sebastopol.""And are we to be supposed to credit this?" asked my Lord."I can only aver that I believe it, my Lord," said Lanfranchi,whose massive head and intensely acute features denoted very littleintellectual weakness."I wish you 'd ask her why are we lingering so long in this drearyplace?" sighed Lady Lackington, peevishly."She answered that question yesterday, my Lady," replied he, quietly."How was that? Who asked her? What did she say?""It was the Baron von Glum that asked; and her answer was, 'Expecting adisappointment.'""Very gratifying intelligence, I must say. Did you hear that, my Lord?""Yes, I heard it, and I have placed it in my mind in the same categoryas her Crimean news.""Can she inform us when we are to get away?" asked her Ladyship."She mentioned to-morrow evening as the time, my Lady," said the doctor,calmly.A faint laugh of derisive meaning was Lady Lackington's only reply; andthe doctor gravely remarked: "There is more in these things than we liketo credit; perhaps our very sense of inferiority in presence of suchprediction is a bar to our belief. We do not willingly lend ourselves toa theory which at once excludes us from the elect of prophecy.""Could she tell us who'll win the Derby?" said Spicer, joining thecolloquy. But a glance from her Ladyship at once recalled him from theindiscreet familiarity."Do you think she could pronounce whose is the arrival that makes sucha clatter outside?" said Lord Lackington, as a tremendous chorus ofwhip-cracking announced the advent of something very important; andthe doctor hurried off to receive the visitor. Already a largetravelling-carriage, drawn by eight horses, and followed by a "fourgon"with four, had drawn up before the great entrance, and a courier,gold-banded and whiskered, and carrying a most imposingly swollenmoney-bag, was ringing stoutly for admittance. When Dr. Lanfranchi hadexchanged a few words with the courier, he approached the window of thecarriage, and, bowing courteously, proceeded to welcome the traveller."Your apartments have been ready since the sixteenth, sir; and we hopedeach day to have seen you arrive.""Have your visitors all gone?" asked the stranger, in a low quiet tone."No, sir; the fine weather has induced many to prolong their stay. Wehave the Princess Labanoff, Lord Lackington, the Countess Grembinski,the Duke of Terra di Monte, the Lady Grace--"The traveller, however, paid little attention to the Catalogue, but withthe aid of the courier on one side and his-valet on the other, slowlydescended from the carriage. If he availed himself of their assistance,there was little in his appearance that seemed to warrant its necessity.He was a large, powerfully built man, something beyond the prime oflife, but whose build announced considerable vigor. Slightly stooped inthe shoulders, the defect seemed to add to the fixity of his look,for the head was thus thrown more forward, and the expression of thedeep-set eyes, overshadowed by shaggy gray eyebrows, rendered morepiercing and direct His features were massive and regular, theircharacter that of solemnity and gravity; and as he removed his cap,he displayed a high, bold forehead with what phrenologists would havecalled an extravagant development of the organs of locality. Indeed,these overhanging masses almost imparted an air of retreating to a headthat was singularly straight."A number of letters have arrived for you, and you will find them inyour room, sir," continued Lanfranchi, as he escorted him towards thestairs. A quiet bow acknowledged this speech, and the doctor went on: "Iwas charged with a message from Lord Lackington, too, who desired me tosay that he hoped to see you as soon as possible after your arrival. MayI inform him when you could receive him?""Not to-night; some time to-morrow, about twelve o'clock, or half-past,if that will suit him," said the stranger, coldly. "Is Baron Glumthalhere? Well, tell him to come up to me, and let them send me some tea.""May I mention your arrival to his Lordship, for I know his greatanxiety?""Just as you please," said the other, in the same quiet tone; while hebowed in a fashion to dismiss his visitor.Having glanced casually at the addresses of a number of letters, he onlyopened one or two, and looked cursorily over their contents; and thenopening a window which looked over the lake, he placed a chair on thebalcony and sat down, as if to rest and reflect in the fresh and stillnight air. It was a calm and quiet atmosphere,--not a leaf stirred, nota ripple moved the glassy surface of the lake; so that, as he sat, hecould overhear Dr. Lanfranchi's voice beneath announcing his arrival toLord Lackington."If he can receive Glumthal, why can't he see me?" asked the Viscount,testily. "You must go back and tell him that I desire particularly tomeet him this evening.""If you wish, my Lord--""I do, sir," repeated he, more peremptorily. "Lady Lackington and myselfhave been sojourning here the last three weeks, awaiting this arrival,and I am at a loss to see why our patience is to be pushed further. Praytake him my message, therefore."The doctor, without speaking, left the room at once.Lanfranchi was some minutes in the apartment before he discoveredwhere the stranger was sitting, and then approaching him softly hecommunicated his Lordship's request."I am afraid you must allow me to take my own way. I have contractedan unfortunate habit in that respect," said the stranger, with a quietsmile. "Give my compliments to his Lordship, and say that at twelveto-morrow I am at his orders; and tell Baron Glumthal that I expect himnow."Lanfranchi withdrew; and having whispered the message to the Baron,proceeded to make his communication to the Viscount."Very well, sir," said Lord Lackington, haughtily interrupting;"something like an apology. Men of this sort have a business-likestandard even for their politeness, and there is no necessity for me toteach them something better;" and then, turning to Twining, he added,"That was Dunn's arrival we heard awhile ago.""Oh, indeed! Very glad,--quite rejoiced on your account more than myown. Dunn--Dunn; remarkable man--very," said Twining, hurriedly."Thank Heaven! we may be able to get away from this place to-morrow ornext day," said Lord Lackington, sighing drearily."Yes, of course; very slow for your Lordship--no society--nothing todo.""And the weather beginning to break?" said Lord Lackington, peevishly."Just so, as your Lordship most justly observes,--the weather beginningto break.""Look at that troop of horses," said the Viscount, as the postilionspassed beneath the window in a long file with the cattle just releasedfrom the travelling-carriages. "There goes ten--no, but twelve posters.He travels right royally, doesn't he?""Very handsomely, indeed; quite a pleasure to see it," said Twining,gleefully."These fellows have little tact, with all their worldly shrewdness, orthey 'd not make such ostentatious display of their wealth.""Quite true, my Lord. It is indiscreet of them.""It is so like saying, 'This is our day! '" said the Viscount."So it is, my Lord; and a very pleasant day they have of it, I must say;clever men--shrewd men--know the world thoroughly.""I 'm not so very sure of that, Twining," said his Lordship, smilinghalf superciliously. "If they really had all the worldly knowledge youattribute to them, they 'd scarcely venture to shock the feelings ofsociety by assumptions of this sort They would have more patience,Twining,--more patience.""So they would, my Lord. Capital thing,--excellent thing, patience;always rewarded in the end; great fun." And he rubbed his hands andlaughed away pleasantly."And they'll defeat themselves, that's what will come of it, sir," saidLord Lackington, not heeding the other's remark."I quite agree with your Lordship," chimed in Twining."And shall I tell you why they 'll defeat themselves, sir?""Like it of all things; take it as a great favor on your Lordship'spart.""For this reason, Twining, that they have no 'prestige,'--no, Twining,they have no prestige. Now, sir, wealth unassociated with prestigeis just like--what shall I say?--it is, as it were, a sort of localrank,--a kind of thing like being brigadier in the Bombay Army, but onlya lieutenant when you 're at home; so long, therefore, as these fellowsare rich, they have their influence. Let them suffer a reverse offortune, however, and where will they be, sir?""Can't possibly say; but quite certain your Lordship knows,--perfectlysure of it," rattled out Twining."I do, sir. It is a subject on which I have bestowed considerablethought. I may go further, and say, one which I have reduced to a sortof theory. These men are signs of the times,--emblems of our era;just like the cholera, the electric telegraph, or the gold-fields ofAustralia. We must not accept them as normal, do you perceive? They arethe abnormal incidents of our age.""Quite true, most just, very like the electric telegraph!" mutteredTwining."And by that very condition only exercising a passing influence on oursociety, sir," said his Lordship, pursuing his own train of thought."Perfectly correct, rapid as lightning.""And when they do pass away, sir," continued the Viscount, "they leaveno trace of their existence behind them. The bubble buret, the surfaceof the stream remains without a ripple. I myself may live to see; you,in all probability, will live to see.""Your Lordship far more likely,--sincerely trust as much," said Twining,bowing."Well, sir, it matters little which of us is to witness the extinctionof this Plutocracy." And as his Lordship enunciated this last word, hewalked off like one who had totally exhausted his subject.CHAPTER VIII. MR. DUNN.MR. Davenport Dunn sat at breakfast in his spacious chamber overlookingthe Lake of Como. In addition to the material appliances of that meal,the table was covered with newly arrived letters, and newspapers, maps,surveys, railroad sections, and Parliamentary blue-books littered about,along with chalk drawings, oil miniatures, some carvings in box andivory, and a few bronzes of rare beauty and design. Occasionallyskimming over the newspapers, now sipping his tea, or now examining someobject of art through a magnifier, he dallied over his meal like one whofelt the time thus passed a respite from the task of the day. At lasthe walked out, and, leaning over the balcony, gazed at the gloriouslandscape at his feet. It was early morning, and the great masses ofmisty clouds were slowly beginning to move up the Alps, disclosingas they went spots of bright green verdure, dark-sided ravines andcataracts, amid patches of pine forest, or dreary tracts of snow stilllying deep in the mountain clefts. Beautiful as was the picture of thelake itself, and the wooded promontories along it, his eyes never turnedfrom the rugged grandeur of the Alpine range, which he continued to gazeat for a long time. So absorbed was he in his contemplation, that henever noticed the approach of another, and Baron Glumthal was alreadyleaning over the balustrade beside him ere he had perceived him."Well, is it more assuring now that you have looked at it?" asked theGerman, in English, of which there was the very slightest trace of aforeign accent."I see nothing to deter one from the project," said Dunn, slowly. "Thesequestions resolve themselves purely into two conditions,--time andmoney. The grand army was only a corporal's guard, multiplied byhundreds of thousands.""But the difficulties--""Difficulties!" broke in Dunn; "thank Heaven for them, Baron, or you andI would be no better off in this world than the herd about us. Strongheads and stout hearts are the breaching artillery of mankind,--you canfind rank and file any day.""When I said difficulties, I might have used a stronger word.""And yet," said Dunn, smiling, "I'd rather contract to turn the Alpsyonder, than to drive a new idea into the heads of a people. See here,now," said he, entering the room, and returning with a large plan in hishand, "this is Chiavenna. Well, the levels show that a line drawnfrom this spot comes out below Andeer, at a place called Mhlen,--thedistance something less than twenty-two miles. By Brumall's contract,you will perceive that if he don't meet with water--""But in that lies the whole question," broke in the other."I know it, and I am not going to blink it. I mean to take thealternatives in turn.""Shall I spare you a deal of trouble, Dunn?" said the German, laying hishand on his arm. "Our house has decided against the enterprise. I haveno need to explain the reasons.""And can you be swayed by such counsels?" cried Dunn, eagerly. "Isit possible that you will suffer yourselves to be made the dupes of aRussian intrigue?""Say, rather, the agents of a great policy," said Glumthal, "and youwill be nearer the mark. My dear friend," added he, in a lower and moreconfidential tone, "have I to tell you that your whole latepolicy in England is a mistake, your Crimean war a mistake, your Frenchalliance a mistake, and your present attempt at a reconciliation withAustria the greatest mistake of all?""You would find it a hard task to make the nation believe this," saidDunn, smiling."So I might; but not to convince your statesmen of it. They see italready. They perceive even now some of the perils of the coarse theyhave adopted.""The old story. I have heard it at least a hundred times," broke inDunn. "We have been overturning the breakwaters that the ocean mayswamp us. But I tell you, Baron, that the more democratic we grow inEngland, the safer we become. We don't want these alliances we fanciedourselves once in need of. That family compact redounded but little toour advantage.""So it might. But there is another compact now forming, which bodes evenless favorably to you. The Church, by her Concordat, is replacing theold Holy Alliance. You 'll need the aid of the only power that cannot bedrawn into this league,--I mean the only great power,--Russia.""If you will wait till we are so minded, Baron," said Dunn, laughing,"you have plenty of time to help me with my tunnel here." And he pointedto his plans."And where will the world be,--I mean your world and mine,--before thepick of the workman reaches so far?" and he placed his finger onthe Splugen Alps,--"answer me that. What will be the Government ofFrance,--I don't ask who? Where will Naples be? What king will beconvoking the Hungarian Diet? Who will be the Russian viceroy on theDanube?""Far more to the purpose were it if I could tell you how would the Threeper Cents stand," broke in Dunn."I 'm coming to that," said the other, dryly. "No, no," said he, aftera pause; "let us see this unhappy war finished,--let us wait till weknow who are to be partners in the-great game of European politics.Lanfranchi tells me that the French and Russians who meet here cometogether on the best of terms; that intimacies, and even friendships.spring up rapidly between them. This fact, if repeated in DowningStreet, might be heard with some misgiving."Though Dunn affected indifference to this remark, he winced, and walkedto the window to hide his irritation.Immediately beneath where he stood, a trellised vine-walk led down tothe lake, where the boats were usually in waiting; and from this alleynow a number of voices could be heard, although the speakers wereentirely hidden by the foliage. The gay and laughing tones indicateda pleasure-party; and such it was, bent on a picnic to Bellaggio. Somewere loud in praises of the morning, and the splendid promise of theday; others discussed how many boats they should want, and how the partywas to be divided."The Americans with the Russians," said Twining, slapping his legs andlaughing; "great friends--capital allies--what fun! Ourselves and theO'Reillys.--Spicer, look out, and see if they are coming.""And do you mean to say you'll not come?" whispered a very soft voice,after the crowd had passed on."Charmante Molly!" said Lord Lackington, in his most dulcet of accents,"I am quite heart-broken at the disappointment; but when I tell youthat this man has come some hundreds of miles to meet me here,--that thematter is one of deepest importance--""And who is he? Could you make him come too?""Impossible, ma belle. He is quite unsuited to this kind of thing,--amere creature of parchments. The very sight of him would only suggestthoughts of foreclosing mortgages and renewal fines.""How I hate him!""Do, dearest,--hate him to your heart's content,--and for nothing morethan the happiness of which he robs me.""Well, I 'm sure, I did think--" And she stopped, and seemed confused."And what, pray, was it that you did think?" said his Lordship, mostwinningly."I thought two things, then, if you must know," said she, archly:"first, that a great personage like your Lordship would make a verysmall one like this Mr. Dunn understand it was his duty to await yourconvenience; and my second thought was--But perhaps you don't care tohear it?""Of all things. Pray go on.""Well, then, my second was that if I asked you to come, you'd not refuseme.""What an inexorable charmer it is!" cried he, in stage fashion. "Do youfancy you could ever forgive yourself if, yielding to this temptation, Iwere really to miss this man?""You told me yourself, only yesterday," said she, "ce que femmeveut--Besides, you'll have him all day tomorrow, and the next, and--""Well, so be it. See how I hug my chains!" said he, drawing her armwithin his, and moving on towards the boat."Were you to be of that party, Baron?" asked Dunn, pointing to the crowdbeside the lake."So I was. The Princess engaged me last night; they are going to thePlinniana and Bellaggio. Why not join us?""Oh, I have a score of letters to write, and double as many to read. Infact, I have kept all my work for a quiet day in this nice tranquil spotI wish I could take a week here.""And why not do it? Have n't you yet learned that it is the world's dutyto wait on us? For my own part, I have always found that one emergesfrom these secluded places with renewed energy and awakened vigor. Iheard Stadeon once say that when anything puzzled him, he went to passa day at Maria Zell, and he never came away without hitting on thesolution. They are beckoning to me; so good-bye!""Anything puzzled him!" muttered Dunn, repeating the words of theother's story. "If he but knew that what puzzles me at this moment ismyself!"The very nature of the correspondence that then littered his table mightwell warrant what he felt. Who, and what was he, to whom great ministerswrote confidentially, and secretaries of state began, "My dear Dunn"?How had he risen to this eminence? What were the gifts by which he held,and was to maintain it? Most men who have attained to high station fromsmall beginnings, have so conformed to the exigencies of each newchange in life as to carry but little of what they started with to theirposition of eminence; gradually assimilating to the circumstances aroundthem as they went, they flung the past behind them, only occupied withthose qualities which should fit them for the future. Not so DavenportDunn: he was ever present to his own eyes as the son of the veryhumblest parentage; as the poor boy educated by charity, strugglingdrearily through years of poverty,--the youth discouraged and slighted,the man repulsed and rejected. Certain incidents of his life never lefthim; there they were, as if photographed on his heart; and at will hecould behold himself as he was turned away ignominiously from Kellett'shouse; or a morning scarce less sad, as he learned his rejection for thesizarship; or the day still more bitter that Lord Glengariff put him outof doors, with words of insult and shame. Like avenging spirits, thesememories travelled with him wherever he journeyed. They sat beside himas he dined at great men's tables; they loitered with him in his lonelywalks, and whispered into his ear in the dark hours of the night. Nohigh-hearted hope, no elevating self-reliance, had sustained him throughthese youthful reverses; each new failure, on the contrary, seemed tohave impressed him more and more strongly with the conviction that thegifts which win success in life had not been vouchsafed him; that hisabilities were of that humble order which never elevate their possessorabove mere mediocrity; that if he meant to strive for the great prizesof life, it must be less by addressing himself to great intellectualefforts than by a patient study of men themselves,--of their frailties,their weaknesses, and their follies. Whatever he had seen of the worldhad shown him how invariably the greatest minds were alloyed withsome deteriorating influence, and that passions of one kind or other,ambitions more or less worthy, even the subtlety of flattery, swayedthose whose intellects soared loftily among their fellows. "I cannotshare in the tilt with these," said he. "Mine are no gifts of eloquenceor imaginative power; I am not versed in the mysteries of science, nordeep-read in the intricacies of law. Let me, however, see if I cannot,by dexterity, accomplish what is denied to my strength. Every man,whatever his station, covets wealth. The noblest and the meanest, theman dignified by exalted aspirations, the true creature of selfishenjoyments, are all alike enlisted in the pursuit. Let me consider howthis common tendency may be best turned to account. To enrich others,it is not necessary that I should be wealthy myself. The geographer maysafely dictate the route by which the explorer is to journey through adesert he has never travelled himself. The great problems of financecan be worked by suggestions in a garret, though their application maydemand millions." Starting thus from an humble attorney in a countrytown, he gradually grew to be known as a most capable adviser in allmonetary matters. Rich men consulted him about profitable investmentsand safe employment of their capital; embarrassed men confided to himtheir difficulties, and sought his aid to meet them; speculators askedhis advice as to this or that venture; and even those who gambled onthe eventful fortunes of a ministry were fain to be guided by his wisepredictions. "Dunn has got me the money on reasonable terms;" "Dunnhas managed to let me have five per cent;" "Dunn assures me I may riskthis;" "Dunn tells me that they 'll carry the bill next session,"--suchand such things were the phrases one heard at every turn, till hisopinion became a power in the land, and he grew to feel it so.This first step led to another and higher one. Through the moneyedcircumstances of men he came to learn their moral natures: against whattemptations this one was proof; to what that other would yield; whatwere the goals for which each was striving; what the secret doubts andmisgivings that beset them. What the doctor was to the world of sicknessand infirmity did he become to the world of human passion and desire.Men came to him with the same unreserve; they stripped before him andlaid bare the foul spots of their heart's disease, as though it werebut repeating the story to themselves. Terrible and harrowing as are thetales which reach the physician's ears, the stories revealed to his weremore terrible and harrowing still. They came to him with narratives ofreckless waste and ruin; with histories of debt that dated a centuryback; with worse, far worse,--with tales of forgery and fraud. Crimesfor which the law would have exacted its last expiation were whisperedto him in that dreary confessional, his private office, and theevidences of guilt placed in his hands that he might read and reflectover them. And as the doctor moves through life with the sad knowledgeof all the secret suffering around him,--how little that "flush"indicates of health, how faintly beats the heart that seems to swellwith happiness,--so did this man walk a world that was a mere hospitalward of moral rottenness. Why should the priest and the physician be theonly men to trade upon the infirmities of human nature? Why should theybe the sole depositaries of those mysteries by which men's actions canbe swayed and moulded? By what temptations are men so assailable asthose that touch their material fortunes, and why not make this moralcountry an especial study? Such were his theory and his practice.There is often a remarkable fitness--may we call it a "pre-establishedharmony"?--between men and the circumstances of their age, and this hasled to the opinion that it is by the events themselves the agents aredeveloped; we incline to think differently, as the appearance of bothtogether is rather in obedience to some over-ruling edict of Providencewhich has alike provided the work and the workmen. It would be a shallowreading of history to imagine Cromwell the child of the Revolution, orNapoleon as the accident of the battle of the sections.Davenport Dunn sprang into eminence when, by the action of theEncumbered Estates Court, a great change was operated in the conditionof Ireland. To grasp at once the immense consequences of a tremendoussocial revolution--to foresee even some of the results of this sweepingconfiscation--required no common knowledge of the country, and no smallinsight into its habits. The old feudalism that had linked the fate ofa starving people with the fortunes of a ruined gentry was to beextinguished at once, and a great experiment tried. Was Ireland to bemore governable in prosperity than in adversity? This was a problemwhich really might not seem to challenge much doubt, and yet was it byno means devoid of difficulty to those minds who had long based theirideas of ruling that land on the principles of fomenting its dissensionsand separating its people. Davenport Dunn saw the hesitation of themoment, and offered himself at once to solve the difficulty. Thetransfer of property might be conducted in such a way as to favor theviews of a particular party in the state; the new proprietary might beselected, and the aim of a government consulted in the establishmentof this new squirearchy. He thought so, at least, and, what is more, hepersuaded a chief secretary to believe him.Nothing reads more simply than the sale of an encumbered estate: "In thematter of Sir Roger O'Moore, Bart, Brian O'Moore, and Margaret Halliday,owners, and Paul May-bey, petitioner, the Commissioners will, on Fridaynext, at the hour of noon,"--and so on; and then come the descriptiveparticulars of Carrickross, Dummaymagan, and Lantygoree, withGriffith's valuation and the ordnance survey, concluding with a recitalof all the penalties, reservations, covenants, clauses, &c., with themodest mention of twenty-odd pounds some shillings tithe-rent charge,for a finish. To dispossess of this a man that never really owned it forthe last forty years, and invest it in another, who never saw it,was the easy operation of the auctioneer's hammer; and with a chiefcommissioner to ratify the sale, few things seemed easier than thewhole process. Still, there are certain aspects in the transaction whichsuggest reflection. What were the ties, what the relations, between theoriginal owner and the tenantry who held under him? What kind of socialsystem had bound them,--what were the mutual services they rendered eachother? For the reverence and respect tendered on one side, and for thethousand little charities and kindnesses bestowed on the other, whatwas to be the compensation? How was that guidance and direction, moreor less inherent in those who are the heads of a neighborhood, to bereplaced? Was it quite certain that the incoming proprietor would careto study the habits, the tastes, and the tempers of the peasantry on hisestate, learn their ways, or understand their difficulties? And, lastly,what new political complexion would the country wear? Would it becomemore Conservative or more Whig, more Democratic or more Saxon?Davenport Dunn's opinion was that the case was precisely that of anew colony, where the first settlers, too busy about their materialinterests to care for mere speculative questions, would attachthemselves heartily to any existing government, giving their adhesionto whatever afforded protection to their property and safety to theirlives. "Take this new colony," said he, "into your especial care, andtheir sons and grandsons will be yours after-wards. A new regiment isbeing raised; write your own legends on their colors, and they are yourown." He sketched out a system by which this new squirearchy was to bedealt with,--how courted, flattered, and rewarded. He showed how, inattaching them to the State, the government of the country mightbe rendered more easy, and the dreaded influence of the priest beantagonized most effectually; and, finally, demonstrated that Ireland,which had been the stereotyped difficulty of every administration, mightnow be turned into a stronghold against opposition.To replace the great proprietary whose estates were now in the marketby a new constituency in accordance with his views was, therefore,his general scheme, and he addressed himself to this task with all hispeculiar energy. He organized the registry of all the encumberedestates of Ireland, with every detail which could illustrate the variousadvantages; he established an immense correspondence with Englishcapitalists eager for new investments; he possessed himself of intimateknowledge of all the variations and fluctuations which attend the moneymarket at certain periods, so that he knew the most favorable momentsto suggest speculation; and, lastly, he had craft enough to carry hissystem into operation without any suspicion being attached to it; andwas able to say to a Viceroy, "Look and judge for yourself, my Lord,whose influence is now paramount in Ireland."Truly, it was not easy for a government to ignore him; his name turnedup at every moment. From the stirring incident of a great countyelection to the small contest for a poor-law guardianship, he figuredeverywhere, until every question of policy became coupled with theinevitable demand, "What does Dunn think of it?"Like all men of strong ambition, he encouraged few or no intimacies; hehad actually no friendships. He wanted no counsels; nor would hehave stooped to have laid a case for advice before any one. Partly inconsequence of this, he was spoken of generally in terms of depreciationand discredit. Some called him lucky,--a happy phrase that adaptsitself to any fancy; some said he was a commonplace, vulgar fellow, withcertain business aptitudes, but quite incapable of any wide or extendedviews; some, again, went further, and said he was the mere tool ofcertain clever heads that did not care to figure in the foreground; andnot a few wondered that "a man of this kind" should have ever attainedto any eminence or station in the land."You 'll see how his Excellency will turn him to account; he knows howto deal with fellows of this stamp," said a private secretary in theCastle."I have no doubt, sir, Mr. Davenport Dunn would agree with you," saidthe Attorney-General, with a sneer; "but the opinion would be bad inlaw!""He 's not very much of a churchman, I suspect," whispered a bishop;"but we find him occasionally useful.""He serves our purpose!" pompously spoke a country gentleman, whoreally, in the sentiment, represented a class.Such was the man who now sat alone, communing with himself, in his roomat the Villa d'Este. Let us believe that he had enough to think of.CHAPTER IX. A DAY ON THE LAKE OF COMO.We fully sympathize with Lord Lackington, who preferred the picnicand the society of Miss Molly O'Reilly to the cares of business and aninterview with Davenport Dunn. The Lake of Como, on a fine day of summeror early autumn, and with a heart moderately free from the anxieties andsorrows of life, is a very enjoyable locality, and essentially so toa man of the world like the noble Viscount, who liked to have the moreromantic features of the scene blended with associations of easeand pleasure, and be able to turn from the contemplation of Alpineruggedness to the sight of some terraced garden, glowing in theluxuriance of its vegetation. Never, perhaps, was there ever a spot socalculated to appeal successfully to the feelings of men of his stamp.There was mountain grandeur and desolation, snow-peak and precipice; butall in the back distance, not near enough to suggest even the fearof cold, or the disagreeable idea of a sledge journey. There wereinnumerable villas of every style and class,--some spacious and splendidenough for royal residences; others coquettish little chalets, wherelovers might pass the honeymoon. There were tasteful pavilions over thevery lake; snug spots where solitude might love to ponder, a studentread, or an idler enjoy his cigar, in the most enviable of scenes.Trellised vine-walks zigzagged up the hills to some picturesque shrinewhose modest little spire rose above the olive-trees, or some rudesteps in the rock led down to a little nook, whole white sands glistenedbeneath the crystal waters,--such a bath as no Sybarite, in all his mostglowing fancy, ever imagined. And amid all and through all there wasthat air of wealth--that assurance of affluence and abundance--whichcomes so home to the hearts of men whose sense of enjoyment can only begratified where there is to be no sacrifice to their love of ease.In the noble Viscount's estimation, the place was perfect It was evenassociated with the solitary bit of romance of his whole life. It washere that he passed the first few weeks after his wedding; and though hehad preserved very little of those feelings which imparted happinessto that period, though her Ladyship did not recall to his mind theattractions which once had fascinated him,--new glazed and new lacqueredover and over again as was the vase, "the scent of the roses had clungto it still," The distance that lends enchantment to the material hasalso its influence on the moral picture. Memory softens and subdues manya harsh tint, mellows many an incongruity, and blends into a pleasantharmony many things which in their proximity were the reverse ofagreeable. Not that we would be understood to say that Lord Lackington'shoneymoon was not like yours, an elysium of happiness and bliss;we would simply imply that, in recalling it, he only remembered therose-tints, and never brought up one of the shadows. He had, in his ownfashion, poetized that little episode of his life, when, dressed ina fancy and becoming costume, he played gondolier to his young bride,scaled the mountain to fetch her Alp-roses, and read aloud "ChildeHarold," as he interpolated Harrow recollections of its author. Not oneof these did he now remember; he'd as soon have dreamed of being markerat a billiard table as of playing the barcarole; and as to mountainexcursions he 'd not have bargained for any success that required theexertion of a steep staircase."There 's a little villa in a bay somewhere hereabouts," said he, as theboat glided smoothly along; "I should like much to show it to you." Thiswas addressed to Molly O'Reilly, who sat beside him. "Do you happen toknow La Pace?" asked he of one of the boatmen."To be sure I do, Eccellenza. Who doesn't? My own father was barcarolethere to a great Milordo, I can't say how many years back. Ah," addedhe, laughing, "what stories he used to have of that same Milordo,who was always dressing himself up to be as a gondolier or achamois-hunter.""We have n't asked for your father's memoirs, my good fellow; we onlywanted you to show us where La Pace lies," said the Viscount, testily."There it is, then, Eccellenza," said the man, as they rounded a littlepromontory of rock, and came in full view of a small cove, in the centreof which stood the villa.Untenanted and neglected as it was, there was yet about it that gloriousluxuriance of vegetation, that rare growth of vines and olive andoleander and cactus which seems to more than compensate all the careand supervision of men. The overloaded orange-trees dipped their wearybranches in the lake, where the golden balls rose and fell as the watersurged about them. The tangled vines sprawled over the ground, stainingthe deep grass with their purple blood. Olive berries lay deep around,and a thousand perfumes loaded the air as the faint breeze stirred it."Let me show you a true Italian villa," said the Viscount, as the boatglided up to the steps cut in the marble rock. "I once passed a fewweeks here; a caprice seized me to know what kind of life it would beto loiter amidst olive groves, and have no other company than the cicalaand the green lizard.""Faith, my Lord," said O'Reilly, "if you could live upon figs andlemons, you 'd have nothing to complain of; but I 'm thinking you foundit lonely.""I scarcely remember, but my impression is, I liked it," said he, with aslight hesitation. "I used to lie under the great cedar yonder, and readPetrarch.""Capital fun--excellent--live here for two hundred a year, or evenless--plenty of fish in the lake--keep the servants on watermelons,"said Twining, slapping his legs, as he made this domestic calculation tohimself."With people one liked about one," said Miss O'Reilly, "I don't see whythis should n't be a delicious spot.""There's not a hundred yards of background. You could n't give ahorse walking exercise here if your life was on it," said Spicer,contemptuously."Splendid grapes, wonderful oranges, finest melons I ever saw,--allgoing to waste too," said Twining, laughing, as if such utter neglectwas a very droll thing. "Get this place a bargain,--might have it for amere nothing.""So you might, O'Reilly," said the Viscount; "it is one of thosedeserted spots that are picked up for a tenth of their value; buyit, fit it up handsomely, and we'll come and spend the autumn withyou,--won't we, Twining?""Upon my life we will, I 'll swear it; be here 1st September to the day,and stay till--as long as you please. Great fun!""Delicious spot to come and repose in from the cares and worries oflife," said Lord Lackington, as he stretched upon a bench and beganpeeling an orange."I 'd get the blue devils in a week; I 'd be found hanging some finemorning--""For shame, papa," broke in Molly. "My Lord says he 'd come on a visitto us, and you know we 'd only be here in the autumn.""Just so--come here for the wine season--get in your olives and lookafter your oil--great fun," chimed in Twining, merrily."I declare, I 'd like it of all things, would not you?" said the eldergirl to Spicer, who had now begun to reflect that there was a kind ofstraw-yard season for men as well as for hunters,--when the great objectwas to live cheap and husband your resources; and as he ruminated overthe lazy quietness of an existence that would cost nothing, when evenhis "Bell's Life" should be inserted amongst the family extraordinaires,he vouchsafed to approve the scheme; and in his mumbling tone, inimitation of Heaven knows what celebrated sporting character, hegrumbled out, "Make the governor go in for it by all means!"Twining had entered into the project most eagerly. One of the mostmarked traits of his singular mind was not merely to enjoy his ownpre-eminence in wealth over so many others, but to chuckle over all thepossible mistakes which he had escaped and they had fallen into. Toknow that there was a speculation whose temptation he had resisted andwhich had engulfed all who engaged in it; to see the bank fail whosedirectorship he had refused, or the railroad smashed whose preferenceshares he had rejected,--this was an intense delight to him; and on suchoccasions was it that he slapped his lean legs most enthusiastically,and exclaimed, "What fun!" with the true zest of enjoyment.To plant a man of O'Reilly's stamp in such a soil seemed, therefore,about the best practical joke he had ever heard of; and so he walkedhim over the villa, discoursing eloquently on all the advantages of theproject,--the great social position it would confer, the place he wouldoccupy in the country, the soundness of the investment, the certainty ofsecuring great matches for the girls. What a view that window opened ofthe Splugen Alps! What a delicious spot, this little room, to sip one'sclaret of an autumn evening! Think of the dessert growing almost intothe very dining-room, and your trout leaping within a yard of thebreakfast-table! Austrians charmed to have you--make you a count--aHof something or other, at once--give you a cross--great fun, eh?--GrafO'Reilly--sound admirably--do it, by all means!While Twining's attack was being conducted in this fashion, LordLackington was not less industriously pursuing his plan of campaignelsewhere. He had sauntered with Molly into the garden and a littlepavilion at the end of it, where the lake was seen in one of its mostpicturesque aspects. It was a well-known spot to him; he had passed manyan evening on that low window-seat, half dreamingly forgetting himselfin the peaceful scene, half consciously recalling pleasant nights atBrookes's and gay dinners at Carlton House. Here was it that he firstgrew hipped with matrimony, and so sated with its happiness that heactually began to long for any little disaster that might dash thesmooth monotony of his life; and yet now, by one of those strange tricksmemory plays us, he fancied that the moments he had once passed here hadnever been equalled in all his after-life."I'm certain, though you won't confess," said she, after one of his mosteloquent bursts of remembered enjoyment,--"I 'm certain you were verymuch in love those days.""An ideal passion, perhaps, a poetized vision of that bright creaturewho should, one day or other, sway this poor heart;" and he flattenedthe creases of his spotless white waistcoat; "but if you mean that Iknew of any, had ever seen any, until now, this very moment--""Stop! remember your promise," said she, laughing."But, charmante Molly, I 'm only mortal," said he, with an air of suchsuperb humility that made her at once remember it was a peer who saidit."Mortals must keep their words," said she, pertly. "The condition onwhich I consented to accept your companionship was--But I need n'tremind you.""No, do not, dear Molly, for I shall be delighted to forget it. You areaware that no law ever obliged a man to do what was impossible; and thatto exact any pledge from him to such an end is in itself an illegality.You little suspected, therefore, that it was you, not I, was thedelinquent.""'All I know is, that you assured me you 'd not--you 'd not talknonsense," said she, blushing deeply, half angry, half ashamed."Oh! never guessed you were here," broke in Twining, as he peepedthrough the window. "Sweet spot--so quiet and secluded--capital fun!""There is such a view from this, papa," said Molly, in some confusionat Twining's bantering look; "come round and see it.""I have just been telling this dear girl of yours, O'Reilly, that youought to make this place your own," said Lord Lackington. "Don't fancyyou 'd be out of the world here. Why, there 's the Villa d'Este,a European celebrity at once; it will be thronged next year tosuffocation. The 'Galignani,' I see, has already mentioned myself andLady Lackington as among the visitors. These things have their effectThe press in our day is an estate.""Indeed, I 'm sure of it. There was a cousin of my wife's drew his twohundred a year out of the 'Tyrawley Express,'--a daily little paper,that, maybe, your Lordship never seen.""When I said an estate, sir, I rather alluded to a recognized conditionof power and influence than to mere wealth. Not, I will add, that I amone of those who approve of this consummation; nor can I see how men ofmy order can ever so regard it.""Well," said O'Reilly, sighing, as though the confession cost something,"there 's nothing equal to a newspaper. I 'm reading 'Saunders' thiseight-and-forty years, and I own to you I never found one I liked somuch. For you see, my Lord, it's the same with a paper as with yourhouse,--you ought to know where to lay your hand on what you want. Now,you might as well put me in Buckingham Palace, and tell me to find mybedroom, as give me the 'Times' and bid me discover the Viceregal Court.If they mention it at all, it 's among the accidents and offences.""Castle festivities--Patrick's Hall--great fun!" said Twining,laughing pleasantly, for he cherished some merry recollections of thesehospitalities."Have you--But of course you were too young for presentation," said hisLordship to Molly."We were n't out; but, in any case, I 'm sure we 'd not have beenthere," said Molly."The pleasure of that presentation may perhaps be reserved for me, whoknows?" said the Viscount, graciously. "If our people come in, it is thepost they 'd offer me.""Lord-Lieutenant!" said Molly, opening her eyes to the fullest."Even so, ma belle. Shall we rehearse the ceremony of presentation?Twining, do you perform the Chamberlain. Stand aside, O'Reilly; bea gentleman at large, or an Ulster King-at-arms. Now for it!" Andso saying, he drew himself proudly up to an attitude of considerabledignity, while Twining, muttering to himself, "What fun!" announcedaloud, "Miss Molly O'Reilly, your Excellency;" at which, and before shewas aware, his Excellency stepped one step in advance, and sainted heron either cheek with a cordiality that covered her with blushes.[Illustration: 124]"That 's not it, at all, I 'm certain," said she, half angrily."On my life, it's the exact ceremony, and no more," said the Viscount.Then resuming the performance, he added, "Take care, Twining, that sheis put on your list for the balls. O'Reilly, your niece is charming.""My niece--sure she 's--""You forget, my worthy friend, that we are enacting Viceroy, and cannotcharge our memory with the ties of kindred."Spicer now came up to say that a thunderstorm was threatening, and thatthe wisest course would probably be to land the luncheon and remainwhere they were till the hurricane should pass over. The proposition wasat once approved of, and the party were soon busily occupying themselvesin the cares for the entertainment; all agreeing that they felt noregret at being separated from the other boat, which had proceeded upthe lake; in fact, as Mr. O'Reilly said, "they were snugger as theywere, without the Roosians,"--a sentiment in various ways acknowledgedby the rest.Strange freemasonry is there in conviviality. The little preparationsfor this picnic dinner disseminated amidst them all the fellowship ofold acquaintance, and, as they assisted and aided each other, a degreeof kindliness grew up that bound them together like a family. Each viedwith each in displaying his power of usefulness and agreeability; eventhe noble Viscount, who actually did nothing what-ever, so simulatedoccupation and activity that he was regarded by all as the very life andsoul of the party. And yet we are unjust in saying he did nothing; forhe it was who, by the happy charm of his manner, the ready tact of aconsummate man of the world, imparted to the meeting its great success.Unused to the agreeable qualities of such men, O'Reilly felt all theastonishment that great conversational gifts inspire, and sat amazed anddelighted at the stores of pleasant stories, witty remarks, and acuteobservations poured out before him.He knew nothing of the skill by which these abilities were guided, norhow, like cunning shopkeepers dressing their wares to most advantage,such men exhibit their qualities with all the artifice of display. Henever suspected the subtle flattery by which he was led to fancy himselfthe intimate of men whose names were freely talked of before him, tillat length the atmosphere of the great world was to him like the air hehad breathed from childhood."How the Prince would have relished O'Reilly!" said the Viscount toTwining, in a whisper easily overheard. "That racy humor, that strongnative common-sense, that vigorous disregard of petty obstacles whereverhe is bent on following out a path,--his royal Highness would haveappreciated all these.""Unquestionably--been charmed with them--thought him mostagreeable--great fun.""You remind me of O'Kelly,--Colonel O'Kelly,--O'Reilly; strange enough,too, each of you should be of that same old Celtic blood. But, perhaps,it is just that very element that gives you the peculiar socialfascination I was alluding to. You are not old enough, Twining, toremember that small house with the bay-windows opening on the BirdcageWalk; it was like a country parsonage dropped down in the midst ofLondon, with honeysuckles over the porch, and peacocks on the lawnin front of it. O'Kelly and Payne lived there together,--the twopleasantest bachelors that ever joined in partnership. The Prince dinedwith them by agreement every Friday. The charm of the thing was nostate, no parade, whatever. It was just as if O'Reilly here were to takethis villa, and say, 'Now, Lackington, I am rich enough to enjoy myself;I don't want the worry and fatigue of hunting out the pleasant peopleof the world; but you know them all, you understand them,--their ways,their wants, and their requirements; just tell me, frankly, could n't wemanage to make this their rallying-spot throughout Europe? Settled downhere in the midst of the most lovely scenery in the world, with agood cook and a good cellar, might not this place become a perfectParadise?'""If I only knew that your Lordship, just yourself alone, and, of course,the present company," added O'Reilly, with a bow round the table, "wouldvouchsafe me the honor of a visit, I'd be proud to be the owner of thisplace to-morrow. Indeed, I don't see why we would n't be as well hereas traipsing over the world in dust and heat. If, then, the girls see noobjection--""I should like it of all things, papa," broke in Miss O'Reilly."I am charmed with the very thought of it," cried Molly."Capital thought--romantic notion--save any amount of money, and notaxes," muttered Twining."There's no approach by land whatever," said Spicer, who foresaw thatall his horse capabilities would receive no development here."All the better," broke in Twining; "no interlopers--no fellowscantering down to luncheon, or driving over to dine--must come by boat,and be seen an hour beforehand.""If I know anything of my friend here," said the Viscount, "his tastewill rather lie in the fashion of a warm welcome than a polite denialto a visitor. You must talk to Lanfranchi about the place to-morrow,O'Reilly. He 's a shrewd fellow, and knows how to go about thesethings.""Faith, my Lord, I see everything in sunshine so long as I sit in suchcompany. It's the very genial kind of thing I like. A few friends--if I'm not taking too great a liberty--""No, by no means, O'Reilly. The esteem I feel for you, and that Twiningfeels for you "--here his Lordship looked over at Spicer and slightlynodded, as though to say, "There is another there who requires no formalmention in the deed "--"are not passing sentiments, and we sincerelydesire they may be accepted as true friendship.""To be sure--unquestionably--great regard--unbounded admiration--whatfun!" muttered Twining, half aloud.The evening wore along in pleasant projects for the future. Spicer hadundertaken to provide workmen and artificers of various kinds to repairand decorate the villa and its grounds. He knew of such a gardener, too;and he thought, by a little bribery and a trip down to Naples, hemight seduce the Prince of Syracuse's cook,--a Sicilian, worth all theFrenchmen in the world for an ultramontane "cuisine." In fact, ere thebright moonlight on the lake reminded them of their journey homeward,they had arranged a plan of existence for the O'Reillys almost Elysianin its enjoyments.Few things develop more imaginative powers than the description of amode of life wherein "money is no object," and wishing and having areconvertible terms. Let a number of people--the least gifted though theybe with the graces of fancy--so picture forth such an existence, andsee how, by the mere multiplication of various tastes, they will end bycreating a most voluptuous and splendid tableau. O'Reilly's counsellorswere rather adepts in their way, and certainly they did not forgetone single ingredient of pleasure; till, when the boat glided into thelittle bay of the D'Este, such a story of a life was sketched out asnothing out of fairy-land could rival."I 'll have it, my Lord; the place is as good as mine this minute," saidO'Reilly, as he stepped on shore; and as he spoke his heart thrilledwith the concentrated delights of a whole life of happiness.CHAPTER X. A "SMALL DINNER"Lady Lackington and Lady Grace Twining passed the morning together.Their husbands' departure on the picnic excursion offered them asuitable subject to discuss those gentlemen, and they improved theoccasion to some purpose.The Viscountess did not, indeed, lean very heavily on her Lord'sfailings; they were, as she described them, the harmless follies ofcertain middle-aged gentlemen, who, despite time and years, would stillbe charming and fascinating. "He likes those little easy conquests heis so sure of amongst vulgar people," said she. "He affects only tobe amused by them, but he actually likes them; and then, as he neverindulges in this sort of thing except in out-of-the-way places, why,there 's no great harm in it."Lady Grace agreed with her, and sighed. She sighed, because she thoughtof her own burden, and how far more heavily it pressed. Twining's wereno little foibles, no small weaknesses; none of his faults had theirroot in any easy self-deceptions. Everything he did or said or thoughtwas maturely weighed and considered; his gay, laughing manner, his easy,light-hearted gesticulation, his ready concurrence in the humor abouthim, were small coin that he scattered freely while he pondered overheavy investments.From long experience of his crafty, double-dealing nature, coupled withsomething very near aversion to him, Lady Grace had grown to believethat in all he said or did some unseen motive lay, and she broughtherself to believe that even his avaricious and miserly habits werepractised still less for the sake of saving than for some ulterior andsecret end.Of the wretched life they led she drew a dreary picture: a mock splendorfor the world, a real misery at home; all the outward semblance ofcostly living, all the internal consciousness of meanness and privation.He furnished houses with magnificence, that he might let them; he setup splendid equipages, that, when seen, they should be sold. "Myvery emeralds," said she, "were admired and bought by the Duchess ofWindermere. It is very difficult to say that there is anything out ofwhich he cannot extract a profit. If my ponies were praised in the park,I knew it was only the prelude to their being at Tattersall's inthe morning; even the camellia which I wore in my hair was turned toadvantage, for it sold the conservatory that raised it. And yet theytell me that if--they say that--I mean--I am told that the law wouldnot construe these as cruelty, but simply a very ordinary exercise ofmarital authority, something unpleasant, perhaps, but not enough towarrant complaint, still less resistance.""But they are cruelties," broke in Lady Lackington; "men in Mr.Twining's rank of life do not beat their wives--""No, they only break their hearts," sighed Lady Grace; "and this, Ibelieve, is perfectly legal.""They were doing, or going to do, something about that t' other dayin the Lords. That dear old man, Lord Cloudeslie, had a bill or anamendment to somebody's bill, by which--I 'm not sure I 'm quite correctabout it--but I believe it gave the wife power to take her settlement.No, that is not it; she was to be able, after five years of greatcruelty--I'm afraid I have no clear recollection of its provisions,but I know the odious Chancellor said it would effectually make womenindependent of men.""Of course it never will become law, then," sighed Lady Grace, again."Who knows, dear? They are always passing something or other they 'resorry for afterwards in either House. Shall I tell you who'd know allabout it?--that Mr. Davenport Dunn. He is just the kind of person tounderstand these things.""Indeed!" exclaimed Lady Grace, with more animation in her manner."Let as ask him to dinner," said Lady Lackington; "I know himsufficiently to do so,--that is, I have met him once. He 'll be charmed,of course; and if there is anything very good and very safe to be doneon the Bourse, he 'll certainly tell us.""I don't care for the Bourse. Indeed, I have nothing to speculate with.""That is the best reason in the world, my dear, to make a venture; atleast, so my brother-in-law, Annesley, says. You are certain to comeout a winner, and in my own brief experiences, I never gave anything,--Ionly said, 'Yes, I 'll have the shares.' They were at fifty-eight andthree-quarters, they said, and sure to be at sixty-four or five; andthey actually did rise to seventy, and then we sold--that is, Dunndid--and remitted me twelve hundred and fifty-three pounds odd.""I wish he could be equally fortunate with me. I don't mean as regardsmoney," said Lady Grace; and her cheek became crimson as she spoke."I have always said there's a fate in these things; and who knows if hisbeing here Just at this moment is not a piece of destiny.""It might be so," said the other, sadly."There," said Lady Lackington, as she rapidly wrote a few lines on apiece of note-paper, "that ought to do:--"'Dear Mr. Dunn,--If you will accept of an early dinner,with Lady Grace Twining and myself for the company, to-day,you will much oblige"'Your truly,"'Georgina Lackington.'""To another kind of man I'd have said something about two pauvresfemmes dlaisses, but he 'd have been frightened, and probably notcome.""Probably," said Lady Grace, with a sigh."Now, let us try the success of this." And she rang a bell, anddespatched the note.Lady Lackington had scarcely time to deliver a short essay on the classand order of men to which Mr. Davenport Dunn pertained, when theservant returned with the answer. It was a very formal acceptance of theinvitation, "Mr. Davenport Dunn presented his compliments,"--and so on."Of course, he comes," said she, throwing the note away. "Do you know,my dear, I half suspect we have been indiscreet; for now that we havecaught our elephant, what shall we do with him?""I cannot give you one solitary suggestion.""These people are not our people, nor are their gods our gods," saidLady Lackington."If we all offer up worship at the same temple,--the Bourse," said LadyGrace, something sadly,--"we can scarcely dispute about a creed.""That is only true in a certain sense," replied the other. "Money is anecessity to all; the means of obtaining it may, therefore, be common tomany. It is in the employment of wealth, in the tasteful expenditure ofriches, that we distinguish ourselves from these people. You haveonly to see the houses they keep, their plate, their liveries, theirequipages, and you perceive at once that whenever they rise above somegrovelling imitation they commit the most absurd blunders against alltaste and propriety. I wish we had Spicer here to see about this dinner,it is one of the very few things he understands; but I suppose we mustleave it to the cook himself, and we have the comfort of knowing thatthe criticism on his efforts will not be of a very high order.""We dine at four, I believe," said Lady Grace, in her habitual tone ofsorrow, as she swept from the room with that gesture of profound woethat would have graced a queen in tragedy.Let us turn for a moment to Mr. Davenport Dunn. Lady Lackington'sinvitation had not produced in him either those overwhelming sensationsof astonishment or those excessive emotions of delight which she had sosanguinely calculated on. There was a time that a Viscountess asking himthus to dinner had been an event, the very fact being one requiring someeffort on his part to believe; but these days were long past. Mr. Dunnhad not only dined with great people since that, but had himself beentheir host and entertainer. Noble lords and baronets had sipped hisclaret, right honorables praised his sherry, and high dignitariescondescended to inquire where he got "that exquisite port."The tremulous, faint-hearted, doubting spirit, the suspectful,self-distrusting, humble man, had gone, and in his place there was abold, resolute nature, confident and able, daily testing his strengthagainst some other in the ring, and as often issuing from the contestsatisfied that he had little to fear from any antagonist. He was cleverenough to see that the great objects in life are accomplished less bydexterity and address than by a strong, undeviating purpose. The failureof many a gifted man, and the high success of many a commonplace one,had not been without its lesson for him; and it was in the firm resolveto rise a winner that he sat down to the game of life.Lady Lackington's invitation was, therefore, neither a cause of pleasurenor astonishment. He remembered having met her somewhere, some time, andhe approached the renewed acquaintance without any one of the sentimentsher Ladyship had so confidently predicted. Indeed, so little of thatflurry of anticipation did he experience, that he had to be remindedher Ladyship was waiting dinner for him, before he could remember thepleasure that was before him.It may be a very ungallant confession for this true history to make,but we cannot blink saying that Lady Lack-ington and Lady Grace bothevidenced by their toilette that they were not indifferent to theimpression they were to produce upon their guest.The Viscountess was dressed in the perfection of that French taste whosechief characteristic is freshness and elegance. She was light,gauzy, and floating,--a sweeping something of Valenciennes and whitemuslin,--but yet human withal, and very graceful. Her friend, in deepblack, with a rich lace veil fastened on her head behind, and drapedartistically over one shoulder, was a charming personification ofaffliction not beyond consolation. When they met, it was with anexchange of looks that said, "This ought to do."Lady Lackington debated with herself what precise manner of receptionshe would award to Mr. Dunn,--whether to impose by the haughtycondescension of a fine lady, or fascinate by the graceful charm of anagreeable one. She was "equal to either fortune," and could calculateon success, whichever road she adopted. While she thus hesitated, heentered.If his approach had little or nothing of the man of fashion about it,it was still a manner wherein there was little to criticise. It was notbold nor timid, and, without anything like over-confidence, there wasyet an air of self-reliance that was not without dignity.At dinner the conversation ranged over the usual topics of foreigntravel, foreign habits, collections, and galleries. Of pictures andstatues he had seen much, and evidently with profit and advantage; ofpeople and society he knew next to nothing, and her Ladyship quicklydetected this deficiency, and fell back upon it as her stronghold."When hard-worked men like myself take a holiday," said Dunn, "theyare but too glad to escape from the realities of life by taking refugeamongst works of art. The painter and the sculptor suggest as muchpoetry as can consist with their stern notions, and are always realenough to satisfy the demand for fact.""But would not what you call your holiday be more pleasantly passed inmaking acquaintances? You could of course have easy access to the mostdistinguished society.""I'm a bad Frenchman, my Lady, and speak not a word of German orItalian.""English is very generally cultivated just now,--the persons best worthtalking to can speak it.""The restraint of a strange tongue, like the novelty of a court dress,is a sad detractor from all naturalness. At least, in my own littleexperience with strangers, I have failed to read anything of a man'scharacter when he addressed me in a language not his own.""And was it essential you should have read it?" asked Lady Grace,languidly."I am always more at my ease when I know the geography of the land Ilive in," said Dunn, smiling."I should say you have great gifts in that way,--I mean in decipheringcharacter," said Lady Lackington."Your Ladyship flatters me. I have no pretensions of the kind. Oncesatisfied of the sincerity of those with whom I come into contact, Inever strive to know more, nor have I the faculties to attempt more.""But, in your wide-spread intercourse with life, do you not, insensiblyas it were, become an adept in reading men's natures?""I don't think so, my Lady. The more one sees of life the simpler doesit seem, not from any study of humanity, but by the easy fact that threeor four motives sway the whole world. An unsupplied want of one kind orother--wealth, rank, distinction, affection, it may be--gives the entireimpulse to a character, just as a passion imparts the expression to aface; and all the diversities of temperament, like those of countenance,are nothing but the impress of a want,--you may call it a wish. Nowit may be," added he, and as he spoke he stole a glance, quick aslightning, at Lady Grace, "that such experiences are more common to menlike myself,--men, I mean, who are intrusted with the charge of others'interests; but assuredly I have no clew to character save in that onefeature,--a want.""But I want fifty thousand things," said Lady Lacking-ton. "I want adeal of money; I want that beautiful villa near Palermo, the 'SerraNovena;' I want that Arab pony Kratuloff rides in the park; I want, inshort, everything that pleases me every hour of the day.""These are not wants that make impulses, no more than a passing showermakes a climate," said Dunn. "What I speak of is that unceasing,unwearied desire that is with us in joy or sadness, that journeys withus and lives with us, mingling in every action, blending with everythought, and presenting to our minds a constant picture of ourselvesunder some wished-for aspect different from all we have ever known,where we are surrounded with other impulses and swayed by otherpassions, and yet still identically ourselves. Lady Grace apprehendsme.""Perhaps,--at least partly," said she, fanning herself and concealingher face."There are very few exempt from a temptation of this sort, or, if theybe, it is because their minds are dissipated on various objects.""I hate things to be called temptations, and snares, and the rest ofit," said Lady Lackington; "it is a very tiresome cant. You may tell mewhile I am waiting for my fish-sauce at dinner, it is a temptation; butif you wish me really to understand the word, tell me of some wonderfulspeculation, some marvellous scheme for securing millions. Oh, dear Mr.Dunn, you who really know the way, will you just show me the road to--Iwill be moderate--about twenty thousand pounds?""Nothing easier, my Lady, if you are disposed to risk forty.""But I am not, sir. I have not the slightest intention to risk onehundred. I 'm not a gambler.""And yet what your Ladyship points at is very like gambling.""Pray place that word along with temptation, in the forbidden category;it is quite hateful to me.""Have you the same dislike to chance, Lady Grace?" said he, stealing alook at her face with some earnestness."No," said she, in a low voice; "it is all I have to look for.""By the way, Mr. Dunn, what are they doing in Parliament about us? Isthere not something contemplated by which we can insist upon separatemaintenance, or having a suitable settlement, or--""Separation--divorce," said Lady Grace, solemnly."No, my Lady, the law is only repairing an old road, not making a newone. The want of the age is cheapness,--cheap literature, cheap postage,and cheap travelling, and why not cheap divorce? Legislation nowprofesses as its great aim to extend to the poor all the comforts of therich; and as this is supposed to be one of them--""Have you any reason to doubt it, sir?" asked Lady Grace."Luxuries cease to be luxuries when they become common. Cheap divorcewill be as unfashionable as cheap pine-apple when a coal-heaver can haveit," said Lady Lackington."You mistake, it seems to me, what constitutes the luxury," interposedLady Grace. "Every day of the year sees men liberated from prison, yetno one will pretend that the sense of freedom is less dear to everycreature thus delivered.""Your figure is but too like," said Dunn. "The divorced wife will be tothe world only too much a resemblance of the liberated prisoner. Darkor fair, guilty or innocent, she will carry with her the opprobrium ofa public trial, a discussion, and a verdict. Now, how few of us wouldgo through an operation in public for the cure of a malady! Would we notrather hug our sorrows and our sufferings in secrecy than accept healthon such conditions?""Not when the disease was consuming your very vitals,--not when aperpetual fever racked your brain and boiled in your blood. You'd takelittle heed of what is called exposure then. The cry of your heart wouldbe, 'Save me! save me!'" As she spoke, her voice grew louder and wilder,till it became almost a shriek, and, as she ended, she lay back, flushedand panting, in her chair."You have made her quite nervous, Mr. Dunn," said Lady Lackington, asshe arose and fanned her."Oh, no. It's nothing. Just let me have a little fresh air,--on theterrace. Will you give me your arm?" said Lady Grace, faintly. And Dunnassisted her as she arose and walked out. "How very delicious this is!"said she, as she leaned over the balcony, and gazed down upon the placidwater, streaked with long lines of starlight. "I conclude," said she,after a little pause, "that scenes like this--moments as peacefullytranquil--are as dear to you, hard-worked men of the world, as theyare to the wearied hearts of us poor women, all whose ambitions are sohumble in comparison.""We are all of us striving for the same goal, I believe," saidhe,--"this same search after happiness, the source of so much misery!""You are not married, I believe?" said she, in an accent whose verysoftness had a tone of friendship."No; I am as much alone in the world as one well can be," rejoined he,sorrowfully."And have you gone through life without ever meeting one with whomyou would have been content to make partnership,--taking her, as thosesolemn words say, 'for better, for worse'?""They are solemn words," said he, evading her question; "for they pledgethat for which it is so hard to promise,--the changeful moods which timeand years bring over us. Which of us at twenty can say what he will beat thirty,--still less at fifty? The world makes us many things we nevermeant to be."[Illustration: 137]"So, then, you are not happy?" said she, in the same low voice."I have not said so much," said he, smiling sadly; "are you?""Can you ask me? Is not the very confidence wherewith I treatyou--strangers as we were an hour back to each other--the best evidencethat it is from the very depth of my misery I appeal to you?""Make no rash confidences, Lady Grace," said he, seriously. "They whotell of their heart's sorrows to the world are like those who counttheir gold before robbers. I have seen a great deal of life, and thebest philosophy I have learned from it is to 'bear.' Bear everythingthat can be borne. You will be surprised what a load you will carry bymere practice of endurance.""It is so easy to say to one in pain, 'Have patience,'" said she,bitterly."I have practised what I teach for many a year. Be assured of onething,--the Battle of Life is waged by all. The most favored byfortune--the luckiest, as the world calls them--have their contest andtheir struggle. It is not for existence, but it is often for what makesexistence valuable."She sighed deeply, and, after a pause, he went on,--"We pity the poor, weary, heart-sick litigant, wearing out life in thedreary prosecution of a Chancery suit, dreaming at night of that fortunehe is never to see, and waking every day to the same dull round ofpursuit. As hope flickers in his heart, suffering grows a habit; hiswhole nature imbibes the conflicting character of his cause; he doubtsand hesitates and hopes and fears and wishes, till his life is one longfever. But infinitely more painful is the struggle of the heart whoseaffections have been misplaced. These are the suits over which no hopeever throws a ray. It is a long, dreary path, without a halting-place ora goal."As he spoke, she covered her face with her handkerchief; but he couldperceive that she was weeping."I am speaking of what I know," said he. "I remember once comingclosely into relations with a young nobleman whose station, fortune,and personal advantages combined to realize all that one could fancy ofworldly blessings. He was just one of those types a novelist would taketo represent the most favored class of the most favored land of Europe.He had an ancient name, illustrious in various ways, a splendidfortune, was singularly endowed with abilities, highly accomplished, andhandsome, and, more than all, he was gifted with that mysteriouspower of fascination by which some men contrive to make themselves soappreciated by others that their influence is a sort of magic. Give himan incident to relate,--let him have a passing event to tell, whereinsome emotion of pity, some sentiment of devotion played a part,--andwithout the slightest touch of artifice, without the veriest shade ofingenuity, he could make you listen breathlessly, and hang in rapture onhis words. Well, this man--of whom, if I suffer myself to speak, Ishall grow wearisome in the praise--this man was heart-broken. Before hesucceeded to his title, he was very poor, a subaltern in the army, withlittle beyond his pay. He fell in love with a very beautiful girl--Inever heard her name, but I know that she was a daughter of one of thefirst houses in England. She returned his affection, and there was oneof those thousand cases wherein love has to combat all the odds, anddevotion subdue every thought that appeals to worldly pride and vanity."She accepted the contest nobly; she was satisfied to brave humblefortune, obscurity, exile,--everything for him--at least she said so,and I believe she thought she could keep her word. When the engagementtook place--which was a secret to their families--the London season hadjust begun."It is not for me to tell you what a period of intoxicating pleasureand excitement that is, nor how in that wondrous conflict of wealth,splendor, beauty, and talent, all the fascination of gambling isimparted to a scene where, of necessity, gain and loss are alternating.It demands no common power of head and heart to resist thesetemptations. Apparently she had not this self-control. The gorgeousfestivities about her, the splendor of wealth, and more than even that,the esteem in which it was held, struck her forcibly. She saw that thevirtues of humble station met no more recognition than the false lustreof mock gems,--that ordinary gifts, illustrated by riches, became actualgraces. She could not shut out the contrast between her lover,poor, unnoticed, and unregarded, and the crowd of fashionable anddistinguished youths whose princely fortunes gave them place andpre-eminence. In fact, as he himself told me,--for Allington excusedher--Good Heavens! are you ill?" cried be, as with a low, faint cry shesank to the ground."Is she dying? Good God! is she dead?" cried Lady Lackington, as shelifted the powerless arm, and held the cold hands within her own.Lanfranchi was speedily sent for, and saw that it was merely a faintingfit."She was quite well previously, was she not?" asked he of Dunn."Perfectly so. We were chatting of indifferent matters,--of London, andthe season,--when she was seized," said he. "Is there anything in theair here that disposes to these attacks?"Lanfranchi looked at him without reply. Possibly they understood eachother, for they parted without further colloquy.CHAPTER XI. "A CONSULTATION."It was late in the night as Lord Lackington and his friends reached thevilla, a good deal wearied, very jaded, and, if the confession maybe made, a little sick of each other; they parted pretty much as themembers of such day-long excursions are wont to do,--not at all sorry tohave reached home again, and brought their trip of pleasure to an end.Twining, of course, was the same happy-natured, gay, volatile creaturethat he set out in the morning. Everything went well with him, theworld had but one aspect, which was a pleasant one, and he laughed andmuttered, "What fun!" as in half-dogged silence the party wended theirway through the garden towards the house."I hope these little girls may not have caught cold," said the Viscount,as he stood with Twining on the terrace, after saying "Good-night!""I hope so, with all my heart. Charming girls--most fascinating--fatherso amiable.""Isn't that Dunn's apartment we see the light in?" asked the other, halfimpatiently. "I 'll go and make him a visit.""Overjoyed to see you, greatly flattered by the attention," chimed inTwining; and while he rubbed his hands over the enchanting prospect,Lord Lackington walked away.Not waiting for any announcement, and turning the handle of the doorimmediately after he had knocked at it, the Viscount entered. WhetherDunn had heard him or not, he never stirred from the table where he waswriting, but continued engrossed by his occupation till his Lordshipaccosted him."I have come to disturb you, I fear, Dunn?""Oh! Lord Lackington, your most obedient. Too happy to be honored byyour presence at any time. Just returned, I conclude?""Yes, only this moment," said the Viscount, sighing weariedly. "Thesepicnics are stupid inventions; they fatigue and they exhaust. They givelittle pleasure at the time, and none whatever to look back upon.""Your Lordship's picture is rather a dreary one," said Dunn, smiling."Perfectly correct, I assure you; I went simply to oblige some countryfolks of yours. The O'Reillys,--nice little girls,--very natural, verypretty creatures; but the thing is a bore. I never knew any one whoenjoyed it except the gentleman who gets tipsy, and he has an awfulretribution in the next day's headache,--the terrible headache of icedrum punch."Dunn laughed, because he saw that his Lordship expected as much; and theViscount resumed,--"I am vexed, besides, at the loss of time; I wanted to have my morningwith you here."Dunn bowed graciously, but did not speak."We have so much to talk over--so many things to arrange--that I amquite provoked at having thrown away a day; and you, too, are possiblypressed for time?"He nodded in assent."You can give me to-morrow, however?""I can give you to-night, my Lord, which will, perhaps, do as well.""But to-morrow--""Oh, to-morrow, my Lord, I start with Baron Glumthal for Frankfort, tomeet the Elector of Darmstadt,--an appointment that cannot be broken.""Politically most important, I have no doubt," said the Viscount, withan undisguised sarcasm in the tone."No, my Lord, a mere financial affair," said Dunn, not heeding theother's manner. "His Highness wants a loan, and we are willing toaccommodate him.""I wish I could find you in the same liberal spirit. It is the verything I stand in need of Just now. In fact, Dunn, you must do it."The half-coaxing accent of these last words was a strong contrast to thesneer of a few seconds before, and Dunn smiled as he heard them."I fancy, my Lord, that if you are still of the same mind as before, youwill have little occasion to arrange for a loan in any quarter.""Pooh! pooh! the scheme is absurd. It has not one, but fifty obstaclesagainst it. In the first place, you know nothing of this fellow, orwhether he can be treated with. As for myself, I do not believe one wordabout his claim. Why, sir, there's not a titled house in England has notat some period or other been assailed with this sort of menace. Itis the stalest piece of knavery going. If you were to poll the peersto-morrow, you 'd not meet two out of ten have not been served withnotice of action, or ejectment on the title; in fact, sir, these suitsare a profession, and a very lucrative one, too."Lord Lackington spoke warmly, and ere he had finished had lashed himselfup into a passion. Meanwhile Duun sat patiently, like one who awaitedthe storm to pass by ere he advanced upon his road."I conclude, from your manner, that you do not agree with me?" said theViscount."Your Lordship opines truly. I take a very different view of thistransaction. I have had all the documents of Conway's claim beforeme. Far more competent judges have seen and pronounced upon them. Theyconstitute a most formidable mass of evidence, and, save in a very fewand not very important details, present an unbroken chain of testimony.""So, then, there is a battery preparing to open fire upon us?" said theViscount, with a laugh of ill-affected indifference."There is a mine whose explosion depends entirely upon your Lordship'sdiscretion. If I say, my Lord, that I never perused a stronger case,I will also say that I never heard of one so easy of management Theindividual in whose favor these proofs exist has not the slightestknowledge of them. He has not a suspicion that all his worldly prospectsput together are worth a ten-pound note. It is only within the lastthree months that I have succeeded in even discovering where he is.""And where is he?""Serving as a soldier with his regiment in the Crimea. He was inhospital at Scutari when I first heard, but since that returned to dutywith his regiment.""What signifies all this? The fellow himself is nothing to us!"Dunn again waited till this burst of anger had passed, and thenresumed,--"My Lord, understand me well. You can deal with this case now; sixmonths hence it may be clear and clean beyond all your power ofinterference. If Conway's claim derive, as I have strong ground tobelieve it, from the elder branch, the estate and the title are bothhis.""You are a hardy fellow, a very hardy fellow, Mr. Dunn, to make such aspeech as this!""I said, 'If,' my Lord--'If' is everything here. The assumption is thatReginald Conway was summoned by mistake to the House of Peers in Henrythe Seventh's reign,--the true Baron Lackington being then an exile. Itis from him this Conway's descent claims.""I'm not going to constitute myself a Committee of Privileges, sir, andlisten to all this jargon; nor can I easily conceive that the unshakenpossession of centuries is to be disturbed by the romantic pretensionsof a Crimean soldier. I am also aware how men of your cloth conductthese affair to their own especial advantage. They assume to be thearbiters of the destinies of great families, and they expect to be paidfor their labors,--eh, is n't it so?""I believe your Lordship has very accurately defined our position,though, perhaps, we might not quite agree as to the character of theremuneration.""How so? What do you mean?""I, for instance, my Lord, would furnish no bill of costs to eitherparty. My relations with your Lordship are such as naturally give me avery deep interest in what concerns you; of Mr. Conway I know nothing.""So, then, you are simply moved in this present affair by a principleof pure benevolence; you are to be a sort of providence to the House ofLackington,--eh, is that it?""Your Lordship's explanation is most gracious," said Dunn, bowing."Come, now; let us talk seriously," said the Viscount, in a changedtone. "What is it you propose?""What I would suggest, my Lord," said Dunn, with a marked emphasis onthe word, "is this. Submit the documents of this claim--we can obtaincopies of the most important of them--to competent opinion, learn ifthey be of the value I attribute to them, see, in fact, if this claimbe prosecuted, whether it is likely to succeed at law, and, if so,anticipate the issue by a compromise.""But what compromise?""Your Lordship has no heir. Your brother, who stands next in succession,need not marry. This point at once decided, Conway's claim can take itscourse after Mr. Beecher's demise. The estates secured to your Lordshipfor life will amply guarantee a loan to the extent you wish.""But they are mine, sir; they are mine this moment. I can go into themarket to-morrow and raise what amount I please--""Take care, my Lord, take care; a single imprudent step might spoil all.If you were to negotiate a mere ten thousand to-morrow, you might be metby the announcement that your whole property was about to be litigated,and your title to it contested. Too late to talk of compromise, then.""This sounds very like a threat, Mr. Dunn.""Then have I expressed myself most faultily, my Lord; nor was thereanything less near my thoughts.""Would you like to see my brother? He shall call on you in Dublin; youwill be there by--when?""Wednesday week, my Lord; and it is a visit would give me muchpleasure.""If I were to tell you my mind frankly, Dunn," said the Viscount, in amore assured tone, "I 'd say, I would not give a ten-pound note tobuy up this man's whole claim. Annesley, however, has a right to beconsulted; he has an interest only second to my own. See him, talk itover with him, and write, to me.""Where shall I address you, my Lord?""Florence; I shall leave this at once,--to-night," said LordLackington, impatiently; for, somehow,--we are not going to investigatewherefore,--he was impatient to be off, and see no more of those he hadbeen so intimate with.CHAPTER XII. ANNESLEY BEECHER'S "PAL"Lord Lackington was not much of a letter-writer; correspondence was notamongst the habits of his day. The society in which he moved, and ofwhich, to some extent, he was a type, cared more for conversational thanepistolary graces. They kept their good things for their dinner-parties,and hoarded their smart remarks on life for occasions where the successwas a personal triumph. Twice or thrice, however, every year, he wasobliged to write. His man of business required to be reminded of thisor that necessity for money, and his brother Annesley should alsobe admonished, or reproved, or remonstrated with, in that tone ofsuperiority and influence so well befitting one who pays an annuity tohim who is the recipient. In fact, around this one circumstance weregrouped all the fraternal feelings and brotherly interest of thesetwo men. One hundred and twenty-five pounds sterling every half-yearrepresented the ties of blood that united them; and while it offered tothe donor the proud reflection of a generous self-sacrifice, it gave tohim who received the almost as agreeable occasion for sarcastic allusionto the other's miserly habits and sordid nature, with a contrast of whathe himself had done were their places in life reversed.It was strange enough that the one same incident should have begottensuch very opposite emotions; and yet the two phrases, "If you knew all Ihave done for him," and the rejoinder, "You 'd not believe the beggarlypittance he allows me," were correct exponents of their severalfeelings.Not impossible is it that each might have made out a good case againstthe other. Indeed, it was a theme whereon, in their several spheres,they were eloquent; and few admitted to the confidence of either had notheard of the utter impossibility of doing anything for Annesley,--hisreckless folly, his profligacy, and his waste; and, on the other hand,"the incredible meanness of Lackington, with at least twelve thousand ayear, and no children to provide for, giving me the salary of an upperbutler." Each said far too much in his own praise not to have felt, atleast, strong misgivings in his conscience. Each knew far too well thatthe other had good reason in many things he said; but so long had theirplausibilities been repeated, that each ended by satisfying himself hewas a paragon of fraternal affection, and, stranger still, had obtainedfor this opinion a distinct credence in their several sets in society;so that every peer praised the Viscount, and every hard-up younger sonpitied poor Annesley, and condemned the "infamous conduct of the oldcoxcomb his brother.""That scampish fellow's conduct is killing poor Lackington," would say anoble lord."Annesley can't stand old Lackington's treatment much longer," was thecommentary of half-pay captains of dragoons.Had you but listened to Lord Lackington, he would have told you of atleast fifty distinct schemes he had contrived for his brother's worldlysuccess, all marred and spoiled by that confounded recklessness, "thatutter disregard, sir, of the commonest rules of conduct that every manin life is bound to observe." He might have been, by this time, colonelof the Fifty-something; he might have been governor of some fortunateisland in the Pacific; consul-general at Sunstroke Town, in Africa,where, after three years, you retire with a full pension. If he 'd havegone into the Church,--and there was no reason why he should n't,--therewas the living of St. Cuthbert-in-the-Vale, eight hundred a year, readyfor him. Every Administration for years back had been entreated in hisfavor; and from Ordnance clerkships to Commissions in Lunacy he had beenoffered places in abundance. Sinecures in India and jobs in Ireland hadbeen found out in his behalf, and deputy-somethings created in Bermudajust to provide for him.The concessions he had made, the proxies he had given, "just forAnnesley's sake," formed a serious charge against the noble Lord'spolitical consistency; and he quoted them as the most stunning evidencesof fraternal love, and pointed out where he had gone against hisconscience and his party as to a kind of martyrdom that made a manillustrious forever.As for Annesley, his indictment had, to the full, as many counts. Whathe might have been,--not in a mere worldly sense, not as regards place,pension, or emolument, but what in integrity, what in fair fame, whatin honorable conduct and unblemished character, if Lackington had onlydealt fairly with him,--"there was really no saying." The noble motiveswhich might have prompted, the high aspirations that might havemoved him, all the generous impulses of a splendid nature were there,thwarted, baffled, and destroyed by Lackington's confounded stupidity.What the Viscount ought to have done, what precise species of culturehe should have devoted to these budding virtues, how he ought to havetrained and trellised these tender shoots of aspiring goodness, he neverexactly detailed. It was only clear that, whatever the road, he hadnever taken it; and it was really heart-breaking to hear what the worldhad lost in public and private virtues, all for Lackington's indolenceand folly."He never gave me a chance, sir,--not one chance," would he say. "Why,he knows Palmerston just as well as I know you; he can talk to LordDerby as freely as I am speaking at this minute; and, would you believeit? he wouldn't say, 'There's Annesley--my brother Annesley--wantsthat commissionership or that secretary's place. Annesley 's a devilishclever fellow,--up to a thing or two,--ask Grog Davis if he ain't. Justtry to get between him and the ropes, that's all; see if he does n'tsleep with one eye open. 'Do you tell me there's one of them wouldrefuse him? Grog said to his face, at Epsom Downs, the morning Crocuswas scratched, 'My Lord,' says he, 'take all you can get upon Annesley;make your book on him; he's the best horse in your lot, and it's GrogDavis says it.'"Very true was it that Grog Davis said so. Nay, to enjoy the pleasureof hearing him so discourse was about the greatest gratification ofAnnesley Beecher's present life. He was poor and discredited. The TurfClub would not have him; he durst not show at Tattersall's. Few woulddine, none discount him; and yet that one man's estimate of his giftssustained him through all. "If Grog be right--and he ought to be, seeingthat a more dodgy, crafty fellow never lived--I shall come all roundagain. He that never backed the wrong horse could n't be far astrayabout men. He thinks I've running in me yet; he sees that I 'll comeout one of these days in top condition, and show my number from thestand-house." To have had the greatest opinion in Equity favorable toyour cause in Chancery, to have known that Thesiger or Kelly saidyour case was safe, to learn that Faraday had pronounced your analysiscorrect, or White, of Cowes, had approved of the lines of your newyacht,--would any of them be very reassuring sensations; and yet werethey as nothing to the unbounded confidence imparted to Beecher's mindby the encouraging opinion of his friend Grog Davis. It is only justiceto say that Beecher's estimate of Davis was a feeling totally freeof all the base alloy of any self-interest. With all Grog's greatabilities, with talents of the very highest order, he was the reverseof a successful man. Trainer, auctioneer, sporting character, pugilist,publican, and hell-keeper, he had been always unlucky. He had his shareof good things,--more than his share. He had been in at some ofthe "very best-robberies" ever done at Newmarket. The horses he had"nobbled," the jockeys "squared," the owners "hocussed," were legion.All the matches he had "made safe," all the fights he had sold, wouldhave filled five columns of "Bell's Life." In whatever called itself"sport" he had dabbled and cheated for years; and yet, there he was,with all his successes and all his experiences, something more thanfifteen thousand pounds worse than ruined.Worthy reader, have you stood by while some enthusiastic admirer ofTurner's later works has, in all the fervor of his zeal, encomiumizedone of those strange, incomprehensible creations, where cloud and sea,atmosphere, shadow and smoke, seem madly commingled with tall mastspiercing the lurid vapor, and storm-clouds drifting across ruinedtowers? If at first you gladly welcomed any guidance through thewondrous labyrinth, and you accepted gratefully the aid of one who couldreconcile seeming incongruities, and explain apparent difficulties, whatwas your disappointment, at last, to discover that from some defect oforganization, some absent power of judgment, you could not follow theelucidation; that you saw no power in this, no poetry in that; that nolight gleamed into your soul out of all that darkness, nor any hopeinto your heart, from the mad confusion of that chaos? Pretty muchthe same mystification had it been to you to have listened to Annes-leyBeecher's account of his friend Grog Davis. It was evident that hesaw the reason for everything,--he could account for all; but, alas! theexplanatory gift was denied him. The very utmost you could attain to wasa glimmering perception that there were several young men of rank andstation who had only half trusted the distinguished Davis, and in theirsparing confidence had rescued themselves from his knavery; that veryartful combinations occasionally require confederates, and confederatesare not always loyal; that Grog occasionally did things with too high ahand,--in plain words, reserved for himself more than his share of thebooty; and, in fact, that, with the best intentions and the most decideddetermination to put others "into the hole," he fell in himself, and socompletely, too, that he had never been able to show his head out of itever since.If, therefore, as we have said, Annesley Beecher's explanation of thesetangled skeins was none of the clearest, there was nothing daunting tohimself in that difficulty. On the contrary, he deemed his intimacy withGrog as one of his greatest privileges. Grog had told him things thathe would not tell to another man breathing; he had seen, in Grog's ownhand, what would, if not hang him, give him twenty years at NorfolkIsland; he knew that Grog had done things no man in England but himselfhad ever dreamed of; in fact, as Othello's perils had won the fairDesdemona's love, Grog Davis's rascalities had captivated Beecher'sadmiration; and, as the recruit might gaze upon the thickly studdedcrosses on the breast of some glorious soldier, so did he venerate theproofs of the thousand-and-one knaveries of one who for thirty-odd yearshad been a "leg" and a swindler.Let us present Captain Davis--for by that title was he popularlyknown--to our reader. He was a short, red-faced--very red-faced--man,with a profusion of orange-red hair, while he wore beard and whiskersin that form so common in our Crimean experiences. He was long-armed andbandy, the legs being singularly short and muscular. He affected dress,and was remarkable for more ostentation of velvet than consisted withordinary taste, and a far greater display of rings, charms, and watchtrinkets than is common even to gentlemen of the "Jewish persuasion."The expression of the man's face was eminently determination, and hisgreenish-gray eyes and thin-lipped, compressed mouth plainly declared,"Bet with me or not,--if you give me the shadow of a shade ofimpertinence I 'll fasten a quarrel upon you of which all your rank andstation won't protect you from the consequences. I can hit a sixpence attwenty paces, and I 'll make you feel that fact in every word you say tome. In my brevet rank of the turf you can't disown me, and if you try,mine the fault if you succeed." He had been out three or four times invery sanguinary affairs, so that the question as to "meeting" him was asettled point. He was one of those men to whom the epithet "dangerous"completely applies; he was dangerous alike to the young fellow enteringlife, unsuspectful of its wiles and ignorant of its rascalities;dangerous in the easy facility with which he would make foolish wagers,and lend even large sums on the very slightest acquaintance. He seemedso impressed with his theory that everybody ought to have all theenjoyment he liked, there was such a careless good-nature about him,such an uncalculating generosity, an air of such general kindliness,that very young men felt at once at ease in his company; and if therewere sundry things in his manner that indicated coarseness or badbreeding, if his address was vulgar and his style "snobbish," there weresufficient traits of originality about him to form a set-off for thesedefects, and "Old Grog" was pronounced an "out-and-out good fellow," andalways ready "to help one at a pinch."Such was he to the very young men just passing the threshold of life; tothe older hands--fellows versed in all its acts and ways--he showedno false colors; such, then, he was, the character which no disguiseconceals,--"the leg;" one whose solvency may be counted on more safelythan his honesty, and whose dealings, however based on roguery, arestill guided by that amount of honor which is requisite for transactionsamongst thieves. There was an impression, too,--we have no warranty forsaying how far it was well founded,--that Grog was behind the scenes intransactions where many high and titled characters figured; that he wasconfederate in affairs of more than doubtful integrity; and that, ifhe liked, he could make revelations such as all the dark days atTattersall's never equalled. "They 'll never push me to the wall,"he would say, "take my word for it; they 'll not make Grog Davis turnQueen's evidence," was the boastful exclamation of his after-dinnerhours: and he was right. He could have told of strange doings witharsenic in the stable, and, stranger still, with hocussed negus in theback parlor; he had seen the certain favorite for the Oaks carted outstiff and cold on the morning that was to have witnessed her triumph;and he had opened the door for the ruined heir as he left his lastthousand on the green baize of the hell table. He was so accustomed toall the vicissitudes of fortune--that is, he was so habituated to aidthe goddess in the work of destiny--that nothing surprised him; andhis red, carbuncled face and jaundiced eye never betrayed the slightestevidence of anything like emotion or astonishmentHow could Beecher have felt any other than veneration for one so gifted?He approached him as might some youthful artist the threshold of MichaelAngelo; he felt, when with him, that he was in the presence of one whosemaxims were silver and whose precepts were gold, and that to the man whocould carry away those experiences the secrets of life were no longermysteries.All the delight an old campaigner might have felt had the Great Dukevouchsafed to tell him of his achievements in the Peninsula--how he hadplanned the masterly defences of Torres Vedras, or conceived the boldadvance upon Spain--would have been but a weak representation of theeager enjoyment Beecher experienced when Grog narrated some of hispersonal recollections: how he had squared Sir Toby at Manchester;the way he had won the York Handicap with a dead horse; and the stillprouder day when, by altering the flags at Bolton, he gained twenty-twothousand pounds on the Great National Steeplechase. Nor was it withouta certain vaingloriousness that Grog would speak of these, as, cigarin mouth and his hands deep in his breeches pockets, he grunted out, inbroken sentences, the great triumphs of his life.We began this chapter by saying that Lord Lackington was not animpassioned letter-writer; and here we are discoursing about Mr. Davisand his habits, as if these topics could possibly have any relationto the noble Viscount's ways; and yet they are connected, for it wasprecisely to read one of his Lordship's letters to his friend thatBeecher was now Grog's guest, seated opposite to him at the fire, in avery humble room of a very humble cottage on the strand of Irish-town.Grog had sought this retirement after the last settling at Newmarket,and had been, in popular phrase, "missing" since that event."Well, it's a long one, at all events," said Mr. Davis, as he glancedthrough his double eyeglass at the letter Beecher handed him,--"so longthat I 'll be sworn it had no enclosure. When a man sends the flimsy, hespares you the flourish!""Right there, Grog. It's all preach and no pay; but read it" And helighted his cigar, and puffed away."'Lake of Como, Oct 15"What 's the old cove about up at Como so late in the season?""Read it, and you 'll know all," said the other, sententiously."'Dear Annesley,--I have been plotting a letter to you these half-dozenweeks; but what with engagements, the heat, and that insurmountabledesire to defer whatever can by possibility be put off, all my goodintentions have turned out tolerably like some of your own,--pleasantmemories, and nothing more. Georgina, too, said--'"Who's Georgina?""My sister-in-law.""What's she like,--you never spoke of her?""Oh, nothing particular. She was a Ludworth; they 're a proud set, buthave n't a brass farthing among them.""Why did he marry her?""Who knows? He liked her, I believe," said he, after a pause, as though,failing a good and valid reason, he gave the next best that offered."'Georgina, too, said she 'd write, but the chances are her owncommissions would have been the burden of her letter. She has neverforgotten that bargain of Mechlin lace you once procured her, and alwaysspeculates on some future exercise of your skill.'"Annesley burst into a hearty laugh, and said,--"It was amongst the trumpery they gave me at Antwerp for a bill of threehundred and fifty pounds; I got a Rubens,--a real Rubens, of course,--anebony cabinet, and twenty yards of coffee-colored 'point de Bruxelles,'horrid trash; but no matter, I never paid the bill, and Georgina thoughtthe lace a dead bargain at forty louis.""So that it squared you both?" said Grog."Just so, Master Davis. Read on.""'You must see the utter impossibility of my making any increase to yourpresent allowance--'""Hang me if I do, then!""'--present allowance. The pressure of so many bad years, the charges ofaiding the people to emigrate, and the cost of this confounded war, haveborne very heavily upon us all, and condemned us to economies that wenever dreamed of. For myself, I have withdrawn my subscription fromseveral charities, and will neither give a cup at the Broome Regatta,nor my accustomed ten pounds towards the race ball. I wish I couldimpress you with the necessity of similar sacrifices: these are timeswhen every man must take his share of the national burdens, and reducehis habits of indulgence in conformity with national exigency.'""It 's all very fine to talk of cutting your coat, but when you have n'tgot any cloth at all, Master Davis--""Well, I suppose you must take a little of your neighbor's--if it don'tsuit you to go naked. This here noble Lord writes 'like a book;' butwhen he says, 'I 'm not a-goin' to stump it,' there 's no more to besaid. You don't want to see the horse take his gallops that you knowis to be scratched on the day of the race,--that's a mere piece of idlecuriosity, ain't it?""Quite true, Grog.""Well, it's clear he won't He says he won't, and that's enough.--'Wehave come abroad for no other reason than economy, and are only lookingfor a place inexpensive enough for our reduced means.' What's hisincome?""Better than twelve thousand a year.""Has he debts?""Well, I suppose he may; everybody has.""Ay," said Grog, dryly, and read on.--"'The Continent, however, isnot the cheap place it once was,--rent, servants, markets, all aredearer,--and I 'm quite satisfied you find Ireland much less expensivethan any other part of Europe,'--which means, 'Stay there,'--eh?""No, I don't take it that way," said Beecher, reddening."But I do, and I 'll maintain it," reiterated Grog. "He's a knowing one,that same noble Viscount; he's not the flat you always thought he was.He can square his own book, he can.--As to any prospect of places, Itell you, frankly, there is none. These competitive humbugs they callexaminations do certainly stop a number of importunate people, but thevigilance of Parliament exercises a most overbearing tyranny on theministers; and then the press! Now, we might tide over the House,Annesley, but the press would surely ruin all. If you were gazettedto-day Consul to the least-known South American republic,--commissionerfor the sale of estates in the planet Saturn,--those fellows would havea leader on you to-morrow, showing what you did fifteen years ago atAscot,--all your outlawries, all your actions in bankruptcy. They 'dbegin saying, 'Is this the notorious Hon. Annesley Beecher? or are wemistaken in supposing that the gentleman here referred to is the samelately mentioned in our columns as the friend and associate of the stillmore famous Grog Davis?'""He's cool, he is, the noble Lord," said Davis, laying down the letter,while Beecher laughed till his eyes ran over with tears. "Now, I 'dtrouble his Lordship to tell me," continued Grog, "which had the worstof that same acquaintance, and which was more profitable to the other.If the famous Grog were to split upon the notorious Annes-ley, who 'dcome last out of the bag?""You need n't take it so seriously as all that, Grog," said Beecher, ina placable tone."Why, when I'm told that one of the hardest things to be laid to yourcharge is the knowing me, it's high time to be serious, I think; notbut I might just throw a shell into the enemy's own camp. The noble Lordain't so safe as he fancies. I was head-waiter at Smykes's,--the oldCherry-tree, at Richmond--the night Mat Fortescue was ruined. I couldtell the names of the partners even yet, though it's a matter of I won'tsay how many years ago; and when poor Fortescue blew his brains out, Iknow the man who drove his phaeton into town and said, 'Fortescue neverhad a hand light enough for these chestnuts. I always knew what I coulddo with them if they were my own.'""Lackington never said that. I 'll take my oath of it he never did!"cried Beecher, passionately."Take your oath of it!" said Davis, with an insulting sneer. "Do youmind the day old Justice Blanchard--it was at the York assizes--said,'Have a care, Mr. Beecher, what you are about to swear; if you persistin affirming that document, the consequences may be more serious thanyou apprehend?' And do you remember you did n't swear?""I 'll tell you what, Master Grog," said Beecher, over whose face asudden paleness now spread, "you may speak of me just as you like. Youand I have been companions and pals for many a day; but Lackington isthe head of my family, he has his seat in the Peers, he can hold uphis head with the best in England, and I 'll not sit here to listen toanything against him.""You won't, won't you?" said Grog, placing a hand on either knee, andfixing his fiery gray eyes on the other's face. "Well, then, I 'll tellyou that you shall! Sit down, sir,--sit down, I say, and don'tbudge from that chair till I tell you! Do you see that hand? and thatarm,--grasp it, squeeze it,--does n't feel very like the sinews of afellow that feared hard labor. I was the best ten stone seven man inEngland the year I fought Black Joe, and I 'm as tough this minute, sothat Norfolk Island needn't frighten me; but the Hon. Annesley Beecherwould n't like it, I 'll promise him. He 'd have precious pains in theshoulder-blades, and very sore feelings about the small of the back,after the first day's stone-breaking. Now, don't provoke me, that's all.When the world has gone so bad with a man as it has with me the lastyear or two, it's not safe to provoke him,--it is not.""I never meant to anger you, old fellow," began Annesley."Don't do it, then,--don't, I say," repeated the other, doggedly; and heresumed the letter, saying: "When you 're a-writing the answer to thishere letter, just ask Grog Davis to give you a paragraph. Just say,'Grog, old fellow, I 'm writing to my noble brother; mayhap you have amessage of some kind or other for him,' and you 'll see whether he hasor not.""You 're a rum one, Master Davis," said Beecher, with a laugh thatrevealed very little of a heart at ease."I'm one that won't stand a fellow that doesn't run straight withme,--that's what I am. And now for the noble Viscount." And he ranhis eyes over the letter without reading aloud. "All this here is onlysaying what sums he has paid for you, what terrible embarrassment yourdebts have caused him. Lord love him! it's no new thing to hear of inthis life that paying money is no pleasure. And then it finishes, asall the stories usually do, by his swearing he won't do it any more. 'Ithink,' he says, 'you might come round by a fortunate hit in marriage;but somehow you blundered in every case that I pointed out to you--'""That's too bad!" cried Beecher, angrily. "The only thing he ever 'putme on' was an iron-master's widow at Barnstable, and I found that thewhole concern was under a contract to furnish rails for a Peruvian lineat two pounds ten a ton under the market price of iron.""It was I discovered that!" broke in Grog, proudly."So it was, old fellow; and you got me off the match without payingforfeit.""Well, this here looks better," continued Grog, reading."Young and handsome, one of two daughters of an old Irish provisionmerchant come abroad for the first time in their life, and consequentlynew to everything. The name's O'Reilly, of Mary's Abbey, so that youcan have no difficulty in accurately learning all about him in Dublin.Knowing that these things are snapped up immediately in the cities, Ihave induced O'R. to take a villa on the lake here for the present,so that if your inquiries turn out satisfactorily, you can come out atonce, and we 'll find the birds where I have landed them.'""That's business-like,--that's well and sensibly put," said Davis, in avoice of no counterfeited admiration.He read on: "'O'R. talks of forty thousand to each, but, with theprospect of connecting himself with people of station, might possiblycome down more handsomely in one case, particularly when brought to seethat the other girl's prospects will be proportionately bettered by thisalliance; at all events, no time is to be lost in the matter, and youcan draw on me, at two months, for fifty pounds, which will carry youout here, and where, if you should not find me, you will have lettersof presentation to the O'R.'s. It is not a case requiring either timeor money,--though it may call for more energy and determination than youare in the habit of exercising. At the proper moment I shall be ready tocontribute all in my power.'"What does that mean?" said Davis."I can't even guess; but no matter, the thing sounds well. You cansurely learn all about this O'Reilly?""That's easy enough.""I say, I say, old fellow," cried Beecher, as he flung his cigar awayand walked up and down the room briskly, "this would put us all onour legs again. Wouldn't I 'go a heavy pot' on Rolfs stable! I 'd takeCoulton's three-year-old for the Canterbury to-morrow, I would! and givethem twelve to twenty in hundreds on the double event. We'd serve themout, Master Grog--we'd give them such a shower-bath, old boy! They sayI'm a flat, but what will they say when A. B.'s number hangs out at theStand-house?""There's not much to do on the turf just now," said Grog, dryly. "They've spoiled the turf," said he, as he lighted his cigar,--"cleanspoiled it. Once upon a time the gents was gents, and the legs legs, butnowadays every one 'legs' it, as he can; so I 'd like to see who's tomake a livin' out of it!""There's truth in that!" chimed in Beecher."So that," resumed Grog, "if you go in for this girl, don't you bemaking a book; there's plenty better things to be had now than the ring.There's companies, and banks, and speculations on every hand. You buy inat, say thirty, and sell out at eighty, ninety, or a hundred. I 've beena meditating over a new one I 'll tell you about another time,--let usfirst think about this here marriage,--it ain't impossible.""Impossible! I should think not, Master Grog. But you will please toremember that Lackington has no child. I must succeed to the wholething,--title and all.""Good news for the Jews, would n't it be?" cried Davis. "Why, youroutlying paper would n't leave much of a margin to live on. You oweupwards of a hundred thousand,--that you do.""I could buy the whole concern to-morrow for five-and twenty thousandpounds. They can't touch the entail, old fellow!""My word on't, they 'd have it out of you, one way or other; but nevermind, there's time enough to think of these things,--just stir yourselfabout this marriage.""I 'll start on Monday. I have one or two trifling matters to look afterhere, and then I 'm free.""What's this in the turn-down of Lackington's letter marked 'Strictlyconfidential'?"'I meant to have despatched this yesterday, but fortunatelydeferred doing so--fortunately, I say--as Davenport Dunn hasjust arrived  here, with a very important communication, inwhich your interest is only inferior to my own. Theexplanation would be too long for a letter, and is notnecessary besides, as D. will be in Dublin a day or twoafter this reaches you. See him at once; his address isMerrion Square North, and he will be fully prepared for yourvisit. Be on your guard. In truth, D., who is my ownsolicitor and man of business in Ireland, is somewhat of acrafty nature, and may have other interests in his headparamount to those of, yours,"'Lackington.'""Can you guess what this means, Grog? Has it any reference to themarriage scheme?""No; this is another match altogether," said Grog, sententiously;"and this here Dunn--I know about him, though I never seen him--is theswellest cove going. You ain't fit to deal with him--you ain't!"added he, contemptuously. "If you go and talk to that fellow alone, Iknow how 't will be.""Come, come, I'm no flat"Grog's look--one of intense derision--stopped him, and after stammeringand blushing deeply, he was silent."You think, because you have a turn of speed among cripples, that you're fast," said Grog, with one of his least amiable grins, "but I tellyou that except among things of your own breeding, you'd never savea distance. Lord love ye! it never makes a fellow sharp to be 'done;'that's one of the greatest mistakes people ever make. It makes himsuspicious,--it keeps him on the look-out, as the sailors say; butwhat's the use of being on the look-out if you haven't got good eyes?It's the go-ahead makes a man nowadays, and the cautious chaps have noneof that. No, no; don't you go rashly and trust yourself alone with Dunn.You 'll have to consider well over this,--you 'll have to turn it overcarefully in your mind. I 'd not wonder," said he, after a pause, "butyou 'll have to take me with you!"CHAPTER XIII. A MESSAGE FROM JACK"He's come at last, Bella," said Kellett, as, tired and weary, heentered the little cottage one night after dark. "I waited till I sawhim come out of the station at West-land Row, and drive off to hishouse.""Did he see you, papa?--did he speak to you?" asked she, eagerly."See me--speak to me! It's little he was thinking of me, darling!with Lord Glengariff shaking one of his hands, and Sir Samuel Downiesqueezing the other, and a dozen more crying out, 'Welcome home, Mr.Bunn! it is happy we are to see you looking so well; we were afraid youwere forgetting poor Ireland and not coming back to us!' And by thattime the carmen took up the chorus, and began cheering and hurrahing,'Long life and more power to Davenport Dunn!' I give you my word, you 'dhave thought it was Daniel O'Connell, or at least a new Lord-Lieutenant,if you saw the uproar and excitement there was about him.""And he--how did he take it?" asked she."Just as cool as if he had a born right to it all. 'Thank you verymuch,--most kind of you,' he muttered, with a little smile and a wave ofhis hand, as much as to say, 'There now, that'll do. Don't you see thatI'm travelling incog., and don't want any more homage?'""Oh, no, papa,--not that,--it was rather like humility--""Humility!" said he, bursting into a bitter laugh,--"you know the manwell! Humility! there are not ten noblemen in Ireland this minute hasthe pride and impudence of that man. If you saw the way he walked downthe steps to his carriage, giving a little nod here, and a littlesmile there,--maybe offering two fingers to some one of rank in thecrowd--you'd say, 'There's a Prince coming home to his own country,--seehow, in all their joy, he won't let them be too familiar with him!'""Are you quite just--quite fair in all this, dearest papa?""Well, I suppose I'm not," said he, testily. "It's more likely thefault lies in myself,--a poor, broken-down country gentleman, lookingat everything on the dark side, thinking of the time when his own familywere something in the land, and Mr. Davenport Dunn very lucky if he gotleave to sit down in the servants'-hall. Nothing more likely than that!"added he, bitterly, as he walked up and down the little room in moodydispleasure."No, no, papa, you mistake me," said she, looking affectionately athim. "What I meant was this, that to a man so burdened with weightycares--one whose brain carries so many great schemes and enterprises--asense of humility, proud enough in its way, might naturally mingle withall the pleasures of the moment, whispering as it were to his heart,'Be not carried away by this flattery, be not carried away by your ownesteem; it is less you than the work you are destined for that men arehonoring. While they seem to cheer the pilot, it is rather the gloriousocean to which he is guiding them that they address their salutations.'Might not some such consciousness as this have moved him at such atime?""Indeed, I don't know, and I don't much care," said Kellett, sulkily. "Isuppose people don't feel, nowadays, the way they used when I was young.There's new inventions in everything.""Human nature is the same in all ages!" said she, faintly."Faith, and so much the worse for it, Bella. There's more bad than goodin life,--more cruelty and avarice and falsehood than there's kindness,benevolence, and honesty. For one good-natured act I 've met with,have n't I met twenty, thirty, no, but fifty, specimens of roguery anddouble-dealing. If you want to praise the world, don't call Paul Kellettinto court, that's all!""So far from agreeing with you," cried she, springing up and drawingher arm within his, "you are exactly the very testimony I'd adduce. Fromyour own lips have I heard more stories of generosity--more instancesof self-devotion, trustfulness, and true kindness--than I have everlistened to in life.""Ay, amongst the poor, Bella,--amongst the poor!" said Kellett, halfashamed of his recantation."Be assured, then, that these traits are not peculiar to any class. Thevirtues of the poor, like their sufferings, are more in evidence than inany other condition,--their lives are laid bare by poverty; but I feelassured people are better than we think them,--better than they knowthemselves.""I 'm waiting to hear you tell me that I 'm richer too," said Kellett,with a half-melancholy laugh,--"that I have an elegant credit in a banksomewhere, if I only knew where to draw upon it!""There is this wealth in the heart of man, if he but knew how to profitby it: it is to teach us this lesson that great men have arisen fromtime to time. The poets, the warriors, the explorers, the great inscience, set us all the same task, to see the world fair as it reallyis, to recognize the good around us, to subdue the erroneous thoughtsthat, like poisonous weeds, stifle the wholesome vegetation of ourhearts, and to feel that the cause of humanity is our cause, itstriumphs our triumphs, its losses our losses!""It may be all as you say, Bella darling, but it's not the kind of worldever I saw. I never knew men do anything but cheat each other and telllies; and the hardest of it all," added he, with a bitter sigh, "that,maybe, it is your own flesh and blood treats you worst!"This reflection announced the approach of gloomy thoughts. This wasabout the extent of any allusion he would ever make to his son, andBella was careful not to confirm him in the feeling by discussing oropposing it. She understood his nature well. She saw that some fortunateincident or other, even time, might dissipate what had never been morethan a mere prejudice, while, if reasoned with, he was certain to arguehimself into the conviction that of all the rubs he had met in life hisson Jack's conduct was the hardest and the worst.The long and painful silence that now ensued was at length broken bya loud knocking at the door of the cottage, a sound so unusual as tostartle them both."That's at our door, Bella," said he. "I wonder who it can be? Beechercouldn't come out this time of the night.""There it is again," said Bella, taking a light. "I 'll go and see who'sthere.""No, let me go," cried Kellett, taking the candle from her hand, andleaving the room with the firm step of a man about to confront a danger."Captain Kellett lives here, does n't he?" said a tall young fellow, inthe dress of a soldier in the Rifles.Kellett's heart sank heavily within him as he muttered a faint "Yes.""I'm the bearer of a letter for him," said the soldier, "from his son.""From Jack!" burst out Kellett, unable to restrain himself. "How is he?Is he well?""He's all right now; he was invalided after that explosion in thetrenches, but he's all right again. We all suffered more or less on thatnight;" and his eyes turned half inadvertently towards one side, whereKellett now saw that an empty coat-sleeve was hanging."It was there you left your arm, then, poor fellow," said Kellett,taking him kindly by the hand. "Come in and sit down; I'm CaptainKellett. A fellow-soldier of Jack's, Bella," said Kellett, as heintroduced him to his daughter; and the young man bowed with all theease of perfect good-breeding."You left my brother well, I hope?" said Bella, whose womanly tact sawat once that she was addressing her equal."So well that he must be back to his duty ere this. This letter is fromhim; but as he had not many minutes to write, he made me promise to comeand tell you myself all about him. Not that I needed his telling me, forI owe my life to your son, Captain Kellett; he carried me in on his backunder the sweeping fire of a Russian battery; two rifle bullets piercedhis chako as he was doing it; he must have been riddled with shot if theRussians had not stopped their fire.""Stopped their fire!""That they did, and cheered him heartily. How could they help it! he wasthe only man on that rude glacis, torn and gullied with shot and shell."[Illustration: 166]"Oh, the noble fellow!" burst out the girl, as her eyes ran over."Is n't he a noble fellow?" said the soldier. "We don't want for bravefellows in that army; but show me one will do what he did. It was a shotcarried off this," said he, touching the empty sleeve of his jacket;"and I said something--I must have been wandering in my mind--about aring my mother had given me, and it was on the finger of that poorhand. Well, what does Jack Kellett do, while the surgeon was dressingmy wound, but set off to the place where I was shot down, and, under allthat hailstorm of Mini-balls, brought in the limb. That's the ring,--herescued it at the risk of his life. There's more than courage in that;there's a goodness and kindness of heart worth more than all the braverythat ever stormed a battery.""And yet he left me,--deserted his poor father!" cried old Kellett,sobbing."If he did so, it was to make a name for you that the first man inEngland might be proud of.""To go off and list as a common soldier!" said Kellett; and then,suddenly shocked at his own rudeness, and shamed by the deep blush onSybella's face, he stammered out, "Not but I've known many a man withgood blood in his veins,--many a born gentleman,--serving in the ranks.""Well, I hope so," said the other, laughing with a hearty good-nature."It's not exactly so common a thing with us as with our worthy alliesthe French; but every now and then you'll find a firelock in the handsthat once held a double-barrelled Manton, and maybe knocked over thepheasants in his own father's preserves.""Indeed, I have heard of such things," said Kellett, with a sigh; buthe was evidently lending his assent on small security, because he caredlittle for the venture."How poor Jack loves you!" cried Bella, who, deep in her brother'sletter, had paid no attention to what was passing; "he calls youCharley,--nothing but Charley.""My name is Charles Conway," said the young man, smiling pleasantly."'Charley,'" read she, aloud, "'my banker when I have n't a shilling, mynurse in hospital, my friend always,--he 'll hand you this, and tellyou all about me. How the dear old dad will love to hear his stories ofcampaigning life, so like his own Peninsular tales! He'll see that thelong peace has not tamed the native pluck of the race, but that thefellows are just as daring, just as steady, just as invincible as everthey were; and he'll say, too, that to have won the friendship of such acomrade I must have good stuff in me also.'""Oh, if he hadn't gone away and left his old father!" broke in Kellett,lamentingly; "sure it was n't the time to leave me.""Wasn't it, though?" broke in the soldier; "I differ with you there. Itwas the very moment that every fellow with a dash of spirit about himshould have offered his services. We can't all have commissions,--wecan't all of us draw handsome allowances from our friends; but we cansurely take our turn in the trenches, and man a battery; and it's not abad lesson to teach the common fellow, that for pluck, energy, and evenholding out, the gentleman is at least his equal.""I think it's the first of the name ever served in the ranks," said theold man, who, with a perverse obstinacy, would never wander from thisone idea."How joyously he writes!" continued Bella, as she bent over the letter:"'I see by the papers, dearest Bella, that we are all disgusted anddispirited out here,--that we have nothing but grievances about greencoffee and raw pork, and the rest of it; don't believe a word of it.We do curse the Commissariat now and then. It smacks like epicurism toabuse the rations; but ask Charley if these things are ever thought ofafter we rise from dinner and take a peep at those grim old earthworks,that somehow seem growing every day, or if we grumble about freshvegetables as we are told off for a covering party. There's plenty offighting; and if any man has n't enough in the regular way, he can stealout of a clear night and have a pop at the Russians from a rifle-pit.I 'm twice as quick a shot as I was when I left home, and I confess thesport has double the excitement of my rambles after grouse over MahersMountain. It puts us on our mettle, too, to see our old enemies theFrench taking the work with us; not but they have given us the lion'sshare of it, and left our small army to do the same duties as theirlarge one. One of the regiments in our brigade, rather than flinch fromtheir share, returned themselves twelve hundred strong, while they hadclose upon three hundred sick,--ay, and did the work too. Ask dad ifhis Peninsulars beat that? Plenty of hardships, plenty of roughing,and plenty of hard knocks there are, but it's the jolliest life ever afellow led, for all that. Every day has its own story of some dashingbit of bravery, that sets us all wild with excitement, while we wonderto ourselves what do you all think of us in England. Here comes an orderto summon all to close their letters, and so I shut up, with my fondestaffection to the dear old dad and yourself."'Ever yours,"'Jack Kellett."'As I don't suppose you'll see it in the "Gazette," I may as well saythat I 'm to be made a corporal on my return to duty. It's a long wayyet to major-general, but at least I 'm on the road, Bella.'""A corporal! a corporal!" exclaimed Kellett; "may I never, if I knowwhether it's not a dream. Paul Kellett's eldest son--Kellett ofKellett's Court--a corporal!""My father's prejudices all attach to the habits of his own day," saidBella, in a low voice, to the soldier,--"to a time totally unlike thepresent in everything.""Not in everything, Miss Kellett," said the youth, with a quiet smile."Jack has just told you that all the old ardor, all the old spirit,is amongst the troops. They are the sons and grandsons of the gallantfellows that beat the French out of Spain.""And are you going back?" asked Kellett, half moodily, and scarcelyknowing what he said."They won't have me," said the soldier, blushing as he looked at hisempty sleeve; "they want fellows who can handle a Mini rifle.""Oh, to be sure--I ought to have known--I was forgetting," stammered heout, confusedly; "but you have your pension, anyhow.""I've a kind old mother, which is better," said the youth, blushingdeeper again. "She only gave me a short leave to run over and see JackKellett's family; for she knows Jack, by name at least, as if he wereher own."To Bella's questions he replied that his mother had a small cottage nearBettws, at the foot of Snowdon; it was one of the most picturesque spotsof all Wales, and in one of those sunny nooks where the climate almostcounterfeits the South of Europe."And now you'll go back, and live tranquilly there," said the girl, halfdreamily, for her thoughts were wandering away Heaven knows where.The youth saw the preoccupation, and arose to take his leave. "I shallbe writing to Jack to-morrow, Captain Kellett," said he. "I may say Ihave seen you well and hearty, and I may tell the poor fellow--I 'msure you 'll let me tell him--that you have heartily forgiven him?" OldKellett shook his head mournfully; and the other went on: "It's a hardthing of a dark night in the trenches, or while you lie on the wetground in front of them, thinking of home and far away, to have anyone thought but love and affection in your heart It does n't do to bemourning over faults and follies, and grieving over things one is sorryfor. One likes to think, too, that they who are at home, happy at theirfiresides, are thinking kindly of us. A man's heart is never so stoutbefore the enemy as when he knows how dear he is to some one far away."As the youth spoke these words half falteringly, for he was naturallybashful and timid, Bella turned her eyes fully upon his, with aninterest she had not felt before, and he reddened as he returned hergaze."I 'm sure you forgive me, sir," said he, addressing Kellett. "It was agreat liberty I took to speak to you in this fashion; but I was Jack'scomrade,--he told me every secret he had in the world, and I know howthe poor fellow would march up to a Russian battery to-morrow with aneasier heart than he'd hear one hard word from you.""Ask Bella there if I ever said a word, ever as much as mentioned hisname," said Kellett, with all the self-satisfaction of egotism.Bella's eyes quickly turned towards the soldier, with an expressionso full of significance that he only gave a very faint sigh, andmuttered,--"Well, I can do no more; when I next hear from Jack, sir, you shall knowit." And with this he moved towards the door.Bella hastily whispered a few words in her father's ear, to which, as heseemed to demur, she repeated still more eagerly."How could we, since it's Sunday, and there will be Beecher coming out?"muttered he."But this is a gentleman, papa; his soldier jacket is surely nodisgrace--""I couldn't, I couldn't," muttered he, doggedly.Again she whispered, and at last he said,--"Maybe you 'd take your bit of dinner with us tomorrow, Conway,--quitealone, you know."The young fellow drew himself up, and there was, for an instant, alook of haughty, almost insolent, meaning in his face. There was that,however, in Bella's which as speedily overcame whatever irritation hadcrossed his mind, and he politely said,--"If you will admit me in this dress,--I have no other with me.""To be sure,--of course," broke in Kellett. "When my son is wearing thesame, what could I say against it?"The youth smiled good-naturedly at this not very gracious speech; mayhapthe hand he was then holding in his own compensated for its rudeness,and his "Good-bye!" was uttered in all frankness and cordiality.CHAPTER XIV. A DINNER AT PAUL KELLETT'STo all you gentlemen who live at home at ease there are few things lesstroublesome than the arrangement of what is called a dinner-party.Some difficulty may possibly exist as to the guests. Lady Mary may beindisposed. It might not be quite right to ask Sir Harry to meet theHeadleys. A stray embarrassment or two will arise to require a littlethought or a little management The material details, however, give nocare. There is a stereotyped mode of feeding one's friends, out of whichit is not necessary, were it even possible, to issue. Your mock-turtlemay have a little more or less the flavor of Madeira; your salmon besomewhat thicker in the shoulder; your sirloin be a shade more or lessunderdone; your side dishes a little more or less uneatable than yourneighbor's; but, after all, from the caviare to the cheese, thewhole thing follows an easy routine, and the dinner of No. 12 is thefac-simile of the dinner at No. 13; and the same silky voice thatwhispers "Sherry, sir?" has its echo along the whole street The sametoned-down uniformity pervades the intellectual elements of the feast;all is quiet, jogtrot, and habitual; a gentle atmosphere of murmuringdulness is diffused around, very favorable to digestion, and ratherdisposing to sleep.How different are all these things in the case of the poor man,especially when he happens to be a reduced gentleman, whose memories ofthe past are struggling and warring with exigencies of the present andthe very commonest necessities are matters of grave difficulty.Kellett was very anxious to impress his son's friend with a sense of hissocial standing and importance, and he told Bella "not to mind spendingthe whole week's allowance, just to show the soldier what Jack's familywas." A leg of mutton and a little of Kinnahan's port constituted, inhis mind, a very high order of entertainment; and these were at oncevoted. Bella hoped that after the first outburst of this ostentatiousfit he would fall back in perfect indifference about the whole matter;but far from it,--his waking thought in the morning was the dinner; andwhen she remarked to him at breakfast on the threatening aspect of theclouds, his reply was, "No matter, dear, if we have plenty of capers."Even the unhappy possibility of Beecher's "dropping in" was subordinateto his wish to cut a figure on the occasion; and he pottered about fromthe dining-room to the kitchen, peeped into saucepans, and scrutinizedcovered dishes with a most persistent activity. Nor was Bella herselfquite averse to all this. She saw in the distance--remotely it mightbe--the glimmering of a renewed interest about poor Jack. "The pleasurethis little incident imparts," thought she, "will spread its influencewider. He 'll talk of him too; he 'll be led on to let him mingle withour daily themes. Jack will be one of us once more after this;" and soshe encouraged him to make of the occasion a little festival.What skill did she not practise, what devices of taste not display,to cover over the hard features of their stern poverty! The few littlearticles of plate which remained after the wreck of their fortune wereplaced on the sideboard, conspicuous amongst which was a cup "presentedby his brother officers to Captain Paul Kellett, on his retirementfrom the regiment, with which he had served thirty-eight years,"--atestimonial only exhibited on the very most solemn occasions. His swordand sash--the same he wore at Waterloo--were arrayed over the fireplace,and his Talavera chako--grievously damaged by a French sabre--hung abovethem. "If he begins about 'that expedition,'"--it was thus he alwaysdesignated the war in the Crimea,--"Bella, I 'll just give him a touchof the real thing, as we had it in the Peninsula! Faith, it wasn'tdigging holes in the ground we were then;" and he laughed to himself atthe absurdity of the conceit.The few flowers which the garden owned at this late season, humble andcommon as they were, figured on the chimney-piece, and not a resourceof ingenuity was neglected to make that little dinner-room look pleasantand cheery. Fully a dozen times had Kellett gone in and out of the room,never weary of admiring it, and as constantly muttering to himself somepraise of Bella, to whose taste it was all owing. "I 'd put the cup inthe middle of the table, Bella. The wallflowers would do well enoughat the sideboard. Well, maybe you 're right, darling; it is lesspretentious, to be sure. And be careful, dear, that old Betty hasa clean apron. May I never, but she's wearing the same one sinceCandlemas! And don't leave her any corks to draw; she's the devil forbreaking them into the bottle. I 'll sit here, where I can have thescrew at my hand. There 's a great convenience in a small room, afterall. By the good day, here 's Beecher!" exclaimed he, as that worthyindividual approached the door."What's all this for, Kellett, old boy? Are you expecting the Viceroy,or celebrating a family festival, eh? What does it mean?""'T is a mutton chop I was going to give a friend of Jack's,--a youngfellow that brought me a letter from him yesterday.""Oh! your son Jack. By the way, what's his regiment,--Light Dragoons, isn't it?""No; the Rifles," said Kellett, with a short cough."He's pretty high up for his lieutenancy by this, ain't he?" saidBeecher, rattling on. "He Joined before Alma, didn't he?""Yes; he was at the battle," said Kellett, dryly; for though he had onceor twice told his honorable friend that Jack was in the service, he hadnot mentioned that he was in the ranks. Not that Annesley Beecherwould have, in the least, minded the information. The fact could not bypossibility have touched himself; it never could have compelled himto mount guard, do duty in the trenches, eat Commissariat biscuit, orsubmit to any of the hardships soldiery inflicts; and he 'd have heardof Jack's fate with all that sublime philosophy which teaches us to beartranquilly the calamities of others."Why don't you stir yourself to get him a step? There's nothing tobe had without asking! ay, worse than asking,--begging, worrying,importuning. Get some fellow in one of the offices to tell you whenthere's a vacancy, and then up and at them. If they say, 'We are onlywaiting for an opportunity, Captain Kellett,' you reply, 'Now's yourtime then, Groves of the Forty-sixth is gone "toes up;" Simpson,of the Bays, has cut his lucky this morning.' That's the way to go towork.""You are wonderful!" exclaimed Kellett, who really did all but worshipthe worldly wisdom of his friend."I 'd ask Lackington, but he 's no use to any one. Just look at my owncase." And now he launched forth into the theme he really loved andnever found wearisome. His capacity for anything--everything, his exactfitness for fifty opposite duties, his readiness to be a sinecurist, andhis actual necessity for a salary, were subjects he could be eloquenton; devoting occasional passing remarks to Lackington's intensestupidity, who never exerted himself for him, and actually "thought hima flat." "I know you won't believe--but he does, I assure you--he thinksme a flat!"Before Kellett could fully rally from the astounding force of such anunjustifiable opinion, his guest, Conway, knocked at the door."I say, Kellett, there comes an apology from your friend.""How so?" asked Kellett, eagerly."I just saw a soldier come up to the door, and the chances are it 's anofficer's servant with a note of excuse."The door opened as he spoke, and Conway entered the room. Kellett methim with an honest cordiality, and then, turning to Beecher, said,--"My son's friend and comrade,--Mr. Annesley Beecher;" and the two menbowed to each other, and exchanged glances that scarcely indicated muchpleasure at the acquaintance."Why, he 's in the ranks, Kellett," whispered Beecher, as he drew himinto the window."So is my son," said Kellett, with a gulp that half choked him."The deuce he is; you never told me that. And is this our dinnercompany?""I was just going to explain--Oh, here's Bella!" and Miss Kellettentered, giving such a cordial greeting to the soldier that made Beecheractually astounded."What's his name, Kellett?" said Beecher, half languidly."A good name, for the matter of that; he's called Conway.""Conway--Conway?" repeated Beecher, aloud; "we have fortieth cousins,Conways. There was a fellow called Conway in the Twelfth Lancers thatwent a tremendous pace; they nicknamed him the 'Smasher,' I don't knowwhy. Do you?" said he, addressing the soldier."I 've heard it was from an awkward habit he had of putting his heel onsnobs.""Oh! you know him, perhaps?" said Beecher, affectedly."Why, as I was the man myself, I ought, according to the old adage, tosay I knew but little of him.""You Conway of the Twelfth! the same that owned Brushwood and LadyKiller, that won the Riddlesworth?""You're calling up old memories to me," said the youth, smiling, "which,after all, I 'd just as soon forget.""And you were an officer in the Lancers!" exclaimed Kellett, eagerly."Yes; I should have had my troop by this if I hadn't owned thosefortunate three-year-olds Mr. Beecher has just reminded me of. Likemany others, whom success on the turf has misled, I went on madly, quiteconvinced I had fortune with me.""Ah!" said Beecher, moralizing, "there's no doing a good stroke of workwithout the legs. Cranley tried it, Hawchcome tried it, Ludborough triedit, but it won't do. As Grog Davis says, 'you must not ignore existinginterests.'""There's another name I have n't heard for many a year. What a scoundrelthat fellow was! I 've good ground for believing that this Davis it waspoisoned Sir Aubrey, the best horse I ever owned. Three men of his stampwould make racing a sport unfit for gentlemen.""Miss Kellett, will you allow me?" said Beecher, offering his arm,and right well pleased that the announcement of dinner cut short theconversation."A nice fellow that friend of your brother's," muttered he, as he ledher along; "but what a stupid thing to go and serve in the ranks! It'sabout the last step I 'd ever have thought of taking.""I'm certain of it," said Bella, with an assent so ready as to soundlike flattery.As the dinner proceeded, old Kellett's astonishment continued toincrease at the deference paid by Beecher to every remark that fell fromConway. The man who had twice won "the Bexley," and all but won "theElms;" he who owned Sir Aubrey, and actually took the odds against all"Holt's stable," was no common celebrity. In vain was it Conway tried tolead the conversation to his friend Jack,--what they had seen, and wherethey had been together,--Beecher would bring them back to the Turf andthe "Racing Calendar." There were so many dark things he wanted to know,so much of secret history he hoped to be enlightened in; and whenever,as was often the case, Conway did not and could not give him the desiredinformation, Beecher slyly intimated by a look towards Kellett that hewas a deep fellow; while he muttered to himself, "Grog Davis would haveit out of him, notwithstanding all his cunning."Bella alone wished to hear about the war. It was not alone that herinterest was excited for her brother, but in the great events ofthat great struggle her enthusiastic spirit found ample material foradmiration. Conway related many heroic achievements, not alone ofBritish soldiers, but of French and even Russians. Gallantry, ashe said, was of no nation in particular,--there were brave fellowseverywhere; and he told, with all the warmth of honest admiration, howdaringly the enemy dashed into the lines at night and confronted certaindeath, just for the sake of causing an interruption to the siege, anddelaying, even for a brief space, the advance of the works. Told, asthese stories were, with all the freshness which actual observationconfers, and in a spirit of unexaggerated simplicity, still old Kellettheard them with the peevish jealousy of one who felt that they weredestined to eclipse in their interest the old scenes of Spain andPortugal. That any soldiers lived nowadays like the old Light Division,that there were such fellows as the fighting Fifth, or Crawfurd'sBrigade, no man should persuade him; and when he triumphantly asked ifthey had n't as good a general as Sir Arthur Welles-ley, he fell back,laughing contemptuously at the idea of such being deemed war at all, orthe expedition, as he would term it, being styled a campaign."Remember, Captain Kellett, we had a fair share of your old Peninsularfriends amongst us,--gallant veterans, who had seen everything from theDouro to Bayonne.""Well, and did n't they laugh at all this? did n't they tell you fairlyit was not fighting?""I 'm not so sure they did," said Conway, laughing good-naturedly."Gordon told an officer in my hearing, that the charge up the heightsat the Alma reminded him strongly of Harding's ascent of the hills atAlbuera.""No, no, don't say that; I can't stand it!" cried Kellett, peevishly;"sure if it was only that one thinks they were Frenchmen--Frenchmen,with old Soult at their head--at Albuera--""There's nothing braver than a Russian, sir, depend on 't," said theyouth, with a slight warmth in his tone."Brave if you like; but, you see, he isn't a soldier by nature, like theFrenchman; and yet we beat the French, thrashed him from the sea to thePyrenees, and over the Pyrenees into France.""What's the odds? You'd not do it again; or, if you did, not get Nap toabdicate. I 'd like to have two thousand to fifty on the double event,"said Beecher, chuckling over an imaginary betting-book."And why not do it again?" broke in Bella. "Is it after listeningto what we have heard this evening that we have cause for anyfaint-heartedness about the spirit of our soldiery? Were Cressy orAgincourt won by braver fellows than now stand entrenched aroundSebastopol?""I don't like it; as Grog says, 'never make a heavy book on a waitingrace!'""I conclude, then," said Conway, "you are one of those who augur ill ofour success in the present war?""I 'd not stake an even fifty, on either side," said Beecher, who hadshrewd suspicions that it was what he 'd have called a "cross," and thatTodleben and Lord Raglan could make "things comfortable" at any moment."I see Miss Bella's of my mind," added he, as he perceived a verypeculiar smile just parting her lips."I suspect not, Mr. Beecher," said she, slyly."Why did you laugh, then?""Shall I tell you? It was just this, then, passing in my mind. I waswondering within myself whether the habit of reducing all men's motivesto the standard of morality observable in the 'ring' more often lead tomistakes, or the contrary.""I sincerely trust that it rarely comes right," broke in Conway. "I wasclose upon four years on the turf, as they call it; and if I had n'tbeen ruined in time, I 'd have ended by believing that an honest man wasas great a myth as anything we read of amongst the heathen gods.""That all depends upon what you call honest," said Beecher."To be sure it does; you 're right there," chimed in Kellett; andBeecher, thus seconded, went on,--"Now, I call a fellow honest when he won't put his pal into a hole; whenhe 'll tell him whenever he has got a good thing, and let him have hisshare; when he'll warn him against a dark lot, and not let him 'in' tooblige any one,--that's honesty.""Well, perhaps it is," said Conway, laughing. "The Russians said it wasmercy t' other day, when they went about shooting the wounded. There'sno accounting for the way men are pleased to see things.""I 'd like to have your definition of honesty," said Beecher, slightlypiqued by the last remark."How can you expect me to give you one? Have I not just told you I wasfor more than three years on the turf, had a racing stable, and dealtwith trainers and jocks?" He paused for a second or two, and then, ina stronger voice, went on: "I cannot believe that the society of commonsoldiers is a very high standard by which to measure either manners ormotives; and yet I pledge my word to it, that my comrades, in comparisonwith my old companions of the turf, were unexceptionable gentlemen. Imean that, in all that regards truthfulness, fair dealing, and honorableintercourse, it would be insult to compare them.""Ah, you see," said Beecher, "you got it 'all hot,' as they say. You're not an unprejudiced juryman. They gave you a bucketing,--I heard allabout it. If Corporal Trim had n't been doctored, you 'd have won twelvethousand at Lancaster."Conway smiled good-humoredly at the explanation thus suggested, but saidnothing."Bother it for racing," said Kellett "I never knew any real taste forhorses or riding where there was races. Instead of caring for a fine,showy beast, a little thick in the shoulder, square in the joints, andstrong in the haunch, they run upon things like greyhounds, all drawn upbehind and low before; it's a downright misery to mount one of them.""But it's a real pleasure to see him come in first, when your booktells you seven to one in your favor. Talk of sensations," said he,enthusiastically; "where is there the equal of that you feel when theorange and blue you have backed with a heavy pot comes pelting round thecorner, followed by two,--then three,--all punishing, your own fellowholding on beautifully, with one eye a little thrown backward to seewhat's coming, and that quiet, calm look about the mouth that says,'I have it.' Every note of the wild cheer that greets the winner isapplause to your own heart; that deafening yell is your own song oftriumph.""Listen to him!--that 's his hobby," cried Kellett, whose eyes glistenedwith excitement at the description, and who really felt an honestadmiration for the describer. "Ah, Beecher, my boy!--you 're at homethere.""If they 'd only give me a chance, Paul,--one chance!"Whether it was that the expression was new and strange to him, or thatthe energy of the speaker astonished him, but Conway certainly turnedhis eyes towards him in some surprise; a sentiment which Beecher at onceinterpreting as interest, went on,--"You," said he,--"you had many a chance; I never had one. Youmight have let them all in, you might have landed them all--so they tellme, at least--if you'd have withdrawn Eyetooth. He was own brother toAurelius, and sure to win. Well, if you 'd have withdrawn him for theBexley, you'd have netted fifty thousand. Grog--I mean a fellow 'wellup' among the legs--told me so.""Your informant never added what every gentleman in England would havesaid of me next day," said Conway. "It would have been neither morenor less than a swindle. The horse was in perfect health and topcondition,--why should I not have run him?""For no other reason that I know, except that you 'd have been richer byfifty thousand for not doing it.""Well," said Conway, quietly, "it's not a very pleasant thing to becrippled in this fashion; but I 'd rather lose the other arm than dowhat you speak of. And if I did n't know that many gentlemen get a looseway of talking of fifty things they 'd never seriously think of doing, I'd rather feel disposed to be offended at what you have just said.""Offended! of course not,--I never dreamed of anything offensive. I onlymeant to say that they call me a flat; but hang me if I'd have letthem off as cheaply as you did.""Then they're at perfect liberty to call me a flat also," said Conway,laughing. "Indeed, I suspect I have given them ample reason to think meone."The look of compassionate pity Beecher bestowed on him as he utteredthese words was as honest as anything in his nature could be.It was in vain Bella tried to get back the conversation to the eventsof the campaign, to the scenes wherein poor Jack was an actor. Beecher'sperverse activity held them chained to incidents which, to him, embracedall that was worth living for. "You must have had some capital things inyour time, though. You had some race-horses, and were well in with TomNolan's set," said he to Conway."Shall I tell you the best match I ever had,--at least, the one gave memost pleasure?""Do, by all means," said Beecher, eagerly, "though I guess it already.It was against Vickersley, even for ten thousand, at York.""No," said the other, smiling."Well, then, it was the Cotswold,--four miles in two heats. You won itwith a sister to Ladybird.""Nor that, either; though by these reminiscences you show me howaccurately you have followed my humble fortunes.""There 's not a man has done anything on the turf for fifty yearsI can't give you his history; not a horse I won't tell you all hisperformances, just as if you were reading it out of the 'RacingCalendar.' As 'Bell's Life' said t' other day, 'If Annesley Beechercan't answer that question,'--and it was about Running Rein,--'no manin England can.' I'm 'The Fellow round the corner' that you always seealluded to in 'Bell.'""Indeed!" exclaimed Conway, with assumed deference."That I am,--Kellett knows it. Ask old Paul there,--ask Grog,--askany one you like, whether A. B. is up to a thing or two. But we 'reforgetting this match,--the best thing you said you ever had.""I 'm not so sure you 'll be of my mind when you hear it," saidConway, smiling. "It was a race we had t' other day in the Crimea,--asteeplechase, over rather a stiff course, with Spanish ponies; and Irode against Lord Broodale, Sir Harry Curtis, and Captain Marsden, andwon five pounds and a dozen of champagne. My comrades betted somethinglike fifty shillings on the match, and there would have been a generalbankruptcy in the company if I had lost. Poor Jack mortgaged his watchand a pilot coat that he was excessively proud of,--it was the onlybit of mufti in the battalion, I think; but he came off all right, andtreated us all to a supper with his winnings, which, if I don't mistake,did n't pay more than half the bill.""Good luck to him, and here's his health," cried Kellett, whose heart,though proof against all ordinary appeals to affection, could notwithstand this assault of utter recklessness and improvidence. "He's myown flesh and blood, there's no denying it."If Conway was astounded at this singular burst of paternal affection, hedid not the less try to profit by it, and at once began to recount theachievements of his comrade, Jack Kellett. The old man listened halfdoggedly at first, but gradually, as the affection of others for hisson was spoken of, he relaxed, and heard, with an emotion he could noteasily repress, how Jack was beloved by the whole regiment,--that to behis companion in outpost duty, to be stationed with him in a battery,was a matter of envy. "I won't say," said Conway, "that every corps andevery company has not fellows brave as he; but show me one who 'll carrya lighter spirit into danger, and as soft a heart amid scenes ofcruelty and bloodshed. So that if you asked who in our battalion is thepluckiest, who the most tenderhearted, who the most generous, and whothe least given to envy, you'd have the one answer, 'Jack Kellett,'without a doubt.""And what will it all do for him?" broke in the old man, resorting oncemore to his discontent."What will it do for him? What has it done for him? Is it nothing thatin a struggle history will make famous a man's name is a household word;that in a war where deeds of daring are so rife, his outnumbers those ofany other? It's but a few weeks back a Sardinian staff-officer, comingto our head-quarters on business, asked if the celebrated 'Bersagliere'was there,--so they call riflemen,--and desired to see him; and, betterthan that, though he didn't know Jack's name, none doubted who wasmeant, but Jack Kellett was sent for on the instant. Now, that I callfame.""Will it get him his commission?" said Beecher, knowingly, as though byone shrewd stroke of intelligence he had embraced the entire question."A commission can be had for four hundred and fifty pounds, and some manin Parliament to ask for it. But what Jack has done cannot be boughtby mere money. Do you go out there, Mr. Beecher, just go and see foryourself--it's well worth the while--what stuff fellows are made of thatface danger every day and night, without one thought above duty, neverexpecting, never dreaming that anything they do is to have its personalbenefit, and would far rather have their health drunk by their comradesthan be quoted in the 'Times.' You'll find your old regiment there,--youwere in the Fusilier Guards, weren't you?""Yes, I tried soldiering, but I did n't like it," said Beecher; "and itwas better in my day than now, they tell me."A movement of impatience on Conway's part was suddenly interrupted byKellett, saying, "He means that the service is n't what it was; andindeed he's right there. I remember the time there wasn't a man in theEighty-fifth could n't carry away three bottles of Bennett's strongport, and play as good a rubber, afterwards, as Hoyle himself.""It's the snobbery I was thinking of," said Beecher; "fellows go intothe army now who ought to be counter-jumping.""I don't know what they ought to be doing," broke in Conway, angrily,"but I could tell you something of what they are doing; and where youare to find men to do it better, I 'm not so clear. I said a fewmoments back, you ought to go out to the Crimea; but I beg to correctmyself,--it is exactly what you ought not to do.""Never fear, old fellow; I never dreamed of it. Give you any odds youlike, you 'll never see my arrival quoted at Balaklava.""A thousand pardons, Miss Kellett," whispered Conway, as he arose, "butyou see how little habit I have of good company; I'm quite ashamed ofmy warmth. May I venture to come and pay you a morning visit before I goback?""Oh, by all means; but why not an evening one? You are more certain tofind us.""Then an evening one, if you'll allow me;" and shaking Kellett's handwarmly, and with a cold bow to Beecher, he withdrew."Wasn't he a flat!" cried Beecher, as the door closed after him. "TheSmasher--that was the name he went by--went through an estate of sixthousand a year, clean and clear, in less than four years, and there heis now, a private soldier with one arm!""Faith, I like him; he's a fine fellow," said Kellett, heartily."Ask Grog Davis if he'd call him a fine fellow," broke in Beecher,sneeringly; "there's not such a spoon from this to Newmarket. Oh, Paul,my hearty, if I had but one, just one of the dozen chances he has thrownaway! But, as Grog says, 'a crowbar won't make a cracksman;' nor willa good stable of horses, and safe jocks 'bring a fellow round,' if hehasn't it here." And he touched his forehead with his forefinger mostsignificantly.Meanwhile Charles Conway sauntered slowly back to town, on the wholesomewhat a sadder man than he had left it in the morning. His friendJack had spoken much to him of his father and sister, and why or towhat extent he knew not, but somehow they did not respond to his ownself-drawn picture of them. Was it that he expected old Kellett wouldhave been a racier version of his son,--the same dashing, energeticspirit,--seeing all for the best in life, and accepting even itsreverses in a half-jocular humor? Had he hoped to find in him Jack'scareless, easy temper,--a nature so brimful of content as to make allaround sharers in its own blessings; or had he fancied a "fine old Irishgentleman" of that thoroughbred school he had so often heard of?Nor was he less disappointed with Bella; he thought she had beenhandsomer, or, at least, quite a different kind of beauty. Jack wasblue-eyed and Saxon-looking, and he fancied that she must be a "blonde,"with the same frank, cheery expression of her brother; and he found herdark-haired and dark-skinned, almost Spanish in her look,--the cast ofher features grave almost to sadness. She spoke, too, but little, andnever once reminded him, by a tone, a gesture, or a word, of his oldcomrade.Ah! how these self-created portraits do puzzle and disconcert us throughlife! How they will obtrude themselves into the foreground, makingthe real and the actual but mere shadows in the distance! What seemingcontradiction, too, do they create as often as we come into contact withthe true, and find it all so widely the reverse of what we dreamed of!How often has the weary emigrant sighed over his own created promisedland in the midst of the silent forest or the desolate prairie! How hasthe poor health-seeker sunk heavy-hearted amid scenes which, had he notmisconstrued them to himself, he had deemed a paradise!These "phrenographs" are very dangerous paintings, and the more so thatwe sketch them in unconsciously."Jack is the best of them; that's clear," said Conway, as he walkedalong; and yet, with all his affection for him, the thought did notbring the pleasure it ought to have done.CHAPTER XV. A HOME SCENEWhen Paul Kellett described Mr. Davenport Dunn's almost triumphal entryinto Dublin, he doubtless fancied in his mind the splendors that awaitedhim at home; the troops of servants in smart liveries, the homage ofhis household, and the costly entertainment which most certainly shouldcelebrate his arrival. Public rumor had given to the hospitalitiesof that house a wide extended fame. The fashionable fishmonger of thecapital, his Excellency's "purveyor" of game, the celebrated Italianwarehouse, all proclaimed him their best customer. "Can't let you havethat turbot, sir, till I hear from Mr. Dunn." "Only two pheasants to behad, sir, and ordered for Mr. Dunn." "The white truffles only takenby one gentleman in town. None but Mr. Dunn would pay the price." Theculinary traditions of his establishment threw the Castle into thebackground, and Kellett revelled in the notion of the great festivitythat now welcomed his return. "Lords and earls--the biggest salmon inthe market--the first men of the land--and lobster sauce--ancient namesand good families--with grouse, and 'Sneyd's Twenty-one'--that 'swhat you may call life! It is wonderful, wonderful!" Now, when Paulenunciated the word "wonderful" in this sense, he meant it to imply thatit was shameful, distressing, and very melancholy for the prospects ofhumanity generally. And then he amused himself by speculating whetherDunn liked it all,--whether the unaccustomed elegance of these greatdinners did not distress and pain him rather than give pleasure, andwhether the very consciousness of his own low origin wasn't a poisonthat mingled in every cup he tasted."It's no use talking," muttered he to himself; "a man must be bred toit, like everything else. The very servants behind his chair frightenhim; he's, maybe, eating with his knife, or he's putting salt where heought to put sugar, or he does n't take the right kind of wine with hismeat. Beecher says he 'd know any fellow just by that, and then it's'all up' with him. Wonderful, wonderful!"How would it have affected these speculations had Kellett known that,while he was indulging them, Dunn had quietly issued by a back doorfrom his house, and, having engaged a car, set out towards Clontarf?A drearier drive of a dreary evening none need wish for. Occasionalshowers were borne on the gusty wind, swooping past as though hurryingto some elemental congress far away, while along the shore the wavesbeat with that irregular plash that betokens wild weather at sea. Thefitful moonlight rather heightened than diminished the dismal aspect ofthe scenery. For miles the bleak strand stretched away, no headland noreven a hillock marking the coast; the spectral gable of a ruined churchbeing the only object visible against the leaden sky. Little garlands ofpaper, the poor tributes of the very poor, decorated the graves andthe head-stones, and, as they rustled in the night wind, sounded likeghostly whisperings. The driver piously crossed himself as they passedthe "un-cannie" spot, but Dunn took no heed of it. To wrap his cloaktighter about him, to shelter more closely beneath his umbrella, wereall that the dreary scene exacted from him; and except when a vividflash of lightning made the horse swerve from the road and dash downinto the rough shingle of the strand, he never adverted to the way orthe weather."What's this,--where are we going?" cried he, impatiently."'T is the flash that frightened the beast, yer honner," said the man;"and if it was plazin' to you, I 'd rather tarn back again.""Turn back--where to?""To town, yer honner.""Nothing of the kind; drive on, and quickly too. We have five miles yetbefore us, and it will be midnight ere we get over them at this rate."Sulkily and unwillingly did he obey; and, turning from the shore, theyentered upon a low, sandy road that traversed a wide and dreary tract,barely elevated a few feet above the sea. By degrees the little patchesof grass and fern disappeared, and nothing stretched on either side butlow sand hummocks, scantily covered with rushes. Sea-shells crackledbeneath the wheels as they went, and after a while the deep booming ofthe sea thundering heavily along a sandy shore, apprised them that theyhad crossed the narrow neck of land which divided two bays."Are you quite certain you I 've taken the right road, my man?" criedDunn, as he observed something like hesitation in the other's manner."It ought to be somewhere hereabout we turn off," said the man, gettingdown to examine more accurately from beneath. "There was a little crossput up to show the way, but I don't see it.""But you have been here before. Ton told me you knew the place.""I was here onst, and, by the same token, I swore I 'd never come again.I lamed the best mare I ever put a collar on, dragging through thisdeep sand. Wirra, wirra! why the blazes would n't he live where otherChristians do! There it is now; I see a light. Ah! bother them, it's outagain."Pushing forward as well as he might in the direction he had seen thelight, he floundered heavily on, the wheels sinking nearly to the axles,and the horse stumbling at every step."Your horse is worth nothing, my good fellow; he has n't strength tokeep his legs," said Dunn, angrily."Good or bad, I 'll give you lave to broil me on a gridiron if ever yecatch me coming the same road again. Ould Duun won't have much companyif he waits for me to bring them.""I 'll take good care not to tempt you!" said Dunn, angrily.And now they plodded on in moody silence till they issued forth upon alittle flat space, bounded on three sides by the sea, in the midst ofwhich a small two-storied house stood, defended from the sea by a roughstone breakwater that rose above the lower windows."There it is now, bad luck to it!" said the carman, savagely, for hishorse was so completely exhausted that he was obliged to walk at hishead and lift him at every step."You may remain here till I want you," said Dunn, getting down andplodding his way through the heavy sand. Flakes of frothy seadrift sweptpast him as he went, and the wild wind carried the spray far inlandin heavy showers, beating against the walls and windows of the lonelyhouse, and making the slates rattle. A low wall of large stones acrossthe door showed that all entrance by that means was denied; and Dunnturned towards the back of the house, where, sheltered by the low wall,a small door was detectable. He knocked several times at this beforeany answer was returned; when, at last, a harsh voice from within calledout,--"Don't ye hear who it is? confound ye! Open the door at once!" and Dunnwas admitted into a large kitchen, where in a great straw chair besidethe fire was seated the remains of a once powerful man, and who,although nearly ninety years of age, still preserved a keen eye, asearching look, and a quick impatience of manner rarely observable athis age."Well, father, how are you?" said Dunn, taking him affectionately byboth hands, and looking kindly in his face."Hearty,--stout and hearty," said the old man. "When did you arrive?""A couple of hours ago. I did not wait for anything but a biscuit and aglass of wine, when I set out here to see you. And you are well?""Just as you see: an odd pain or so across the back, and a swimming ofthe head,--a kind of giddiness now and then, that's all. Put the lightover there till I have a look at you. You 're thinner, Davy,--a dealthinner, than when you went away.""I have nothing the matter with me; a little tired or so, that's all,"said Dunn, hastily. "And how are things doing here, father, since Ileft?""There's little to speak of," said the old man. "There never is muchdoing at this season of the year. You heard, of course, that Gogarty haslost his suit; they 're moving for a new trial, but they won't get it.Lanty Moore can't pay up the rest of the purchase for Slanestown, andI told Hankes to buy it in. Kelly's murderer was taken on Friday last,near Kilbride, and offers to tell, God knows what, if they won't hanghim; and Sir Gilbert North is to be the new Secretary, if, as the'Evening Mail' says, Mr. Davenport Dunn concurs in the appointment"--andhere the old man laughed till his eyes ran over. "That's all the news,Davy, of the last week; and now tell me yours. The papers say you weredining with kings and queens, and driving about in royal coaches allover the Continent,--was it true, Davy?""You got my letters, of course, father?""Yes; and I could n't make out the names, they were all new and strangeto me. I want to have from yourself what like the people are,--are theyas hard-working, are they as 'cute as our own? There's just two thingsnow in the world,--coal and industry,--sorra more than that And so youdined with the King of France?""With the Emperor, father. I dined twice; he took me over toFontainebleau and made me stay the day.""You could tell him many a thing he'd never hear from another, Davy; youcould explain to him what's doing here, and how he might imitate itover there,--rooting out the old vermin and getting new stock in theland,--eh, Davy?""He needs no counsels, at least from such as me," said Dunn."Faith, he might have worse, far worse. An Encumbered Estate Court woulddo all his work for him well, and the dirty word 'Confiscation' neednever be uttered!""He knows the road he wants to go," said Dunn, curtly."So he may; but that does n't prove it 's the best way.""Whichever path he takes he'll tread it firmly, father, and that's morethan half the battle. If you only saw what a city he has made Paris--""That's just what I don't like. What's the good of beautifying andgilding or ornamenting what you 're going to riddle with grape andsmash with round shot? It's like dressing a sweep in a field-marshal'suniform, And we all know where it will be to-morrow or next day.""That we don't, sir. You 're not aware that these spaciousthoroughfares, these wide squares, these extended terraces, are socontrived that columns may march and manoeuvre in them, squadronscharge, and great artillery act through them. The proudest temples ofthat splendid city serve as bastions; the great Louvre itself is less apalace than a fortress.""Ay, ay, ay," cackled the old man, to whom these revelations opened anew vista of thought. "But what's the use of it, after all, Davy? Hemust trust somebody; and when it comes to that with anybody in life,where 's his security, tell me that? But let us talk about home. Is ittrue the Ministry is going out?""They're safer than ever; take my word for it, father, that thesefellows know the trick of it better than all that went before them.They 'll just do whatever the nation and the 'Times' dictate to them;a little slower, mayhap, than they are ordered, but they 'll do it Theyhave no embarrassments of a policy of any kind; and the only pretence ofa principle they possess is to sit on the Treasury benches.""And they 're right, Davy,--they 're right," said the old man,energetically."I don't doubt but they are, sir; the duty of the pilot is to takecharge of the ship, but not to decide the port she sails for.""I wish you were one of them, Davy; they'd suit you, and you 'd suitthem.""So we should, sir; and who knows what may turn up? I'm not impatient""That's right, Davy; that's the lesson I always taught you;wait,--wait!""When did you see Driscoll, father?" asked Dunn, after a pause."He was here last week; he's up to his ears about that claim to theBeecher estate, Lord--Lord--What's his--""Lackington.""Yes, Lord Lackington. He says if you were once come home, you 'd gethim leave to search the papers in the Record Tower at the Castle, andthat it would be the making of himself if anything came out of it.""He's always mare's-nesting, sir," said Dunn, carelessly."Faith, he has contrived to feather his own nest, anyhow," said the oldman, laughing. "He lent Lord Glengariff five thousand pounds t' otherday at six per cent, and on as good security as the Bank.""Does he pretend to have discovered anything new with respect to thatclaim?""He says there's just enough to frighten them, and that your help--thetwo of ye together--could work it well.""He has not, then, found out the claimant?""He has his name, and the regiment he's in, but that's all. He wastalking of writing to him.""If he's wise, he'll let it alone. What chance would a poor soldierin the ranks have against a great lord, if he had all the right in theworld on his side?""So I told him; but he said we could make a fine thing out of it, forall that; and, somehow, Davy, he's mighty seldom mistaken.""If he be, sir, it is because he has hitherto only meddled with whatlay within his power. He can scheme and plot and track out a clew in thelittle world he has lived in; but let him be careful how he venture uponthat wider ocean of life where his craft would be only a cock-boat.""He hasn't your stuff in him, Davy," cried the old man, in ecstasy;and a very slight flush rose to the other's cheek at the words, butwhether of pride, or shame, or pleasure, it were hard to say. "I 'venothing to offer you, Davy, except a cut of cold pork; could you eatit?" said the old man."I'm not hungry, father; I'm tired somewhat, but not hungry.""I'm tired, too," said the old man, sighing; "but, to be sure, it's timefor me,--I 'll be eighty-nine if I live till the fourth of next month.That's a long life, Davy.""And it has been an active one, sir.""I 've seen great changes in my time, Davy," continued he, following outhis own thoughts. "I was in the Volunteers when we bullied the English,and they 've paid us off for it since, that they have! I was one of thejury when Jackson died in the dock, and if he was alive now, maybe it'sa lord of the Treasury he 'd be. Everything is changed, and everybodytoo. Do you remember Kellett, of Kellett's Court, that used to drive onthe Circular Road with six horses?"Dunn nodded an assent."His liveries were light-blue and silver, and Lord Castletown's was thesame; and Kellett said to him one day, 'My Lord,' says he, 'we're alwaysmistaken for each other; could n't we hit on a way to prevent it?' 'I'mwilling,' says my Lord, 'if I only knew how.' 'Then I 'll tell you,'says Kellett; 'make your people follow your own example and turn theircoats,--that'll do it,' says he." And the old man laughed till his eyesswam. "What's become of them Kelletts?" added he, sharply."Ruined,--sold out""To be sure, I remember all about it; and the young fellow,--Paul washis name,--where's he?""He's not so very young now," said Dunn, smiling; "he has a clerkship inthe Customs,--a poor place it is.""I'm glad of it," said he, fiercely; "there was an old score betweenus,--that's his father and me,--and I knew I would n't die till it wassettled.""These are not kindly feelings, father," said Dunn, mildly."No; but they 're natural ones, and that's as good," said the old man,with an energy that seemed to defy his age. "Where would I be now, wherewould you, if it was only kindness we thought of? There wasn't a manin all Ireland I wanted to be quite with so much as old Kellett ofKellett's Court; and you'd not wonder if you knew why; but I won'ttell."Davenport Dunn's cheek grew crimson and then deadly pale, but he neveruttered a word."And what's more," continued the old man, energetically, "I'd pay thedebt off to his children and his children's children with interest, if Icould."Still was the other silent; and the old man looked angry that he hadnot succeeded in stimulating the curiosity he had declared he would notgratify."Fate has done the work already, sir," said Dunn, gravely. "Look wherewe are, and where they!""That 's true,--that's true; we have a receipt in full for it all; butI 'd like to show it to him. I 'd like to say to him, 'Mr. Kellett, onceupon a time, when my son there was a child--'""Father, father, these memories can neither make us wiser nor happier,"broke in Dunn, in a voice of deep emotion. "Had I taken upon me to carrythrough life the burden of resentments, my back had been broken longago; and from your own prudent counsels I learned that this could neverlead to success. The men whom destiny has crushed are like bankruptdebtors, and to pursue them is but to squander your own resources."The old man sat moodily, muttering indistinctly to himself, andevidently little moved by the words he had listened to."Are you going away already?" cried he, suddenly, as Dunn rose from hischair."Yes, sir; I have a busy day before me to-morrow, and need some sleep toprepare for it.""What will you be doing to-morrow, Davy?" asked the old man, while abright gleam of pride lighted up his eyes and illuminated his wholeface."I have deputations to receive,--half a dozen, at least. The DrainageCommission, too, will want me, and I must contrive to have half an hourfor the Inland Navigation people; then the Attorney-General will callabout these prosecutions, and I have not made up my mind about them;and the Castle folk will need some clew to my intentions about the newSecretary; there are some twenty provincial editors, besides, waitingfor directions, not to speak of private and personal requests, some ofwhich I must not refuse to hear. As to letters, three days won'tget through them; so that you see, father, I do need a little restbeforehand.""God bless you, my boy,--God bless you, Davy," cried the old man,tenderly, grasping his hand in both his own. "Keep the head clear, andtrust nobody; that's the secret,--trust nobody; the only mistakes I evermade in life was when I forgot that rule." And affectionately kissinghim, the father dismissed his son, muttering blessings on him as hewent.CHAPTER XVI. DAVIS VERSUS DUNN.Davenport Dunn had not exaggerated when he spoke of a busy day for themorrow. As early as eight o'clock was he at breakfast, and before ninethe long back parlor, with its deep bay-window, was crowded likethe waiting-room of a fashionable physician. Indeed, in the faces ofanxiety, eagerness, and impatience of those assembled there, there wasa resemblance. With a tact which natural shrewdness and long habit couldalone confer, Mr. Clowes, the butler, knew exactly where each arrivalshould be introduced; and while railway directors, bank governors, andgreat contractors indiscriminately crowded the large dining-room, peersand right honorables filled the front drawing-room, the back one beingreserved for law officers of the Crown, and such secret emissaries ascame on special mission from the Castle. From the hall, crammed withfrieze-coated countryfolk, to the little conservatory on the stairs,where a few ladies were grouped, every space was occupied. Either fromprevious acquaintance, or guided by the name of the visitor, Mr. Cloweshad little difficulty in assigning him his fitting place, dropping,as he accompanied him, some few words, as the rank and station of theindividual might warrant his addressing to him. "I 'll let Mr. Dunnknow your Lordship is here this instant; he is now just engaged withthe Chief Baron."--"He 'll see you, Sir Samuel, next."--"Mr. Wilcox,you have no chance for two hours; the Foyle deputation is just gonein."--"You need scarcely wait to-day, Mr. Tobin; there are eighteenbefore you."--"Colonel Craddock, you are to come on Saturday, and bringthe plans with you."--"Too late, Mr. Dean; his Grace the Archbishopwaited till a quarter to eleven, the appointment is now for to-morrow atone."--"No use in staying, my honest fellow, your own landlord could n'tsee Mr. Dunn to-day." In the midst of such brief phrases as these, whilehe scattered hopes and disappointments about him, he suddenly paused toread a card, stealing a quick glance at the individual who presented it"'Mr. Annesley Beecher.' By appointment, sir?""Well, I suppose I might say yes," muttered the visitor, while he turnedto a short and very overdressed person at his side for counsel in thedifficulty."To be sure--by appointment," said the other, confidently, while hebestowed on the butler a look of unmistakable defiance."And this--gentleman--is with you, sir?" asked the butler, pausing erehe pronounced the designation. "Might I request to have his name?""Captain Davis," said the short man, interposing. "Write it under yourown, Beecher."While Mr. Annesley Beecher was thus occupied,--and, sooth to say, itwas an office he did not discharge with much despatch,--Clowes had ampletime to scan the appearance and style of the strangers."If you 'll step this way, sir," said Clowes, addressing Beecher only,"I'll send in your card at once." And he ushered them as he spoke intothe thronged dinner-room, whose crowded company sat silent and moody,each man regarding his neighbor with a kind of reproachful expression,as though the especial cause of the long delay he was undergoing."You ought to 'tip' that flunkey, Beecher," said Davis, as soon as theywere alone in a window."Haven't the tin, Master Grog!" said the other, laughing; whilehe added, in a lower voice, "Do you know, Grog, I don't feel quitecomfortable here. Rather mixed company, ain't it, for a fellow who onlygoes out of a Sunday?""All safe," muttered Davis. "These all are bank directors or railwayswells. I wish we had the robbing of them!""Good deal of humbug about all this, ain't there?" whispered Beecher, ashe threw his eyes over the crowded room."Of course there is," replied the other. "While he's keeping us allkicking our shins here, he's reading the 'Times,' or gossiping with afriend, or weighing a double letter for the post. It was the dentiststook up the dodge first, and the nobs followed them.""I 'm not going to stand it much longer, Grog. I tell you I don't feelcomfortable.""Stuff and nonsense! You don't fancy any of these chaps has a writ inhis pocket, do you? Why, I can tell you every man in the room. Thatlittle fellow, with the punch-colored shorts, is chairman of the RoyalCanal Company. I know him, and he knows me. He had me 'up' about aroulette-table on board of one of the boats, and if it had n't been fora trifling incident that occurred to his wife at Boulogne, where shewent for the bathing, and which I broke to him in confidence--But stay,he's coming over to speak to me.""How d'ye do, Captain Davis?" said the stranger, with the air of a manresolved to brave a difficulty, while he threw into the manner a tone ofhaughty patronage."Pretty bobbish, Mr. Hailes; and you, the same I hope.""Well, thank you. You never paid me that little visit you promised atLeixlip.""I 've been so busy of late; up to my ears, as they say. Going to starta new company, and thinking of asking your assistance too.""What's the nature of it?""Well, it's a kind of a mutual self-securing sort of thing againstfamily accidents. You understand,--a species of universal guarantee toinsure domestic peace and felicity,--a thing that will come home tous all; and I only want a few good names in the direction, to give theshares a push."Beecher looked imploringly, to try and restrain him; but he went on,--"May I take the liberty to put you down on the committee of management?"Before any answer could come to this speech, Mr. Clowes called out in adeep voice,--"Mr. Annesley Beecher and Captain Davis;" and flung wide the door forthem to pass out."Why did you say that to him, Grog?" whispered Beecher, as they movedalong."Just because I was watching the way he looked at me. He had a hardy,bold expression on his face that showed he needed a reminder, and so Igave him one. Always have the first blow when you see a fellow means tostrike you."Mr. Davenport Dunn rose as the visitors entered the' room, and havingmotioned to them to be seated, took his place with his back to thefire,--a significant intimation that he did not anticipate a lengthyreview. Whether it was that he had not previously settled in his ownmind how to open the object of his visit, or that something in Dunn'smanner and appearance unlike what he anticipated had changed hisintention; but certain is it that Beecher felt confused and embarrassed,and when reminded by Dunn's saying, "I am at your service, sir," heturned a most imploring look towards Davis to come to his rescue. Thecaptain, however, with more tact, paid no attention to the appeal;and Beecher, with an immense effort, stammered out, "I have taken theliberty to call on you. I have come here today in consequence of aletter--that is, my brother, Lord Lackington--You know my brother?""I have that honor, sir.""Well, in writing to me a few days back, he added a hurried postscript,saying he had just seen you; that you were then starting for Ireland,where, on your arrival, it would be well I should wait upon you atonce.""Did his Lordship mention with what object, sir?""I can't exactly say that he did. He said something about your being hisman of business, thoroughly acquainted with all his affairs, and so, ofcourse, I expected--I believed, at least--that you might be able to leadthe way,--to show me the line of country, as one might call it," addedhe, with a desperate attempt to regain his ease by recurring to hisfavorite phraseology."Really, sir, my engagements are so numerous that I have to throw myselfon the kindness of those who favor me with a call to explain the objectof their visit.""I haven't got Lackington's letter about me; but if I remember aright,all he said was, 'See Dunn as soon as you can, and he 'll put you up toa thing or two,' or words to that effect.""I regret deeply, sir, that the expressions give me no clew to thematter in hand.""If this ain't fencing, my name isn't Davis," said Grog, breaking in."You know well, without any going about the bush, what he comes about;and all this skirmishing is only to see if he's as well 'up' as yourselfin his own business. Now then, no more chaff, but go in at once.""May I ask who is this gentleman?""A friend,--a very particular friend of mine," said Beecher,quickly,--"Captain Davis.""Captain Davis," repeated Dunn, in a half voice to himself, as if toassist his memory to some effort,--"Captain Davis.""Just so," said Grog, defiantly,--"Captain Davis.""Does his Lordship's letter mention I should have the honor of a callfrom Captain Davis, sir?""No; but as he's my own intimate friend,--a gentleman who possesses allmy confidence,--I thought, indeed, I felt, the importance of having hisadvice upon any questions that might arise in this interview.""I 'm afraid, sir, you have subjected your friend to a most unprofitableinconvenience.""The match postponed till further notice," whispered Grog."I beg pardon, sir," said Dunn, not overhearing the remark."I was a saying that no race would come off to-day, in consequence ofthe inclemency of the weather," said Grog, as he adjusted his shirtcollar."Am I to conclude, then," said Beecher, "that you have not anycommunication to make to me?""No, you ain't," broke in Grog, quickly. "He don't like me, that's all,and he has n't the manliness to say it.""On the contrary, sir, I feel all the advantage of your presence on thisoccasion, all the benefit of that straightforward manner of putting thequestion which saves us so much valuable time."Grog bowed an acknowledgment of the compliment, but with a grin on hisface that showed in what spirit he accepted it."Lord Lackington did not speak to you about my allowance?" askedBeecher, losing all patience."No, sir, not a word.""He did not allude to a notion--he did not mention a plan--he did notdiscuss people called O'Reilly, did he?" asked he, growing more and moreconfused and embarrassed."Not a syllable with reference to such a name escaped him, sir.""Don't you see," said Grog, rising, "that you 'll have to look for theexplanation to the second column of the 'Times,' where 'A. B. will hearsomething to his advantage if he calls without C.D.'?"Davenport Dunn paid no attention to this remark, but stood calmlyimpassive before them."It comes to this, then, that Lackington has been hoaxing me," saidBeecher, rising, with an expression of ill-temper on his face."I should rather suggest another possibility," said Dunn, politely;"that, knowing how far his Lordship has graciously reposed his ownconfidence in me, he has generously extended to me the chance ofobtaining the same position of trust on the part of his brother,--anhonor I am most ambitious to attain. If you are disengaged on Sundaynext," added he, in a low voice, "and would favor me with your companyat dinner, alone,--quite alone--"Beecher bowed an assent in silence, casting a cautious glance towardsDavis, who was scanning the contents of the morning paper."Till then," muttered Dunn, while he added aloud, "A good-morning," andbowed them both to the door."Well, you are a soft un, there's no denying it," said Davis, as theygained the street."What d'ye mean?" cried Beecher, angrily."Why, don't you see how you spoiled all? I'd have had the whole storyout of him, but you would n't give me time to 'work the oracle.' He onlywanted to show us how cunning he was,--that he was deep and allthat; and when he saw that we were all wonder and amazement about hisshrewdness, then he 'd have gone to business.""Not a bit of it, Master Grog; that fellow's wide awake, I tell you.""So much the worse for you, then, that's all.""Why so?""Because you're a going to dine with him on Sunday next, all alone. Iheard it, though you did n't think I was listening, and I saw the lookthat passed, too, as much as to say, 'We 'll not have that fellow;' andthat's the reason I say, 'So much the worse for you.'""Why, what can he do, with all his craft? He can't make me put my nameto paper; and if he did, much good would it do him.""You can't make running against the like of him," said Grog,contemptuously. "He has an eye in his head like a dog-fox. You 'veno chance with him. He could n't double on me,--he 'd not try it; but he'll play you like a trout in a fish-pond.""What if I send him an excuse, then,--shall I do that?""No. You must go, if it was only to show that you suspect nothing; butkeep your eyes open, watch the ropes, and come over to me when the 'heatis run.'"And with this counsel they parted.CHAPTER XVII. THE "PENSIONNAT GODARDE."Let us ask our reader to turn for a brief space from these scenes andthese actors, and accompany us to that rich plain which stretches tothe northwest of Brussels, and where, on the slope of the gentle hill,beneath the royal palace of Lacken, stands a most picturesque old house,known as the Chteau of the Three Fountains. The very type of a chteauof the Low Countries, from its gabled fronts, all covered with festoonedrhododendron, to its trim gardens, peopled with leaden deities andornamented by the three fountains to which it owes its name, nothingwas wanting. From the plump little figure who blew his trumpet on theweather-vane, to the gaudily gilded pleasure-boat that peeped fromamidst the tall water-lilies of the fish-pond, all proclaimed thepeculiar taste of a people who loved to make nature artificial, and seethe instincts of their own quaint natures reproduced in every copse andhedgerow around them.All the little queer contrivances of Dutch ingenuity were there,--mockshrubs, which blossomed as you touched a spring; jets, that spurted outas you trod on a certain spot; wooden figures, worked by mechanisms,lowered the drawbridge to let you pass; nor was the toll-keeperforgotten, who touched his cap in salutation. Who were they who haddesigned all these pleasant conceits, and what fate had fallen on theirdescendants, we know not. At the time we speak of, the chteau was aselect Pensionnat for ten young ladies, presided over by Madame Godarde,"of whom all particulars might be learned at Cadel's Library, OldBond Street, or by personal application to the Rev. Pierre Faucher,Evangelical Minister, Adam Street, Strand, London." It was, as we havesaid, select,--the most select of Pensionnats. The ten young ladies werechosen after investigations the most scrutinizing; the conditions of theadmission verged on the impossible. The mistress realized in her personall the rare attributes of an elevated rank and a rigid Protestantism,while the educational programme was little short of a fellowship course.Just as being a guardsman is supposed to confer a certain credit overa man's outset in life, it was meant that being an lve of MadameGodarde should enter the world with a due and becoming prestige; forwhile the range of acquirements included something at least from everybranch of human science, the real superiority and strength of theestablishment lay in the moral culture observed there; and as the femaleteachers were selected from amongst the models of the sex, the maleinstructors were warranted as having triumphed over temptationsnot inferior to St. Anthony's. The ritual of the establishment wellresponded to all the difficulties of admission. It was almost conventualin strictness; and even to the uniform dress worn by the pupils therewas much that recalled the nunnery. The quiet uniformity of an unbrokenexistence, the changeless fashion of each day's life, impressed evenyoung and buoyant hearts, and toned down to seriousness spirits thatnature had formed to be light and joyous. One by one, they who hadentered there underwent this change; a little longer might be thestruggle with some, the end was alike to all; nay, not to all! there wasone whose temperament resisted to the last, and who, after three yearsof the durance, was just as unbroken in spirit, just as high in heart,just as gay, as when she first crossed the threshold. Gifted with oneof those elastic natures which rise against every pressure, she acceptedevery hardship as the occasion for fresh resource, and met each newinfliction, whether it were a severe task, or even punishment, witha high-hearted resolve not to be vanquished. There was nothing in herappearance that indicated this hardihood: she was a fair, slight girl,whose features were feminine almost to childishness. The gray-blueeyes, shaded with deep lashes; the beautifully formed mouth, on whicha half-saucy smile so often played; a half-timid expression conveyedin the ever-changing color of her cheek,--suggested the expression ofa highly impressionable and undecided nature; yet this frail, delicategirl, whose birdlike voice reminded one of childhood, swayed and ruledall her companions. She added to these personal graces abilities of ahigh order. Skilled in every accomplishment, she danced and sang anddrew and played better than her fellows; she spoke several modernlanguages fluently, and even caught up their local dialects with aquickness quite marvellous. She could warble the Venetian barcarole withall the soft accents of an Adriatic tongue, or sing the Bauerlied of theTyrol with every cadence of the peasant's fancy. With a memory soretentive that she could generally repeat what she had once read overattentively, she had powers of mimicry that enabled her to produce atwill everything noticeable that crossed her. A vivid fancy, too, threwits glittering light over all these faculties, so that even thecommonplace incidents of daily life grouped themselves dramatically inher mind, and events the least striking were made the origin ofsituation and sentiment, brilliant with wit and poetry.[Illustration: 206]Great as all these advantages were, they were aided, and notinconsiderably, by other and adventitious ones. She was reputed to be agreat heiress. How and when and why this credit attached to her, it werehard to say; assuredly she had never given it any impulse. She spoke,indeed, constantly of her father--her only living relation--as of onewho never grudged her any indulgence, and she showed her schoolfellowsthe handsome presents which from time to time he sent her; these intheir costliness--so unlike the gifts common to her age--may possiblyhave assisted the belief in her great wealth. But however founded, theimpression prevailed that she was to be the possessor of millions,and in the course of destiny, to be what her companions called her injest--a Princess.Nor did the designation seem ill applied. Of all the traits her natureexhibited, none seemed so conspicuous as that of "birth." The admixtureof timidity and haughtiness, that blended gentleness with an air ofcommand, a certain instinctive acceptance of whatever deference wasshown her as a matter of right and due, all spoke of "blood;" andher walk, her voice, her slightest gesture, were in keeping with thisimpression. Even they who liked her least, and were most jealous ofher fascination, never called her Princess in any mockery. No, strangeenough, the title was employed with all the significance of respect, andas such did she receive it.If it were not that, in her capricious moods, Nature has mouldedstranger counterfeits than this, we might incur some risk of incredulityfrom our reader when we say that the Princess was no other than GrogDavis's daughter!Davis had been a man of stratagems from his very beginning in life.All his gains had been acquired by dexterity and trick. Whatever he hadaccomplished was won as at a game where some other paid the loss. Hismind, consequently, fashioned itself to the condition in which he lived,and sharpness and shrewdness and over-reaching seemed to him not alonethe only elements of success, but the only qualities worth honoring. Hehad seen honesty and imbecility so often in company that he thoughtthem convertible terms; and yet this man--"leg," outcast, knave thathe was--rose above all the realities of a life of roguery in oneaspiration,--to educate his child in purity, to screen her from thecontamination of his own set, to bring her up amongst all the refininginfluences of care and culture, and make her, as he said to himself,"the equal of the best lady in the land!" To place her amongst thewell-born and wealthy, to have her where her origin could not be traced,where no clew would connect her with himself, had cost him a greaterexercise of ingenuity than the deepest scheme he had ever plotted onthe turf. That exchange of references on which Madame Godarde'sexclusiveness so peremptorily insisted was only to be met at heavycost. The distinguished baronet who stood sponsor to Grog Davis'srespectability received cash for the least promising of promissory notesin return, and the lady who waited on Madame Godarde in her brougham "tomake acquaintance with the person who was to have charge of her youngrelative," was the distracted mother of a foolish young man who hadgiven bills to Davis for several thousands, and who by this specialmission obtained possession of the documents. In addition to thesedirect, there were many other indirect sacrifices. Grog was obliged fora season to forego all the habits and profits of his daily life, tolive in a sort of respectable seclusion, his servants in mourning, andhimself in the deepest sable for the loss of a wife who had diedtwelve years before. In fact, he had to take out a species of moralnaturalization, the details of which seemed interminable, and served toconvince him that respectability was not the easy, indolent thing he hadhitherto imagined it.If Davis had been called on to furnish a debtor and creditor account ofthe transaction, the sum spent in the accomplishment of this feat wouldhave astonished his assignee. As he said himself, "Fifteen hundredwould n't see him through it." It is but fair to say that the amount sorepresented comprised the very worst of bad debts, but Grog cared littlefor that; his theory was that there was n't the difference between aguinea and a pound in the best bill from Baring's and the worst paper inHolywell Street. "You can always get either your money or your money'sworth," said he, "and very frequently the last is the better of thetwo."If it was a proud day for the father as he consigned his daughter toMadame Godarde's care, it was no less a happy one for Lizzy Davis,as she found herself in the midst of companions of her own age,and surrounded with all the occupations and appliances of a life ofelegance. Brought up from infancy in a small school in a retired partof Cornwall, she had only known her father during the two or three offmonths of that probationary course of respectability we have alludedto. With all his affection for his child, and every desire to give itutterance, Davis was so conscious of his own defects in education,and the blemishes which his tone of mind and thought would inevitablyexhibit, that he had to preserve a sort of estrangement towards her, andguard himself against whatever might prejudice him in her esteem. If,then, by a thousand acts of kindness and liberality he gained on heraffection, there was that in his cold and distant manner that as totallyrepelled all confidence. To escape from the dull uniformity of thatdreary home, where a visitor never entered, nor any intercourse withthe world was maintained, to a scene redolent of life, with gaylight-hearted associates, all pursuing the same sunny paths, to engageher brilliant faculties in a variety of congenial pursuits, whereinthere was only so much of difficulty as inspired zeal, to enter on anexistence wherein each day imparted the sense of new acquirement, was ahappiness that verged on ecstasy. It needed not all the flatteries thatsurrounded her to make this seem a paradise; but she had these, too, andin so many ways. Some loved her light-heartedness, and that gayspirit that floated like an atmosphere about her; others praised hergracefulness and her beauty; some preferred to these, those versatilegifts of mind that gave her the mastery over whatever she desired tolearn; and there were those who dwelt on the great fortune she was tohave, and the great destiny that awaited her.How often in the sportive levity of happy girlhood had they asked herwhat life she should choose for herself,--what station, and what land tolive in! They questioned her in all sincerity, believing she had but towish, to have the existence that pleased her. Then what tender caressesfollowed,--what flattering entreaties that the dear Princess would notforget Josephine or Gertrude or Julia, in the days of her greatness, butwould recognize those who had been her loved schoolfellows years before!"What a touchstone of your tact will it be, Lizzy, when you 're aduchess," said one, "to meet one of us in a watering-place or on asteamboat, and to explain, delicately enough, not to hurt us, to hisGrace the Duke that you knew us as girls, and how provoking if youshould call me Jane or Clara!""And then the charming condescension of your inquiry if we were married,though a half-bashful and an awkward-looking man should be standing byat our interview, waiting to be presented, and afraid to be spoken to.Or worse than that, the long, terrible pauses in conversation, whichshow how afraid you are lest we should tumble into reminiscences.""Oh, Lizzy darling," cried another, "do be a duchess for a moment, andshow how you would treat us all. It would be charming.""You seem to be forgetting, mesdames," said she, haughtily, "what anupstart you are making of me. This wondrous elevation, which is at onceto make me forget my friends and myself, does not present to my eyes thesame dazzling effect. In fact, I can imagine myself a duchess to-morrowwithout losing either my self-respect or my memory.""Daisy dearest, do not be angry with us," cried one, addressing her bythe pet name which they best loved to call her."I am rather angry with myself that I should leave no better impressionbehind me. Yes," added she, in a tone of sadness, "I am going away.""Oh, darling Lizzy,--oh, Daisy, don't say so," broke out so many voicestogether."Too true! dearest friends," said she, throwing her arms around thosenearest to her. "I only learned it this morning. Madame Godarde came tomy room to say papa had written for me, and would come over to fetch mein about a fortnight I ought doubtless to be so happy at the prospect ofgoing home; but I have no mother,--I have not either brother or sister;and here, amidst you, I have every tie that can attach the heart. Whenshall I ever live again amidst such loving hearts?--when shall life bethe happy dream I have felt it here?""But think of us, Daisy, forlorn and deserted," cried one, sobbing."Yes, Lizzy," broke in another, "imagine the day-by-day disappointmentsthat will break on us as we discover that this pleasure or that spotowed its charm to you,--that it was your voice made the air melody, youraccents gave the words their feeling! Fancy us as we find out--asfind out we must--that the affection we bore you bound us into onesisterhood--""Oh," burst Lizzy in, "do let me carry away some of my heart to him whoshould have it all, and make not my last moments with you too painful tobear. Remember, too, that it is but a passing separation; we can and wewill write to each other. I 'll never weary of hearing all about youand this dear spot. There's not a rosebud opening to the morning airbut will bring some fragrance to my heart; and that dear old window! howoften shall I sit at it in fancy, and look over the fair plain beforeus. Bethink you, too, that I am only the first launched into that wideocean of life where we are all to meet hereafter.""And be the dear, dear friends we now are," cried another. And so theyhung upon her neck and kissed her, bathing her soft tresses with theirtears, and indulging in all the rapture of that sorrow no ecstasy of joycan equal.CHAPTER XVIII. SOME DOINGS OF MR. DRISCOLL."There it is, Bella," said Kellett, as he entered the cottage atnightfall, and threw a sealed letter on the table. "I hadn't the courageto open it. A fellow came into the office and said, 'Is one Kelletthere? This is a letter from Mr. Davenport Dunn.' He was Mister, andI was one Kellett. Wasn't I low enough when I couldn't say a word toit?--wasn't I down-in the world when I had to bear it in silence?""Shall I read it for you?" said she, gently."Do, darling; but before you begin, give me a glass ofwhiskey-and-water. I want courage for it, and something tells me, Bella,I'll need courage too.""Come, come, papa, this is not like yourself; this is not the oldAlbuera spirit you are so justly proud of.""Five-and-thirty years' hard struggling with the world never improveda man's pluck. There was n't a fellow in the Buffs had more life in himthan Paul Kellett. It was in general orders never to sell my traps orcamp furniture when I was reported missing; for, as General Pack said,'Kellett is sure to turn up to-morrow or the day after.' And look at menow!" cried he, bitterly; "and as to selling me out, they don't show memuch mercy, Bella, do they?"She made no reply, but slowly proceeded to break the seal of the letter."What a hurry ye're in to read bad news!" cried he, peevishly; "can'tyou wait till I finish this?" And he pointed to the glass, which hesipped slowly, like one wishing to linger over it.A half-melancholy smile was all her answer, and he went on,--"I'm as sure of what's in that letter there as if I read it. Now, markmy words, and I'll just tell you the contents of it: Kellett's Courtis sold, the first sale confirmed, and the Master's report on your poormother's charge is unfavorable. There's not a perch of the old estateleft us, and we're neither more nor less than beggars. There it is foryou in plain English.""Let us learn the worst at once, then," said she, resolutely, as sheopened the letter."Who told you that was the worst?" broke he in, angrily. "The worstisn't over for the felon in the dock when the judge has finished thesentence; there's the 'drop' to come, after that.""Father, father!" cried she, pitifully, "be yourself again. Rememberwhat you said the other night, that if we had poor Jack back again you'dnot be afraid to face life in some new world beyond the seas, and carelittle for hardships or humble fortune if we could only be together.""I was dreaming, I suppose," muttered he, doggedly."No; you were speaking out of the fulness of your love and affection;you were showing me how little the accidents of fortune touch thehappiness of those resolved to walk humbly, and that, once divestedof that repining spirit which was ever recalling the past, we shouldconfront the life before us more light of heart than we have felt formany a year.""I wonder what put it in my head," muttered he, in the same despondenttone."Your own stout heart put it there. You were recalling what young Conwaywas telling us about poor Jack's plans and projects; and how, when thewar was over, he 'd get the Sultan to grant him a patch of land closeto the Bosphorus, where he'd build a little kiosk for us all, and we'd grow our own corn and have our own vines and fig-trees, seeking fornothing but what our own industry should give us.""Dreams, dreams!" said he, sighing drearily. "You may read the letternow." And she began,--"Sir,--By direction of Mr. Davenport Dunn, I have toacquaint you that the Commissioners, having overruled theobjections submitted by him, will on Tuesday next proceed tothe sale of the lands of Kellett's Court, Gorestown, andKilinaganny, free of all charges and encumbrances thereon,whether by marriage settlement--""I told you,--that's just what I was saying," burst in Kellett; "there'snot sixpence left us!"She ran hurriedly over to herself the tiresome intricacies thatfollowed, till she came to the end, where a brief postscript ran,--"As your name is amongst those to be reduced in consequenceof the late Treasury order regarding the Customs, Mr. Dunnhopes you will lose no time in providing yourself withanother employment, to which end he will willinglycontribute any aid in his power."A wild, hysterical burst of laughter broke from Kellett as she ceased."Isn't there any more good news, Bella? Look over it carefully, darling,and you 'll surely discover something else."The terrible expression of his face shocked her, and she could make noreply."I 'll wager a crown, if you search well, you 'll see something aboutsending me to jail, or, maybe, transporting me.--Who's that knockingat the door there?" cried he, angrily, as a very loud noise resoundedthrough the little cottage."'T is a gentleman without wants to speak to the master," said the oldwoman, entering."I 'm engaged, and can't see anybody," rejoined Kellett, sternly."He says it's the same if he could see Miss Bella," reiterated the oldwoman."He can't, then; she 's engaged too."The woman still lingered at the door, as if she expected some change ofpurpose."Don't you hear me?--don't you understand what I said?" cried he,passionately."Tell him that your master cannot see him," said Bella."If I don't make too bould,--if it's not too free of me,--maybe you 'dexcuse the liberty I 'm taking," said a man, holding the door slightlyopen, and projecting a round bullet head and a very red face into theroom."Oh, Mr. Driscoll," cried Bella. "Mrs. Hawkshaw's brother, papa,"whispered she, quietly, to her father, who, notwithstanding theannouncement, made no sign."If Captain Kellett would pardon my intrusion," said Driscoll, enteringwith a most submissive air, "he'd soon see that it was at laste withgood intentions I came out all the way here on foot, and a bad nightbesides,--a nasty little drizzling rain and mud,--such mud!" And he heldup in evidence a foot about the size of an elephant's."Pray sit down, Mr. Driscoll," said Bella, placing a chair for him."Papa was engaged with matters of business when you knocked,--someletters of consequence.""Yes, miss, to be sure, and did n't want to be disturbed," saidDriscoll, as he sat down, and wiped his heated forehead. "I 'm often thesame way myself; but when I 'm at home, and want nobody to disturb me, Iput on a little brown-paper cap I have, and that's the sign no one's totalk to me."Kellett burst into a laugh at the conceit, and Driscoll so artfullyjoined in the emotion that when it ceased they were already on terms ofintimacy."You see what a strange crayture I am. God help me!" said Driscoll,sighing. "I have to try as many dodges with myself as others does beusing with the world, for my poor head goes wanderin' away about this,that, and the other, and I 'm never sure it will think of what I want.""That's a sad case," said Kellett, compassionately."I was like everybody else tell I had the fever," continued Driscoll,confidentially. "It was the spotted fever, not the scarlet fever, d' yemind; and when I came out of it on the twenty-ninth day, I was the sameas a child, simple and innocent You 'd laugh now if I told you what Idid with the first half-crown I got. I bought a bag of marbles!"And Kellett did laugh heartily; less, perhaps, at the circumstance thanat the manner and look of him who told it."Ay, faith, marbles!" muttered Driscoll to himself; "'tis a game I'mmighty fond of.""Will you take a little whiskey-and-water? Hot or cold?" asked Kellett,courteously."Just a taste, to take off the deadness of the water," said Driscoll. "I'm obleeged to be as cautious as if I was walkin' on eggs. Dr. Dodd saysto me, 'Terry,' says he, 'you had never much brains in your best days,but now you 're only a sheet of thin paper removed from an idiot, and ifyou touch spirits it's all up with you.'""That was plain speaking, anyhow," said Kellett, smiling."Yes," said Driscoll, while he seemed struggling to call up somereminiscence: and then, having succeeded, said, "Ay, 'There'sfive-and-twenty in Swift's this minute,' said he, 'with their headsshaved, and in blue cotton dressing-gowns, more sensible than yourself.'But, you see, there was one thing in my favor,--I was always harmless."The compassionate expression with which Kellett listened to thisdeclaration guaranteed how completely the speaker had engaged hissympathy."Well, well," continued Driscoll, "maybe I'm just as happy, ay, happierthan ever I was! Every one is kind and good-natured to me now. Nobodytakes offence at what I say or do; they know well in their hearts that Idon't mean any harm.""That you don't," broke in Bella, whose gratitude for many a passingword of kindness, as he met her of a morning, willingly seized upon theopportunity for acknowledgment."My daughter has often told me of the kind way you always spoke to her.""Think of that, now," muttered Terry to himself; "and I saying all thewhile to my own heart, "'T is a proud man you ought to be to-day, TerryDriscoll, to be giving good-morning to Miss Kellett of Kellett's Court,the best ould blood in your own county.'""Your health, Driscoll,--your health," cried Kellett, warmly. "Let yourhead be where it will, your heart's in the right place, anyhow.""Do you say so, now?" asked he, with all the eagerness of one putting amost anxious question."I do, and I 'd swear it," cried Kellett, resolutely. "'Tis too cleverand too 'cute the world's grown; they were better times when there wasmore good feeling and less learning.""Indeed--indeed, it was the remark I made to my sister Mary the nightbefore last," broke in Driscoll. "'What is there,' says I, 'thatMiss Kellett can't teach them? They know the rule of three and What's-his-name's Questions as well as I know my prayers. You don't wantthem to learn mensuration and the use of the globes?' 'I 'll send themto a school in France,' says she; 'it's the only way to be genteel.'""To a school in France?" cried Bella; "and is that really determinedon?""Yes, miss; they 're to go immediately, and ye see that was the reason Iwalked out here in the rain to-night I said to myself, 'Terry,' says I,'they 'll never say a word about this to Miss Kellett till the quarteris up; be off, now, and break it to her at once.'""It was so like your own kind heart," burst out Bella."Yes," muttered Driscoll, as if in a revery, "that's the only good o' menow,--I can think of what will be of use to others.""Did n't I tell you we were in a vein of good luck, Bella?" saidKellett, between his teeth; "didn't I say awhile ago there was morecoming?""'But,' says I to Mary," continued Driscoll, "'you must take care torecommend Miss Kellett among your friends--'"Kellett dashed his glass down with such force on the table as tofrighten Driscoll, whose speech was thus abruptly cut short, and the twomen sat staring fixedly at each other. The expression of poor Terry'svacant face, in which a struggling effort to deprecate anger was thesolitary emotion readable, so overcame Kellett's passion that, stoopingover, he grasped the other's hand warmly, and said,--"You 're a kind-hearted creature, and you 'd never hurt a living soul. I'm not angry with you.""Thank you, Captain Kellett,--thank you," cried the other, hurriedly,and wiped his brow, like one vainly endeavoring to follow out a chainof thought collectedly. "Who is this told me that you had anotherdaughter?""No," said Kellett; "I have a son.""Ay, to be sure! so it was a son, they said, and a fine strapping youngfellow too. Where is he?""He 's with his regiment, the Rifles, in the Crimea.""Dear me, now, to think of that,--fighting the French, just the way hisfather did.""No," said Kellett, smiling, "it 's the Russians he 's fighting, and theFrench are helping him to do it.""That's better any day," said Driscoll; "two to one is a pleasantermatch. And so he's in the Rifles?" And here he laid his head on his handand seemed lost in thought. "Is he a captain?" asked he, after a longpause."No, not yet," said Kellett, while his cheek flushed at the evasion hewas practising."Well, maybe he will soon," resumed the other, relapsing once more intodeep thought. "There was a young fellow joined them in Cork just beforethey sailed, and I lent him thirty shillings, and he never paid me. Iwonder what became of him? Maybe he's killed.""Just as likely," said Kellett, carelessly."Now, would your son be able to make him out for me?--not for the sakeof the money, for I would n't speak of it, but out of regard for him,for I took a liking to him; he was a fine, handsome fellow, and bold asa lion.""He mightn't be in Jack's battalion, or he might, and Jack not know him.What was his name?" said Kellett, in some confusion."I 'll tell you if you 'll pledge your word you 'll never say a syllableabout the money, for I can't think but he forgot it.""I 'll never breathe a word about it.""And will you ask your son all about him,--if he likes the sarvice, orif he 'd rather be at home, and how it agrees with him?" "And the name?""The name?--I wrote it down on a bit of paper just for my own memory'ssake, for I forget everything; the name is Conway,--Charles Conway.""Why, that's the very--" When he got so far, a warning look from Bellaarrested Kellett's voice, and he ceased speaking, looking eagerly at hisdaughter for some explanation. Had he not been so anxious for someclew to her meaning, he could scarcely have failed to be struck by theintense keenness of the glance Driscoll turned from the countenance ofthe father to that of the daughter. She, however, marked it, and withsuch significance that a deathlike sickness crept suddenly over her, andshe sank slowly down into a seat."You ware saying, 'That's the very--'" said Driscoll, repeating thewords, and waiting for the conclusion."The very name we read in a newspaper," said Bella, who, with a sortof vague instinct of some necessity for concealment, at once gave thisevasive reply. "He volunteered for somewhere, or was first inside abattery, or did something or other very courageous.""It was n't killed he was?" said Driscoll, in his habitual tone."No, no," cried Kellett, "he was all safe.""Isn't it a queer thing? but I'd like to hear of him! There was someConway s connections of my mother's, and I can't get it out of my headbut he might be one of them. It's not a common name, like Driscoll.""Well, Jack will, maybe, be able to tell you about him," said Kellett,still under the spell of Bella's caution."If you would tell me on what points you want to be informed," saidBella, "I shall be writing to my brother in a day or two. Are there anydistinct questions you wish to be answered?"The calm but searching glance that accompanied these few words graduallygave way to an expression of pity as Bella gazed at the hopelessimbecility of poor Driscoll's face, wherein not a gleam of intelligencenow lingered. It was as if the little struggle of intellect had soexhausted him that he was incapable of any further effort of reason.And there he sat, waiting till the returning tide of thought should flowback upon his stranded intelligence."Would you like him to be questioned about the family?" said she,looking good-naturedly at him."Yes, miss,--yes," said he, half dreamily; "that is, I would n't likemy own name, poor crayture as I am, to be mentioned; but if you couldanyways find out if he was one of the Conway s of Abergedley,--they weremy mother's people,--if you could find out that for me, it would be agreat comfort.""I'll charge myself with the commission," said Bella, writing down thewords "Conway of Abergedley.""Now there was something else, if my poor head could only remember it,"said Driscoll, whose countenance displayed the most complete picture ofa puzzled intelligence."Mix yourself another tumbler, and you'll think of it by and by," saidKellett, courteously."Yes," muttered Driscoll, accepting the suggestion at once. "It wassomething about mustard-seed, I think," added he, after a pause; "theysay it will keep fresh for two years if you put it in a blue-paperbag,--deep blue is best" A look of sincere compassion passed betweenKellett and his daughter, and Driscoll went on, "I don't think it wasthat, though, I wanted to remember." And he fell into deep reflectionfor several minutes, at the end of which he started abruptly up,finished off his glass, and began to button up his coat in preparationfor the road."Don't go till I see what the night looks like," cried Kellett, as heleft the room to examine the state of the weather."If I should be fortunate enough to obtain any information, how shallI communicate with you?" asked Bella, addressing him hastily, as if toprofit by the moment of their being alone.Driscoll looked fixedly at her for a second or two, and gradually theexpression of his face settled down into its habitual cast of unmeaningimbecility, while he merely muttered to himself, "No evidence; throw outthe bills."She repeated her question, and in a voice to show that she believedherself well understood."Yes!" said he, with a vacant grin,--"yes! but they don't agree witheverybody.""There's a bit of a moon out now, and the rain has stopped," saidKellett, entering, "so that it would n't be friendly to detain you.""Good-night, good-night," said Driscoll, hurriedly; "that spirit is gotup to my head. I feel it. A pleasant journey to you both, and be sure toremember me to Mrs. Miller." And with these incoherent words he hastenedaway, and his voice was soon heard singing cheerily as he plodded hisway towards Dublin. "That's the greatest affliction of all," saidKellett, as he sat down and sipped his glass. "There 's nothing likehaving one's faculties, one's reason, clear and unclouded. I would n'tbe like that poor fellow there to be as rich as the Duke of Leinster.""It is a strange condition," said Bella, thoughtfully. "There weremoments when his eyes lighted up with a peculiar significance, as if,at intervals, his mind had regained all its wonted vigor. Did you remarkthat?""Indeed, I did not. I saw nothing of the kind," said Kellett, peevishly."By the way, why were you so cautious about Conway?""Just because he begged that his name might not be mentioned. He saidthat some trifling debts were still hanging over him, from his formerextravagance; and though all in course of liquidation, he dreaded theimportunate appeals of creditors so certain to pour in if they heard ofhis being in Dublin.""Every one has his troubles!" muttered Kellett, as he sank into a moodyreflection over his own, and sipped his liquor in silence.Let us now follow Driscoll, who, having turned the corner of the lane,out of earshot of the cottage, suddenly ceased his song, and walkedbriskly along towards town. Rapidly as he walked, his lips moved morerapidly still, as he maintained a kind of conversation with himself,bursting out from time to time with a laugh, as some peculiar conceitamused him. "To be sure, a connection by the mother's side," said he."One has a right to ask after his own relations! And, for all I know, mygrandmother was a Conway. The ould fool was so near pokin' his footin it, and letting out that he knew him well. She's a deep one, thatdaughter; and it was a bould stroke the way she spoke to me when we werealone. It was just as much as to say, 'Terry, put your cards down, forI know your hand.' 'No, miss,' says I, 'I've a thrump in the heel ofmy fist that ye never set eyes on. Ha, ha, ha!' but she's deep for allthat,--mighty deep; and if it was safe, I wish we had her in the plot!Ay! but is it safe, Mr. Driscoll? By the virtue of your oath, TerryDriscoll, do you belave she wouldn't turn on you? She's a fine-lookinggirl, too," added he, after an interval. "I wish I knew her sweetheart,for she surely has one. Terry, Terry, ye must bestir yourself; ye mustbe up early and go to bed late, my boy. You 're not the man ye werebefore ye had that 'faver,'--that spotted faver!"--here he laughed tillhis eyes ran over. "What a poor crayture it has left ye; no memory, nohead for anything!" And he actually shook with laughter at the thought."Poor Terry Driscoll, ye are to be pitied!" said he, as he wiped thetears from his face. "Is n't it a sin and a shame there's no one to lookafter ye?"CHAPTER XIX. DRISCOLL IN CONFERENCE"Not come in yet, sir; but he is sure to be back soon," said Mr. Clowes,the butler, to Terry Driscoll, as he stood in the hall of Mr. DavenportDunn's house, about eleven o'clock of the same night we have spoken ofin our last chapter."You're expecting him, then?" asked Driscoll, in his own humble manner."Yes, sir," said Clowes, looking at his watch; "he ought to be herenow. We have a deal of business to get through to-night, and severalappointments to keep; but he'll see you, Mr. Driscoll. He always givesdirections to admit you at once.""Does he really?" asked Driscoll, with an air of perfect innocence."Yes," said Clowes, in a tone at once easy and patronizing, "he likesyou. You are one of the very few who can amuse him. Indeed, I don'tthink I ever heard him laugh, what I 'd call a hearty laugh, except whenyou 're with him.""Isn't that quare, now!" exclaimed Driscoll. "Lord knows it's little funis in me now!""Come in and take a chair; charge you nothing for the sitting," saidClowes, laughing at his own smartness as he led the way into a mostcomfortably furnished little room which formed his own sanctum.The walls were decorated with colored prints and drawings of greatprojected enterprises,--peat fuel manufactories of splendidpretensions, American packet stations on the west coast, of almost regalarchitecture, vied with ground-plans of public parks and ornamentalmodel farms; fish-curing institutions, and smelting-houses, andbeetroot-sugar buildings, graced scenes of the very wildest desolation,and, by an active representation of life and movement, seemed to typifythe wealth and prosperity which enterprise was sure to carry intoregions the very dreariest and least promising."A fine thing, that, Mr. Driscoll!" said Clowes, as Terry stoodadmiring a large and highly colored plate, wherein several steam-engineswere employed in supplying mill-streams with water from a vast lake,while thousands of people seemed busily engaged in spade labor onits borders. "That is the 'Lough Corrib Drainage and Fresh StrawberryCompany,' capital eight hundred thousand pounds! Chemical analysishas discovered that the soil of drained lands, treated with a suitableadmixture of the alkaline carbonates, is peculiarly favorable tothe growth of the strawberry,--a fruit whose properties are only nowreceiving their proper estimate. The strawberry, you are perhaps notaware, is a great anti-scorbutic. Six strawberries, taken in a glass ofdiluted malic acid of a morning, fasting, would restore the healthof those fine fellows we are now daily losing in such numbers in theCrimea. I mean, of course, a regular treatment of three months ofthis regimen, with due attention to diet, cleanliness, and habit ofexercise,--all predisposing elements removed, all causes of mentalanxiety withdrawn. To this humane discovery this great industrialspeculation owes its origin. There you see the engines at full work; thelake is in process of being drained, the water being all utilized by themills you see yonder, some of which are compressing the strawberry pulpinto a paste for exportation. Here are the people planting the shoots;those men in blue, with the watering-pots, are the alkaline feeders, whosupply the plant with the chemical preparation I mentioned, the strengthbeing duly marked by letters, as you see. B. C. P. means bi-carbonate ofpotash; S. C. S., sub-carbonate of soda; and so on. Already, sir," saidhe, raising his voice, "we have contracts for the supply of twenty-eighttons a week, and we hope," added he, with a tremulous fervor in hisvoice, "to live to see the time when the table of the poorest peasant inthe land will be graced by the health-conducing condiment.""With all my heart and soul I wish you success," said Driscoll; whilehe muttered under his breath what sounded like a fervid prayer for therealization of this blessed hope."Of that we are pretty certain, sir," said Clowes, pompously; "theshares are now one hundred and twelve,--paid up in two calls, thirty-sixpounds ten shillings, He," said Clowes, with a jerk of his thumbtowards Mr. Dunn's room, meant to indicate its owner,--"he don't likeit; calls it a bubble, and all that, but I have, known him mistaken,sir,--ay, and more than once. You may remember that vein of yellowmarble--giallo antico, they call it--found on Martin's property--That'shis knock; here he comes now," cried he, hurrying away to meet hismaster, and leaving the story of his blunder unrelated. "All right,"said Clowes, re-entering, hastily; "you can go in now. He seems in aprecious humor to-night," added he, in a low whisper; "something orother has gone wrong with him."Driscoll had scarcely closed the inner door of cloth that formedthe last security of Davenport Dunn's privacy, when he perceived thecorrectness of Mr. Clowes's information. Dunn's brow was dark andclouded, his face slightly flushed, and his eye restless and excited."What is it so very pressing, Driscoll, that could n't wait tillto-morrow?" said he, peevishly, and not paying the slightest attentionto the other's courteous salutation."I thought this was the time you liked best," said Driscoll, quietly;"you always said, 'Come to me when I've done for the day--'""But who told you I had done for the day? That pile of letters has yetto be answered; many of them I have not even read. The Attorney-Generalwill be here in a few minutes about these prosecutions too.""That's a piece of good luck, anyhow," said Driscoll, quickly."How so? What d' ye mean?""Why, we could just get a kind of travelling opinion out of him aboutthis case.""What nonsense you talk!" said Dunn, angrily; "as if a lawyer ofstanding and ability would commit himself by pronouncing on a mostcomplicated question, the details of which he was to gather from you!"The look and emphasis that accompanied the last word were to the lastdegree insulting, but they seemed to give no offence whatever to him towhom they were addressed; on the contrary, he met them with a twinkleof the eye, and a droll twist of the mouth, as he muttered half tohimself,--"Yes, God help me, I 'll never set the Liffey on fire!""You might, though, if you had it heavily insured," said Dunn, with asavage irony in his manner that might well have provoked rejoinder;but Driscoll was proof against whatever he didn't want to resent, andlaughed pleasantly at the sarcasm."You were dining at the Lodge, I suppose, to-day?" asked he, eager toget the conversation afloat at any cost."No, at Luscombe's,--the Chief Secretary's," said Dunn, curtly."They say he's a clever fellow," said Driscoll."They are heartily welcome to this opinion who think so," broke in Dunn,peevishly. "Let them call him a fortunate one if they like, and they 'llbe nearer the mark.--What of this affair?" said he, at last "Have youfound out Conway?""No; but I learned that he dined and passed the evening with ould PaulKellett He came over to Ireland to bring him some news of his son, whoserved in the same regiment, and so I went out to Kellett to pump them;but for some reason or other they're as close as wax. The daughter beatsall ever you saw! She tried a great stroke of cunning with me, but itwouldn't do.""It was your poor head and the spotted fever,--eh?" said Dunn, laughing."Yes," said Driscoll; "I never was rightly myself since that" And helaughed heartily."This is too slow for me, Driscoll; you must find out the young fellowat once, and let me see him. I have read over the statement again, andit is wonderfully complete. Hatch-ard has it now before him, and willgive me his opinion by Sunday next On that same day Mr. Beecher is todine with me; now if you could manage to have Conway here on Mondaymorning, I 'd probably be in a condition to treat openly with him.""You're going too fast,--too fast, entirely," said Driscoll; "sure, ifConway sees the road before him, he may Just thravel it without us atall.""I 'll take care he shall not know which path to take, Driscoll; trustme for that. Remember that the documents we have are all-essential tohim. Before he sees one of them our terms must be agreed on.""I'll have ten thousand paid down on the nail. 'Tis eight years I amcollectin' them papers. I bought that shooting-lodge at Banthry,that belonged to the Beechers, just to search the old cupboard in thedinner-room. It was plastered over for fifty years, and Denis Magrathwas the only man living knew where it was.""I am aware of all that. The discovery--if such it prove--was all yourown, Driscoll; and as to the money remuneration, I 'll not defraud youof a sixpence.""There was twelve hundred pounds," continued Driscoll, too full of hisown train of thought to think of anything else, "for a wretched ouldplace with the roof fallin' in, and every stack of it rotten! Eightyears last Michaelmas,--that's money, let me tell you! and I never gotmore than thirty pounds any year out of it since.""You shall be paid, and handsomely paid.""Yes," said Terry, nodding."You can have good terms on either side.""Yes, or a little from both," added Driscoll, dryly.CHAPTER XX. AN EVENING WITH GROG DAVIS.It was late at night, and Grog Davis sat alone by a solitary candle inhis dreary room. The fire had long burned out, and great pools of wet,driven by the beating rain through the rickety sashes, soaked the raggedcarpet that covered the floor, while frequent gusts of storm scatteredthe slates, and shook the foundations of the frail building.To all seeming, he paid little attention to the poor and comfortlessfeatures of the spot. A short square bottle of Hollands, and a paperof coarse cigars beside him, seemed to offer sufficient defence againstsuch cares, while he gave up his mind to some intricate problem which hewas working out with a pack of cards. He dealt, and shuffled, and dealtagain, with marvellous rapidity. There was that in each motion ofthe wrist, in every movement of the finger, that bespoke practisedmanipulation, and a glance quick as lightning on the board was enough toshow him how the game fared.[Illustration: 230]"Passed twelve times," muttered he to himself; then added aloud, "Makeyour game, gentlemen, make your game. The game is made. Red, thirty-two.Now for it, Grog,--man or a mouse, my boy. Mouse it is! by----," criedhe, with an infamous oath. "Red wins! Confound the cards!" cried he,dashing them on the floor. "Two minutes ago I had enough to live on therest of my days. I appeal to any man in the room," said he, with a lookof peculiar defiance around him, "if he ever saw such ill luck! There'snot another fellow breathing ever got it like me!" And as he spoke, hearose and walked up and down the chamber, frowning savagely, and turningglances of insolent meaning on every side of him. At last, approachingthe table, he filled out a glass of gin and drank it off; and then,stooping down, he gathered up the cards and reseated himself. "Take youfifty on the first ace," cried he, addressing an imaginary bettor, whilehe began to deal out the cards in two separate heaps. "Won!" exclaimedhe, delightedly. "Go you double or quits, sir?--Any gentleman withanother fifty?--A pony if you like, sir?--Done! Won again, by jingo!This is the only game, after all; decided in a second. I make the bank,gentlemen, two hundred in the bank. Why, where are the bettorsthis evening? This is only punting, gentlemen. Any one say fivehundred--four--three--one hundred--for the first knave?" And the cardsfell from his hands with wondrous rapidity. "Now, if no one is inclinedto play, let 's have a broiled bone," said he, rising, and bowingcourteously around him."Second the motion!" cried a cheery voice, as the door opened andAnnesley Beecher entered. "Why, Grog, my hearty, I thought you had aregular flock of pigeons here. I heard you talking as I came up thestairs, and fancied you were doing a smart stroke of work.""What robbery have you been at with that white choker and thatgimcrack waistcoat?" said Davis, sulkily."Dining with Dunn, and a capital dinner he gave me. I 'm puzzled to saywhether I like his wine or his cookery best.""Were there many there?""None but ourselves.""Lord! how he must have worked you!" cried Davis, with an insolent grin."Ain't such a flat as you think me, Master Grog. Solomon was a wise man,and Samson a strong one, and A. B. can hold his own with most 'in theruck.'"A most contemptuous look was the only answer Davis condescended to thisspeech. At last, after he had lighted a fresh cigar, and puffed it intofull work, he said, "Well, what was it he had to say to you?""Oh, we talked away of everything; and, by Jupiter! he knows a little ofeverything. Such a memory, too; remembers every fellow that was in powerthe last fifty years, and can tell you how he was 'squared,' for it 'sall on the 'cross' with them, Grog, just as in the ring. Every fellowrides to order, and half the running one sees is no race! Any hot waterto be had?""No, there's cold in that jug yonder. Well, go on with Dunn.""He is very agreeable, I must say; for, besides having met everybody, heknows all their secret history,--how this one got out of his scrape,and why that went into the hole. You see in a moment how much he mustbe trusted, and that he can make his book on life as safe as the Bank ofEngland. Fearfully strong that gin is!""No, it ain't," said Grog, rudely; "it's not the velvety tipple Dunngave you, but it's good British gin, that's what it is.""You would n't believe, too, how much he knows about women! He's up toeverything that's going on in town. Very strange that, for a fellow likehim! Don't you think so?"Davis made no answer, but puffed away slowly. "And after women, whatcame next?""He talked next--let me see--about books. How he likes Becky Sharp,--howhe enjoys her! He says that character will do the same service as thepublished discovery of some popular fraud; and that the whole race ofBeckys now are detected swindlers,--nothing less.""And what if they are? Is that going to prevent their cheating? Hasn'tthe world always its crop of flats coming out in succession like greenpeas? What did he turn to after that?""Then we had a little about the turf.""He don't know anything about the turf!" said Grog, with intensecontempt."I 'm not so sure of that," said Beecher, cautiously."Did he speak of me at all?" said Grog, with a peculiar grin."No; only to ask if you were the same Captain Davis that was mentionedin that affair at Brighton.""And what did you say?""Said! Not knowing, could n't tell, Master Grog. Knew you were a greatfriend of my brother Lackington's, and always hand and glove withBlanchard and the swells.""And how did he take that?""Said something about two of the same name, and changed the subject."Davis drew near the table, and taking up the cards began to shufflethem slowly, like one seeking some excuse for a moment of uninterruptedreflection. "I've found out the way that Yankee fellow does the king,"said he, at last. "It's not the common bridge that everybody knows.It's a Mississippi touch, and a very neat one. Cut them now wherever youlike."Beecher cut the cards with all due care, and leaned eagerly over thetable."King of diamonds!" cried Grog, slapping the card on the board."Do it again," said Beecher, admiringly; and once more Davis performedthe dexterous feat."It's a nick!" cried Beecher, examining the edge of the card minutely."It ain't no such thing!" said Davis, angrily. "I'd give you ten yearsto find it out, and twenty to do it, and-you 'd fail in both.""Let's see the dodge, Grog," said Beecher, half-coaxingly."You don't see my hand till you put yours on the table," said Davis,fiercely. Then crossing his arms before him, and fixing his redfiery eyes on Beecher's face, he went on, "What do you mean by thisfencing--just tell me what you mean by it?""I don't understand you," said Beecher, whose features were now of ashypaleness."Then you shall understand me!" cried Davis, with an oath. "Do you wantme to believe that Dunn had you to dine with him all alone, just to talkabout politics, of which you know nothing, or books, of which you knowless; that he 'd give you four precious hours of a Sunday evening tobear your opinions about men or women or things in general? Do you askme to swallow that, sir?""I ask you to swallow nothing," stammered out Beecher, in whose heartpride and fear were struggling for the mastery. "I have told you whatwe spoke of. If anything else passed between us, perhaps it was ofa private and personal nature; perhaps it referred to family topics;perhaps I might have given a solemn assurance not to reveal the subjectof it to any one.""You did,--did you?" said Davis, with a sneer."I said, perhaps I might have done so. I did n't say I had.""And so you think--you fancy--that you 're a going to double on me,"said Davis, rising, and advancing towards him with a sort of insultingmenace. "Now, look here, my name ain't Davis but if ever you try it--tryit, I say, because, as to doing it, I dare you to your face--but ifyou just try it, twelve hours won't pass over till the dock of apolice court is graced by the Honorable Annesley Beecher on a charge offorgery.""Oh, Davis!" cried Beecher, as he placed his hands over the other'slips, and glanced in terror through the room. "There never was anythingI did n't tell you,--you 're the only man breathing that knows me.""And I do know you, by Heaven, I do!" cried the other, savagely; "andI know you'd sneak out of my hands to-morrow, if you dared; but thisI tell you, when you leave mine it will be to exchange into theturnkey's. You fancy that because I see you are a fool that I don'tsuspect you to be a crafty one. Ah! what a mistake you make there!""But listen to me, Grog,--just hear me.""My name 's Davis, sir,--Captain Davis,--let me hear you call meanything else!""Well, Davis, old fellow,--the best and truest friend ever fellow hadin the world,--now what's all this about? I 'll tell you every syllablethat passed between Dunn and myself. I'll give you my oath, as solemnlyas you can dictate it to me, not to conceal one word. He made me swearnever to mention it. It was he that imposed the condition on me. Whathe said was this: 'It's a case where you need no counsel, and where anycounsel would be dangerous. He who once knows your secret will be in aposition to dictate to you. Lord Lackington must be your only adviser,since his peril is the same as your own.'""Go on," said Davis, sternly, as the other seemed to pause too long.Beecher drew a long breath, and, in a voice faint and broken, continued:"It's a claimant to the title,--a fellow who pretends he derives fromthe elder branch,--the Conway Beechers. All stuff and nonsense,--theywere extinct two hundred years ago,--but no matter, the claim is there,and so circumstantially got up, and so backed by documents and the restof it, that Lackington is frightened,--frightened out of his wits. Themere exposure, the very rumor of the thing, would distract him. He'sproud as Lucifer,--and then he's hard up; besides, he wants a loan, andDunn tells him there's no getting it till this affair is disposed of,and that he has hit on the way to do it.""As how?" said Davis, dryly."Well," resumed Beecher, whose utterance grew weaker and less audible atevery word, "Lackington, you know, has no children. It 's very unlikelyhe ever will now; and Dunn's advice is that for a life interest in thetitle and estates I should bind myself not to marry. That fellow then,if he can make good his claim, comes in as next of kin after me; andas to who or what comes after me," cried he, with more energy, "itmatters devilish little. Once 'toes up' and Annesley Beecher won'tfret over the next match that comes off,--eh, Grog, old fellow?" And heendeavored by a forced jocularity to encourage his own sinking heart."Here's a shindy!" said Grog, as he mixed himself a fresh tumbler andlaid his arms crosswise on the table; "and so it's no less than thewhole stakes is on this match?""Title and all," chimed in Beecher."I was n't thinking of the title," said Grog, gruffly, as he relapsedinto a moody silence. "Now, what does my Lord say to it all?" asked he,after a long pause."Lackington?--Lackington says nothing, or next to nothing. You read thepassage in his letter where he says, 'Call on Dunn,' or 'Speak to Dunn,'or something like that,--he did n't even explain about what; and thenyou may remember the foolish figure we cut on that morning we waited onDunn ourselves, not being able to say why or how we were there.""I remember nothing about cutting a foolish figure anywhere or any time.It's not very much my habit. It ain't my way of business.""Well, I can't say as much," said Beecher, laughing; "and I own franklyI never felt less at ease in my life.""That's your way of business," said Grog, nodding gravely at him."Every fellow is n't born as sharp as you, Davis. Samson was a wiseman--no, Solomon was a wise man--""Leave Samson and Solomon where they are," said Grog, puffing his cigar."What we have to look to here is whether there be a claim at all, andthen what it's worth. The whole affair may be just a cross between thisfellow Dunn and one of his own pals. Now, it's my Lord's business to seeto that. You are only the second horse all this while. If my Lordknows that he can be disqualified, he's wide awake enough to square thematch, he is. But it maybe that Dunn hasn't put the thing fairly beforehim. Well, then, you must compare your book with my Lord's. You'll haveto go over to him, Beecher." And the last words were uttered with asolemnity that showed they were the result of a deep deliberation."It's all very well, Master Davis, to talk of going over to Italy; butwhere's the tin to come from?""It must be had somehow," said Davis, sententiously. "Ain't there anyfellows about would give you a name to a bit of stiff, at thirty-onedays' date?""Pumped them all dry long ago!" said Beecher, laughing. "There's nota man in the garrison would join me to spoil a stamp; and, as to thecivilians, I scarcely know one who isn't a creditor already.""You are always talking to me of a fellow called Kellett,--why not havea shy at him?""Poor Paul!" cried Beecher, with a hearty laugh. "Why, Paul Kellett'sruined--cleaned out--sold in the Encumbered what d'ye-call-'ems, and hasn't a cross in the world!""I ought to have guessed as much," growled out Grog, "or he'd not havebeen on such friendly terms with you.""A polite speech that, Grog," said Beecher, smiling."It's true, and that's better," said Davis. "The only fellows that stickclose to a man in his poverty are those a little poorer than himself.""Not but, if he had it," said Beecher, following up his ownthoughts,--"not but, if he had it, he's just the fellow to do a rightgood-natured thing.""Well, I suppose he's got his name,--they have n't sold that, havethey?""No, but it's very much like the estate," said Beecher. "It's far tooheavily charged ever to pay off the encumbrances.""Who minds that, nowadays? A bad bill is a very useful thing sometimes.It's like a gun warranted to burst, and you can always manage to have itin the right man's hands when it comes the time for the explosion.""You are a rum un, Davis,--you are, indeed," said Beecher,admiringly; for it was in the delivery of such wise maxims that Davisappeared to him truly great."Get him down for fifty,--that ain't much,--fifty at three months. MyLord says he 'll stand fifty himself, in that letter I read. It was tohelp you to a match, to be sure; but that don't matter. There can be noquestion of marrying now. Let me see how this affair is going to turn.Well, I'll see if I can't do something myself. I've a precious lot ofstamped paper there,"--and he pointed to an old secretary,--"if I couldhit upon a sharp fellow to work it.""You are a trump, Grog!" cried Beecher, delightedly."If we had a clear two hundred, we could start to-morrow," said Grog,laying down his cigar, and staring steadfastly at him."Why, would you come, too?" muttered Beecher, who had never so much asimagined the possibility of this companionship on the Continent."I expect I would," said Davis, with a very peculiar grin. "It ain'tlikely you'd manage an affair like this without advice.""Very true,--very true," said Beecher, hurriedly. "But remember,Lackington is my brother,--we 're both in the same boat.""But not with the same skulls," said Grog. And he grinned a savage grinat the success of his pun.Beecher, however, so far from appreciating the wit, only understood theremark as a sneer at his intelligence, and half sulkily said,--"Oh! I'm quite accustomed to that, now,--I don't mind it.""That's right,--keep your temper," said Grog, calmly; "that's the bestthing in your book. You 're what they call good-tempered. And," addedhe, in the moralizing tone, "though the world does take liberties withthe good-tempered fellows, it shies them many a stray favor,--many asly five-pun'-note into the bargain. I've known fellows gothrough life--and make a rare good thing of it, too--with no otherstock-in-trade than this same good temper."Beecher did not pay his habitual attention to Grog's words, but satpondering over all the possible and impossible objections to a tourin such company. There were times and places where men might be seentalking to such a man as Davis. The betting-ring and the weighing-standhave their privileges, just like the green-room or the "flats," but inneither case are the intimacies of such localities exactly of a kind forparade before the world. Of all the perils of such a course none knewbetter than Beecher. What society would think,--what clubs would say ofit,--he could picture to his mind at once.Now, there were very few of life's casualties of which the HonorableAnnesley Beecher had not tasted. He knew what it was to have hisbills protested, his chattels seized, his person arrested; he hadbeen browbeaten by Bankruptcy Commissioners, and bullied by sheriffs'officers; tradesmen had refused him credit; tailors abjured hiscustom; he had "burned his fingers" in one or two not very creditabletransactions; but still, with all this, there was yet one depth to whichhe had not descended,--he was never seen in public with a "wrong man."He had a jerk of the head, a wink, or a glance for the leg who met himin Piccadilly, as every one else had. If he saw him in the garden of theStar and Garter, or the park at Greenwich, he might even condescend tobanter him on "looking jolly," and ask what new "robbery" he was in for;but as to descending to intimacy or companionship openly before the gazeof the world, he 'd as soon have thought of playing cad to a 'bus, orsweep at a crossing.It was true the Continent was not Hyde Park,--the most strait-lacedand well-conducted did fifty things there they had never ventured onat home. Foreign travel had its license, and a passport was a sort ofplenary indulgence for many a social transgression; but, with all this,there were a few names--about half a dozen in all Europe--that no mancould afford to link his own along with.As for Grog, he was known everywhere. From Ostend to Odessa his fameextended, and there was scarcely a police prefect in the travelleddistricts of the Continent that had not a description of his person,and some secret instructions respecting him. From many of the smallerstates, whose vigilance is in the ratio of their littleness, he wasrigidly excluded; so that in his journeying through Europe, he was oftenreduced to a zigzag and erratic procedure, not unlike the game knownto schoolboys as scotch-hop. In the ten minutes--it was not more--thatBeecher passed in recalling these and like facts to his memory, his mindgrew more and more perplexed; nor was the embarrassment unperceived byhim who caused it. As Davis sipped and smoked, he stole frequent glancesat his companion's face, and strove to read what was passing in hismind. "It may be," thought Grog, "he does n't see his way to raising themoney. It may be that his credit is lower in the market than I fancied;or"--and now his fiery eyes grew fiercer and his lip more tense--"orit may be that he doesn't fancy my company. If I was only sure it wasthat," muttered he between his teeth; and had Annesley Beecher onlychanced to look at him as he said it, the expression of that face wouldhave left a legacy of fear behind it for many a day."Help yourself," said Grog, passing the bottle across the table,--"helpyourself, and the gin will help you, for I see you are 'pounded.'""Pounded? No, not a bit; nothing of the kind," said Beecher, blushing."I was thinking how Lackington would take all this; what my Lady wouldsay to it; whether they 'd regard it seriously, or whether they 'd laughat my coming out so far about nothing.""They'll not laugh, depend on't; take my word for it, they won't laugh,"said Davis, dryly."Well, but if it all comes to nothing,--if it be only a plant to extortmoney?""Even that ain't anything to laugh at," said Davis. "I 've done a littlethat way myself, and yet I never saw the fellow who was amused by it.""So that you really think I ought to go out and see my brother?""I'm sure and certain that we must go," said Davis, just giving the veryfaintest emphasis to the "we.""But it will cost a pot of money, Grog, even though I should travel inthe cheapest way,--I mean, the cheapest way possible for a fellow aswell known as I am."This was a bold stroke; it was meant to imply far more than the merewords announced. It was intended to express a very complicated argumentin a mere innuendo."That's all gammon," said Grog, rudely. "We don't live in an age ofcouriers and extra-post; every man travels by rail nowadays, and nobodycares whether you take a coup or a horse-box; and as to being known, soam I, and almost as well known as most fellows going."This was pretty plain speaking; and Beecher well knew that Davis'sfrankness was always on the verge of the only one thing that was worsethan frankness."After all," said Beecher, after a pause, "let the journey be ever sonecessary, I have n't got the money.""I know you haven't, neither have I; but we shall get it somehow. You'll have to try Kellett; you 'll have to try Dunn himself, perhaps. Idon't see why you should n't start with him. He knows that you oughtto confer with my Lord; and he could scarce refuse your note at threemonths, if you made it--say fifty.""But, Grog," said Beecher, laying down his cigar, and nerving himselffor a great effort of cool courage, "what would suffice fairly enoughfor one, would be a very sorry allowance for two; and as the whole ofmy business will be with my own brother,--where of necessity I must bealone with him,--don't you agree with me that a third person would onlyembarrass matters rather than advance them?""No!" said Grog, sternly, while he puffed his cigar in measured time."I 'm speaking," said Beecher, in a tone of apology,--"I'm speaking,remember, from my knowledge of Lackington. He's very high and veryproud,--one of those fellows who 'take on,' even with their equals; andwith myself, he never forgets to let me feel I'm a younger brother.""He would n't take any airs with me," said Grog, insolently. AndBeecher grew actually sick at the bare thought of such a meeting."I tell you frankly, Davis," said he, with the daring of despair, "itwouldn't do. It would spoil all. First and foremost, Lackington wouldnever forgive me for having confided this secret to any one. He'd say,and not unfairly either, 'What has Davis to do with this? It's notthe kind of case he is accustomed to deal with; his counsel could n'tpossibly be essential here.' He does n't know," added he, rapidly,"your consummate knowledge of the world; he hasn't seen, as I have,how keenly you read every fellow that comes before you.""We start on Monday," said Grog, abruptly, as he threw the end of hiscigar into the fire; "so stir yourself, and see about the bills."Beecher arose and walked the room with hurried strides, his brow growingdarker and his face more menacing at every moment."Look here, Davis," cried he, turning suddenly round and facing theother, "you assume to treat me as if I was a--schoolboy;" and it wasevident that he had intended a stronger word, but had not courage toutter it, for Davis's wicked eyes were upon him, and a bitter grin ofirony was already on Grog's mouth as he said,--"Did you ever try a round with me without getting the worst of it? Doyou remember any time where you came well out of it? You 've been mauledonce or twice somewhat roughly, but with the gloves on,--always withthe gloves on. Now, take my advice, and don't drive me to take themoff,--don't! You never felt my knuckles yet,--and, by the Lord Harry, ifyou had, you'd not call out 'Encore.'""You just want to bully me," said Beecher, in a whimpering tone."Bully you,--bully you!" said Davis, and his features put on a look ofthe most intense scorn as he spoke. "Egad!" cried he, with an insolentlaugh, "you know very little about either of us.""I'd rather you'd do your worst at once than keep threatening me in thisfashion.""No, you would n't; no--no--nothing of the kind," said Davis, with amockery of gentleness in his voice and manner."May I be hanged if I would not!" cried Beecher, passionately."It ain't hanging now,--they 've made it transportation," said Davis,with a grin; "and them as has tried it says the old way was easiest."And in the slang style of the last words there was a terriblesignificance,--it was as though a voice from the felons' dock wasuttering a word of warning. Such was the effect on Beecher that he sankslowly down into a seat, silent and powerless."If you had n't been in this uncommon high style tonight," said Grog,quietly, "I'd have told you some excellent reasons for what I wasadvising. I got a letter from Spicer this morning. He, and a foreignfellow he calls Count Lienstahl,--it sounds devilish like 'lie andsteal,' don't it?--have got a very pretty plant together, and if theycould only chance upon a good second-rate horse, they reckon about eightor ten hundred in stakes alone this coming spring. They offer me a shareif I could come out to them, and mean to open the campaign at Brussels.Now, there's a thing to suit us all,--'picking for every one,' as theysay in the oakum-sheds.""Cochin China might be had for five hundred; or there's Spotted Snake,they want to sell him for anything he'll bring," said Beecher, withanimation."They could manage five hundred at least, Spicer says. We 're good forabout twelve thousand francs, which ought to get us what we're lookingfor.""There's Anchovy Paste--""Broke down before and behind.""Hop the Twig, own sister to Levanter; ran second for the ColchesterCup--""Mares don't answer abroad.""Well, what do you say to Mumps?""There's the horse for the Continent. A great heavy-headed, thick-jawedbeast, with lazy action, and capped hocks. He's the animal to walk intoa foreign jockey club. Oh, if we had him!""I know where he is!" exclaimed Beecher, in ecstasy. "There 's aBrummagem fellow driving him through Wales,--a bagman,--and he takes hima turn now and then for the county stakes that offer. I 'll lay my headon't we get him for fifty pounds.""Come, old fellow," said Grog, encouragingly, "you have your witsabout you, after all. Breakfast here to-morrow, about twelve o'clock,and we 'll see if we can't arrange the whole affair. It's a sure fivehundred apiece, as if we had it here;" and he slapped his pockets as hespoke.Beecher shook his friend's hand with a warmth that showed all his wontedcordiality, and with a hearty "Good-night!" they separated.Grog had managed cleverly. He had done something by terror, and the resthe had accomplished by temptation. They were the two only impulses tosway that strange temperament.CHAPTER XXI. A DARK DAYIt was the day appointed for the sale of Kellett's Court, and aconsiderable crowd was assembled to witness the proceeding. Property wasrapidly changing hands; new names were springing up in every county,and old ones were growing obsolete. Had the tide of conquest andconfiscation flowed over the land, a greater social revolution could nothave resulted; and while many were full of hope and confidence thata new prosperity was about to dawn upon Ireland, there were some whocontinued to deplore the extinction of the old names, and the exileof the old families, whose traditions were part of the history of thecountry.Kellett's Court was one of those great mansions which the Irishgentlemen of a past age were so given to building, totally forgettinghow great the disproportion was between their house and their rent-roll.Irregular, incongruous, and inelegant, it yet, by its very size andextent, possessed a certain air of grandeur. Eighty guests had sat downto table in that oak wainscoted dinner-room; above a hundred had beenaccommodated with beds beneath that roof; the stables had stallsfor every hunting-man that came; and the servants' hall was a greatgalleried chamber, like the refectory of a convent, in everything savethe moderation of the fare.Many were curious to know who would purchase an estate burdened by socostly a residence, the very maintenance of which in repair constituteda heavy annual outlay. The gardens, long neglected and forgotten,occupied three acres, and were themselves a source of immense expense;a considerable portion of the demesne was so purely ornamental thatit yielded little or no profit; and, as an evidence of the tastes andhabits of its former owners, the ruins of a stand-house marked out whereraces once were held in the park, while hurdle fences and deep drainseven yet disfigured the swelling lawn.Who was to buy such a property was the question none could answer.The house, indeed, might be converted into a "Union," if its localitysuited; it was strong enough for a jail, it was roomy enough for anunnery. Some averred the Government had decided on purchasing it fora barrack; others pretended that the sisterhood of the Sacred Hearthad already made their bargain for it; yet to these and many otherassertions not less confidently uttered there were as many demurrers.While rumors and contradictions were still buzzed about, theCommissioner took his place on the bench, and the clerk of the Courtbegan that tedious recital of the circumstances of the estate with whosedetails all the interested were already familiar, and the mere curiouscared not to listen to. An informality on a former day had interferedwith the sale, a fact which the Commissioner alluded to withsatisfaction, as property had risen largely in value in the interval,and he now hoped that the estate would not alone clear off all thecharges against it, but realize something for its former owner. Aconfused murmur of conversation followed this announcement. Mentalked in knots and groups, consulted maps and rent-rolls, madehasty calculations in pencil, whispered secretly together, mutteringfrequently the words "Griffith," "plantation measure," "drainage," and"copyhold," and then, in a half-hurried, half-wearied way, the Courtasked, "Is there no bidding after twenty-seven thousand five hundred?""Twenty-eight!" said a deep voice near the door.A long, dreary pause followed, and the sale was over."Twenty-eight thousand!" cried Lord Glengariff; "the house alone costfifty.""It's only the demesne, my Lord," said some one near; "it's not theestate is sold.""I know it, sir; but the demesne contains eight hundred acres, fullywooded, and enclosed by a wall.--Who is it for, Dunn?" asked he, turningto that gentleman."In trust, my Lord," was the reply."Of that I am aware, sir; you have said as much to the Court."Dunn bent over, and whispered some words in his ear."Indeed!" exclaimed the other, with evident astonishment; "and intendingto reside?" added he."Eventually, I expect so," said Dunn, cautiously, as others were nowattending to the conversation.Again Lord Glengariff spoke; but, ere he had finished, a strangemovement of confusion in the body of the Court interrupted him, whilea voice hoarse with passionate meaning cried out, "Is the robberyover?--is it done?" and a large, powerful man, his face flushed, andhis eyes glaring wildly, advanced through the crowd to the railingbeneath the bench. His waistcoat was open, and he held his cravat in onehand, having torn it off in the violence of his excitement."Who is this man?" asked the Commissioner, sternly."I'll tell you who I am,--Paul Kellett, of Kellett's Court, the owner ofthat house and estate you and your rascally miscreants have just stolenfrom me,--ay, stolen is the word; law or justice have nothing to do withit. Your Parliament made it law, to be sure, to pamper your Manchesterupstarts who want to turn gentlemen--""Does any one know him?--has he no friends who will look after him?"said the Commissioner, leaning over and addressing those beneath in asubdued voice."Devil a friend in the world! It's few friends stick to the man whoseproperty comes here. But don't make me out mad. I 'm in my full senses,though I had enough to turn fifty men to madness.""I know him, my Lord; with the permission of the Court, I 'll takecharge of him," said Dunn, in a tone so low as to be audible only to afew. Kellett, however, was one of them, and he immediately cried out,--"Take charge of me! Ay, that he will. He took charge of my estate, too,and he 'll do by me what he did with the property,--give a bargain ofme!"A hearty burst of laughter filled the hall at this sally; for Dunn wasone of those men whose prosperity always warrants the indulgence ofa sarcasm. The Court, however, could no longer brook the indecorousinterruption, and sternly ordered that Kellett might be removed."My dear Mr. Kellett, pray remember yourself; only recollect where youare; such conduct will only expose you--""Expose me! do you think I've any shame left in me? Do you think, when aman is turned out to starve on the roads, that he cares much what peoplesay of him?""This interruption is intolerable," said the Commissioner. "If he be notspeedily removed, I 'll order him into the custody of the police.""Do, in God's name," cried Kellett, calmly. "Anything that will keep mefrom laying hands on myself, or somebody else, will be a charity.""Come with me, Kellett,--do come along with me!" said Dunn,entreatingly."Not a step,--not an inch. It was going with you brought me here.This man, my Lord," cried he, addressing the Court with a wildearnestness,--"this man said to me that this was the time to sell aproperty,--that land was rising every day; that if we came intothe Court now, it's not twenty, nor twenty-five, but thirty years'purchase--""I am sorry, sir," said the Commissioner, sternly, "that you will giveme no alternative but that of committing you; such continued disrespectof Court cannot longer be borne.""I 'm as well in jail as anywhere else. You 've robbed me of myproperty, I care little for my person. I'll never believe it'slaw,--never! You may sit up with your wig and your ushers and yourcriers, but you are just a set of thieves and swindlers, neither morenor less. Talk of shame, indeed! I think some of yourselves might blushat what you 're doing. There, there, I 'm not going to resist you," saidhe to the policeman; "there's no need of roughness. Newgate is the bestplace for me now. Mind," added he, turning to where the reporters forthe daily press were sitting,--"mind and say that I just offered a calmprotest against the injustice done me; that I was civilly remonstratingwith the Court upon what every man--"Ere he could finish, he was quietly removed from the spot, and beforethe excitement of the scene had subsided, he was driving away rapidlytowards Newgate."Drunk or mad,--which was it?" said Lord Glengariff to Davenport Dunn,whose manner was scarcely as composed as usual."He has been drinking, but not to drunkenness," said Dunn, cautiously."He is certainly to be pitied." And now he drew nigh the bench andwhispered a few words to the Commissioner.Whatever it was that he urged--and there was an air of entreaty in hismanner--did not seem to meet the concurrence of the judge. Dunn pleadedearnestly, however; and at last the Commissioner said, "Let him bebrought up tomorrow, then, and having made a suitable apology to theCourt, we will discharge him." Thus ended the incident, and once morethe clerk resumed his monotonous readings. Townlands and baronies weredescribed, valuations quoted, rights of turbary defined, and an ancientsquirearchy sold out of their possessions with as little commotion orexcitement as a mock Claude is knocked down at Christie's. Indeed, of solittle moment was the scene we have mentioned deemed, that scarcely halfa dozen lines of the morning papers were given to its recital. The Courtand its doings were evidently popular with the country at large, and oneof the paragraphs which readers read with most pleasure was that whereinit was recorded that estates of immense value had just changed owners,and that the Commissioner had disposed of so many thousands' worth oflanded property within the week.Sweeping measures, of whatever nature they be, have always been in favorwith the masses; never was any legislation so popular as the guillotine!Evening was closing in, the gloomy ending of a gloomy day in winter, andSybella Kellett sat at the window anxiously watching for her father'sreturn. The last two days had been passed by her in a state of feverishuneasiness. Since her father's attendance at the custom-house ceased,--.for he had been formally dismissed at the beginning of the week,--hismanner had exhibited strange alternations of wild excitement and deepdepression. At times he would move hurriedly about, talking rapidly,sometimes singing to himself; at others he would sit in a state oftorpor for hours. He drank, too, affecting some passing pain orsome uneasiness as an excuse for the whiskey-bottle; and when gentlyremonstrated with on the evil consequences, became fearfully passionateand excited. "I suppose I 'll be called a drunkard next; there 'snothing more likely than I 'll be told it was my own sottishhabits brought all this ruin upon me. 'He 's a sot.'--'He 's neversober.'--'Ask his own daughter about him.'" And then stimulatinghimself, he would become furious with rage. As constantly, too, did heinveigh against Dunn, saying that it was he that ruined him, and thathad he not listened to his treacherous counsels he might have arrangedmatters with his creditors. From these bursts of passion he wouldfall into moods of deepest melancholy, accusing his own folly andrecklessness as the cause of all his misfortunes, and even pushingself-condemnation so far as to assert that it was his misconduct andwaste had driven poor Jack from home and made him enlist as a soldier.Bella could not but see that his intellect was affected and his judgmentimpaired, and she made innumerable pretexts to be ever near him. Now shepretended that she required air and exercise, that her spirits were low,and needed companionship. Then she affected to have little purchases tomake in town, and asked him to bear her company. At length he showed arestlessness under this restraint that obliged her to relax it; he evendropped chance words as if he suspected that he was the object of someunusual care and supervision. "There's no need of watching me," said he,rudely, to her on the morning that preceded the sale; "I 'm in no wantof a keeper. They 'll see Paul Kellett 's not the man to quail under anycalamity; the same to-day, to-morrow, and the next day. Sell him out orbuy him in, and you 'll never know by his face that he felt it."He spoke very little on that morning, and scarcely tasted his breakfast.His dress was more careful than usual; and Bella, half by way of sayingsomething, asked if he were going into Dublin."Into Dublin! I suppose I am, indeed," said he, curtly, as though givinga very obvious reply. "Maybe," added he, after a few minutes,--"maybeyou forget this is the seventeenth, and that this is the day for thesale.""I did remember it," said she, with a faint sigh, but not daring to askhow his presence there was needed."And you were going to say," added he, with a bitter smile, "what didthat matter to me, and that wasn't wanted. Neither I am,--I 'm neitherseller nor buyer; but still I 'm the last of the name that livedthere,--I was Kellett of Kellett's Court, and there 'll never be anotherto say the same, and I owe it to myself to be there to-day,--just as I'd attend a funeral,--just as I 'd follow the hearse.""It will only give you needless pain, dearest father," said she,soothingly; "pray do not go.""Faith, I'll go if it gave me a fit," said he, fiercely. "They may saywhen they go home, 'Paul Kellett was there the whole time, as cool asI am now; you 'd never believe it was the old family place--the househis ancestors lived in for centuries--was up for sale; there he was,calm and quiet If that is n't courage, tell me what is.'""And yet I 'd rather you did not go, father. The world has trials enoughto tax our energies, that we should not go in search of them.""That's a woman's way of looking at it," said he, contemptuously."A man with a man's heart likes to meet danger, just to see how he 'lltreat it.""But remember, father--""There, now," said he, rising from the table, "if you talked till youwere tired, I 'd go still. My mind is made up on it."Bella turned away her head, and stole her handkerchief to her eyes."I know very well," burst he in, bitterly, "that the blackguardnewspapers to-morrow will just be as ready to abuse me for it. It wouldhave been more dignified, or more decent, or something or other, if Mr.Kellett had not appeared at the sale; but I 'll go, nevertheless, if itwas only to see the man that's to take our place there! Wait dinner forme till six,--that is, if there 's any dinner at all." And, with a laughof bitterest meaning, he left the room, and was soon seen issuing fromthe little garden into the road.What a sad day, full of gloomy forebodings, was that for her! She knewwell how all the easy and careless humor of her father had been changedby calamity into a spirit fierce and resentful; that, suspectful ofinsult on every hand, he held himself ever prepared to meet the mostharmless remark with words of defiance. An imaginary impression thatthe world had agreed to scorn him, made him adopt a bearing at onceaggressive and offensive; and he who was once a proverb for good temperbecame irritable and savage to a degree.What might not come of such a temperament, tried in its tenderest spot?What might occur to expose him to the heartless sneers of those whoneither knew his qualities nor his trials? These were her thoughts asshe walked to and fro in her little room, unable to read, unableto write, though she made several attempts to begin a letter to herbrother. The dark future also lowered before, without one flicker oflight to pierce its gloom. How were they to live? In a few days morethey would be at the end of their frail resources,--something less thantwo pounds was all that they had in the world. How she envied those insome foreign land who could stoop to the most menial labor, unseen andunremembered by their own. How easily, she thought, poverty might beborne, if divested of the terrible contrast with a former condition.Could they by any effort raise the means to emigrate,--and where to?Might not Mr. Dunn be the person to give counsel in such a case? Fromall she had heard of him, he was conversant with every career, everywalk, and every condition. Doubtless he could name the very colony, andthe very spot to suit them,--nor impossible that he might aid them toreach it. If they prospered, they could repay him. They might pledgethemselves to such a condition on this head as he would dictate. How,then, to approach him? A letter? And yet a letter was always so wantingin the great requisite of answering doubts as they arose, and meetingdifficulties by ready re-Joinder. A personal interview would do this.Then why not ask for an audience of him? "I'll call upon him at once,"said she; "he may receive me without other solicitation,--my name willsurely secure me that much of attention." Would her father approve ofsuch a step?--would it not appear to his eyes an act of meanness anddependence?--might not the whole scheme be one to which he would offeropposition? From conflicts like these she came back to the drearypresent and wondered what could still delay his coming. It was a roadbut little travelled; and as she sat watching at the window, her eyesgrew wearied piercing the hazy atmosphere, darkening deeper and deeperas night drew near. She endeavored to occupy herself in various ways:she made little preparations for his coming; she settled his roomneatly, over and over; she swept the hearth, and made a cheerful fire togreet him; and then, passing into the kitchen, she looked after thehumble dinner that awaited him. Six o'clock passed, and another wearyhour followed. Seven,--and still he came not. She endeavored to diverther thoughts into thinking of the future she had pictured to herself.She tried to fancy the scenery, the climate, the occupation of thatdream-land over the seas; but at every bough that beat against thewindow by the wind, at every sound of the storm without, she would startup, and hasten to the door to listen.It was now near eight o'clock; and so acute had her hearing become byintense anxiety that she could detect the sounds of a footfall comingalong the plashy road. She did not venture to move, lest she should losethe sound, and she dreaded, too, lest it should pass on. She bent downher head to hear; and now, oh, ecstasy of relief! she heard the latch ofthe little wicket raised, and the step upon the gravel-walk within. Sherushed at once to the door, and, dashing out into the darkness, threwherself wildly upon his breast, saying, "Thank God you are come! Oh, howI have longed for you, dearest, dearest father!" And then as suddenly,with a shriek, cried out, "Who is it? Who is this?""Conway,--Charles Conway. A friend,--at least, one who would wish to bethought so."With a wild and rapid utterance she told him of her long and wearywatch, and that her fears--mere causeless fears, she said she knew theywere--had made her nervous and miserable. Her father's habits, always soregular and homely, made even an hour's delay a source of anxiety."And then he had not been well for some days back,--circumstances hadoccurred to agitate him; things preyed upon him more heavily than theyhad used. Perhaps it was the dreary season--perhaps their solitary kindof life--had rendered them both more easily depressed. But, somehow--"She could not go on; but hastening towards the window, pressed her handsto her face."If you could tell me where I would be likely to hear of him,--what arehis haunts in town--""He has none,--none whatever. He has entirely ceased to visit any of hisformer friends; even Mr. Beecher he has not called on for months long.""Has he business engagements in any quarter that you know of?""None now. He did hold an office in the Customs, but he does so nolonger. It is possible--just possible--he might have called at Mr.Dunn's, but he could not have been detained there so late as this. Andif he were--" She stopped, confused and embarrassed."As to that," said he, catching at her difficulty with ready tact, "Icould easily pretend it was my own anxiety that caused the visit. Icould tell him it was likely I should soon see Jack again, and ask ofhim to let me be the bearer of some kind message to him.""Yes, yes," muttered Bella, half vacantly; for he had only given to hiswords the meaning of a mere pretext."I think you may trust to me that I will manage the matter delicately.He shall never suspect that he has given any uneasiness by his absence.""But even this," said she, eagerly, "condemns me to some hours longer offeverish misery. You cannot possibly go back to town and return here inless than two--perhaps three hours.""I 'll try and do it in half the time," said Conway, rising, and takinghis cap. "Where does Mr. Dunn live?""In Menion Square. I forget the number, but it does not matter; everyone knows his house. It is on the north side.""You shall see me before--What o'clock is it now?""Half-past eight," said she, shuddering, as she saw how late it was."Before eleven, I promise you confidently,--and earlier if I can.""You know my father so very little--so very recently," said Sybella,with some confusion, "that it may be necessary to guard you,--that is,you ought to be made aware that on this day the estate our family hasheld for centuries was sold. It is true we are no poorer than we wereyesterday; the property we called our own, and from habit believed tobe such, had been mortgaged this many a year. Why or how we everfancied that one day or other we should be in a position to pay off theencumbrances, I cannot tell you; but it is true that we did so fancy,and used to talk of that happy event as of one we felt to be in storefor us. Well, the blow has fallen at last, and demolished all ourcastle-building! Like storm-tossed vessels, we saw ships sinking onevery side, and yet caught at hope for ourselves. This hope has now leftus. The work of this morning has obliterated every trace of it. It is ofthis, then, I would ask you to be mindful when you see my poor father.He has seen ruin coming this many a year; it never came face to facewith him till to-day. I cannot tell how he may brave it, though therewas a time I could have answered for his courage.""Jack Kellett's father could scarcely be deficient in that quality,"said Conway, whose flashing eyes showed that it was Jack's sister wasuppermost in his mind as he spoke."Oh," said she, sorrowfully, "great as the heroism is that meets deathon the field of battle, it is nothing to the patient and enduringbravery that confronts the daily ills of life,--confronts them nobly,but in humility, neither buoyed up by inordinate hope, nor cast down bydespondency, but manfully resolved to do one's best, and, come what may,to do it without sacrifice of self-respect. Thus meeting fate, andwith a temper that all the crosses of life have not made irritable norsuspectful, makes a man to my eyes a greater hero than any of those whocharge in forlorn hopes, or single-handed rush up the breach torn bygrape-shot." Her cheek, at first pale, grew deeper and deeper red,and her dark eyes flashed till their expression became almost wild inbrilliancy, when, suddenly checking her passionate mood, she said, "Itwere better I should go along with you,--better, at least, I were athand. He will bear much from me that he would not endure from another,and I will go." So saying, she hastened from the room, and in a momentcame back shawled and ready for the road."What a night for you to venture out," said Conway; "and I have got nocarriage of any kind.""I am well accustomed to brave bad weather, and care nothing for it.""It is raining fearfully, and the waves are washing clear over the lowsea-wall," said he, trying to dissuade her."I have come out here on many such nights, and never the worse for it.Can't you fancy Jack Kellett's sister equal to more than this?" saidshe, smiling through all her sadness, as she led the way to the door.And now they were upon the road, the wild rain and the gusty windbeating against them, and almost driving them back. So loud the stormthat they did not try to speak, but with her arm close locked within hisown, Conway breasted the hurricane with a strange sensation of delighthe had never known before.Scarcely a word passed between them as they went; as the rain beatheavily against her he would try as well as he could to shelter her;when the cutting wind blew more severely, he would draw her arm closerwithin his own; and yet, thus in silence, they grew to each other likefriends of many a year. A sense of trustfulness, a feeling of a commonobject too, sufficed to establish between them a sentiment to be mouldedby the events of after-life into anything. Ay, so is it! Out of thesechance affinities grow sometimes the passion of a life, and sometimesthe disappointments that embitter existence!"What a good fortune it was that brought you to my aid to-night," saidshe; "I had not dared to have come this long road alone.""What a good fortune mine to have even so humble a service to renderyou! Jack used to talk to me of you for hours long. Nights just likethis have we passed together; he telling me about your habits and yourways, so that this very incident seems to fit into the story of yourlife as an every-day occurrence. I know," continued he, as she seemedto listen attentively, "how you used to ride over the mountains at home,visiting wild and out-of-the-way spots; how you joined him in his longfishing excursions, exploring the deep mountain gorges while he lingeredby the riverside. The very names you gave these desolate places--takenfrom old books of travel--showed me how a spirit of enterprise was inyour heart.""Were they not happy days!" murmured she, half to herself."They must have been," said he, ardently; "to hear of them has charmedthe weariest watches of the night, and made me long to know you.""Yes; but I am not what I was," said she, hastily. "Out of that dreamy,strange existence I have awakened to a world full of its own sternrealities. That pleasant indolence has ill prepared me for the road Imust travel; and it was selfish too! The vulgarest cares of every-daylife are higher aims than all the mere soarings of imagination, and ofthis truth I am only now becoming aware.""But it was for never neglecting those very duties Jack used to praiseyou; he said that none save himself knew you as other than the carefulmistress of a household.""Poor fellow! ours was an humble retinue, and needed little guidance.""I see," said Conway, "you are too proud to accept of such esteem asmine; but yet you can't prevent me offering it.""Have I not told you how I prize your kindness?" said she, gently."Will you let me think so?" cried Conway, pressing her arm closely; andagain they were silent Who knows with what thoughts?How dreary did the streets seem as they entered Dublin! The hazy lamps,dulled by the fast-falling rain, threw a misty light through the loadedatmosphere; the streets, deserted by all but the very poorest weresilent and noiseless, save for the incessant plash of the rain; fewlights were seen on any side, and all was darkness and gloom. Wearilythey plodded onward, Sybella deeply sunk in her own thoughts as to thefuture, and Conway, too respectful of her feelings to interrupt her,never uttered a word as they went. At last they reached Merrion Square,and after some little search stood at the door of Mr. Davenport Dunn.Sybella drew a heavy sigh as Conway knocked loudly, and muttered toherself, "Heaven grant me good tidings of my father!"CHAPTER XXII. AFTER A DINNER-PARTYMr. Davenport Dunn had a dinner-party,--he entertained the notablesof the capital; and a chief secretary, a couple of judges, a poor-lawcommissioner, and some minor deities, soldier and civilian, formed hiscompany. They were all social, pleasant, and conversational. The countrywas growing governable, calendars were light, military duty a merepastime, and they chatted agreeably over reminiscences of a time--notvery remote neither--when Rockites were rife, jails crammed, andthe fatigues and perils of a soldier not inferior to those of actualwarfare."To our worthy host here!" said the Chief Baron, eying his claret beforethe light,--and it was a comet vintage,--"to our worthy host here are weindebted for most of this happy change.""Under Providence," whispered the oily Dean of the Chapel Royal."Of course, so I mean," said the judge, with that kind of impatiencehe would have met a needless suggestion in court. "Great publicworks, stupendous enterprises, and immense expenditure of capital haveencountered rebellion by the best of all methods,--prosperity!""Is it really extinct,--has Lazarus died, or is he only sleeping?"interposed a small dark-eyed man, with a certain air of determinationand a look of defiance that seemed to invite discussion."I should, at all events, call it a trance that must lead toperfect recovery," said the Chief Secretary. "Ireland is no longer adifficulty.""She may soon become something more," said the dark man; "insteadof embarrassing your counsels, she may go far towards swaying andcontrolling them. The energies that were once wasted in factiousstruggles at home here, may combine to carry on a greater combat inEngland; and it might even happen that your statesmen might look backwith envy to days of orange-and-green memory.""She would gladly welcome the change you speak of." said the Secretary."I'm not so sure of that, sir; you have not already shown yourselvesso very tolerant when tried. It is but a few years ago, and your barrebelled at the thought of an Irishman being made Master of the Rolls inEngland, and that Irishman, Plunkett.""I must say," burst in the Attorney-General, fresh from his firstsession in Parliament, and, more still, his first season in town, "thisis but a prejudice,--an unjust prejudice. I can assert for myself thatI never rose in the House without experiencing a degree of attention,--adeference, in short--""Eminently the right of one whose opinions were so valuable," said theSecretary, bowing blandly, and smiling."You did not lash them too often nor too much, Hutchard," said the darkman. "If I remember aright, you rose once in the session, and that wasto move an adjournment.""Ah, Lindley," said the other, good-humoredly, "you are an unforgivingenemy." Then, turning to the Chief Secretary, he said: "He cannot pardonmy efforts, successful as they have been, to enable the Fellows of theUniversity to marry. He obtained his fellowship as a safe retirement,and now discovers that his immunity is worth nothing.""I beg pardon," said Lindley; "I have forgiven you long ago. It was fromyour arguments in its favor the measure was so long resisted. You arereally blameless in the matter!"The sharp give and take of these sallies--the fruit of those intimacieswhich small localities produce--rather astonished the English officials,and the Secretary and the Commissioner exchanged glances of significantimport; nor was this lost on the Chief Baron, who, to change the topic,suddenly asked,--"Who bought that estate--Kellett's Court, I think they call it--was soldthis morning?""I purchased it in trust," said Dunn, "for an English peer.""Does he intend ever to reside there?""He talks of it, my Lord," said Dunn, "the way men talk of somethingvery meritorious that they mean to do--one day or other.""It went, I hear, for half its value," remarked some one."A great deal above that, I assure you," said Dunn. "Indeed, as propertyis selling now, I should not call the price a bad one.""Evidently Mr. Kellett was not of your mind," said the former speaker,laughing."I 'm told he burst into court to-day and abused every one, from theBench to the crier, called the sale a robbery, and the judge a knave.""Not exactly that. He did, it is true, interrupt the order of the Court,but the sale was already concluded. He used very violent language, andso far forgot his respect for the Bench as to incur the penalty of acommittal.""And was he committed?" asked the Secretary."He was; but rather as a measure of precaution than punishment. TheCourt suspected him to be insane." Here Dunn leaned over and whispereda few words in the Secretary's ear. "Nor was it without difficulty,"muttered he, in a low tone. "He continued to inveigh in the most violenttone against us all; declared he 'd never leave the Jail without apublic apology from the Bench; and, in fact, conducted himself soextravagantly that I half suspected the judge to be right, and thatthere was some derangement in the case.""I remember Paul Kellett at the head of the grand jury of his county,"said one."He was high sheriff the first year I went that circuit," said thejudge."And how has it ended?--where is he now?" whispered the Secretary."I persuaded him to come home here with me, and after a little calmingdown he became reasonable and has gone to his own house, but only withinthe last hour. It was that my servant whispered me, when he last broughtin the wine.""And I suppose, after all," said the Poor-Law Commissioner, "there wasnothing peculiar in this instance; his case was one of thousands.""Quite true, sir," said Lindley. "Statistical tables can take no noteof such-like applicants for out-door relief; all are classified aspaupers.""It must be acknowledged," said the Secretary, in a tone of half rebuke,"that the law has worked admirably; there is but one opinion on thatsubject in England.""I should be greatly surprised were it otherwise," said Lindley; "Inever heard that the Cornish fishermen disparaged shipwrecks!""Who is that gentleman?" whispered the Secretary to Dunn."A gentleman very desirous to be Crown Prosecutor at Melbourne," saidDunn, with a smile."He expresses himself somewhat freely," whispered the other."Only here, sir,--only here, I assure you. He is our stanchest supporterin the College.""Of course we shall take Sebastopol, sir," said a colonel from theend of the table. "The Russians are already on half rations, and theirammunition is nigh exhausted." And now ensued a lively discussion ofmilitary events, wherein the speakers displayed as much confidence asskill."It strikes me," said Lindley, "we are at war with the Emperor Nicholasfor practising pretty much the same policy we approve of so strenuouslyfor ourselves. He wanted to treat Turkey like an encumbered estate.There was the impoverished proprietor, the beggared tenantry, theincapacity for improvement,--all the hackneyed arguments, in fact, forselling out the Sultan that we employ so triumphantly against the Irishgentleman.""Excuse me," said the Attorney-General, "he wanted to take forciblepossession.""Nothing of the kind. He was as ready to offer compensation as weourselves are when we superannuate a clerk or suppress an office. Hissole mistake was that he proposed a robbery at the unlucky moment thatthe nation had taken its periodical attack of virtue,--we were in theheight of our honest paroxysm when he asked us to be knaves; and henceall that has followed.""You estimate our national morality somewhat cheaply, sir," said theCommissioner."As to morals, I think we are good political economists. We buy cheaply,and endeavor, at least, to sell in the dearest markets.""No more wine, thank you," said the Secretary, rising. "A cup of coffee,with pleasure."It was a part of Davenport Dunn's policy to sprinkle his dinner companywith men like Lindley. They were what physicians call a sort of mildirritants, and occasionally very useful in their way; but, in thepresent instance, he rather suspected that the application had beenpushed too far, and he approached the Secretary in the drawing-room witha kind of half apology for his guest."Ireland," said he, "has always possessed two species of place-hunters:the one, patiently supporting Government for years, look calmly for therecognition of their services as a debt to be paid; the other, by anirritating course of action, seem to indicate how vexatious and annoyingthey may prove if not satisfactorily dealt with. Lindley is one ofthese, and he ought to be provided for.""I declare to you, Dunn," said the Secretary, as he drew his arm withinthe other's, and walked with him into the back drawing-room, "thesekind of men make government very difficult in Ireland. There is noreserve--no caution about them. They compromise one at every step.You are the only Irishman I ever met who would seem to understand thenecessity of reserve."Dunn bowed twice. It was like the acknowledgment of what he felt to be aright."I go further," said the other, warming; "you are the only man herewho has given us real and effective support, and yet never asked foranything.""What could I wish for better than to see the country governed as itis?" said Dunn, courteously."All are not inspired so patriotically, Dunn. Personal advantages havetheir influence on most men.""Of course,--naturally enough. But I stand in no need of aid in thisrespect I don't want for means. I could n't, if you offered it, takeoffice; my hands are too full already, and of work which anothermight not be able to carry out. Rank, of course--distinction--" and hestopped, and seemed confused."Well, come, we might meet you there, Dunn," said the other, coaxingly."Be frank with me. What do you wish for?""My family is of humble origin, it is true," said Dunn; "but, withoutinvidious reflection, I might point to some others--" Again hehesitated."That need not be an obstacle," said the Secretary."Well, then, on the score of fortune, there are some poorer than myselfin--in--" He stopped again."Very few as wealthy, I should say, Dunn,--very few, indeed. Let me onlyknow your wishes. I feel certain how they will be treated.""I am aware," said Dunn, with some energy, "that you incur the risk ofsome attack in anything you would do for me. I am necessarily in scantfavor with a large party here. They would assail you, they wouldvilify me; but that would pass over. A few weeks--a few months atfurthest--""To be sure,--perfectly correct It would be mere momentary clamor. SirDavenport Dunn, Baronet, would survive--""I beg pardon," said Dunn, in a voice tremulous with emotion. "I don'tthink I heard you aright; I trust, at least, I did not."The Secretary looked quickly in his face, and saw it pale, the lipsslightly quivering, and the brow contracted."I was saying," said he, in a voice broken and uncertain, "that I 'msure the Premier would not refuse to recommend you to her Majesty for abaronetcy.""May I make so bold as to ask if you have already held any conversationwith the Minister on this subject?""None, whatever. I assure you, most solemnly, that I have noinstructions on the subject, nor have I ever had any conversation withhim on the matter.""Then let me beg you to forget what has just passed between us. It is,after all, mere chit-chat. That's a Susterman's, that portrait you arelooking at," said he, eager to change the topic. "It is said to be alikeness of Bianca Capello.""A very charming picture, indeed; purchased, I suppose, in your lastvisit abroad.""Yes; I bought it at Verona. Its companion, yonder, was a present fromthe Archduke Stephen, in recognition, as he was gracious enough to callit, of some counsels I had given the Government engineers about drainagein Hungary. Despotic governments, as we like to term them, have thismerit, at least,--they confer acts of munificent generosity."The Secretary muttered an assent, and looked confused."I reaped a perfect harvest of crosses and decorations," continued Dunn,"during my tour. I have got cordons from countries I should be puzzledto point out on the map, and am a noble in almost every land of Europebut my own.""Ours is the solitary one where the distinction is not a mere title,"said the other, "and, consequently, there are graver considerationsabout conferring it than if it were a mere act of courtesy.""Where power is already acquired there is often good policy inlegitimatizing it," said Dunn, gravely. "They say that even the Churchof Rome knows how to affiliate a heresy.--Well, Clowes, what is it?"asked he of the butler, who stood awaiting a favorable moment to addresshim. He now drew nigh, and whispered some words in his ear."But you said I was engaged--that I had company with me?" said Dunn, inreply."Yes, sir, but she persisted in saying that if I brought up her name youwould certainly see her, were it but for a moment This is her card.""Miss Kellett," said Dunn to himself. "Very well. Show her into thestudy, I will come down.--It is the daughter of that unfortunategentleman we were speaking of awhile ago," said he, showing the card."I suppose some new disaster has befallen him. Will you excuse me for amoment?"As Dunn slowly descended the stairs, a very strange conflict was atwork within him. From his very boyhood there had possessed him a sternsentiment of vengeance against the Kellett family. It was the dailylesson his father repeated to him. It grew with his years, and vagueand unmeaning as it appeared, it had the force of an instinct. His ownmemory failed him as to all the circumstances of an early insult, butenough remained to make him know that he had been ignominiously treatedand expelled from the house. In the great career of his life, withabsorbing cares and high interests around him, he had little time forsuch memories, but in moments of solitude or of depression the thoughtwould come up, and a sense of vindictive pleasure fill him, as heremembered, in the stern words of his father, where was he, and wherewere they? In the protection he had that very day assumed to throwover Kellett in the Court, there was the sentiment of an insolenttriumph; and here was again the daughter of the once proud mansupplicating an interview with him.These were his thoughts as he entered the room where Sybella Kellett wasstanding near the fire. She had taken off her bonnet, and as her longhair fell down, and her dripping clothes clung to her, the picture ofpoverty and destitution her appearance conveyed revolted against thesentiment which had so lately filled him, and it was in a voice ofgentle meaning he asked her to be seated."Can you tell me of my father, sir?" said she, eagerly, and not heedinghis words; "he left home early this morning, and has never returned.""I can tell you everything, Miss Kellett," said he, in a kind voice. "Itwill reassure you at once when I say he is well. Before this he is athome again."The young girl clasped her hands closely, and her pale lips murmuredsome faint words."In a moment of excitement this morning he said something to offend theCourt. It was an emergency to try a calmer temper, perhaps, than his;indeed, he ought not to have been there; at all events, he was betrayedinto expressions which could not be passed over in mere silence, and hewas committed--""To prison?" said she, faintly."Yes, he was taken into custody, but only for a few hours. I obtainedhis release soon after the Court rose. The difficulty was to make himaccept of his liberation. Far from having calmed down, his passion hadonly increased, and it was only after much entreaty that he consented toleave the jail and come here with me. In fact, it was under the pretenceof drawing up a formal protest against his arrest that he did come, andhe has been employed in this manner till about an hour ago, when one ofmy clerks took charge of him to convey him home. A little quietness anda little rest will restore him perfectly, however, and I have no doubtto-morrow or next day will leave no trace of this excitement.""You have been most kind," said she, rising, "and I am very grateful forit. We owe much to you already, and this last but increases the debt."Dunn stood silently contemplating her, as she replaced her bonnet andprepared for the road. At last he said, "Have you come all this way onfoot and alone?""On foot, but not alone; a comrade of my brother's--a fellow-soldier ofhis--kindly gave me his escort. He is waiting for me now without.""Oh, then, the adventure has had its compensation to a certain degree,"said Dunn, with a smile of raillery."Either I do not understand you, or you mistake me,--which is it?" saidshe, boldly."My dear young lady," said Dunn, hastily, "do not let me offend you.There is everything in what you have done this night to secure yourespect and esteem. We live in a time when there is wonderfully littleof personal devotion; and commonplace men like myself may well misjudgeits sacrifices.""And yet it is precisely from you I should have expected the reverse. Ifgreat minds are tainted with littleness, where are we to look for highand noble sentiments?" She moved towards the door as she spoke; andDunn, anticipating her, said,--"Do not go for a moment; let me offer you some refreshment, even a glassof wine. Well, then, your friend? It is scarcely courteous to leave himoutside in such weather.""Pray forgive me not accepting your offer; but I am impatient to be athome again. My father, too, will be distressed at my absence.""But I will send my carriage with you; you shall not walk," said he,ringing the bell."Do not think me ungrateful, but I had rather return as I came. You haveno idea, sir, how painfully kindness comes to hearts like ours. A senseof pride sustains us through many a trial; break down this, and we arehelpless.""Is it that you will accept nothing at my hands,--even the mostcommonplace of attentions? Well, I'll try if I cannot be more fortunateelsewhere;" and so saying, he hurried at once from the room. BeforeSybella could well reflect on his words, he was back again, followed byCharles Conway."Miss Kellett was disposed to test your Crimean habits again, my goodfellow," said Dunn, "by keeping you out there under this terrible rain,and I perceive you have got some rough treatment already;" and helooked at the armless sleeve of his jacket."Yes," said Conway, laughing, "a piece of Russian politeness!"Few as were the words, the tone and manner of the speaker struck Dunnwith astonishment, and he said,--"Have you been long in the service?""Some years," was the short reply."It's very strange," said Dunn, regarding him fixedly, "but yourfeatures are quite familiar to me. You are very like a young officerwho cut such a dash here formerly,--a spendthrift fellow, in a Lancerregiment.""Pray don't involve yourself in any difficulty," said Conway, "for,perhaps--indeed, I 'm convinced--you are describing myself.""Conway, of the Twelfth?""The same, at your service,--at least, in so far as being ruined andone-armed means the same with the fellow who had a good fortune, and twohands to scatter it.""I must go. I 'm impatient to be away," said Sybella, eagerly."Then there is the carriage at the door," said Dunn. "This time I haveresolved to have my way;" and he gave her his arm courteously to conducther."Could you call upon me to-morrow--could you breakfast with me, Mr.Conway?" said Dunn, as he gave him his hand at parting; "my request isconnected with a subject of great importance to yourself.""I 'm your man," said Conway, as he followed Sybella into the carriage.And away they drove.CHAPTER XXIII. A BREAKFAST-TABLEWhen, punctual to the appointed time, Charles Conway presented himselfat Mr. Dunn's door, he learned to his astonishment that that gentlemanhad gone out an hour before to breakfast with the Chief Secretary in thePark."But I came by invitation to breakfast with your master," said he."Possibly so," said Clowes, scanning the simply clad soldier before him."He never mentioned it to me; that's all I know."Conway stood for a moment, half uncertain what to say; then, witha quiet smile, he said, "Pray tell him that I was here,--my name isConway.""As to the breakfast part of the matter," said Clowes, who felt "ratherstruck" by something in the soldier's manner, as he afterwards expressedit, "I 'm just about to take mine; you might as well join me."Conway looked him full in the face,--such a stare was it as a man giveswhen he questions the accuracy of his own senses; a slight flush thenrose to his cheek, and his lip curled, and then, with a saucy laugh thatseemed to combat the passing irritation he was suffering, he said, "It'snot a bad notion, after all; I'm your man."Now, though Mr. Clowes had anticipated a very different reception to hispoliteness, he said nothing, but led the way into his sanctum, trustingto the locality and its arrangement to have their due effect upon hisguest. Indeed, in this respect, he did but fair justice to the comfortsaround him.The breakfast-table, placed close to a cheerful fire, was spread withevery luxury of that meal. A small spirit lamp burned under a dish ofmost appetizing cutlets, in the midst of various kinds of bread, anddifferent sorts of preserves. The grateful odor of mocha mingled withthe purer perfume of fresh flowers, which, although in midwinter, werenever wanting at Mr. Clowes's breakfast-table, while in the centrerose a splendid pineapple, the first of the season, duly offered by thegardener to the grand vizier of Davenport Dunn."I can promise you a better breakfast than he would have given you,"said Clowes, as he motioned his guest to a seat, while he significantlyjerked his thumb towards Dunn's study. "He takes tea and dry toast,and he quite forgets to order anything else. He has some crank or otherabout beginning the day with a light meal; quite a mistake,--don't youthink so?""This is not the most favorable moment to make me a convert to thatopinion," said Conway, laughing. "I must confess I incline to yourside of the controversy.""There are herrings there," said Clowes, "and a spatchcock coming. Yousee," continued he, returning to the discussion, "he overworks--hedoes too much--taxes his powers beyond their strength--beyond any man'sstrength;" and here Mr. Clowes threw himself back in his chair, andlooked pompously before him, as though to say, Even Clowes would n'thave constitution for what he does.--"A man must have his naturalrest, sir, and his natural support;" and in evidence of the last, here-helped himself to the Strasburg pt."Your words are wisdom, and washed down with such Bordeaux I 'd like tosee who 'd gainsay them," said Conway, with a droll twinkle of the eye."Better coffee, that, I fancy, than you got in the Crimea," said Clowes,pointing to the coffee-pot."I suspect Lord Raglan himself never saw such a breakfast as this. May Iask if it be your every-day meal?""We change slightly with the seasons. Oysters and Sauterne suit spring;and then, when summer sets in, we lean towards the subacid fruits andclaret-cup. Dash your pineapple with a little rum,--it's very old, andquite a liqueur.""This must be a very jolly life of yours," said Conway, as he lightedhis cigarette and placed his feet on the fender."You 'd prefer it to the trenches or the rifle-pits, I suspect," saidClowes, laughing, "and small blame to you. It was out there you lostyour arm, I suppose?"Conway nodded, and puffed on in silence.[Illustration: 270]"A bad business,--a bad business we 're making of it all! The Crimeawas a mistake; we should have marched direct to Moscow,--Moscow or StPetersburg,--I don't care which.""Nor should I, if we could get there," said Conway, quietly."Get there,--and why not? Fifty thousand British bayonets are a matchfor the world in arms. It is a head we want, sir,--capacity to deal withthe great questions of strategy. Even you yourself must have remarkedthat we have no generalship,--no guidance--""I won't say that," said Conway, quietly. "We're knocking hard atSebastopol, and all we can say is we have n't found the weak spot yet.""The weak spot! Why, it 's all weak,--earthworks, nothing butearthworks! Now, don't tell me that Wellington would have mindedearthworks! Ah, we have fallen upon sad times!" sighed he, piteously."Our land commanders say earthworks are impregnable; our admirals saystone walls can't be attacked."Conway laughed again, and lighted a fresh cigarette."And what pension have you for that?" asked Clowes, glancing at theempty sleeve."A mere trifle; I can't exactly tell you, for I have not applied for it""I would, though; I 'd have it out of them, and I 'd have whatever Icould, besides. They 'd not give you the Bath; that they keep forgentlemen--"Conway took his cigar from his lips, and while his cheek burned, heseemed about to reply; then, resuming his smoking, he lay back and saidnothing."After all," said Clowes, "there must be distinctions of rank. Oneregrets, one deplores, but can't help it Look at all the attempts atequality, and see their failures. No, sir, you have your place in thesocial scale, and I have mine."Now, when Mr. Clowes had enunciated this sentiment, he seemed suddenlyto be struck by its severity; for he added, "Not but that every man isrespectable in his own rank; don't imagine that I look down upon you."Conway's eyes opened widely as he stared at him, and he puffed his cigara little more energetically, but never spoke."You 've done with the service, I suppose?" said Clowes, after a while."I'm afraid so," said Conway, sighing."Well, he"--and he jerked his thumb towards Dunn's room--"he is theman to help you to something snug. He can give away places every hourof the day. Ay, sir," said he, warming, "he can make anything, from anarchbishop to a barony constable.""I rather fear that my capacity for employment might not be found veryremarkable. I have idle habits and ways," said Conway, smiling."Bad things, my friend,--bad things for any man, but especially for apoor one. I myself began life in an humble way,--true, I assure you; butwith industry, zeal, and attention, I am what you see me.""That is encouraging, certainly," said Conway, gravely."It is so, and I mention it for your advantage."Charles Conway now arose, and threw the half-smoked cigar into the fire.The movement betokened impatience, and, sooth to say, he was half angrywith himself; for, while disposed to laugh at the vanity and conceit ofthe worthy butler, he still felt that he was his guest, and that suchridicule was ill applied to one whose salt he had eaten."You're not going without seeing him?" said Clowes. "He 's sure to bein before noon. We are to receive the Harbor Commissioners exactly attwelve.""I have a call to make, and at some distance off in the country, thismorning.""Well, if I can be of any use to you, just tell me," said Clowes,good-naturedly. "My position here--one of trust and confidence, you mayimagine--gives me many an opportunity to serve a friend; and I like you.I was taken with your manner as you came into the hall this morning, andI said to myself, 'There 's good stuff in that young fellow, whoever heis.' And I ain't wrong. You have some blood in you, I'll be bound.""We used to be rather bumptious about family," said Conway, laughing;"but I suspect the world has taught us to get rid of some of ourconceit.""Never mind the world. Pride of birth is a generous prejudice. Ihave never forgotten that my grandfather, on the mother's side, was adrysalter. But can I be of any use to you? that's the question.""I 'm inclined to think not; though I 'm just as grateful to you. Mr.Dunn asked me here this morning, I suspect, to talk over the war withme. Men naturally incline to hear what an eyewitness has to say, and hemay have fancied I could have mentioned some new fact, or suggested somenew expedient, which in these days seems such a fashionable habit, wheneverybody has his advice to proffer.""No, no," said Clowes, shaking his head; "it could n't be that. Wehave been opposed to this war from the beginning. It was all a mistake,a dead mistake. Aberdeen agreed with us, but we were outvoted. Theywould have a fight. They said we wanted something to get cotton-spinningout of our blood; and, egad! I suspect they've got it."Our views," continued Clowes, pompously, "were either a peace or amarch to St. Petersburg. This French alliance is a rotten thing, sir.That Corsican will double on us. The very first moment any turn offortune gives France an advantage, he 'll make peace, and leave us allthe obloquy of a reluctant assent. That's his view,--that's mine, too;and we are seldom mistaken.""For all that, I wish I were back there again," said Conway. "With everyone of its hardships--and they were no trifles--it was a better lifethan this lounging one I lead now. Tell Mr. Dunn that I was here. Saythat I enjoyed your excellent hospitality and pleasant company; andaccept my hearty thanks for both." And with a cordial shake of the hand,Conway wished him "Good-bye," and departed."That's just the class of men we want in our army," said Clowes, as hefollowed him with his eyes. "A stamp somewhat above the common,--a veryfine young fellow too."In less than a quarter of an hour after Conway's departure, DavenportDunn's carriage drew up at his door, and Mr. Clowes hastened to receivehis master."Are they out, sir,--are they out?" said he, eagerly, as he followed himinto the study."Yes," said Dunn; "but everything is still at sixes and sevens. LordDerby has been sent for, and Lord John sent for, and Lord Palmerstonsent for, but nothing decided on,--nothing done.""And how will it end?" asked Clowes, like one waiting for the solutionof a difficulty."Who has called this morning?" said Dunn, curtly. "Has Lord Glengariffbeen here?""No, sir. Sir Jacob Harris and the Drumsna Directors are all in waiting,and a rather promiscuous lot are in the back parlor. A young soldier,too, was here. He fancied you had asked him to breakfast, and so I madehim join mine.""Indeed!" exclaimed Dunn. "I forgot all about that engagement. Howprovoking! Can you find out where he is stopping?""No. But he's sure to drop in again: I half promised him a sort ofprotection; and he looks a shrewd sort of fellow, and not likely toneglect his hits."A strange twinkle shone in Dunn's eyes as he heard this speech, anda queer motion at the angle of his mouth accompanied it, but he neverspoke a word.As for Conway, meanwhile, he was briskly stepping out towards Clontarf,to inquire after poor Kellett, whose state was one to call for muchanxiety. To the intense excitement of the morning there had succeededa dull and apathetic condition, in which he seemed scarcely to noticeanything or anybody. A look half weary, half vacant, was in his eye; hishead was drooped; and a low muttering to himself was the only sign hegave of any consciousness whatever. Such was his state when Conway leftthe cottage late on the night before, with a promise to be back thereagain early the next morning.Conway saw that the shutters of the little drawing-room were half closedas he entered the garden, and his quiet, cautious knock at the doordenoted the fear at his heart. From the window, partly open, came a low,moaning sound, which, as he listened, he discovered to be the sick man'svoice."He was just asking if you had come," said Bella. "He has been talkingof poor Jack, and fancies that you have some tidings of him." And sosaying, she led him into the house.Seated before the fire, in a low chair, his hands resting on his knees,and his gaze fixed on the embers, Kellett never turned his head roundas they entered, nor did he notice Bella, as, in a soft, low voice, shementioned Conway's name."He has come out to see you, dear papa; to sit with you and keep youcompany, and talk about dear Jack.""Ay!" said the sick man, in a vague, purposeless tone; and Conway nowtook a seat at his side, and laid one of his hands over his."You are better to-day, Captain Kellett, ain't you?" said he, kindly."Yes," said he, in the same tone as before."And will be still better to-morrow, I trust, and able to come out andtake this long walk with me we have so often promised ourselves."Kellett turned and looked him full in the face. The expression of hisfeatures was that of one vainly struggling with some confusion of ideas,and earnestly endeavoring to find his way through difficulties, and afaint, painful sigh at last showed that the attempt was a failure."What does this state mean? Is it mere depression, or is it seriousillness?" whispered Bella."I am not skilful enough to say," replied Conway, cautiously; "but Ihope and trust it is only the effect of a shock, and will pass off as itcame.""Ay," said Kellett, in a tone that startled them, and for a moment theyfancied he must have overheard them; but one glance at his meaninglessfeatures showed that they had no ground for their fears."The evil is deeper than that," whispered Bella, again. "This cold dewon his forehead, those shiverings that pass over him from time to time,and that look in his eye, such as I have never seen before, all betokena serious malady. Could you fetch a doctor,--some one in whom you placeconfidence?""I do know of one, in whom I have the fullest reliance," said Conway,rising hastily. "I'll go for him at once.""Lose not a moment, then," said Bella, as she took the place he had justvacated, and placed her hand on her father's, as Conway had done.Kellett's glance slowly followed Conway to the door, and then turnedfully in Bella's face, while, with a voice of a thrilling distinctness,he said, "Too late, darling,--too late!"The tears gushed from Bella's eyes, and her lips trembled; but she neveruttered a word, but sat silent and motionless as before.Kellett's eyes were now bent upon her fixedly, with an expression ofdeep and affectionate interest; and he slowly drew his hand from beneathhers, and placed his arm around her."I wish he was come, darling," said he, at last."Who, papa?--the doctor?" asked Bella."The doctor!--no, not the doctor," said he, sighing heavily."It is poor Jack you are thinking of," said she, affectionately."Poor, sure enough," muttered he; "we're all poor now." And aninexpressible misery was in his face as he spoke.Bella wished to speak words of comfort and encouragement; she longed totell him that she was ready and willing to devote herself to him; thatin a little time, and by a little effort on their part, their changedfortunes would cease to fret them; that they would learn to see how muchof real happiness can consist with narrow means, but she knew not inwhat spirit her words might be accepted; a chance phrase, an accidentalexpression, might jar upon some excited feeling, and only irritate whereit was meant to soothe, and so she only pressed her lips to his hand andwas silent.The sick man's head gradually declined lower and lower, his breathinggrew heavier, and he slept. The long dreary day dragged on its wearyhours, and still Sybella sat by her father's side watching and waiting.It was already dusk, when a carriage stopped at the little gate andConway got out, and was quickly followed by another. "The doctor, atlast," muttered Sybella, gently moving from her place; and Kellett awokeand looked at him.Conway had barely time to whisper the name of the physician in Bella'sear, when Sir Maurice Dashwood entered. There was none of the solemngravity of the learned doctor, none of the catlike stealthiness of thefashionable practitioner, in his approach. Sir Maurice advanced like aman entering a drawing-room before a dinner-party, easy, confident, andaffable. He addressed a few words to Miss Kellett, and then placing hischair next her father's, said,--"I hope my old brother officer does n't forget me. Don't you rememberDashwood of the 43d?""The wildest chap in the regiment," muttered Kellett, "though he was thesurgeon. Did you know him, sir?""I should think I did," said the doctor, smiling; "he was a great chumof yours, was n't he? You messed together in the Pyrenees for a wholewinter.""A wild chap,--could never come to any good," went on Kellett tohimself. "I wonder what became of him.""I can tell you, I think. Meanwhile, let me feel your pulse. No fixedpain here," said he, touching the region of the heart. "Look fully atme. Ah, it is there you feel it," said he, as he touched the other'sforehead; "a sense of weight rather than pain, isn't it?""It's like lead I feel it," said Kellett; "and when I lay it down, Idon't think I 'll ever be able to lift it up again.""That you will, and hold it high too, Kellett," said the doctor, warmly."You must just follow my counsels for a day or two, and we shall see agreat change in you.""I 'll do whatever you bid me, but it's no use, doctor; but I 'll do itfor her sake there." And the last words were in a whisper."That's spoken like yourself, Kellett," said the other, cheerily. "Nowlet me have pen and ink."As the doctor sat down to a table, he beckoned Bella to his side, andwriting a few words rapidly on the paper before him, motioned to her toread them.She grasped the chair as she read the lines, and it shook beneath herhand, while an ashy pallor spread over her features."Ask him if I might have a little brandy-and-water, Bella," said thesick man."To be sure you may," said Sir Maurice; "or, better still, a glass ofclaret; and it so happens I have just the wine to suit him. Conway, comeback with me, and I 'll give you a half-dozen of it.""And is there nothing--is there no--" Bella could utter no more, when awarning of the doctor's hand showed that her father's eyes were on her."Come here, Bella," said he, in a low tone,--"come here to me. There'sa pound in my waistcoat-pocket, in my room; put a shilling inside of it,for it's a guinea he ought to have, and gold, by rights, if we had it.And tell him we 'll send for him if we want to see him again. Do itdelicately, darling, so as not to let him know. Say I 'm used to theseattacks; say they're in the family; say--But there, they are drivingaway,--they're off! and he never waited for his fee! That's thestrangest thing of all." And so he fell a-thinking over this curiousfact, muttering from time to time to himself, "I never heard of the likebefore."CHAPTER XXIV. THE COTTAGEDavenport Dunn had but little leisure to think about Conway or poorKellett. A change of Ministry had just occurred in England, and men'sminds were all eagerly speculating who was "to come in." Crowds ofcountry gentlemen flocked up to Dublin, and "rising men" of all shadesof opinion anxiously paraded their own claims to notice. Dunn's housewas besieged from morning to night by visitors, all firmly persuadedthat he must know more of the coming event than any one. Whether suchwas really the case, or that he deemed it good policy to maintain thedelusion, Dunn affected a slight indisposition, and refused to admit anyvisitor. Mr. Clowes, indeed, informed the inquirers that it was a merepassing ailment,--"a slight derangement in the bronchi," he said; but berigidly maintained the blockade, and suffered none to infringe it.Of course, a hundred rumors gave their own version of this illness. Itwas spleen; it was indignation; the Government had thrown him over: hehad been refused the secretaryship which he had formerly applied for.Others averred that his attack was most serious,--an ossification or ascirrhus of some cartilage, a thing always fatal and dreadfully painful.Some went further. It was his prosperity was in peril. Over-speculationhad jeopardized him, and he was deep in the "Crdit Mobilier." Now, allthis while, the disappointed politician, the hopeless invalid, and theruined speculator ate and drank well, received and wrote replies toinnumerable confidential notes from those in power, and carefully drewup a list of such as he desired to recommend to the Government for placeand employment.Every morning Sir Maurice Dashwood's well-appointed cab drew up at hisdoor, and the lively baronet would dash up the stairs to Dunn's roomwith all the elasticity of youth, and more real energy than is thefortune of one young fellow in a thousand. With a consummate knowledgeof men and the world, he was second to none in his profession. He felthe could afford to indulge the gay and buoyant spirits with which Naturehad blessed him, and even, doctor that he was, take his share in all thesports of the field and all the pleasures of society."Well, Dunn," cried he, gayly, one morning, as he entered the carefullydarkened room where the other sat, surrounded with papers and deep inaffairs, "I think you may accept your bill of health, and come outof dock tomorrow. They are gazetted now, and the world as wise asyourself.""So I mean to do," said Dunn. "I intend to dine with the Chancellor.What is said about the new Government?""Very little. There is really little to say. They are nearly the samepieces, only placed differently on the board. This trumpery cry about'right men in right places' will lead to all kinds of confusion, sinceit will eternally suggest choice, which, in plain words, means newspaperdictation.""As good as any other dictation: better in one respect, for it so oftenrecants its judgments," said Dunn, sarcastically."Well, they are unanimous about you this morning. They are all eagerlyinquiring in what way the Government propose to recognize the servicesof one of the ablest men and most disinterested patriots of our day.""I don't want anything from them," said Dunn, testily, and walking tothe window to avoid the keen, sharp glance the other bent upon him."The best way to get it when you do want," said Dash-wood. "By theway, what's our new Viceroy like?""A very good appointment, indeed," said Dunn, gravely."Oh, I don't mean that. I want to know what he is personally: is hestiff, haughty, grave, gay, stand-off, or affable?""I should say, from what I have seen of Lord Allington, that he is oneof those men who are grave without sadness--""Come, come, never mind the antithesis; does he care for society, doeshe like sport, is he free-handed, or has he only come here with thetraditional policy to 'drain Ireland'?""You 'll like him much," said Dunn, in his natural voice, "and he 'lllike you."Sir Maurice smiled, as though to say, "I could answer as much formyself;" and then asked, "Have you known him long?""No; that is, not very long," said Dunn, hesitating, "nor veryintimately. Why do you ask?""Just because I want to get something,--at once too. There's a poorfellow, a patient of mine now,--we were brother officers once,--ina very sad way. Your friends of the Encumbered Court have Just beenselling him out, and by the shock they have so stunned him that hisbrain has been attacked; at present it does not seem so formidable, butit will end in softening, and all the rest of it. Now, if they 'd makehim something at once,--quickly it must be,--he could drop out on somesmall retired allowance,--anything, in short, that would support him.""But what is it to be?" asked Dunn."Whatever you like to make him. It can scarcely be a bishop, for he'snot in orders; nor a judge, for he was not called to the bar; but whynot a commissioner of something? You have them for all purposes and ofall degrees.""You take a low estimate of commissionerships, I perceive," said Dunn,smiling."They are row-boats, where two or three pull, and the rest only diptheir oars. But come, promise me you 'll look to this; take a note ofthe name,--Paul Kellett a man of excellent family, and once with a largelanded property.""I know him," said Dunn, with a peculiar significance."And know nothing to his disadvantage, I'm certain. He was a goodofficer and a kind-hearted fellow, whom we all liked. And there he isnow," added he, after a pause, "with a charming girl--his daughter--andI really don't believe they have a five-pound note in the world. Youmust do this for me, Dunn. I 'm bent upon it!""I'll see what can be done about it. Anything like a job is always adifficulty.""And everything is a job here, Dunn, and no man knows better how to dealwith one." And so saying, and with a pleasant laugh, the gay-hearteddoctor hurried away, to carry hope, and some portion at least of his owncheery nature, into many a darkened sick-room.Though several names were announced with pressing entreaties for anaudience, Dunn would see no one. He continued to walk up and down theroom deep in thought, and seemed resolved that none should interrupthim. There were events enough to occupy, cases enough to engagehim,--high questions of policy, deep matters of interest, all that canstimulate ambition, all that can awaken energy,--and yet, amidst all,where were his thoughts straying? They were away to the years of hisearly boyhood, when he had been Paul Kellett's playfellow, and when hewas admitted--a rare honor--to the little dinner of the nursery! What astrange thing it was that it was "there and then" his first studies oflife and character should have been made; that it was there and then hefirst moulded himself to the temper and ways of another, conforming tocaprices and tending to inclinations not his own. Stern tyrants werethese child masters! How they did presume upon their high station, howseverely did they make him feel the distance between them, and whatarts did they teach him,--what subtle devices to outwit their ownimperiousness and give him the mastery over them! To these memoriessucceeded others more painful still; and Dunn's brow contracted and hislips became tight-drawn as he recollected them."I suppose even my father would allow that the debt is acquitted now,"muttered he to himself. "I 'll go and see them!" said he, after amoment; "such a sight will teach me how far I have travelled in life."He gently descended a private stair that led to the garden, and, passingout by the stables, soon gained the street Walking rapidly on to thefirst stand, he engaged a car, and started for Clontarf.If Davenport Dunn never gave way to a passion for revenge in life, itwas in some sort because he deemed it a luxury above his means. He oftenfancied to himself that the time might come when he could indulge inthis pleasure, just as now he revelled in a thousand others, which oncehad seemed as remote. His theory was that he had not yet attained thateminence whence he could dispense with all aid, and he knew not whatman's services at any moment might be useful to him. Still, with allthis, he never ceased to enjoy whatever of evil fortune befell those whoeven in times past had injured him. To measure their destiny with hisnow, was like striking a balance with Fate,--a balance so strong in hisfavor; and when he had not actually contributed to their downfall, hedeemed himself high-minded, generous, and pure-hearted.It was reflecting in this wise he drove along, and at last drew upat Kellett's door; his knock was answered by Sybella herself, whosecareworn features and jaded look scarcely reminded him of her appearancewhen first he saw her, flushed and excited by exercise."I thought I'd come myself and ask after him," said Dunn, as heexplained the object of his visit."He has scarce consciousness enough to thank you," said she, mournfully,"but I am very grateful to you;" and she preceded him into the room,where her father sat in the selfsame attitude as before."He doesn't know me," whispered Dunn, as the sick man's gaze was turnedto him without the slightest sign of recognition,--"he does n't knowme!""I do. I know you well, Davenport Dunn, and I know why you come here,"said Kellett, with a distinctness that startled them both. "Leave usalone together, Bella darling; we want to talk privately."Sybella was so astounded at this sudden show of intelligence that shescarcely knew how to take it, or what to do; but at a gesture from Dunn,she stepped noiselessly from the room, and left them together."You must not excite yourself, Kellett, nor prejudice your prospectof recovery by any exertion; there will be time enough for matters ofbusiness hereafter--""No, there won't; that's the reason I want to talk to you now," saidKellett, sharply. "I know well enough my life is short here."[Illustration: 284]Dunn began some phrase of cheering meaning; but the other stopped himabruptly, and said,--"There, there, don't be losing time that way. Is that the touch of a manlong for this world?" and he laid on the other's hand his own hot andburning fingers. "I said I knew why you came here, Dunn," continued he,more strongly; "it was to look at your work. Ay, just so. It was youbrought me to this, and you wanted to see it. Turn your eyes round theroom, and you 'll see it's poor enough. Look in at that bedroom there,and you 'll say it could n't be much more humble! I pawned my watchyesterday; there's all that's out of it;" and he showed some pieces ofsilver and copper mixed together in the palm of his hand; "there's not asilver spoon left, so that you see you 've done it well!""My dear Kellett, these words of yours have no meaning in them--""Maybe not; but maybe you understand them, for all that! Look here, now,Dunn," said he, clutching his hand in his own feverish grasp; "what theChild begins the Man finishes! I know you well, and I 've watched youfor many a year. All your plans and schemes never deceived me; butit's a house of cards you 're building, after all! What I knew about youas a boy others may know as a man; and I would n't believe St. Peter ifhe told me you only did it once!""If this be not raving, it is a deliberate insult!" muttered Dunn,sternly, while he rudely pushed away the other's hand, and drew back hischair."Well, it's not raving, whatever it is," said Kellett, calmly. "The coldair of the earth that's opening for me clears my brain, and I know wellthe words I 'm saying, and the warning I 'm giving you. Tell the peoplefairly that it's only scheming you were; that the companies are a bubbleand the banks a sham; that you 're only juggling this man's creditagainst that, making the people think that you have the confidence ofthe Government, and the Government believe that you can do what you likewith the people. Go at once and publish it, that you are only cheatingthem all, or you 'll have a gloomier ending even than this!""I came out of compassion for you.""No, you did n't, not a bit of it. You came to tell old Mat Dunn thatthe score was wiped off; he came to the window here this morning andlooked in at me.""My father? Impossible! He's nearly ninety, and barely able to moveabout a room.""I don't care for that: there he was, where you see that bush, and heleaned on the window-sill and looked at me; and he wiped the glass,where his breath dulled it, twice. Then I gave a shout at him that senthim off. They had to carry him to the car outside.""Is this true?" cried Dunn, eagerly."If I had had but the strength to bring me to the window, it's little I'd have minded his white hair.""If you had dared!" said Dunn, rising, and no longer able to control hisanger."Don't go yet; I have more to say to you," cried he, stretching out hishands towards him. "You think, because your roguery is succeeding, thatyou are great and respected. Not a bit; the gentlemen won't have you,and your own sort won't have you. There's not an honest man would eatyour salt,--there's not an honest girl would bear your name. There youstand, as much alone in the world as if you came out of another country,and you 're the only man in Ireland does n't see it."Dunn darted from the room as the last words were uttered, and gained theroad. So overwhelmed was he by rage and astonishment that it was someminutes ere he could remember where he was or whither he would go."To Beldoyle," said he to the carman, pointing in the direction of thelow shore, where his father lived; "drive your best pace." Then suddenlychanging his mind, he said, "No, to town.""Is he gone, Bella?" said Kellett, as his daughter entered."Yes; and before I could thank him for his coming.""I think I said enough," said he, with a fierce laugh, which made hersuddenly turn and look at him.It was all she could do to repress a sudden cry of horror; for one sideof his face was distorted by palsy, and the mouth drawn all awry."What's this here, Bella?" said he, trying to touch his cheek with hishand; "a kind of stiffness--a sort of--Eh, are you crying, darling?""No; it was something in my eye pained me," said she, turning away tohide her face."Give me a looking-glass, quickly," cried he."No, no," said she, forcing a laugh; "you have not shaved these twodays, and you are quite neglected-look-ing. You sha'n't see yourself insuch a state.""Bring it this minute, I say," said he, passionately, and in a voicethat grew less and less articulate every moment."Now pray be patient, dearest papa.""Then I'll go for it myself;" and with these words he grasped the armof the chair and tried to rise."There, there," said she, softly forcing him back into his seat, "I 'llfetch it at once. I wish you would be persuaded, dear papa--" began she,still holding the glass in her hands. But he snatched it rudely fromher, and placed it before him."That's what it is," said he, at last; "handsome Paul Kellett they usedto call me at Corfu. I wonder what they'd say now?""It is a mere passing thing, a spasm of some kind.""Ay," said he, with a mocking laugh, to which the distortion imparteda shocking expression. "Both sides will be the same--to-morrow or nextday--I know that."She could hear no more, but, covering her face with her hands, sobbedbitterly.Kellett still continued to look at himself in the glass; and whetherthe contortion was produced by the malady or a passing emotion, ahalf-sardonic laugh was on his features as he said, "I was wrong when Isaid I'd never be chapfallen."CHAPTER XXV. A CHURCHYARD.There come every now and then, in our strange climate, winter dayswhich imitate the spring, with softened sunlight, glistening leaves, andwarbling birds; even the streams unite in the delusion, and run clearlyalong with eddying circles, making soft music among the stones. Thesedelicious intervals are full of pleasant influences, and the gardenbreath that floats into the open drawing-room brings hope as wellas health on its wings. It was on such a morning a little funeralprocession entered the gateway of the ruined church at Kellester, andwound its way towards an obscure corner where an open grave was seen.With the exception of one solitary individual, it was easy to perceivethat they who followed the coffin were either the hired mourners, orsome stray passers-by indulging a sad curiosity in listlessness. It waspoor Kellett's corpse was borne along, with Conway walking after it.The mournful task over, and the attendants gone, Conway lingered aboutamong the graves, now reading the sad records of surviving affection,now stopping to listen to the high-soaring lark whose shrill notesvibrated in the thin air. "Poor Jack!" thought he, aloud; "he littleknows the sad office I have had this morning. He always was talkingof home and coming back again, and telling his dear father of all hiscampaigning adventures; and so much for anticipation--beneath thatlittle mound of earth lies all that made the Home he dreamed of! He'salmost the last of the Albueras," said he, as he stood over the grave;and at the same time a stranger drew near the spot, and, removing hishat, addressed him by name. "Ah! Mr. Dunn, I think?" said Conway."Yes,V--said the other; "I regret to see that I am too late. I wished topay the last tribute of respect to our poor friend, but unfortunatelyall was over when I arrived.""You knew him intimately, I believe?" said Conway."From boyhood," said Dunn, coughing, to conceal some embarrassment. "Ourfamilies were intimate; but of him, personally, I saw little: he wentabroad with his regiment, and when he returned, it was to live in aremote part of the country, so that we seldom met.""Poor fellow!" muttered Conway, "he does seem to have been well-nighforgotten by every one. I was alone here this morning.""Such is life!" said Dunn."But such ought not death to be," rejoined Conway. "A gallant oldsoldier might well have been followed to his last billet by a fewfriends or comrades; but he was poor, and that explains all!""That is a harsh judgment for one so young as you are.""No: if poor Kellett had fallen in battle, he had gone to his gravewith every honor to his memory; but he lived on in a world where otherqualities than a soldier's are valued, and he was forgotten,--that's thewhole of it!""We must think of the daughter now; something must be done for her,"said Dunn."I have a plan about that, if you will kindly aid me with it," saidConway, blushing as he spoke. "You are aware, perhaps, that Jack Kellettand I were comrades. He saved my life, and risked his own to do it, andI owe him more than life in the cheery, hearty spirit he inspired mewith, at a time when I was rather disposed to sulk with the whole world;so that I owe him a heavy debt." Here he faltered, and at last stopped,and it was only as Dunn made a gesture to him to continue, that hewent on: "Well, I have a dear, kind old mother, living all alone inWales,--not over well off, to be sure, but quite able to do a kindthing, and fully as willing. If Miss Kellett could be induced to comeand stay with her,--it might be called a visit at first,--time wouldgradually show them how useful they were to each other, and they 'd findthey need n't--they could n't separate. That's my plan; will you supportit?""I ought to tell you, frankly, that I have no presumption to counselMiss Kellett. I never saw her till the night you accompanied her tomy house; we are utter strangers to each other therefore. There is,however, sufficient in your project to recommend itself, and if anythingI can add will aid it, you may reckon upon me; but you will yourself seewhether my counsels be admissible. There is only one question Iwould ask,--you 'll excuse the frankness of it for the sincerity itguarantees,--Miss Kellett, although in poverty, was the daughter of agentleman of fortune,--all the habits of her life were formed in thatstation; now, is it likely--I mean--are your mother's circumstances--""My mother has something like a hundred a year in the world," broke inConway, hastily. "It's a poor pittance, I know, and you would be puzzledto say how one could eke out subsistence on it, but she manages it verycleverly.""I had really no intention to obtrude my curiosity so far," said Dunn,apologizing. "My object was to show you, generally, that Miss Kellett,having hitherto lived in a condition of comfort--""Well, we 'll do our best--I mean my mother will," said Conway. "Onlysay you will recommend the plan, and I 'm satisfied.""And for yourself--have you no project, no scheme of life struck out?A man so full of youth and energy should not sink into the listlessinactivity of a retired soldier.""You forget this," said Conway, pointing to his armless sleeve."Many a one-armed officer leads his squadron into fire; and yourservices--if properly represented, properly supported--would perhapsmeet recognition at the Horse Guards. What say you, would you serveagain if they offered you a cornetcy?""Would I?--would I bless the day that brought me the tidings? But thequestion is not of me," said he, proudly; and he turned away to leavethe spot. Dunn followed him, and they walked out into the road together.A handsome chariot, splendid in all its appointments, and drawn by twopowerful thoroughbreds, awaited the rich man's coming, and the footmanbanged down the steps with ostentatious noise as he saw him approach."Let the carriage follow," said Dunn to the servant, and walked on atConway's side. "If it was not that I am in a position to be of serviceto you, my observation would be a liberty," said Dunn; "but I have someinfluence with persons in power--""I must stop you at once," said Conway, good-humoredly. "I belong to aclass which does not accept of favors except from personal friends; andthough I fully recognize your kind intentions towards me, remember weare strangers to each other.""I should wish to forget that," said Dunn, courteously."I should still be ungracious enough to bear it in mind. Come, come, Mr.Dunn," said he, "this is not the topic I want you to be interested in.If you can bring some hope and comfort into that little cottage yonder,you will do a far greater kindness than by any service you can renderone like me.""It would scarcely be advisable to do anything for a day or two?" saidDunn, rather asking the question."Of course not. Meanwhile I'll write to my mother, and she shall herselfaddress Miss Kellett, or, if you think it better, she 'd come overhere.""We 'll think over that. Come back with me to town and eat your dinnerwith me, if you have no engagement.""Not to-day,--excuse me to-day. I am low and out of sorts, and I feel asif I 'd rather be alone.""Will you let me see you to-morrow, or the day after?""The day after to-morrow be it. By that time I shall have heard from mymother," said Conway. And they parted.Long after Mr. Dunn's handsome equipage had driven away, Charles Conwaycontinued to linger about the neighborhood of the little cottage. Theshutters were closed, and no smoke issued from the chimney, and itlooked dreary and desolate. Again and again would he draw near thelittle wicket and look into the garden. He would have given all hepossessed to have been able to ask after her,--to have seen any one whocould have told him of her,--how she bore up in her dread hour of trial;but none was to be seen. More than once he adventured to approach thedoor, and timidly stood, uncertain what to do, and then, cautiouslyretracing his steps, he regained the road, again to resume his lonelywatch. And so the noon passed, and the day waned, and evening drew nigh,and there he still lingered. He thought that when night closed in, someflickering light might give sign of life within,--some faint indicationof her his heart was full of; but all remained dark, silent, andcheerless. Even yet could he not bear to leave the spot, and it wasalready far into the night ere he turned his steps towards Dublin.Let us go back for a moment to Mr. Davenport Dunn, who was not the onlyoccupant of the handsome chariot that rolled smoothly back to town. Mr.Driscoll sat in one corner; the blind carefully down, so as to screenhim from view."And that was Conway!" said he, as soon as Dunn had taken his seat."Wasn't I right when I said you were sure to catch him here?""I knew as much myself," said Dunn, curtly."Well, and what is he like?--is he a chap easy to deal with?--is he anyway deep?""He's as proud as Lucifer,--that 's all I can make out of him; and thereare few things harder to manage than real pride.""Ay, if you can't get round it," said Driscoll, with a sly twinkle ofthe eye."I have no time for such management," said Dunn, stiffly."Well, how did he take what you said to him? Did he seem as if he 'denter into the business kindly?""You don't suppose that I spoke to him about his family or his fortune,do you? Is it in a chance meeting like this that I could approach asubject full of difficulty and complication? You have rare notions ofdelicacy and address, Driscoll!""God help me! I'm a poor crayture, but somehow I get along for all that,and I 'm generally as far on my road at the end of the day as them thattravels with four posters.""You'd make a pretty mess of whatever required a light hand and a finetouch, that I can tell you. The question here lies between a peer of therealm with twelve thousand a year, and a retired soldier with eightpencea day pension. It does not demand much thought to see where the balanceinclines.""You're forgetting one trifling matter. Who has the right to be the peerwith the twelve thousand a year?""I am not forgetting it; I was going to it when you stopped me. Until wehave failed in obtaining our terms from Lord Lackington--""Ay, but what are the terms?" broke in Driscoll, eagerly."If you interrupt me thus at every moment, I shall never be able toexplain my meaning. The terms are for yourself to name; you may writethe figures how you please. As for me, I have views that in no way clashwith yours. And to resume: until we fail with the Viscount, we have noneed of the soldier. All that we have to think of as regards Conwayis, that he falls into no hands but our own, that he should never learnanything of his claim, nor be within reach of such information till thehour when we ourselves think fit to make it known to him--""He oughtn't to keep company with that daughter of Paul Kellett, then,"broke in Driscoll. "There's not a family history in the kingdom shehasn't by heart.""I have thought of that already, and there is some danger of such anoccurrence.""As how?""Young Conway is at this very moment plotting how she may bedomesticated with his mother, somewhere in Wales, I believe.""If he's in love with her, it will be a bad business," said Driscoll."She does be reading and writing, too, from morning till night. There'sno labor nor fatigue she's not equal to, and all the searches andinquiries that weary others she'd go into out of pure amusement. Now, ifshe was ever to be with his mother, and heard the old woman talk aboutfamily history, she 'd be at it hard and fast next morning.""There is no need she should go there.""No. But she must n't go,--must never see her.""I think I can provide for that. It will be somewhat more difficultto take him out of the way for the present. I wish he were back in theCrimea.""He might get killed--""Ay, but his claim would not die. Look here, Driscoll," said he, slowly;"I ventured to tell him this morning that I would assist him with myinfluence if he wishes to re-enter the service as an officer, and heresented the offer at once as a liberty. Now, it might be managed inanother way. Leave me to think it over, and perhaps I can hit uponthe expedient. The Attorney-General is to report upon the claims to meto-morrow, next day I'm to see Conway himself, and then you shall learnall.""I don't like all these delays," began Driscoll; but at a look from Dunnhe stopped, and held down his head, half angry, half abashed."You advance small loans of money on approved security, Driscoll,"said Dunn, with a dry expression of the mouth. "Perhaps some of thesemornings you may be applied to for a few hundreds by a young fellowwishing to purchase his commission,--you understand me?""I believe I do," said Driscoll, with a significant smile."You 'll not be too hard on him for the terms, especially if he has anyold family papers to deposit as security,--eh?""Just so--just so. A mere nominal guarantee," said Driscoll, stilllaughing. "Oh, dear! but it's a queer world, and one has to work hiswits hard to live in it." And with this philosophic explanation oflife's trials, Mr. Driscoll took his leave of Dunn, and walked homeward.CHAPTER XXVI. THE OSTEND PACKETIt was a wild, stormy night, with fast-flying clouds above, and a heavyrolling sea below, as the "Osprey" steamed away for Ostend, her closedhatchways and tarpaulined sailors, as well as her sea-washed deck anddripping cordage, telling there was "dirty weather outside." Though thewaves broke over the vessel as she lay at anchor, and the short distancebetween the shore and her gangway had to be effected at peril of life,the captain had his mail, and was decided on sailing. There were butthree passengers: two went aboard with the captain; the third wasalready on deck when they arrived, and leisurely paraded up and downwith his cigar, stopping occasionally to look at the lights on shore, orcast a glance towards the wild chaos of waves that raged without."Safe now, I suppose, Grog?" muttered Beecher, as the vessel, loosedfrom her last mooring, turned head to sea out of the harbor."I rather suspect you are," said Davis, as he struck a light for hiscigar. "Few fellows would like to swim out here with a judge's warrantin his mouth such a night as this.""I don't like it overmuch myself," said Beecher; "there's a tremendoussea out there, and she's only a cockleshell after all.""A very tidy one, sir, in a sea, I promise you," said the Captain,overhearing, while with his trumpet he bellowed forth some directions tothe sailors."You've no other passengers than ourselves, have you?" asked Beecher."Only that gentleman yonder," whispered the Captain, pointing towardsthe stranger."Few, I take it, fancy coming out in such weather," said Beecher."Very few, sir, if they have n't uncommonly strong reasons for crossingthe water," replied the Captain."I think he had you there!" growled Grog in his ear. "Don't you gopoking nonsense at fellows like that. Shut up, I tell you! shut up!""I begin to feel it deuced cold here," said Beecher, shuddering."Come down below, then, and have something hot. I 'll make a brew andturn in," said Davis, as he moved towards the ladder. "Come along.""No, I must keep the deck, no matter how cold it is. I suffer dreadfullywhen I go below. Send me up a tumbler of rum-and-water, Davis, as hot asmay be.""You 'd better take your friend's advice, sir," said the Captain. "Itwill be dirty weather out there, and you 'll be snugger under cover."Beecher, however, declined; and the Captain, crossing the deck, repeatedthe same counsel to the other passenger."No, I thank you," said he, gayly; "but if one of your men couldspare me a cloak or a cape, I 'd be much obliged, for I am somewhatill-provided against wet weather.""I can let you have a rug, with pleasure," said Beecher, overhearing therequest; while he drew from a recess beneath the binnacle one of thoseserviceable aids to modern travel in the shape of a strong woollenblanket."I accept your offer most willingly, and the more so as I suspect Ihave had the honor of being presented to you," said the stranger. "Do Iaddress Mr. Annesley Beecher?""Eh?--I'm not aware--I'm not quite sure, by this light," began Beecher,in considerable embarrassment, which the other as quickly perceived, andremedied by saying,--"I met you at poor Kellett's. My name is Conway.""Oh, Conway,--all right," said Beecher, laughing. "I was afraid youmight be a 'dark horse,' as we say. Now that I know your colors, I'measy again."Conway laughed too at the frankness of the confession, and they turnedto walk the deck together."You mentioned Kellett. He 's gone 'toes up,' is n't he?" said Beecher."He is dead, poor fellow," said Conway, gravely. "I expected to have metyou at his funeral.""So I should have been had it come off on a Sunday," said Beecher,pleasantly; "but as in seeing old Paul 'tucked in' they might havenabbed me, I preferred being reported absent without leave.""These were strong reasons, doubtless," said Conway, dryly."I liked the old fellow, too," said Beecher. "He was a bit of a bore,to be sure, about Arayo Molinos, and Albuera, and Soult, and Beresford,and the rest of 'em; but he was a rare good one to help a fellow at apinch, and hospitable as a prince.""That I 'm sure of!" chimed in Conway."I know it, I can swear to it; I used to dine with him every Sunday,regularly as the day came. I'll never forget those little tough legsof mutton,--wherever he found them there's no saying,--and those hardpellets of capers, like big swan-shot, washed down with table beer andwhiskey-grog, and poor Kellett thinking all the while he was giving youhaunch of venison and red hermitage.""He 'd have given them just as freely if he had them," broke in Conway,half gruffly."That he would! He did so when he had it to give,--at least, so theytell me, for I never saw the old place at Kellett's Town, or CastleKellett--""Kellett's Court was the name.""Ay, to be sure, Kellett's Court. I wonder how I could forget it, forI'm sure I heard it often enough.""One forgets many a thing they ought to remember," said Conway,significantly."Hit him again, he hasn't got no friends!" broke in Beecher, laughingjovially at this rebuke of himself. "You mean, that I ought to have afresher memory about all old Paul's kindnesses, and you 're right there;but if you knew how hard the world has hit me, how hot they 've beengiving it to me these years back, you 'd perhaps not lean so heavily onme. Since the Epsom of '42," said he, solemnly, "I never had one chance,not one, I pledge you my sacred word of honor. I 've had my little'innings,' you know, like every one else,--punted for five-pun-noteswith the small ones, but never a real chance. Now, I call that hard,deuced hard.""I suppose it is hard," said Conway; but, really, it would have beenvery difficult to say in what sense his words should be taken."And when a fellow finds himself always on the wrong side of the road,"said Beecher, who now fancied that he was taking a moralist's view oflife, and spoke with a philosophic solemnity,--"I say, when a fellowsees that, do what he will, he's never on the right horse, he begins tobe soured with the world, and to think that it's all a regular 'cross.'Not that I ever gave in. No! ask any of the fellows up at Newmarket--askthe whole ring--ask--" he was going to say Grog Davis, when he suddenlyremembered the heavy judgment Conway had already fulminated on thatrevered authority, and then, quickly correcting himself, he said, "Askany of the legs you like what stuff A. B. 's made of,--if he ain'thammered iron, and no mistake!""But what do you mean when you say you never gave in?" asked Conway,half sternly."What do I mean?" said Beecher, repeating the words, half stunned by theboldness of the question,--"what do I mean? Why, I mean that they neversaw me 'down,'--that no man can say Annesley Beecher ever said 'die.'Have n't I had my soup piping hot,--spiced and peppered too! Was n't Iin for a pot on Blue Nose, when Mope ran a dead heat with Belshazzar forthe Cloudeslie,--fifteen to three in fifties twice over, and my horserunning in bandages, and an ounce of corrosive sublimate in his stomach!Well, you 'd not believe it,--I don't ask any one to believe it thatdid n't see it,--but I was as cool as I am here, and I walked up toLady Tinkerton's drag and ate a sandwich; and when she said, 'Oh!Mr. Beecher, do come and tell me what to bet on,' I said to her,'Quicksilver's the fastest of metals, but don't back it just now.' Theyhad it all over the course in half an hour: 'Quicksilver's the fastestof metals--'""I'm afraid I don't quite catch your meaning.""It was alluding to the bucketing, you know. They 'd just given BlueNose corrosive sublimate, which is a kind of quicksilver.""Oh, I perceive," said Conway."Good,--wasn't it?" said Beecher, chuckling. "Let A. B. alone to 'sarvethem out,'--that's what all the legs said!" And then he heaved a littlesigh, as though to say that, after all, even wit and smartness were onlya vanity and a vexation of spirit, and that a "good book" was betterthan them all."I detest the whole concern," said Conway. "So long as gentlemen bredand trained to run their horses in honorable rivalry, it was a noblesport, and well became the first squirearchy of the world; but when itdegenerated into a field for every crafty knave and trickster,--whenthe low cunning of the gambler succeeded to the bold daring of the truelover of racing,--then the turf became no better than the rouge etnoir table, without even the poor consolation of thinking that chancewas any element in the result.""Why, what would you have? It's a game where the best player wins,that's all," broke in Beecher."If you mean it is always a contest where the best horse carries awaythe prize, I enter my denial to the assertion. If it were so, the legswould have no existence, and all that classic vocabulary of 'nobbling,''squaring,' and so on, have no dictionary.""It's all the same the whole world over," broke in Beecher. "Thewide-awake ones will have the best seat on the coach."Conway made no reply; but the increased energy with which he puffed hiscigar bespoke the impatience he was suffering under."What became of the daughter?" asked Beecher, abruptly; and then, notawaiting the answer, went on: "A deuced good-looking girl, if properlytogged out, but she had n't the slightest notion of dressing herself.""Their narrow fortune may have had something to say to that," saidConway, gravely."Where there's a will, there's a way,--that 's my idea. I was never sohard up in life but I could make my tailor torn me out like a gentleman.I take it," added he, returning to the former theme, "she was a proudone. Old Kellett was awfully afraid of doing many a thing from the dreadof her knowing it. He told me so himself.""Indeed!" exclaimed Conway, with evident pleasure in the tone."I could have helped him fifty ways. I knew fellows who would have'done' his bills,--small sums, of course,--and have shoved him alongpleasantly enough, but she would n't have it at any price.""I was not aware of that," remarked Conway, inviting, by his manner,further revelations.Beecher, however, mistaking the source of the interest he had thusexcited, and believing that his own craft and shrewdness were thequalities that awakened respect, went on to show how conversant he waswith all financial operations amongst Jews and money-lenders, proudlydeclaring that there was not a "man on town" knew the cent per centersas he did."I've had my little dealings with them," said he, with some vanity inthe manner. "I 've had my paper done when there was n't a fellow on the'turf' could raise a guinea. You see," added he, lowering his voice to awhisper that implied secrecy, "I could do them a service no money couldrepay. I was up to all that went on in life and at the clubs. WhenEtheridge got it so heavy at the 'Rag,' I warned Fordyce not to advancehim beyond a hundred or two. I was the only gentleman knew Brookdale'shorse could win 'the Ripsley.' The legs, of course, knew it well beforethe race came off. Jemmy could have had ten thousand down for his'book.' Ah! if you and I had only known each other six years ago, whata stroke of work we might have done together! Even now," said he, withincreased warmth of voice, "there's a deuced deal to be done abroad.Brussels and Florence are far from worked out; not among the foreigners,of course, but our own fellows,--the young Oxford and Cambridge'saps,'--the green ones waiting for their gazette in the Guards! Whereare you bound for?--what are you doing?" asked he, as if a suddenthought had crossed his mind."I am endeavoring to get back to the Crimea," said Conway, smiling atthe prospect which the other had with such frankness opened to him."The Crimea!" exclaimed Beecher, "why, that is downright madness; they're fighting away there just as fresh as ever. The very last paper I sawis filled with an account of a Russian sortie against our lines, and alot of our fellows killed and wounded.""Of course there are hard knocks--""It's all very well to talk of it that way, but I think you might havebeen satisfied with what you saw, I 'd just as soon take a cab down toGuy's, or the Middlesex Hospital, and ask one of the house-surgeons tocut me up at his own discretion, as go amongst those Russian savages. Itell you it don't pay,--not a bit of it!""I suppose, as to the paying part, you 're quite right; but, remember,there are different modes of estimating the same thing. Now, I likesoldiering--""No accounting for tastes," broke in Beecher. "I knew a fellow who wasso fond of the Queen's Bench Prison he would n't let his friends clearhim out; but, seriously speaking, the Crimea 's a bad book.""I should be a very happy fellow to-night if I knew how I could get backthere. I 've been trying in various ways for employment in any branchof the service. I 'd rather be a driver in the Wagon Train than whip theneatest four-in-hand over Epsom Downs.""There 's only one name for that," said Beecher; "at least, out ofHanwell.""I 'd be content to be thought mad on such terms," said Conway,good-humoredly, "and not even quarrel with those who said so!""I 've got a better scheme than the Crimea in my head," said Beecher, ina low, cautious voice, like one afraid of being overheard. "I've halfa mind to tell you, though there 's one on board here would come downpretty heavily on me for peaching.""Don't draw any indignation on yourself on my account," said Conway,smiling. "I'm quite unworthy of the confidence, and utterly unable toprofit by it.""I 'm not so sure of that," responded Beecher. "A fellow who has got itso hot as you have, has always his eyes open ever after. Come a littleto this side," whispered he, cautiously. "Did you remark my goingforward two or three times when I came on board?""Yes, I perceived that you did so.""You never guessed why?""No; really I paid no particular attention to it.""I 'll tell you, then," whispered he, still lower, "it was to look aftera horse I 've got there. 'Mumps,' that ran such a capital second for theYarmouth, and ran a dead heat afterwards with Stanley's 'Cross-Bones,'he's there!" and his voice trembled between pride and agitation."Indeed!" exclaimed Conway, amused at the eagerness of his manner."There he is, disguised as a prize bull for the King of Belgium. Nobodysuspects him,--nobody could suspect him, he 's so well got up, horns andall. Got him on board in the dark in a large roomy box, clap posters toit on the other side, and 'tool' him along to Brussels. That's what Icall business! Now, if you wait a week or two, you can lay on him asdeep as you like. We'll let the Belgians 'in,' before we 've donewith them. We run him under the name of 'Klepper;' don't forgetit,--Klepper!""I've already told you I 'm unworthy of such a confidence; you only riskyourself when you impart a secret to indiscretion like mine.""You'd not blow us?" cried Annesley, in terror."The best security against my doing so accidentally is that I may behundreds of miles away before your races come off."For a minute or two Beecher's misery was extreme. He saw how hisrashness had carried him away to a foolish act of good-nature, and hadnot even reaped thanks for his generosity. What would he not have givento recall his words?--what would he not have done to obliterate theirimpression? At last a sudden thought seemed to strike him, and hesaid,--"There are two of us in 'the lay,' and my 'pal' is the readiest pistolin Europe.""I 'll not provoke any display of his skill, depend on 't," said Conway,controlling, as well as he could, the inclination to laugh out."He'd tumble you over like winking if you sold him. He 'd make it asshort work with myself if he suspected me.""I'd rather have a quieter sort of colleague," said Conway, dryly."Oh! but he's a rare one to 'work the oracle.' Solomon was a wise man--""What infernal balderdash are you at with Solomon and Samson, there?"shouted out Grog Davis, who had just been looking after the horse-box inthe bow. "Come down below, and have a glass of brandy-and-water.""I 'll stay where I am," said Beecher, sulkily, and walked away indudgeon from the spot."I think I recognize your friend's voice," said Conway, when Beechernext joined him. "If I 'm right, it's a fellow I 've an old grudgeagainst.""Don't have it out, then,--that 's all," broke in Beecher, hastily."I 'd just as soon go into a cage and dispute a bone with one of VanAmburgh's tigers, as I 'd 'bring him to book.'""Make your mind easy about that," said Conway. "I never go in searchof old scores. I would only say, don't leave yourself more in his powerthan you can easily escape from. As for myself, it's very unlikely Ishall ever see him again.""I wish you'd given up the Crimea," said Beecher, who, by one of thestrange caprices of his strange nature, began to feel a sort of likingfor Conway."Why should I give it up? It's the only career I 'm fit for,--if I evenbe fit for that, which, indeed, the Horse Guards don't seem to think.But I 've got an old friend in the Piedmontese service who is goingout in command of the cavalry, and I 'm on my way now to Turin tosee whether he cannot make me something,--anything, in short, froman aide-de-camp to an orderly. Once before the enemy, it matterswonderfully little what rank a man holds.""The chances of his being knocked over are pretty much alike," saidBeecher, "if that's what you mean.""Not exactly," said Conway, laughing, "not exactly, though even inthat respect the calculation is equal."They now walked the deck step for step together in silence. Theconversation had arrived at that point whence, if not actuallyconfidential, it could proceed no further without becoming so, and soeach appeared to feel it, and yet neither was disposed to lead the way.Beecher was one of those men who regard the chance persons they meetwith in life just as they would accidental spots where they halt when ona journey,--little localities to be enjoyed at the time, and never, inall likelihood, revisited. In this way they obtained far more of hisconfidence than if he was sure to be in constant habits of intercoursewith them. He felt they were safe depositaries, just as he would havefelt a lonely spot in a wood a secure hiding-place for whateverhe wanted to conceal. Now he was already--we are unable to saywhy--disposed to like Conway, and he would gladly have revealed to himmuch that lay heavily at his heart,--many a weighty care, many a soremisgiving. There was yet remaining in his nature that reverence andrespect for honesty of character which survives very often a long courseof personal debasement, and he felt that Conway was a man of honor.Such men he very well knew were usually duped and done,--they were thevictims of the sharp set he himself fraternized with; but, with allthat, there was something about them that he still clung to, just as hemight have clung to a reminiscence of his boy-days."I take it," said he, at last, "that each of us have caught itas heavily as most fellows going. You, to be sure, worse thanmyself,--for I was only a younger son.""My misfortunes," said Conway, "were all of my own making. Isquandered a very good fortune in a few years, without ever so muchas suspecting I was in any difficulty; and, after all, the worstrecollection of the past is, how few kindnesses, how very fewgood-natured things a fellow does when he leads a life of mereextravagance. I have enriched many a money-lender, I have started halfa dozen rascally servants into smart hotel-keepers, but I can scarcelyrecall five cases of assistance given to personal friends. The truth is,the most selfish fellow in the world is the spendthrift.""That 's something new to me, I must own," said Beecher, thoughtfully;but Conway paid no attention to the remark. "My notion is this," saidBeecher, after a pause,--"do what you will, say what you will, the worldwon't play fair with you!"Conway shook his head dissentingly, but made no reply, and another and alonger silence ensued."You don't know my brother Lackington?" said Beecher, at length."No. I have met him in the world and at clubs, but don't know him.""I 'll engage, however, you 've always heard him called a clever fellow,a regular sharp fellow, and all that, just because he's the Viscount;but he is, without exception, the greatest flat going,--never saw hisway to a good thing yet, and if you told him of one, was sure to spoilit. I 'm going over to see him now," added he, after a pause."He 's at Rome, I think, the newspapers say?""Yes, he's stopping there for the winter." Another pause followed, andBeecher threw away the end of his cigar, and, sticking an unlighted onein his mouth, walked the deck in deep deliberation. "I 'd like to put acase to you for your opinion," said he, as though screwing himself to agreat effort. "If you stood next to a good fortune,--next in reversion,I mean,--and that there was a threat--just a threat, and no more--of asuit to contest your right, would you accept of a life interest in theproperty to avoid all litigation, and secure a handsome income for yourown time?""You put the case too vaguely. First of all, a mere threat would notdrive me to a compromise.""Well, call it more than a threat; say that actual proceedings had beentaken,--not that I believe they have; but just say so.""The matter is too complicated for my mere Yes or No to meet it; buton the simple question of whether I should compromise a case of thatnature, I'd say No. I'd not surrender my right if I had one, and I 'dnot retain possession of that which did n't belong to me.""Which means, that you 'd reject the offer of a life interest?""Yes, on the terms you mention.""I believe you 're right. Put the bold face on, and stand the battle.Now the real case is this. My brother Lack-ington has just been servedwith notice--"Just as Beecher had uttered the last word, his arm, which rested on thebinnacle against which he was standing, was grasped with such force thathe almost cried out with the pain, and at the same instant a mutteredcurse fell upon his ear."Go on," said Conway, as he waited to hear more.Beecher muttered some unintelligible words about feeling suddenlychilled, and "wanting a little brandy," and disappeared down the stairsto the cabin."I heard you," cried Davis, as soon as the other entered,--"I heard you!and if I hadn't heard you with my own ears, I 'd not have believed it!Have n't I warned you, not once but fifty times, against that confoundedpeaching tongue of yours? Have n't I told you that if every act of yourlife was as pure and honest as you know it is not, your own stupid talkwould make an indictment against you? You meet a fellow on the deck of asteamer--""Stop there!" cried Beecher, whose temper was sorely tried by thisattack. "The gentleman I talked with is an old acquaintance; he knowsme,--ay, and what's more, he knows you!""Many a man knows me, and does not feel himself much the better forhis knowledge!" said Davis, boldly."Well, I believe our friend here would n't say he was the exception tothat rule," said Beecher, with an ironical laugh."Who is he?--what's his name?""His name is Conway; he was a lieutenant in the 12th Lancers, but youwill remember him better as the owner of Sir Aubrey.""I remember him perfectly," replied Davis, with all his owncomposure,--"I remember him perfectly,--a tall, good-looking fellow,with short moustaches. He was--except yourself--the greatest flat Iever met in the betting-ring; and that's a strong word, Mr. AnnesleyBeecher,--ain't it?""I suspect you 'd scarcely like to call him a flat to-day, at least, tohis face," said Beecher, angrily.A look of mingled insolence and contempt was all the answer Davis gavethis speech; and then half filling a tumbler with brandy, he drank itoff, and said slowly,--"What I would dare to do, you certainly would never suspect,--thatmuch I 'm well aware of. What you would dare is easily guessed at.""I don't clearly understand you," said Beecher, timidly."You 'd dare to draw me into a quarrel on the chance of seeing me'bowled over,'" said Davis, with a bitter laugh. "You 'd dare to seeme stand opposite another man's pistol, and pray heartily at the sametime that his hand might n't shake, nor his wrist falter; but I'vegot good business habits about me, Master Beecher. If you open thatwriting-desk, you 'll own few men's papers are in better order, or moreneatly kept; and there is no satisfaction I could have to offer any onewould n't give me ample time to deposit in the hands of justice sevenforged acceptances by the Honorable Annesley Beecher, and the power ofattorney counterfeited by the same accomplished gentleman's hand."Beecher put out his hand to catch the decanter of brandy; but Davisgently removed the bottle, and said, "No, no; that's only Dutch courage,man; nerve yourself up, and learn to stand straight and manfully, andwhen you say, 'Not guilty,' do it with a bold look at the jury box.'"Beecher dropped into his seat, and buried his head between his hands."I often think," said Davis, as he took out his cigar-case and proceededto choose a cigar,--"I often think it would be a fine sight when theswells--the fashionable world, as the newspapers call them--would bepressing on to the Old Bailey to see one of their own set in the dock.What nobs there would be on the Bench! All Brookes's and the Wyndhamscattered amongst the bar. The 'Illustrated News' would have aphotographic picture of you, and the descriptive fellows would come outstrong about the way you recognized your former acquaintances in court.Egad! old Grog Davis would be quite proud to give his evidence in suchcompany!' How long have you been acquainted with the prisoner in thedock, Mr. Davis?' cried he, aloud, imitating the full and imperiousaccents of an examining counsel. 'I have known him upwards of fifteenyears, my Lord. We went down together to Leeds in the summer of 1840 ona little speculation with cogged dice--'"Beecher looked up and tried to speak, but his strength failed him, andhis head fell heavily down again on the table."There, 'liquor up,' as the Yankees say," cried Davis, passing thedecanter towards him. "You 're a poor chicken-hearted creature, anddon't do much honor to your 'order.'""You 'll drive me to despair yet," muttered Beecher, in a voice scarcelyabove a whisper."Not a bit of it, man; there's pluck in despair! You 'll never go thatfar!"Beecher grasped his glass convulsively; and as his eyes flashed wildly,he seemed for a moment as if about to hurl it in the other's face.Davis's look, however, appeared to abash him, and with a low, faint sighhe relinquished his hold, while his head fell forward on his bosom.Davis now drew near the fire, and with a leg on either side of it,smoked away at his ease.CHAPTER XXVII. A VISIT OF CONDOLENCE"I think she will see me," said Davenport Dunn, to the old womanservant who opened the door to him at the Kelletts' cottage, "if youwill tell her my name: Mr. Dunn,--Mr. Davenport Dunn.""She told me she 'd not see anybody, sir," was the obdurate reply."Yes; but I think when you say who it is--""She would not see that young man that was in the regiment with herbrother, and he was here every day, wet or dry, to ask after her.""Well, take in my card now, and I 'll answer for it she'll not refuseme."The old woman took the card half sulkily from his hand, and returned ina few minutes to say that Miss Kellett would receive him.Dressed in mourning of the very humblest and cheapest kind, and with allthe signs of recent suffering and sorrow about her, Sybella Kellettyet received Mr. Dunn with a calm and quiet composure for which he wasscarcely prepared."If I have been importunate, Miss Kellett," said he, "it is because Idesire to proffer my services to you. I feel assured that you willnot take ill this assistance on my part I would wish to be thought afriend--""You were so to my father, sir," said she, interrupting, while she heldher handkerchief to her eyes.Dunn's face grew scarlet at these words, but, fortunately for him, shecould not see it."I had intended to have written to you, sir," said she, with recoveredcomposure. "I tried to do so this morning, but my head was aching sothat I gave it up. I wanted your counsel, and indeed your assistance. Ihave no need to tell you that I 'm left without means of support. Ido not want to burden relatives, with whom, besides, I have had nointercourse for years; and my object was to ask if you could assist meto a situation as governess, or, if not, to something more humble still.I will not be difficult to please," said she, smiling sadly, "for mypretensions are of the very humblest.""I 'm aware how much you underrate them. I 'm no stranger to MissKellett's abilities," said Dunn, bowing.She scarcely moved her head in acknowledgment of this speech, and wenton: "If you could insure me immediate occupation, it would serve toextricate me from a little difficulty at this moment, and relieve mefrom the embarrassment of declining ungraciously what I cannot acceptof. This letter here is an invitation from a lady in Wales to acceptthe hospitality of her house for the present; and however deeply thekindness touches me, I must not avail myself of it. You may read theletter," said she, handing it to him.Dunn perused it slowly, and, folding it up, laid it on the table again."It is most kindly worded, and speaks well for the writer," said he,calmly."I feel all its kindness," said she, with a slight quivering of the lip."It comes when such is doubly precious, but I have my reasons againstaccepting it.""Without daring to ask, I can assume them, Miss Kellett. I am one ofthose who believe that all efforts in life to be either good or greatshould strike root in independence; that he who leans upon another partswith the best features of identity, and loses himself in suiting histastes to another's."She made no reply, but a slight flush on her cheek, and an increasedbrightness in her eye, showed that she gave her full concurrence to thewords."It is fortunate, Miss Kellett," said he, resuming, "that I am thebearer of a proposition which, if you approve of, meets the case atonce. I have been applied to by Lord Glengariff to find a lady whowould accept the situation of companion to his daughter. He has so farexplained the requirements he seeks for, that I can answer for MissKellett being exactly everything to fulfil them.""Oh, sir!" broke she in, "this is in no wise what I desired. I amutterly unfitted for such a sphere and such associations. Remember howand where my life has been passed. I have no knowledge of life, and noexperience of society.""Let me interrupt you. Lord Glengariff lives completely estrangedfrom the world in a remote part of the country. Lady Augusta, his onlyunmarried daughter, is no longer young; they see no company; indeed,their fortune is very limited, and all their habits of the very simplestand least expensive. It was remembering this very seclusion, I was gladto offer you a retreat so likely to meet your wishes.""But even my education is not what such persons would look for. I havenot one of the graceful accomplishments that adorn society. My skill asa musician is very humble; I cannot sing at all; and though I can readsome modern languages, I scarcely speak them.""Do not ask me to say how much I am aware of your capacity andacquirements, Miss Kellett. It is about two months back a little volumecame into my hands which had once been yours; how it ceased to be so Idon't choose to confess; but it was a work on the industrial resourcesof Ireland, annotated and commented on by you. I have it still. ShallI own to you that your notes have been already used by me in my reports,and that I have adopted some of the suggestions in my recommendations toGovernment? Nay, if you doubt me, I will give you the proof.""I left such a volume as you speak of at Mr. Hawkhaw's, and believed ithad been mislaid.""It was deliberately stolen, Miss Kellett, that's the truth of it. Mr.Driscoll chanced to see the book, and happened to show it to me. I couldnot fail to be struck with it, the more as I discovered in your remarkshints and suggestions, coupled with explanations, that none had everoffered me.""How leniently you speak of my presumption, sir!""Say, rather, how sincerely I applaud your zeal and intelligence,--thebook bespeaks both. Now, when I read it, I wished at once to make youracquaintance. There were points wherein you were mistaken; there wereothers in which you evidently see further than any of us. I felt thatif time, and leisure, and opportunity of knowledge were supplied, thesewere the studies in which you might become really proficient. LordGlengariff s proposal came at the very moment. It was all I could desirefor you,--a quiet home, the society of those whose very breeding isacted kindliness.""Oh, sir! do not flatter me into the belief that I am worthy of suchadvantages.""The station will gain most by your association with it, take my wordfor that."How was it that these words sent a color to her cheek and a courage toher heart that made her for a moment forget she was poor and fatherlessand friendless? What was it, too, that made them seem less flatterythan sound, just, and due acknowledgment? He that spoke them was neitheryoung, nor handsome, nor fascinating in manner; and yet she felt hispraise vibrate within her heart strangely and thrillingly.He spoke much to her about her early life,--what she had read, and howshe was led to reflect upon themes so unlikely to attract a young girl'sthoughts. By degrees, as her reserve wore off, she ventured toconfess what a charm the great men of former days possessed forher imagination,--how their devotion, their courage, theirsingle-heartedness animated her with higher hopes for the time whenIreland should have the aid of those able to guide her destinies andmake of her all that her great resources promised."The world of contemporaries is seldom just to these," said Dunn,gravely; "they excite envy rather than attract friendship, and thenthey have often few of the gifts which conciliate the prejudices aroundthem.""What matter if they can live down these prejudices?" cried she, warmly;then blushing at her own eagerness, she said, falteringly, "How have Idared to speak of these things, and to you?"Dunn arose and walked to the window, and now a long pause occurred inwhich neither uttered a word."Is this cottage yours, Miss Kellett?" said he, at last."No; we had rented it, and the time expires in a week or two.""And the furniture?""It was hired also, except a very few articles of little or no value."Dunn again turned away, and seemed lost in deep thought; then, in avoice of some uncertainty and hesitation, said: "Your father's affairswere complicated and confused,--there were questions of law, too, tobe determined about them,--so that, for the present, there is no sayingexactly how they stand; still, there will be a sum,--a small one,unfortunately, but still a sum available to you, which, for presentconvenience, you must allow me to advance to you.""You forget, sir, that I have a brother. To him, of right, belongsanything that remains to us.""I had, indeed, forgotten that," said Dunn, in some confusion, "and itwas just of him I wanted now to speak. He is serving as a soldier with aRifle regiment in the Crimea. Can nothing be done to bring him favorablybefore the notice of his superiors? His gallantry has already attractednotice; but as his real station is still unknown, his advancement hasbeen merely that accorded to the humblest merits. I will attend to it. I'll write about him this very day.""How I thank you!" cried she, fervently; and she bent down and pressedher lips to his hand.A cold shivering passed over Dunn as he felt the hot tears that fellupon his hand, and a strange sense of weakness oppressed him."It will make your task the lighter," cried she, eagerly, "to know thatJack is a soldier in heart and soul,--brave, daring, and high-hearted,but with a nature gentle as a child's. There was a comrade of his herethe other day, one whose life he saved--""I have seen Conway," said Dunn, dryly, while he scanned her featuresclosely.No change of color nor voice showed that she felt the scrutiny, and ina calm tone she went on: "I know so little of these things that I donot know, if my dear brother were made an officer to-morrow, whether hiswant of private fortune would prevent his acceptance of the rank, butthere surely must be steps of advancement open to men poor as he is.""You may trust all to me," interrupted Dunn. "Once that you consider meas your guardian, I will neglect nothing that concerns you.""Oh, how have I deserved such kindness!" cried she, trying to smotherher emotion."You must call me your guardian, too, and write to me as such. The worldis of such a temper that it will serve you to be thought my ward. EvenLady Augusta Arden herself will feel the force of it." There was a kindof rude energy in the way these last words were uttered that gave them acharacter almost defiant."You are, then, decided that I ought to take the situation?" saidshe. And already her manner had assumed the deference of one seekingdirection."Yes, for the present it is all that could be desired. There will be nonecessity of your continuing there if it should ever be irksome to you.Upon this, as upon all else, I trust you will communicate freely withme.""I should approach an actual duty--a task--with far more confidencethan I feel in offering to accommodate myself to the ways and tempers ofutter strangers.""Very true," said he; "but when I have told you about them they willbe strangers no longer. People are easily comprehended who have certainstrong ruling passions. They have only one, and that the very simplestof all motives,--pride. Let me tell you of them." And so he drew hischair to her side, and began to describe the Ardens.We do not ask the reader to follow Davenport Dunn in his sketch; enoughthat we say his picture was more truthful than flattering, for heportrayed traits that had often given him offence and suffering.He tried to speak with a sort of disinterested coldness,--a kind ofhalf-pitying indifference about "ways and notions" that people estrangedfrom "much intercourse with the world will fall into;" but his tonewas, in spite of himself, severe and resentful, and scarcely compensatedby his concluding words, "though, of course, to you they will beamiable and obliging.""How I wish I could see them, though only for a minute!" said she, as hefinished."Have you such confidence, then, in your power of detecting character atsight?" asked he, with a keen and furtive glance."My gift is generally enough for my own guidance," said she, frankly;"but, to be sure, it has only been exercised amongst the country people,and they have fewer disguises than those we call their betters.""I may write word, then, that within a week you will be ready,"said Dunn, rising. "You will find in that pocket-book enough for anyimmediate outlay,--nay, Miss Kellett, it is your own,--I repeat it,all your own. I am your guardian, and no more." And with a stiffness ofmanner that almost repelled gratitude, he took his leave and withdrew.As he gained the door, however, he stopped, and after a moment came backinto the room. "I should like to see you again before you leave; thereare topics I would like to speak with you on. May I come in a day ortwo?""Whenever and as often as you please."Dunn took her hand and pressed it tenderly. A deep crimson overspreadher face as she said "Good-bye!" and the carriage had rolled away ereshe knew that he was gone.CHAPTER XXVIII. THE HERMITAGE AT GLENGARIFF.Beside a little arm of the sea, and surrounded by lofty mountains,stood the cottage of Lord Glengariff. It was originally built as a merefishing-lodge, a resting-place in the bathing-season, or a spot tovisit when it was the pleasure of its owners to affect retirement andseclusion. Then would the Earl and his Countess and the Ladies Julia andJemima come down to the Hermitage with a sort of self-approving humilitythat seemed to say, "Even we know how to chastise pride, and vanity,and the sinful lusts of the flesh." Whether it was that these seasons ofmortification became more frequent, or that they required more space,we cannot say; but, in course of time, the hermitage extended its limbs,first in one direction, and then in another, till at length it grewto be a very commodious house, with ample rooms and every imaginablecomfort, Owing to the character of the architecture, too, it gained inpicturesque effect by these successive additions; and in its juttingprojections, its deep-shadowed courts, and its irregular line of roof,it presented a very pleasing specimen of that half-Elizabethan cottageso rarely hit upon in any regular plan. As the fortunes of the noblehouse declined,--the Earl's ancestors had been amongst the mostextravagant of Irish gentry,--the ancient castle of Holt-Glengariff,where they had long resided, was sold, and the family settled down tolive at the Hermitage. At first the change was supposed to be merelytemporary,--"they were going to live in London or in Brighton; theywere about to establish themselves in Paris; her Ladyship was ordered toItaly,"--a variety of rumors, in fact, were afloat to explain that thesunshine of their presence in that lonely glen would be but brief andshort-lived. All the alterations that might be made in the cottage orits grounds, all the facilities of approach by land and water, all thebeneficial changes in the village itself, were alluded to as projectsfor the day when they would come back there; for my Lord said he"really liked the place,"--a species of avowal that was accepted by theneighborhood as the proudest encomium man could pronounce upon their"happy valley."With all these plans and intentions, it was now eighteen years, andthe Earl had never quitted the Hermitage for any longer journey thanan occasional trip to Dublin. The Countess had taken a longer roadthan that over the Alps, and lay at rest in the village churchyard. TheLadies Georgina, Arabella, and Julia had married off, and none remainedbut Lady Augusta Arden, of whom we have already made brief mention toour readers in a former chapter.We did but scant justice to Lady Augusta when we said that she had oncebeen handsome: she was so still. She had fine eyes and fine teeth; aprofusion of brown hair of the very silkiest; her figure was singularlygraceful; and, baring a degree of haughtiness,--a family trait,--hermanner was unexceptionably good and pleasing. Both the Earl and hisdaughter had lived too long amongst those greatly inferior to themin rank and fortune not to conceive a very exaggerated estimate ofthemselves.No Pasha was ever more absolute than my Lord in the little villagebeside him; his will was a sort of firman that none dreamed ofdisputing; and, indeed, the place men occupied in the esteem of theirfellows there, was little else than a reflex of how they were regardedat the Hermitage. We never scruple to bestow a sort of derisive pityupon the savage who, having carved his deity out of a piece of wood,sits down to worship him; and yet, what an unconscious imitation of thered man is all our adulation of great folks! We follow him to the veryletter, not only in investing the object of our worship with a hundredqualities that he has not, but we make him the butt of our evilpassions, and in the day of our anger and disappointment we turn roundand rend him! Not that the villagers ever treated my Lord in thiswise,--they were still in the stage "of worship;" they had been at"their offices," fathers and grandfathers, for many a year, and thoughsome were beginning to complain that their knees were getting sore, nonedreamed of getting on their legs! The fact was, that even they who likedthe religion least thought it was not worth while abjuring the faith oftheir fathers, especially when they could not guess what was to replaceit; and so my Lord dictated and decided and pronounced for thewhole neighborhood; and Lady Augusta doctored and model-schooled andloan-funded them to her heart's content. Nay, we are wrong! It was allin the disappointed dreariness of an unsatisfied heart that she took tobenevolence! Oh, dear! what a sorry search is that after motives, if oneonly knew how much philanthropy and active charity have come of abreach of promise to marry! Not that Lady Augusta had ever stood in thisposition, but either that she had looked too high, or was too hard toplease, or from some other cause, but she never married.The man who has no taste for horsemanship consoles himself for theunenjoyed pleasure by reading of the fractured ribs and smashedcollar-bones of the hunting-field. Was it in something of this spiritthat Lady Augusta took an especial delight in dwelling in her mind andin her letters on all the disagreeables of her sisters' wedded life? Theextravagance of men, their selfishness, their uncomplying habits, theodious tyranny of their tempers, were favorite themes with her, dashedwith allusions to every connubial contingency, from alimony to themeasles in the nursery! At last, possibly because, by such frequentrecurrence to the same subjects, she had no longer anything new to sayon them, or perhaps--it is just possible--that the themes themselves hadless interest for others than for herself, her sisters seemed to replyless regularly than of old. Their answers were shorter and drier; andthey appeared neither to care so much for sympathy and condolence asformerly; and, in fact, as Lady Augusta said to herself, "They weregrowing inured to ill-treatment!" And if half of us in this world onlyknew of the miseries we are daily suffering, and which sympatheticfriends are crying over, what a deal of delightful affliction might weenjoy that we now are dead to! What oppressive governments do we liveunder, what cruel taskmasters, what ungrateful publics, not to speak ofthe more touching sorrows of domestic life,--the undervaluing parentsand unsympathizing wives! Well, one thing is a comfort: there are dearkind hearts in mourning over all these for us, anxiously looking for theday we may awaken to a sense of our own misery!It was of a cheery spring morning, sunlit and breezy, when, in thechirping songs of birds, the rustling leaves, and fast-flowing rivulets,Nature seems to enjoy a more intense vitality, that the Earl sat atbreakfast with his daughter. A fairer prospect could hardly be seen thanthat which lay before the open windows in front of them. The green lawn,dotted with clumps of ancient trees, inclined with many a waving slopeto the sea, which in a long narrow arm pierced its way between twojutting headlands,--the one bold, rocky, and precipitous; the othergrass-covered and flowery, reflecting its rich tints in the glassy waterbeneath. The sea was, indeed, calm and still as any lake, and, savewhen a low, surging sound arose within some rocky cavern, as silent andnoiseless. The cattle browsed down to the very water's edge, and thenets of the fishermen hung to dry over the red-berried foliage ofthe arbutus. They who looked--when they did, perchance, look on thisscene--gazed with almost apathy on it. Their eyes never brightened asthe changing sunlight cast new effects upon the scene. Nor was thisindifference the result of any unconsciousness of its beauty. A fewmonths back it was the theme of all their praises. Landscape-paintersand photographers were invited specially to catch its first morningtints, its last mellow glow at sunset. The old Lord said it was finerthan Sorrento, equal to anything in Greece. If the Mediterraneanwere bluer, where was there such emerald verdure,--where such blendedcoloring of heaths, purple and blue and violet,--in what land did thefragrance of the white thorn so load the warm atmosphere? Such, and suchlike, were the encomiums they were wont to utter; and wherefore wasit that they uttered them no more? The explanation is a brief one. Acommission, or a deputation, or a something as important, had come downto examine Bantry Bay, and investigate its fitness to become a packetstation for America. In the course of this examination, a scientificmember of the body had strayed down to Glengariff, where, being ofa speculative as well as of a scientific turn, he was struck by itsimmense capabilities. What a gem it was, and what might it not be made!It was Ireland in the tropics,--"the Green Isle" in the Indian Ocean!Only imagine such a spot converted into a watering-place! With a lodgefor the Queen on that slope sheltered by the ilex-copse, crescents, andcasinos, and yacht stations, and ornamental villas rose on every sideby his descriptive powers, and the old Earl--for he was dining withhim--saw at one glance how he had suddenly become a benefactor ofmankind and a millionnaire. "That little angle of the shore yonder, myLord,--the space between the pointed rock and the stone-pine trees,--isworth fifty thousand pounds; the crescent that would stand there wouldleave many an untenanted house at Kemp Town. I 'll engage myself to getyou a thousand guineas for that small bit of tableland to the right; theDuke of Uxmore is only waiting to hit upon such a spot. Here, too, wherewe sit, must be the hydropathic establishment. You can't help it, myLord, you must comply. This park will bring you in a princely revenue.It is gold,--actual gold,--every foot of it! There 's not a Swisscottage in these woods won't pay cent per cent!"Mr. Galbraith--such was his name--was of that pictorially giftedorder of which the celebrated George Robins was once chief. He knew howto dress his descriptions with the double attraction of the picturesqueand the profitable, so that trees seemed to bend under golden fruit, andthe sea-washed rocks looked like "nuggets."If there be something very seductive in the prospect of growingimmensely rich all at once, there is a terrible compensation in theutter indifference inflicted on us as to all our accustomed pleasures inlife. The fate of Midas seems at once our own; there is nothing left tous but that one heavy and shining metal of all created blessedness! LordGlengariff was wont to enjoy the lonely spot he lived in with an intenseappreciation of its beauty. He never wearied of watching the changingeffects of season on a scene so full of charm; but now he surveyed itwith a sense of fidgety impatience, eager for the time when the soundsof bustle and business should replace the stillness that now reignedaround him."This is from Dunn," said he, breaking open a large, heavy-sealed letterwhich had just arrived. His eyes ran hastily along it, and he exclaimedpeevishly, "No prospectus yet; no plan issued; nothing whateverannounced. 'I have seen Galbraith, and had some conversation with himabout your harbor.' My harbor!""Go on," said Lady Augusta, mildly."Why, the insolent upstart has not even listened to what was said tohim. My harbor! He takes it for granted that we were wanting to makethis a packet station for America, and he goes on to say that the placehas none of the requisite qualifications,--no depth of water! I wish thefellow were at the bottom of it! Really, this is intolerable. Here isa long lecture to me not to be misled by those 'speculation-mongers whoare amongst the rife products of our age.' I ask you, if you ever heardof impertinence like that? This fellow--the arch-charlatan of his day,the quack par excellence of his nation--dares to warn me against theperils of his class and kindred! Only listen to this, Gusty," cried he,bursting into a fit of half-angry laughter: "'I am disposed to thinkthat, by drawing closer to the present party in power, you could serveyour interests much more effectively than by embarking in any schemesof mere material benefit. Allington'--he actually calls himAllington!--'dropped hints to this effect in a confidential conversationwe held last evening together, and I am in hopes that, when we meet, youwill enter into our views.' Are the coronets of the nobility to be putup to sale like the acres of the squirearchy? or what is it this fellowis driving at?" cried he, flinging down the letter in a rage, andwalking up and down the room. "The rule of O'Connell and his followerswas mild and gentle and forbearing, compared with the sway of thesefellows. In the one case we had a fair stand-up fight,--opinion metopinion, and the struggle was an open one; but here we have an organizedassociation to investigate the state of our resources, to pry into ourprivate affairs, learning what pressure bears upon us here, what weakspot gives way there. They hold our creditors in leash, to slip them onus at any moment; and the threat of a confiscation--for it is just that,and nothing less--is unceasingly hanging over us!"He stopped short in his torrent of passion, for the white sail of asmall fishing-craft that just showed in the offing suddenly diverted histhoughts to that vision of prosperity he so lately revelled in,--thatpleasant dream of a thriving watering-place, bright, sunny, andprosperous, the shore dotted with gayly caparisoned donkeys, and the seaspeckled with pleasure-boats. All the elements of that gay Elysium cameup before him,--the full tide of fortune setting strongly in, andcoming to his feet. Galbraith, who revelled in millions, whose rapidcalculations rarely descended to ignoble thousands, had constantlyimpressed upon him that if Dunn only took it up, the project was alreadyaccomplished. "He'll start you a company, my Lord, in a week; a splendidprospectus and an admirable set of names on the direction, with apaid-up capital, to begin with, of--say 30,000. He knows to a nicetyhow many Stock Exchange fellows, how many M.P.'s, how many countygentlemen to have. He 'll stick all the plums in the right place too;and he'll have the shares quoted at a premium before the scrip is wellout in the market. Clever fellow, my Lord,--vastly clever fellow, Dunn!"And so the Earl thought, too, till the letter now before him dashed thatimpression with disappointment."I 'll tell you what it is, Gusty," said he, after a pause,--"we mustask him down here. It is only by an actual inspection of the bay that hecan form any just conception of the place. You must write to him for me.This gouty knuckle of mine makes penwork impossible. You can say--Justfind a sheet of paper, and I 'll tell you what to say." Now, the nobleEarl was not as ready at dictation as he had fancied; for when LadyAugusta had opened her writing-desk, arranged her writing-materials, andsat, pen in hand, awaiting his suggestions, he was still pacing up anddown the room, muttering to himself in broken and unconnected phrases,quite unsuited to the easy flow of composition. "I suppose, Gusty,--Itake it for granted,--you must begin, 'My dear sir,'--eh?--or, perhaps,better still, 'Dear Mr. Dunn.'""'Dear Mr. Dunn,'" said she, not looking up from the paper, but quietlyretouching the last letters with her pen."But I don't see why, after all, we should follow this foolish lead,"said he, proudly. "The acceptance he meets from others need not dictateto us, Gusty. I 'd say, 'The Earl of Glengariff'--or, 'I am requested byLord Glen-gariff--'""'My father, Lord Glengariff,'" interposed she, quietly."It sounds more civilly, perhaps. Be it so;" and again he walked upand down, in the same hard conflict of composition. At length he burstforth: "There 's nothing on earth more difficult than addressing a manof this sort. You want his intimacy without familiarity. You wish tobe able to obtain the benefit of his advice, and yet not incur theinfliction of his dictation. In fact, you are perfectly prepared totreat him as a valued guest, provided he never lapses into the delusionthat he is your friend. Now, it would take old Metternich to write thesort of note I mean.""If I apprehend you, your wish is to ask him down here on a visit ofa few days, with the intimation that you have a matter of business tocommunicate--""Yes, yes," said he, impatiently, "that's very true. The business partof the matter should come in incidentally, and yet the tone of theinvitation be such as to let him distinctly understand that he does notcome without an express object Now you have my meaning, Gusty," said he,with the triumphant air of one who had just surmounted a difficulty."If I have, then, I am as far as ever from knowing how to convey it,"said she, half peevishly. "I'd simply say, 'Dear Sir,' or, 'Dear Mr.Dunn,--There is a question of great moment to myself, on which youradvice and counsel would be most valuable to me. If you could spareme the few days a visit would cost you, and while giving us the greatpleasure of your society--'""Too flattering, by half. No, no," broke he in again. "I 'll tell youwhat would be the effect of all that, Gusty,"--and his voice swelled outfull and forcibly,--"the fellow would come here, and, before a week wasover, he 'd call me Glengariff!"She grew crimson over face and forehead and neck, and then almost asquickly pale again; and, rising hastily from the table, said, "Really,you expect too much from my subtlety as a note-writer. I think I'd better request Mr. Dunn to look out for one of those invaluablecreatures they call companions, who pay your bills, correct your Frenchnotes, comb the lapdog, and scold your maid for you. She might be,perhaps, equal to all this nice diplomacy.""Not a bad notion, by any means, Gusty," said he, quickly. "A cleverwoman would be inestimable for all the correspondence we are like tohave soon; far better than a man,--less obtrusive, more confidential,not so open to jobbery; a great point,--a very great point. Dunn's thevery man, too, to find out the sort of person we want.""Something more than governess, and less than lady," said she, halfsuperciliously."The very thing, Gusty,--the very thing. Why, there are women withbreeding enough to be maids of honor, and learning sufficient for aprofessor, whose expectations never rise beyond a paltry hundred ayear--what am I saying?--sixty or seventy are nearer the mark. Now forit, Gusty. Make this object the substance of your letter. You canhave no difficulty in describing what will suit us. We live intimes, unfortunately, when people of birth and station are reducedto straitened circumstances on every hand. It reminds me of what poorHammersley used to say,--'Do you observe,' said he, 'that wheneverthere's a great smash on the turf, you 'll always see the coaches horsedwith thoroughbreds for the next year or two!'""A very unfeeling remark, if it mean anything at all." "Never mind.Write this letter, and say at the foot of it, 'We should be much pleasedif, in your journeys 's out'--he's always coming down to Cork and theneighborhood--you could give us a few days at Glengariff Hermitage. Myfather has certain communications to make to you, which he is confidentwould exempt your visit from the reproach of mere idleness.' He'll takethat; the fellow is always flattered when you seem impressed by theimmensity of his avocations!" And with a hearty chuckle at the weaknesshe was triumphing over, the old Lord left the room, while his daughterproceeded to compose her letter.CHAPTER XXIX. A MORNING AT OSTEND.It would never have occurred to the mind of any one who saw AnnesleyBeecher and Davis, as they sat at breakfast together in Ostend, thatsuch a scene as we have described could have occurred between them. Notonly was their tone frank and friendly with each other, but a gayand lively spirit pervaded the conversation, and two seemingly morelight-hearted fellows it were hard to find.As the chemist is able by the minutest drop, an almost imperceptibleatom of some subtle ingredient, to change the properties of some vastmass, altering color and odor and taste at once, so did the great artistGrog Davis know how to deal with the complicated nature of Beecher,that he could at any moment hurl him down into the blackest depths ofdespair, or elevate him to the highest pinnacle of hope and enjoyment.The glorious picture of a race-course, with all its attendant rogueries,betting-stands crammed with "fats," a ring crowded with "green-horns,"was a tableau of which he never wearied. Now, this was a sort oflandscape Grog touched off neatly. All the figures he introduced werelife-studies, every tint and shade and effect taken carefully fromnature. With a masterly hand he sketched out a sort of future campaign,artfully throwing Beecher himself into the foreground, and making himfancy that he was in some sort necessary to the great events beforethem."Mumps did not touch his hock, I hope, when he kicked there?" askedBeecher."Call him Klepper,--never forget that," remonstrated Grog; "he'sremarkably like Mumps, that's all; but Mumps is in Staffordshire,--oneof the Pottery fellows has him.""So he is," laughed Beecher, pleasantly. "I know the man that owns him.""No, you don't," broke in Davis; "you've only heard his name,--itis Coulson or Cotton, or something like that. One thing, however, iscertain: he values him at twelve hundred pounds, and we 'd sell ourhorse for eight.""So we would, Grog, and be on the right side of the hedge too.""He'd be dog cheap for it," said Davis; "he's one of those lazy beggarsthat never wear out. I 'd lay an even thousand on it that he runs thisday two years as he does to-day, and even when he has n't speed for aflat race he 'll be a rare steeple-chase horse."Beecher's eyes glistened, and he rubbed his hands with delight as heheard him."I do like an ugly horse," resumed Davis; "a heavy-shouldered beast,with lob-ears, lazy eyes, and capped hocks, and if they know how to comeout a stable with a 'knuckle over' of the pastern, or a little bit lame,they 're worth their weight in gold."What a merry laugh was Beecher's as he listened!"Blow me!" cried Grog, in a sort of enthusiasm, "if some horses don'tseem born cheats,--regular legs! They drag their feet along, all wearyand tired; if you push them a bit, they shut up, or they answer the whipwith a kind of shrug, as if to say, 'It ain't any use punishing me atall,' the while they go plodding in, at the tail of the others, tillwithin five, or maybe four lengths of the winning-post, and then you seethem stretching--it ain't a stride, it's a stretch--you can't say howit's done, but they draw on--on--on, till you see half a head in front,and there they stay--just doing it--no more.""Mumps is exactly--""Klepper,--remember, he's Klepper," said Grog, mildly."Klepper, to be sure,--how can I forget it?""I hope that fellow Conway is off," said Grog."Yes, he started by the train for Liege,--third class too,--must bepretty hard up, I take it, to travel that way.""Good enough for a fellow that has been roughing it in the ranks thesetwo years.""He's a gentleman, though, for all that," broke in Beecher."And Strawberry ran at Doncaster, and I saw him t' other day in a 'bus.Now, I 'd like to know how much better he is for having once been aracer?""Blood always tells--""In a horse, Beecher, in a horse, not in a man. Have n't I got a deal ofnoble blood in my veins?--ain't I able to show a thoroughbred pedigree?"said he, mockingly. "Well, let me see the fellow will stand at eightpaces from the muzzle of a rifle-pistol more cool, or who'll sight hisman more calm than I will." There was a tinge of defiance in the waythese words were said that by no means contributed to the ease of himwho heard them."When do we go for Brussels, Grog?" asked he, anxious to change thesubject."Here's the map of the country," said Davis, producing a card scrawledover with lines and figures. "Brussels, the 12th and 14th; Spa, the20th; Aix, the 25th. Then you might take a shy at Dusseldorf, Ican't; I winged a Prussian major there five years ago, and they won'tlet me in. I 'll meet you at Wiesbaden, and we 'll have a week at thetables. You 'll have to remember that I 'm Captain Christopher so longas we're on the Rhine; once at Baden, 'Richard's himself again!'""Is this for either of you, gentlemen?" said the waiter, presenting anenvelope from the telegraph-office."Yes; I'm Captain Davis," said Grog, as he broke the seal."'Is the Dean able to preach?--may we have a collection?--Telegraphback.--Tom,'" read? Davis, slowly, aloud; and then added, "Ain't he aflat to be always telegraphing these things? As if every fellow in theoffice couldn't see his game!""Spicer, is it?" asked Beecher."Yes; he wants to hear how the horse is,--if there's good running inhim, and what he's to lay on; but that's no way to ask it. I mind theday, at Wolverton, when Lord Berrydale got one of these: 'Your mother isbetter,--they are giving her tonics.' And I whispered to George Rigby,'It 's about Butterfly his mare, that's in for the York, and that's tosay, "She's all safe, lay heavy on it." And so I hedged round, andbacked her up to eight thousand,--ay, and I won my money; and whenBerrydale said to me after the race was over, 'Grog,' says he, 'you seemto have had a glimpse of the line of country this time,' says I to him;'Yes, my Lord,' says I; 'and I 'm glad to find the tonics agree withyour Lordship's mother.' Did n't he redden up to the roots of his hair!and when he turned away he said, 'There's no coming up to that fellowDavis!'""But I wonder you let him see that you were in his secret," saidBeecher."That was the way to treat him. If it was Baynton or Berries, I'd nothave said a word; but I knew Berrydale was sure to let me have a sharein the first good thing going just out of fear of me, and so he did;that was the way I came to back Old Bailey."It was now Beecher's turn to gaze with admiring wonder at this greatintelligence, and certainly his look was veneration itself."Here's another despatch," cried Davis, as the waiter presented anotherpacket like the former one. "We 're like Secretaries of State to-day,"added he, laughing, as he tore open the envelope. This time, however, hedid not read the contents aloud, but sat slowly pondering over the linesto himself."It's not Spicer again?" asked Beecher."No," was the brief reply."Nor that other fellow,--that German with the odd name?""No.""Nothing about Mumps,--Klepper, I mean,--nothing about him?""Nothing; it don't concern him at all. It's not about anything you everheard of before," said Davis, as he threw a log of wood on the fire, andkicked it with his foot. "I 'll have to go to Brussels to-night. I 'llhave to leave this by the four o'clock train," said he, looking at hiswatch. "The horse is n't fit to move for twenty-four hours, so you 'llremain here; he must n't be left without one of us, you know.""Of course not. But is there anything so very urgent--""I suppose a man is best judge of his own affairs," said Davis, rudely.Beecher made no reply, and a long and awkward silence ensued."Let him have one of the powders in a linseed mash," said Davis, atlast, "and see that the bandages are left on--only a little loose--atnight. Tom must remain with him in the box on the train, and I 'll lookout for you at the station. If we shouldn't meet, come straight to theHtel Tirlemont, where all will be ready for you.""Remember, Grog, I've got no money; you haven't trusted me with a singlenapoleon.""I know that; here's a hundred francs. Look out sharp, for you 'll haveto account for every centime of it when we meet. Dine upstairs here, forif you go down to the ordinary you 'll be talking to every man Jack youmeet,--ay, you know you will.""Egad! it's rather late in the day to school me on the score ofmanners.""I 'm not a-talking of manners, I 'm speaking of discretion,--of commonprudence,--things you 're not much troubled with; you 're just as fit togo alone in life as I am to play the organ at an oratorio.""Many thanks for the flattery," said Beecher, laughing."What would be the good of flattering you?" broke out Grog. "You ain'trich, that one could borrow from you; you haven't a great house, whereone could get dinners out of you; you 're not even the head of yourfamily, that one might draw something out of your rank,--you ain'tanything.""Except your friend, Grog Davis; pray don't rob me of thatdistinction," said Beecher, with a polished courtesy the other felt morecutting than any common sarcasm."It's the best leaf in your book, whatever you may think of it," saidDavis, sternly; "and it will be a gloomy morning for you whenever youcease to be it.""I don't intend it, old fellow; I 'll never tear up the deed ofpartnership, you may rely upon that. The old-established firm of Beecherand Davis, or Davis and Beecher--for I don't care which--shall last mytime, at least;" and he held out his hand with a cordiality that evenGrog felt irresistible, for he grasped and shook it heartily."If I could only get you to run straight, I 'd make a man of you," saidGrog, eying him fixedly. "There's not a fellow in England could do asmuch for you as I could. There's nobody knows what's in you as I do, andthere's nobody knows where you break down like me.""True, O Grog, every word of it.""I 'd put you in the first place in the sporting world,--I 'd haveyour name at the top of the list at 'the turf.' In six months fromthis day--this very day--I 'd bind myself to make Annesley Beecher theforemost man at Newmarket. But just on one condition.""And that?""You should take a solemn oath--I 'd make it a solemn one, I promiseyou--never to question anything I decided in your behalf, but obey meto the letter in whatever I ordered. Three months of that servitude, andyou 'd come out what I 've promised you.""I 'll swear it this moment," cried Beecher."Will you?" asked Davis, eagerly."In the most solemn and formal manner you can dictate on oath to me. I'll take it now, only premising you 'll not ask me anything against thelaws.""Nothing like hanging, nor even transportation," said Grog, laughing,while Beecher's face grew crimson, and then pale. "No,--no; all I 'llask is easily done, and not within a thousand miles of a misdemeanor.But you shall Just think it over quietly. I don't want a 'catch match.'You shall have time to reconsider what I have said, and when we meet atBrussels you can tell me your mind.""Agreed; only I hold you to your bargain, remember, if I don'tchange.""I'll stand to what I've said," said Davis. "Now, remember, the HotelTirlemont; and so, good-bye, for I must pack up."When the door closed after him, Annesley Beecher walked the room,discussing with himself the meaning of Davis's late words. Well didhe know that to restore himself to rank and credit and fair fame wasa labor of no common difficulty. How was he ever to get back to thatstation, forfeited by so many derelictions! Davis might, it is true,get his bills discounted,--might hit upon fifty clever expedients forraising the wind,--might satisfy this one, compromise with that; hemight even manage so cleverly that racecourses and betting-rooms wouldbe once more open to him. But what did--what could Grog know of thathigher world where once he had moved, and to which, by his misdeeds,he had forfeited all claim to return? Why, Davis did n't even know thenames of those men whose slightest words are verdicts upon character.All England was not Ascot, and Grog only recognized a world peopled withgentlemen riders and jocks, and a landscape dotted with flagstaffs, andclosed in with a stand-house."No, no," said he to himself; "that's a flight above you, Master Davis.It 's not to be thought of."CHAPTER XXX. THE OPERA.A dingy old den enough is the Htel Tirlemont, with its low-archedporte-cochere, and its narrow windows, small-paned and iron-barred.It rather resembles one of those antiquated hostels you see in thebackground of an Ostade or a Teniers than the smart edifice whichwe nowadays look for in an hotel. Such was certainly the opinion ofAnnesley Beecher as he arrived there on the evening after that partingwith Davis we have just spoken of. Twice did he ask the guide whoaccompanied him if this was really the Tirlemont, and if there were notsome other hotel of the same name; and while he half hesitated whetherhe should enter, a waiter respectfully stepped forward to ask if hewere the gentleman whose apartment had been ordered by Captain Davis,--ademand to which, with a sullen assent, he yielded, and slowly mountedthe stairs."Is the Captain at home?" asked he."No, sir; he went off to the railway station to meet you. Mademoiselle,however, is upstairs.""Mademoiselle!" cried Beecher, stopping, and opening wide his eyes inastonishment. "This is something new," muttered he. "When did shecome?""Last night, sir, after dinner.""Where from?""From a Pensionnat outside the Porte de Scharbeck, I think, sir; atleast, her maid described it as in that direction.""And what is she called,--Mademoiselle Violette, or Virginie, or Ida, orwhat is it, eh?" asked he, jocularly."Mademoiselle, sir,--only Mademoiselle,--the Captain's daughter!""His daughter!" repeated he, in increased wonderment, to himself. "Canthis be possible?""There is no doubt of it, sir. The lady of the Pensionnat brought herhere last night in her own carriage, and I heard her, as she entered thesalon, say, 'Now, Mademoiselle, that I have placed you in the hands ofyour father--' and then the door closed.""I never knew he had a daughter," muttered Beecher to himself. "Which ismy room?""We have prepared this one for you, but to-morrow you shall have a morecomfortable one, with a look-out over the lower town.""Put me somewhere where I sha'n't hear that confounded piano, I beg ofyou. Who is it rattles away that fashion?""Mademoiselle, sir.""To be sure,--I ought to have guessed it; and sings too, I'll be bound?""Like Grisi, sir," responded the waiter, enthusiastically; for theTirlemont, being frequented by the artistic class, had given him greatopportunity for forming his taste.Just at this moment a rich, full voice swelled forth in one of thepopular airs of Verdi, but with a degree of ease and freedom thatshowed the singer soared very far indeed above the pretensions of mereamateurship."Wasn't I right, sir?" asked the waiter, triumphantly. "You'll not hearanything better at the Grand Opera.""Send me up some hot water, and open that portmanteau," said Beecher,while he walked on towards the door of the salon. He hesitated for asecond or two about then presenting himself; but as he thought of GrogDavis, and what Grog Davis's daughter must be like, he turned the handleand entered.A lady rose from the piano as the door opened, and even in thehalf-darkened room Beecher could perceive that she was graceful, andwith an elegance in her gesture for which he was in no wise prepared."Have I the honor to address Miss Davis?""You are Mr. Annesley Beecher, the gentleman my papa has beenexpecting," said she, with an easy smile. "He has just gone off to meetyou."Nothing could be more commonplace than these words, but they wereuttered in a way that at once declared the breeding of the speaker. Shespoke to a friend of her father, and there was a tone of one who feltthat even in a first meeting a certain amount of intimacy might subsistbetween them."It's very strange," said Beecher, "but your father and I have beenfriends this many a year--close friends too--and I never as much assuspected he had a daughter. What a shame of him not to have given methe pleasure of knowing you before!""It was a pleasure he was chary enough of to himself," said she,laughing. "I have been at school nearly four years, and have only seenhim once, and then for a few hours.""Yes--but really," stammered out Beecher, "fascinations--charms suchas--""Pray, sir, don't distress yourself about turning a compliment. I'mquite sure I'm very attractive, but I don't in the least want to be toldso. You see," she added, after a pause, "I 'm presuming upon what papahas told me of your old friendship to be very frank with you.""I am enchanted at it," cried Beecher. "Egad! if you. 'cut out all thework,' though, I 'll scarcely be able to follow you.""Ah! so here you are before me," cried Davis, entering and shaking hishand cordially. "You had just driven off when I reached the station. Allright, I hope?""All right, thank you.""You 've made Lizzy's acquaintance, I see, so I need n't introduce you.She knows you this many a day.""But why have I not had the happiness of knowing her?" asked Beecher."How 's Klepper?" asked Grog, abruptly. "The swelling gone out of thehocks yet?""Yes; he's clean as a whistle.""The wind-gall, too,--has that gone?""Going rapidly; a few days' walking exercise will make him perfect.""No news of Spicer and his German friend,--though I expected to havehad a telegraph all day yesterday. But come, these are not interestingmatters for Lizzy,--we 'll have up dinner, and see about a box for theopera.""A very gallant thought, papa, which I accept with pleasure.""I must dress, I suppose," said Beecher, half asking; for even yet hecould not satisfy his mind what amount of observance was due to thedaughter of Grog Davis."I conclude you must," said she, smiling; "and I too must make asuitable toilette;" and, with a slight bow and a little smile, she sweptpast them out of the room."How close you have been, old fellow,--close as wax,--about this," saidBeecher; "and hang me, if she mightn't be daughter to the proudest Dukein England!""So she might," said Grog; "and it was to make her so, I have consentedto this life of separation. What respect and deference would the fellowsshow my daughter when I wasn't by? How much delicacy would she meetwith when the fear of an ounce ball wasn't over them? And was I going tobring her up in such a set as you and I live with? Was a young creaturelike that to begin the world without seeing one man that wasn't aleg, or one woman that wasn't worse? Was it by lessons of robbery andcheating her mind was to be stored? And was she to start in life bythinking that a hell was high society? Look at her now," said he,sternly, "and say if I was in Norfolk Island to-morrow, where 's thefellow that would have the pluck to insult her? It is true she doesn'tknow me as you and the others know me; but the man that would let herinto that secret would never tell her another." There was a terriblefierceness in his eye as he spoke, and the words came from him with ahissing sound like the venomous threatenings of a serpent. "She knowsnothing of my life nor my ways. Except your own name, she neverheard me mention one of the fellows we live with. She knows you to bethe brother of Lord Viscount Lack-ington, and that you are the HonorableAnnesley Beecher, that's all she knows of you; ain't that littleenough?"Beecher tried to laugh easily at this speech; but it was only a verypoor and faint attempt, after all."She thinks me a man of fortune, and you an unblemished gentleman;and if that be not innocence, I 'd like to know what is! Of where, how,and with whom we pick up our living, she knows as much as we do aboutthe Bench of Bishops.""I must confess I don't think the knowledge would improve her!" saidBeecher, with a laugh.A fierce and savage glance from Davis, however, very quickly arrestedhis jocularity; and Beecher, in a graver tone, resumed: "It was a deucedfine thing of you, Grog, to do this. There 's not another fellow livingwould have bad the head to think of it But now that she has come hometo you, how do you mean to carry on the campaign? A girl like that can'tlive secluded from the world,--she must go out into society? Have youthought of that?""I have thought of it," rejoined Davis, bluntly, but in a tone that byno means invited further inquiry."Her style and her manner fit her for the best set anywhere--""That's where I intend her to be," broke in Davis."I need scarcely tell as clever a fellow as you," said Beecher, mildly,"that there's nothing so difficult as to find footing among thesepeople. Great wealth may obtain it, or great patronage. There are womenin London who can do that sort of thing; there are just two or threesuch, and you may imagine how difficult it is to secure their favor.""They 're all cracked teacups, those women you speak of; one has only toknow where the flaw is, and see how easily managed they are!"Beecher smiled at this remark; he chuckled to himself, too, to see thatfor once the wily Grog Davis had gone out of his depth, and adventuredto discuss people and habits of which he knew nothing; but, unwilling toprolong a controversy so delicate, he hurried away to his room to dress.Davis, too, retired on a similar errand, and a student of life mighthave been amused to have taken a peep into the two dressing-rooms. Asfor Beecher, it was but the work of a few minutes to array himselfin dinner costume. It was a routine task that he performed withouta thought on its details. All was ready at his hand; and even tothe immaculate tie, which seemed the work of patience and skill, hedespatched the whole performance in less than a quarter of an hour. Notso Davis: he ransacked drawers and portmanteaus; covered the bed,the chairs, and the table with garments; tried on and took off again;endeavored to make colors harmonize, or hit upon happy contrasts. Hewas bent on appearing a "swell;" and, unquestionably, when he did issueforth, with a canary-colored vest, and a green coat with gilt buttons,his breast a galaxy of studs and festooned chains, it would have beenunfair to say he had not succeeded.Beecher had but time to compliment him on his "get up," when MissDavis entered. Though her dress was simply the quiet costume of a youngunmarried girl, there was in her carriage and bearing, as she came in,all the graceful ease of the best society; and lighted up by the lampsof the apartment, Beecher saw, to his astonishment, the most beautifulgirl he had ever beheld. It was not alone the faultless delicacy ofher face, but there was that mingled gentleness and pride, thatstrange blending of softness and seriousness, which sit so well on thehigh-born, giving a significance to every gesture or word of those whoseevery movement is so measured, and every syllable so carefully uttered."Why was n't she a countess in her own right?" thought he; "that girlmight have all London at her feet."The dinner went on very pleasantly. Davis, too much occupied inlistening to his daughter or watching the astonishment of Beecher,scarcely ever spoke; but the others chatted away about whatever' cameuppermost in a light and careless tone that delighted him.Beecher was not sorry at the opportunity of a little dis-play. He wasglad to show Davis that in the great world of society he could playno insignificant part; and so he put forth all his little talents asa talker, with choice anecdotes of "smart people," and the sayings anddoings of a set which, to Grog, were as much myths as the inscriptionson an Assyrian monument. Lizzy Davis evidently took interest in hisaccount of London and its life. She liked, too, to hear about thefamilies of her schoolfellows, some of whom bore "cognate" names, andshe listened with actual eagerness to descriptions of the gorgeoussplendor and display of a town "season.""And I am to see all these fine things, and know all these fine people,papa?" asked she."Yes, I suppose so,--one of these days, at least," muttered Grog, notcaring to meet Beecher's eye."I don't think you care for this kind of life so much as Mr. Beecher,pa. Is their frivolity too great for your philosophy?""It ain't that!" muttered Grog, growing confused."Then do tell me, now, something of the sort of people you are fond of;the chances are that I shall like them just as well as the others."Beecher and Davis exchanged glances of most intense significance; andwere it not from downright fear, Beecher would have burst out laughing."Then I will ask Mr. Beecher," said she, gayly. "You 'll not be sochurlish as papa, I 'm certain. You 'll tell me what his world islike?""Well, it's a very smart world too," said Beecher, slyly enjoying themalicious moment of worrying Grog with impunity. "Not so many prettywomen in it, perhaps, but plenty of movement, plenty of fun,--eh, Davis?Are you fond of horses, Miss Davis?""Passionately; and I flatter myself I can ride too. By the way, is ittrue, papa, you have brought a horse from England for me?""Who could have told you that?" said Davis, almost sternly."My maid heard it from a groom that has just arrived, but with suchsecrecy that I suppose I have destroyed all the pleasure of the surpriseyou intended me; never mind, dearest pa, I am just as grateful--""Grateful for nothing," broke in Davis. "The groom is a prating rascal,and your maid ought to mind her own affairs." Then reddening to histemples with shame at his ill-temper, he added, "There is a horse, to besure, but he ain't much of a lady's palfrey.""What would you say to her riding Klepper in the Alle Verte,--it mightbe a rare stroke?" asked Beecher, in a whisper to Davis."Do you think that she is to be brought into our knaveries? Isthat all you have learned from what I 've been saying to you?"whispered Davis, with a look of such savage ferocity that Beecher grewsick at heart with terror."I 'm sorry to break in upon such confidential converse," said she,laughingly, "but pray remember we are losing the first scene of theopera.""I 'm at your orders," said Beecher, as, with his accustomed easygallantry, he stepped forward to offer her his arm.The opera was a favorite one, and the house was crowded in every part.As in all cities of a certain rank, the occupants of the boxes, with afew rare exceptions, were the same well-known people who, night afternight, follow along the worn track of pleasure. To them the stage is buta secondary object, to which attention only wanders at intervals. Thehouse itself, the brilliant blaze of beauty, the splendor of diamonds,the display of dress, and, more than all these, the subtle by-play ofintrigue, detectable only by eyes deep-skilled and trained,--these formthe main attractions of a scene wherein our modern civilization is morestrikingly exhibited than in any other situation.Scarcely had Lizzy Davis taken her seat than a low murmur of wonderingadmiration ran through the whole house, and, in the freedom which ourpresent-day habits license, every opera-glass was turned towards her.Totally unconscious of the admiration she was exciting, her glancesranged freely over the theatre in every part, and her eyes were directedfrom object to object in amazement at the gorgeousness of the scenearound her. Seated far back in the box, entirely screened from view, herfather, too, perceived nothing of that strange manifestation wherein asort of homage is blended with a degree of impertinence, but watched thestage with intense eagerness. Very different from the feelings of eitherfather or daughter were the feelings of Annesley Beecher. He knew wellthe opera and its habits, and as thoroughly saw that it is to the worldof fashion what Tattersall's or the turf is to the world of sport,--thegreat ring where every match is booked, every engagement registered, andevery new aspirant for success canvassed and discussed. There was not aglance turned towards the unconscious girl at his side but he could readits secret import. How often had it been his own lot to stare upfrom his stall at some fair face, unknown to that little world whicharrogates to itself all knowledge, and mingle his criticism with all theimpertinences fashion loves to indulge in! The steady stare of some, theunwilling admiration of others, the ironical gaze of more, were all easyof interpretation by him, and for the very first time in his life hebecame aware of the fact that it was possible to be unjust with regardto the unknown.As the piece proceeded, and her interest in the play increased, aslightly heightened color and an expression of half eagerness gave herbeauty all that it had wanted before of animation, and there was now anexpression of such captivation on her face that, carried away by thatmysterious sentiment which sways masses, sending its secret spell fromheart to heart, the whole audience turned from the scene to watchits varying effects upon that beautiful countenance. The opera was"Rigoletto," and she continued to translate to her father the touchingstory of that sad old man, who, lost to every sentiment of honor, stillcherished in his heart of hearts his daughter's love. The terriblecontrast between his mockery of the world and his affection for hishome, the bitter consciousness of how he treated others, conjuring upthe terrors of what yet might be his own fate, came to him in her words,as the stage revealed their action, and gradually he leaned over in hiseagerness till his head projected outside the box."There--was n't I right about her?" said a voice from one of the stallsbeneath. "That's Grog Davis. I know the fellow well.""I 've won my wager," said another. "There 's old Grog leaning over hershoulder, and there can't be much doubt about her now.""Annesley Beecher at one side, and Grog Davis at the other," saida third, make the case very easy reading. "I 'll go round and getpresented to her.""Let us leave this, Davis," whispered Beecher, while he trembled fromhead to foot,--"let us leave this at once. Come down to the crush-room,and I 'll find a carriage."[Illustration: 342]"Why so--what do you mean?" said Davis; and as suddenly he followedBeecher's glance towards the pit, whence every eye was turned towardsthem.That glance was not to be mistaken. It was the steady and insolent starethe world bestows upon those who have neither champions nor defenders;and Davis returned the gaze with a defiance as insulting."For any sake, Davis, let us get away," whispered Beecher again. "Onlythink of her, if there should be any exposure!""Exposure!--how should there? Who 'd dare--"Before he could finish, the curtain at the back of the box was rudelydrawn aside, and a tall, handsome man, with a certain swaggering ease ofmanner that seemed to assert his right to be there if he pleased, cameforward, saying,--"How goes it, Davis? I just caught a glimpse of that charming--""A word with you, Captain Hamilton," said Davis, between his teeth, ashe pushed the other towards the door."As many as you like, old fellow, by and by. For the present, I mean toestablish myself here.""That you sha'n't, by Heaven!" cried Davis, as he placed himself infront of him. "Leave this, sir, at once.""Why, the fellow is deranged," said Hamilton, laughing; "or is itjealousy, old boy?"With a violent push Davis drove him backwards, and ere he could recover,following up the impulse, he thrust him outside the box, hurriedlypassing outside, and shutting the door after him.So rapidly and so secretly had all this occurred, that Lizzy saw nothingof it, all her attention being eagerly fixed on the stage. Not soBeecher. He had marked it all, and now sat listening in terror to thewords of high altercation in the lobby. From sounds that boded likeinsult and outrage, the noise gradually decreased to more measuredtones; then came a few words in whisper, and Davis, softly drawing thecurtain, stepped gently to his chair at his daughter's back. A hastysign to Beecher gave him to understand that all was settled quietly, andthe incident was over."You 'll not think me very churlish if I rob you of one act of theopera, Lizzy?" said Davis, as the curtain fell; "but I have a rackingheadache, which all this light and heat are only increasing.""Let us go at once, dearest papa," said she, rising. "You should havetold me of this before. There, Mr. Beecher, you needn't leave this--""She's quite right," said Davis; "you must remain."And the words were uttered with a certain significance that Beecher wellunderstood as a command.It was past midnight when Annesley Beecher returned to the hotel, andboth Davis and his daughter had already gone to their rooms."Did your master leave any message for me?" said he to the groom, whoacted as Davis's valet."No, sir, not a word.""Do you know, would he see me? Could you ask him?" said he.The man disappeared for a few minutes, and then coming back, said, "Mr.Davis is fast asleep, sir, and I dare not disturb him.""Of course not," said Beecher, and turned away."How that fellow can go to bed and sleep, after such a business asthat!" muttered Beecher, as he drew his chair towards the fire, andsat ruminating over the late incident. It was in a spirit of triumphantsatisfaction that he called to mind the one solitary point in which hewas the superior of Davis,--class and condition,--and he revelled in thethought that men like Grog make nothing but blunders when they attemptthe habits of those above them. "With all his shrewdness," said he tohimself, half aloud, "he could not perceive that he has been tryingan impossibility. She is beyond them all in beauty, her manners areperfect, her breeding unexceptionable; and yet, there she is, GrogDavis's daughter! Ay, Grog, my boy, you 'll see it one of these days. It's all to no use. Enter her for what stakes you like, she 'll bealways disqualified. There 's only one thing carries these attemptsthrough,--if you could give her a pot of money. Yes, Master Davis, thereare fellows--and with good blood in their veins--that, for fifty orsixty thousand pounds, would marry even your daughter." With this lastremark he finished all his reflections, and proceeded to prepare forbed.Sleep, however, would not come; he was restless and uneasy; the incidentin the theatre might get abroad, and his own name be mentioned; or itmight be that Hamilton, knowing well who and what Davis was, wouldlook to him, Beecher, for satisfaction. There was another pleasanteventuality,--to be drawn into a quarrel and shot for Grog Davis'sdaughter! To be the travelling-companion of such a man was bad enough;to risk being seen with him on railroads and steamboats was surelysufficient; but to be paraded in places of public amusement, to bedragged before the well-dressed world, not as his chance associate,but as a member of his domestic circle, chaperoning his daughter to theopera, was downright intolerable! And thus was it that this man, whohad been dunned and insulted by creditors, hunted from place to place bysheriff's officers, browbeaten by bankruptcy practitioners, stigmatizedby the press, haunted all the while by a conscience that whispered therewas even worse hanging over him, yet did he feel more real terror fromthe thought of how he would be regarded by his own "order" forthis unseemly intimacy, than shame for all his deeper and gravertransgressions."No," said he, at last, springing from his bed, and lighting his candle,"I 'll be off. I 'll cut my lucky, Master Grog; and here goes to writeyou half a dozen lines to break the fact to you. I 'll call it a suddenthought--a notion--that I ought to see Lackington at once. I 'll saythat I could n't think of subjecting Miss Davis to the inconvenience ofthat rapid mode of travelling I feel to be so imminently necessary. I'll tell him that as I left the theatre, I saw one of Fordyce's clerks,that the fellow knew me and grinned, and that I know I shall be arrestedif I stay here. I 'll hint that Hamilton, who is highly connected, willhave the English Legation at us all. Confound it, he 'll believe none ofthese. I 'll just say"--Here he took his pen and wrote,--"Dear D.,--After we parted last night, a sudden capriceseized me that I 'd start off at once for Italy. Had youbeen alone, old fellow, I should never have thought of it;but seeing that I left you in such charming company, withone whose--['No, that won't do--I must strike out that;and so he murmured over the lines ending in 'company.' andthen went on.]--I have no misgivings about being eithermissed or wanted.--['Better, perhaps, missed orregretted.'] We have been too long friends to--['No, weare too old pals, that's better--he does n't care much forfriendship']--too old pals to make me suspect you will bedispleased with this--this unforeseen--['That's acapital word!--unforeseen what? It's always calamitycomes after  unforeseen; but I can't call it calamity']--unforeseen 'bolt over the ropes,' and believe me as ever, orbelieve me 'close as wax,'"Yours,  A. B.""A regular diplomatic touch, I call that note," said he, as he reread itto himself with much complacency. "Lack-ington thinks me a 'flat;' thenlet any one read that, and say if the fellow that wrote it is a fool."And now he sealed and directed his epistle, having very nearly addressedit to Grog, instead of to Captain Davis. "His temper won't be angelicwhen he gets it," muttered he, "but I'll be close to Liege by thattime." And with this very reassuring reflection he jumped into bedagain, determining to remain awake till daybreak.Wearied out at last with watching, Annesley Beecher fell off asleep, andso soundly, too, that it was not till twice spoken to he could arouseand awaken."Eh, what is it, Rivers?" cried he, as he saw the trim training-groom athis side. "Anything wrong with the horse?""No, sir, nothing; he's all right, anyhow.""What is it, then; any one from town looking for us?""No, sir, nobody whatever. It's the Captain himself--""What of him? Is he ill?""Sound as a roach, sir; he's many a mile off by this. Says he to me,'Rivers,' says he, 'when you gets back to the Tirlemont, give this noteto Mr. Beecher; he 'll tell you afterwards what's to be done. Only,'says he, 'don't forget to rub a little of the white oils on that nearhock; very weak,' says he; 'be sure it's very weak, so as not to blisterhim.' Ain't he a wonderful man, sir, to be thinking o' that at such amoment?""Draw the curtain, there,--let me have more light," cried Beecher,eagerly, as he opened the small and crumpled piece of paper. Thecontents were in pencil, and very brief,--"I 'm off through the Ardennes towards Treves; come up toAix with my daughter, and wait there till you hear from me.There 's a vacant 'troop' in the Horse Guards Blue thismorning. Rivers can tell you all.--Yours, C. D.""What has happened, Rivers?" cried he, in intense anxiety. "Tell me atonce.""Sir, it don't take long to tell. It did n't take very long to do. Itwas three, or maybe half-past, this morning, the Captain comes to myroom, and says, 'Rivers, get up; be lively,' says he, 'dress yourself,and go over to Jonesse, that fellow as has the shooting-gallery, givehim this note; he 'll just read it, and answer it at once; then runover to Burton's and order a coup, with two smart horses, to be here atfive; after that come back quickly, for I want a few things packed up.'He made a sign to me that all was to be 'dark,' and so away I went, andbefore three quarters of an hour was back here again. At five to theminute the carriage came to the corner of the park, and we stepped outquietly; and when we reached it, there was Jonesse inside, with a tidylittle box on his knee. 'Oh, is that it?' said I, for I knowed what thatbox meant,--'is that it?'"'Yes,' says the Captain, 'that's it; get up and make him drive brisklyto Boitsfort.' We were a bit late, I think, for the others was therewhen we got up, and I heard them grumbling something about being behindtime. 'Egad,' says the Captain, 'you 'll find we 've come early enoughbefore we've done with you.' They were cruel words, sir, now that Ithink how he tumbled him over stone dead in a moment.""Who dead?""That fine, handsome young man, with the light-brown beard,--Hamilton,they said his name was,--and a nicer fellow you could n't wish to see.I 'll never forget him as he lay there stretched on the grass, and thesmall blue hole in his forehead,--you 'd not believe it was ever halfthe size of a bullet,--and his glove in his left hand, all so natural asif he was alive. I believe I 'd have been standing there yet, looking athim, when the Captain called me, and said, 'Rivers, take these stirrupsup a hole,'--for he had a saddle-horse all ready for him,--'and givethis note to Mr. Beecher; he 'll give you his orders about Klepper,'says he, 'but mind you look to that hock.'""And Captain Hamilton was killed?" muttered Beecher, while he trembledfrom head to foot at the terrible tidings."Killed--dead--he never moved a finger after he fell!""What did his friend do? Did he say anything?--did he speak?""He dropped down on his knees beside him, and caught him by the hand,and cried out, 'George, my own dear fellow,--George, speak to me;' butGeorge never spoke another word.""And Davis,--Captain Davis,--what did he do?""He shook hands with Jones, and said something in French that made himlaugh; and then going over to where the body lay, he said, 'ColonelHumphrey,' says he, 'you 're a witness that all was fair and honorable,and that if this unhappy affair ever comes to be--' and then the Colonelmoved his hand for him to be off, and not speak to him. And so theCaptain took his advice, and got into the saddle; but I heard him muttersomething about 'teaching the Colonel better manners next time theymet."[Illustration: 350]"And then he rode away?""Yes; he turned into the wood, at a walking pace, for he was lightinghis cigar. I saw no more of him, after that, for they called me to helpthem with the body, and it was all we could do, four of us, to carry himto the road where the carriage was standing.""Did you ever hear them mention my name amongst them?" asked Beecher,tremblingly."No, sir; nobody spoke of you but my master, when he handed me thenote.""What a sad business it has all been!" exclaimed Beecher, half aloud."I suppose it would go hard with the Captain, sir, if he was caught?"said Rivers, inquiringly.Again Beecher read over the note, pondering every word as he went "Whata sad business!" murmured he, "and all for nothing, or next to nothing!"Then, as if suddenly rousing himself to action, he said, "Rivers, wemust get away at once. Take this passport to the police, and then lookafter a horse-box for the next train to Liege. We shall start at twoo'clock.""That's just what the Captain said, sir. 'Don't delay in Brussels,' sayshe; 'and don't you go a-talking about this morning's work. If they haveyou up for examination, mind that you saw nothing, you heard nothing,you know nothing.'""Send Miss Davis's maid here," said Beecher; "and then see about thosethings I 've mentioned to you."Mademoiselle Annette was a French Swiss, who very soon apprehended thata "difficulty" had occurred somewhere, which was to be kept secret fromher young mistress; and though she smiled with a peculiar significanceat the notion of Miss Davis travelling under Beecher's protection, shedid so with all the decorum of her gifted class."You 'll explain everything, Annette," said Beecher, who in hisconfusion was eager to throw any amount of burden or responsibility uponanother; "you'll tell her whatever you like as to the cause of his goingaway, and I 'll swear to it.""Monsieur need not give himself any trouble," was the ready answer; "allshall be cared for."CHAPTER XXXI. EXPLANATIONS.What a sad pity it is that the great faculty of "making thingscomfortable," that gifted power which blends the announcement with theexplanation of misfortune, should be almost limited to that narrowguild in life to which Mademoiselle Annette belonged! The happy knackof half-informing and all-mystifying would be invaluable on the Treasurybenches; and great proficients as some of our public men are in thiswalk, how immeasurably do they fall short of the dexterity of the"soubrette"!So neatly and so cleverly had Annette performed her task, that when MissDavis met Beecher at breakfast, she felt that a species of reserve wasnecessary as to the reasons of her father's flight; that, as he had notdirectly communicated with herself, her duty was simply to accept of theguidance he had dictated to her. Besides this, let it be owned, she hadnot yet rallied from the overwhelming astonishment of her first meetingwith her father, so utterly was he unlike all that her imagination hadpictured him! Nothing could be more affectionate, nothing kinder, thanhis reception; a thoughtful anxiety for her comfort pervaded all hesaid. The gloomy old Tirlemont even caught up an air of home as shepassed the threshold; but still he was neither in look, manner, norappearance what she fancied. All his self-restraint could not gloss overhis vulgarity, nor all his reserve conceal his defects in breeding. Hisshort, dictatorial manner with the servants,--his ever-present readinessto confront nobody saw what peril,--a suspectful insistence upon thisor that mark of deference as a right of which he might possibly bedefrauded,--all gave to his bearing a tone of insolent defiance that atonce terrified and repelled her.To all her eager questionings as to their future life, where and how itwas to be passed, he would only answer vaguely or evasively. He met herinquiries about the families and friends of her schoolfellows in thesame way. Of her pleasures and pursuits, her love of music, and herskill in drawing, he could not even speak with those conventionalitiesthat disguise ignorance or indifference. Of the great world--the"swells" he would have called them--he only knew such as were on theturf. Of the opera, he might possibly tell the price of a stall, but notthe name of a singer; and as to his own future, what or where it shouldbe, Grog no more knew than who would be first favorite for the Lger acentury hence. To "fence off" any attempt "to pump him" in the ring, tododge a clever cross-examiner in a court of justice, Davis would haveproved himself second to none,--these were games of skill, which hecould play with the best,--but it was a very different task to threadhis way through the geography of a land he had not so much as heard of,and be asked to act as guide through regions whose very names were newto him.The utmost that Lizzy could glean from that long first evening's talkwas, that her father had few or no political ambitions, rather shunnedthe great world, cared little for dukes or duchesses, nor set any greatstore on mere intellectual successes. "Perhaps," thought she, "he hastried and found the hollowness of them all; perhaps he is weary ofpublic life; perhaps he 'd like the quiet pleasures of a country house,and that calm existence described as the chateau life of England.Would that he were only more frank with me, and let us know each otherbetter!"We entreat our readers to forgive us this digression, necessary as it isto show that Lizzy, whatever her real doubts and anxieties, felt boundnot to display them, but accept Beecher's counsel as her father's will."And so we start for Aix-la-Chapelle by two?" said she, calmly."Yes; and I represent papa," said Beecher. "I hope you feel impressedwith a due reverence for my authority.""Much will depend upon the way you exercise it," said she; "I could veryeasily be a rebel if I suspected the justice of the Crown.""Come, come," said he, laughing, "don't threaten me! my viceroyship willbe very short-lived,--he 'll perhaps be at Aix before us.""And I suppose all my dreams of extravagance here are defeated," saidshe. "Annette and I have been plotting and planning such rare devicesin 'toilette,' not exactly aware where or upon whom the captivationswere to be exercised. I actually revelled in the thought of all thesmart fineries my Pensionnat life has denied me hitherto."There was that blending of levity with seriousness in her tone thattotally puzzled Beecher; and so was it through all she said,--there ranthe same half-mocking vein that left him quite unable even to fathomher meaning. He muttered out something about "dress" and "smart things"being to be found everywhere, and that most probably they should visiteven more pretentious cities than Brussels erelong."Which means that you know perfectly well where we are going, butwon't tell it. Well, I resign myself to my interesting part of 'CaptivePrincess' all the more submissively, since every place is new to me,every town an object of interest, every village a surprise.""You 'd like to see the world,--the real, the great world, I mean?"asked Beecher."Oh, how much!" cried she, clasping her hands in eagerness, as shearose.Beecher watched her as she walked up and down the room, every movementof her graceful figure displaying dignity and pride, her small andbeautifully shaped head slightly thrown back, while, as her hand heldthe folds of her dress, her march had something almost stage-like in itssweeping haughtiness. "And how she would become it!" muttered he, belowhis breath, but yet leaving the murmured sounds half audible."What are you saying, sir? Any disparaging sentiment on school-girlconceit or curiosity?""Something very like the opposite," said Beecher. "I was whispering tomyself that Grantley House and Rocksley Castle were the proper spherefor you.""Are these very splendid?" asked she, calmly."The best houses in England. Of their owners, one is a Duke with twohundred thousand a year, the other an Earl with nearly as much.""And what do they do with it?""Everything; all that money can have--and what is there it cannot?--isthere. Gorgeous houses, horses, dress, dinners, pictures, plate, thebest people to visit them, the best cook, the best deer-park, thefastest yacht at Cowes, the best hunting-stable at Melton.""I should like that; it sounds very fascinating, all of it. Howit submerges at once, too, all the petty cares and contrivances,perpetually asking, 'Can we do this?' 'Dare we do that?' It makesexistence the grand, bold, free thing one dreams it ought to be.""You 're right there; it does make life very jolly.""Are you very rich?" asked she, abruptly."No, by Jove! poor as a church mouse," said he, laughing at thestrangeness of the question, whose sincere simplicity excluded allnotion of impertinence. "I'm what they call a younger son, which meansone who arrives in the world when the feast is over. I have a brotherwith a very tidy fortune, if that were of any use to me.""And is it not the same? You share your goods together, I suppose?""I should be charmed to share mine with him, on terms of reciprocity,"said Beecher; "but I 'm afraid he 'd not like it.""So that he is rich, and you poor?""Exactly so.""And this is called brotherhood? I own I don't understand it.""Well, it has often puzzled me too," said Beecher, laughingly; "but Ibelieve, if I had been born first, I should have had no difficulty in itwhatever.""And papa?" asked she, suddenly,--"what was he,--an elder or a youngerson?"It was all that Beecher could do to maintain a decent gravity at thisquestion. To be asked about Grog Davis's parentage seemed about thedrollest of all possible subjects of inquiry; but, with an immenseeffort of self-restraint, he said,--"I never exactly knew; I rather suspect, however, he was an only child.""Then there is no title in our family?" said she, inquiringly."I believe not; but you are aware that this is very largely the case inEngland. We are not all 'marquises' and 'counts' and 'chevaliers,' likeforeigners.""I like a title; I like its distinctiveness: the sense of carrying outa destiny, transmitting certain traits of race and kindred, seems a fineand ennobling thing; and this one has not, one cannot have, who has nopast. So that," said she, after a pause, "papa is only what you wouldcall a 'gentleman.'""'Gentleman' is a very proud designation, believe me," said he, evadingan answer."And how would they address me in England,--am I 'my Lady'?""No, you are Miss Davis.""How meanly it sounds,--it might be a governess, a maid.""When you are married, you take the rank and title of your husband,--aduchess, if he be a duke.""A duchess be it, then," said she, in that light, volatile tone she wasever best pleased to employ, while, with a rattling gayety, she went on:"How I should love to be one of those great people you have described tome,--soaring away in all that ideal splendor which would come of a lifeof boundless cost, the actual and the present being only suggestive of athousand fancied enjoyments! What glorious visions might one conjureup out of the sportiveness of an untrammelled will! Yes, Mr. Beecher, Ihave made up my mind,--I 'll be a duchess!""But you might have all these as a marchioness, a countess--""No, I 'll be a duchess; you sha'n't cheat me out of my just claims.""Will your Grace please to give orders about packing up, for we must beaway soon after one o'clock," said he, laughing."If I were not humility itself, I'd say the train should await myconvenience," said she, as she left the room with a proud and gracefuldignity that would have become a queen.For a few moments Beecher sat silent and thoughtful in his chair, andthen burst out into a fit of immoderate laughing,--he laughed till hiseyes ran over and his sides ached. "If this ain't going the pace, I 'dlike to know what speed is!" cried he, aloud. "I wonder what old Grogwould say if he heard her; and the best of the joke is, she is seriousall the while. She is in the most perfect good faith about it all. Andthis comes of the absurdity of educating her out of her class. What astrange blunder for so clever a head to make! You might have guessed,Master Grog, that she never could be a 'plater.' Let her only enter fora grand match, and she 'll be 'scratched' from one end of England to theother. Ay, Davis, my boy, you fancy pedigrees are only cared for on theturf; but there is a Racing Calendar, edited by a certain Debrett,that you never heard of."Again, he thought of Davis as a peer,--"Viscount Davis!" Baron Grog,as he muttered it, came across him, and he burst out once more intolaughter; then suddenly checking himself, he said, "I must take rightgood care, though, that he never hears of this same conversation; he'sjust the fellow to say I led her on to laugh at and ridicule him;he 'd suspect in a moment that I took her that pleasant gallop,--and ifhe did--" A long, wailing whistle finished the sentence for him.Other and not very agreeable reflections succeeded these. It was thisvery morning that he himself had determined on "levanting," and therehe was, more securely moored than ever. He looked at his watch, andmuttered, "Eleven o'clock; by this time I should have been at Verviers,and on the Rhine before midnight. In four days more, I 'd have had theAlps between us, and now here I am without the chance of escape; for ifI bolted and left his daughter here, he'd follow me through the world toshoot me!"He sat silent for some minutes, and then, suddenly springing up from hischair, he cried out,--"Precious hard luck it is! but I can neither get on with this fellownor without him;" and with this "summing up" he went off to his roomto finish his preparations for the road.CHAPTER XXXII. THE COUP ON THE RAIL.Annesley Beecher felt it "deuced odd" to be the travelling companionand protector of a very beautiful girl of nineteen, to whose fresh youthevery common object of the road was a thing of wonderment and curiosity;the country, the people, the scores of passengers arriving or departing,the chance incidents of the way all amused her. She possessed thatpower of deriving intense enjoyment from the mere aspect of lifethat characterizes certain minds, and while thus each little incidentinterested her, her gay and lively sallies animated one who withouther companionship had smoked his cigar in half-sulky isolation, votingjourney and fellow-travellers "most monstrous bores." As they traversedthat picturesque tract between Chaude Fontaine and Verviers, her delightand enjoyment increased. Those wonderful little landscapes which openat the exit from each tunnel, and where to the darkness and thegloom succeed, as if by magic, those rapid glances at swelling lawns,deep-bosomed woods, and winding rivers, with peaceful homesteads dottingthe banks, were so many surprises full of marvellous beauty."Ah! Mr. Beecher," said she, as they emerged upon one of these charmingspots, "I'm half relenting about my decision in regard to greatness. Ithink that in those lovely valleys yonder, where the tall willows arehanging over the river, there might possibly be an existence I shouldlike better than the life of even a duchess.""It's a much easier ambition to gratify," said he, smiling."It was not of that I was thinking," said she, haughtily, "nor am I socertain you are right there. I take it people can generally be that theyhave set their heart on being.""I should like to be convinced of your theory," cried he, "for I havebeen I can't say how many years wishing for fifty things I have neversucceeded in attaining.""What else have you done besides wishing?" asked she, abruptly."Well, that is a hard question," said he, in some confusion; "and afterall, I don't see what remained to me to do but wish.""If that were all, it is pretty clear you had no right to succeed. WhenI said that people can have what they set their heart on, I meant whatthey so longed for that no toil was too great, no sacrifice too painfulto deter them; that with eyes upturned to the summit they could breastthe mountain, not minding weariness, and even when, footsore andexhausted, they sank down, they arose to the same enterprise, unshakenin courage, unbroken in faith. Have you known this?""I can scarcely say I have; but as to the longing and pining after agood turn of fortune, I'll back myself against any one going.""That's the old story of the child crying for the moon," said she,laughing. "Now, what was it you longed for so ardently?""Can't you guess?""You wanted to marry some one who would not have you, or who was beneathyou, or too poor, or too some-thing-or-other for your grand relations?""No, not that.""You aspired to some great distinction as a politician, or a soldier, orperhaps a sailor?""No, by Jove! never dreamed of it," burst he in, laughing at the veryidea."You sighed for some advancement in rank, or perhaps it was greatwealth?""There you have it! Plenty of money--lots of ready--with that all therest comes easy.""It must be very delightful, no doubt, to indulge every passing caprice,without ever counting the cost; but, after a while, what a spoilt-childweariness would come over one from all this cloying enjoyment,--howtiresome would it be to shorten the journey between will andaccomplishment, and make of life a mere succession of 'tableaux'! I 'drather strive and struggle and win.""Ay, but one does n't always win," broke he in."I believe one does--if one deserves it; and even when one does not, thebattle is a fine thing. How much sympathy, I ask you, have we for thoseclassic heroes who are always helped out of their difficulties by somefriendly deity? What do we feel for him who, in the thick of the fight,is sure to be rescued by a goddess in a cloud?""I confess I do like a good 'book,' 'hedged' well all round, andstanding to win somewhere. I mean," added he, in an explanatory tone, "Ilike to be safe in this world.""Stand on the bank of the stream, then, and let bolder hearts pushacross the river!""Well, but I 'm rather out of patience," said he, in a tone of halfirritation. "I 've had many a venture in life, and too many of themunfortunate ones.""How I do wonder," said she, after a pause, "that you and papa aresuch great friends; for I have rarely heard of two people who takesuch widely different notions of life. You seem to me all caution andreserve; he, all daring and energy.""That's the reason, perhaps, we suit each other so well," said Beecher,laughing."It may be so," said she, thoughtfully; and now there was silencebetween them."Have you got sisters, Mr. Beecher?" said she, at length."No; except I may call my brother's wife one.""Tell me of her. Is she young?--is she handsome?""She is not young, but she is still a very handsome woman.""Dark or fair?""Very dark, almost Spanish in complexion; a great deal of haughtiness inher look, but great courtesy when she pleases.""Would she like me?""Of course she would," said he, with a smile and a bow; but a flushcovered his face at the bare thought of their meeting."I 'm not so certain you are telling the truth there," said she,laughing; "and yet you know there can be no offence in telling me Ishould not suit some one I have never seen; do, then, be frank with me,and say what would she think of me.""To begin," said he, laughing, "she 'd say you were very beautiful--""'Exquisitely beautiful,' was the phrase of that old gentleman that gotinto the next carriage; and I like it better.""Well, exquisitely beautiful,--the perfection of gracefulness,--andhighly accomplished.""She'd not say any such thing; she'd not describe me like a governess;she 'd probably say I was too demonstrative,--that's a phrase in voguejust now,--and hint that I was a little vulgar. But I assure you," addedshe, seriously, "I'm not so when I speak French. It is a stupid attempton my part to catch up what I imagine must be English frankness whenI talk the language that betrays me into all these outspokenextravagances. Let us talk French now.""You 'll have the conversation very nearly to yourself then," saidBeecher, "for I'm a most indifferent linguist.""Well, then, I must ask you to take my word for it, and believe that I'm well bred when I can afford it. But your sister,--do tell me of her.""She is 'trs grande dame,' as you would call it," said Beecher; "veryquiet, very cold, extremely simple in language, dresses splendidly, andnever knows wrong people.""Who are wrong people?""I don't exactly know how to define them; but they are such as are tobe met with in society, not by claim of birth and standing, but becausethey are very rich, or very clever, in some way or other,--people, infact, that one has to ask who they are.""I understand. But that must apply to a pretty wide circle of thisworld's habitants.""So it does. A great part of Europe, and all America," said Beecher,laughing."And papa and myself, how should we come through this formidableinquiry?""Well," said he, hesitating, "your father has always lived so much outof the world,--this kind of world, I mean,--so studiously retired, thatthe chances are that, in short--""In short, they 'd ask, 'Who are these Davises?'" She threw into herface, as she spoke, such an admirable mimicry of proud pretension thatBeecher laughed immoderately at it "And when they 'd ask it," continuedshe, "I 'd be very grateful to you to tell me what to reply to them,since I own to you it is a most puzzling question to myself.""Well," said Beecher, in some embarrassment, "it is strange enough; butthough your father and I are very old friends,--as intimate as mencan possibly be,--yet he has never spoken to me about his family orconnections,--nay, so far has he carried his reserve, that, untilyesterday, I was not aware he had a daughter.""You don't mean to say he never spoke of me?""Never to me, at least; and, as I have told you, I believe no onepossesses a larger share of his confidence than myself.""That was strange," said she, in deep reflection. Then, after a fewminutes, she resumed: "If I had a story of my life I 'd tell it you; butthere is really none, or next to none. As a child, I was at school inCornwall. Later on, papa came and fetched me away to a small cottagenear Walmer, where I lived with a sort of governess, who treated me withgreat deference,--in short, observed towards me so much respect that Igrew to believe I was something very exalted and distinguished, a sortof 'Man in the Iron Mask,' whose pretensions had only to be known toconvulse half Europe. Thence I passed over to the Pensionnat atthe Three Fountains, where I found, if not the same homage, all theindications of my being regarded as a privileged individual. I had mymaid; I enjoyed innumerable little indulgences none others possessed. I'm not sure whether the pony I rode at the riding-school was my ownor not; I only know that none mounted him but myself. In fact, I wastreated like one apart, and all papa's letters only reiterated the sameorder,--I was to want for nothing. Of course, these teachings couldimpress but one lesson,--that I was a person of high rank and greatfortune; and of this I never entertained a doubt. Now," added she, withmore energy, "so far as I understand its uses, I do like wealth, andso far as I can fancy its privileges, I love rank; but if the tidingscame suddenly upon me that I had neither one nor the other, I feel asort of self-confidence that tells me I should not be dispirited ordiscouraged."Beecher gazed at her with such admiration that a deep blush rose toher face, as she said, "You may put this heroism of mine to the testat once, by telling me frankly what you know about my station. Am I aPrincess in disguise, Mr. Beecher, or am I only an item in the terriblecategory of what you have just called 'wrong people'?"If the dread and terror of Grog Davis had been removed from AnnesleyBeecher's mind, there is no saying to what excess of confidence theimpulse of the moment might have carried him. He was capable of tellingher any and every thing. For a few seconds, indeed, the thought of beingher trusted friend so overcame his prudence that he actually took herhand between his own, as the prelude of the revelations he was about toopen; when, suddenly, a vision of Davis swept before his mind,--Davis,in one of his moods of wrath, paroxysms of passion as they were, whereinhe stopped at nothing. "He 'd send me to the dock as a felon; he 'dshoot me down like a dog," muttered he to himself, as, dropping herhand, he leaned back in the carriage.She bent over and looked calmly into his face. Her own was now perfectlypale and colorless, and then, with a faint, sad smile, she said,--"I see that you 'd like to gratify me. It is through some sense ofdelicacy and reserve that you hesitate. Be it so. Let us be good friendsnow, and perhaps, in time, we may trust each other thoroughly."Beecher took her hand once more, and, bending down, kissed it fervently.What a strange thrill was that that ran through his heart, and what anodd sense of desolation was it as he relinquished that fair, softhand, as though it were that by its grasp he held on to life and hopetogether! "Oh," muttered he to himself, "why was not she--why was not hehimself--twenty things that neither of them were?""I wish I could read your thoughts," said she, smiling gently at him."I wish to heaven you could!" cried he, with an honest energy that hisnature had not known for many a day.For the remainder of the way neither spoke, beyond some chance remarkupon the country or the people. It was as though the bridge between themwas yet too frail to cross, and that they trusted to time to establishthat interchange of thought and confidence which each longed for."Here we are at the end of our journey!" said he, with a sigh, as theyentered Aix."And the beginning of our friendship," said she, with a smile, while sheheld out her hand to pledge the contract.So intently was Beecher gazing at her face that he did not notice theaction."Won't you have it?" asked she, laughing."Which," cried he,--"the hand or the friendship?""I meant the friendship," said she, quietly."Tickets, sir!" said the guard, entering. "We are at the station."Annesley Beecher was soon immersed in all those bustling cares whichattend the close of a journey; and though Lizzy seemed to enjoy theconfusion and turmoil that prevailed, he was far from happy amidst theanxieties about baggage and horse-boxes, the maid and the groom eachtormenting him in the interests of their several departments. All was,however, safe; not a cap-case was missing; Klepper "never lost a hair;"and they drove off to the Hotel of the Four Nations in high spirits all.CHAPTER XXXIII. THE "FOUR NATIONS" AT AIXAll the bustle of "settling down" in the hotel over, AnnesleyBeecher began to reflect a little on the singularity of his situation.The wondering admiration which had followed Lizzy Davis wherever sheappeared on the journey seemed to have reached its climax now, andlittle knots and groups of lounging travellers were to be seen beforethe windows, curious to catch a glance at this surpassing beauty. Now,had she been his bona fide property, he was just the man to derivethe most intense enjoyment from this homage at second hand; he 'd haveexulted and triumphed in it. His position was, however, a very differentone, and, as merely her companion, while it exposed her to verydepreciating judgments, it also necessitated on his part a degree ofhaughty defiance and championship for which he had not the slightestfancy whatever.Annesley Beecher dragged into a row for Grog Davis's daughter, Beecherfighting some confounded Count or other about Lizzy Davis, Annesleyshot by some Zouave Captain who insisted on waltzing with his"friend,"--these were pleasant mind-pictures which he contemplated withthe very reverse of enjoyment; and yet the question of her father'sstation away, he felt it was a cause wherein even one who had no morelove for the "duello" than himself might well have perilled life. Allher loveliness and grace had not been wasted when they could kindle up alittle gleam of chivalry in the embers of that wasted heart!He ran over in his mind all the Lady Julias and Georginasof thefashionable world. He bethought him of each of those who had been thequeens of London seasons, and yet how vastly were they all herinferiors! It was not alone that in beauty she eclipsed them, but shepossessed, besides, the thousand nameless attractions of manner andgesture, a certain blended dignity and youthful gayety that made herseem the very ideal of high-born loveliness. He had seen dukes'daughters who could not vie with her in these gifts; he had knowncountesses immeasurably beneath her. From these thoughts he went on toothers as to her future, and the kind of fellow that might marry her;for, strangely enough, in all his homage there mingled the ever-presentmemory of Grog and his pursuits. Mountjoy Stubbs might marry her; he hasfifty thousand a year, and his father was a pawnbroker. Lockwood Harrismight marry her; he got all his money from the slave trade. There werethree or four more,--all wealthy, and all equivocal in position: men tobe seen in clubs, to be dined with and played with; fellows who hadyachts at Cowes and grouse-lodges in Scotland, and yet in London were"nowhere." These men could within their own sphere do all theypleased,--they could afford any extravagance they fancied; and what adelightful extravagance it would be to marry Lizzy Davis! Often as hehad envied these men, he never did so more than now. They had noresponsibilities of station ever hanging over them; no brothers in thePeerage to bully them about this; no sisters in waiting to worry themabout that. They could always, as he phrased it, "paint their coachtheir own color," without any fear of the Herald's Office; and whatbetter existence could a man wish for than a prolific fancy andunlimited funds to indulge it. "If I were Stubbs, I 'd marry her." Thishe said fully a dozen times over, and even confirmed it with an oath.And what an amiable race of people are the Stubbses of this habitableglobe! how loosely do responsibilities sit upon them! how generously arethey permitted every measure of extravagance and every violation of goodtaste! What a painful contrast did his mind draw between Stubbs'condition and his own! There was a time, too, when the State repaired insome sort the injustice that younger sons groaned under,--the publicservice was full of the Lord Charleses and the Honorables, who looked upto a paternal Government for their support; but now there was actually arun against them. Beecher argued himself so warmly into this belief,that he said aloud, "If I asked for something to-morrow, they 'd refuseme, just because I 've a brother a Peer!"The reader is already aware what a compensation he found for all hisdefeats and shortcomings in life by arraigning the injustice of theworld. Downing Street, the turf, Lackington, Tattersall's, the HorseGuards, and "the little hell in St. James's Street" were all in a leagueto crush him; but he'd show them "a turn round the corner yet," he said;and with a saucy laugh of derision at all the malevolence of fortune, heset about dressing for dinner. Beecher was not only a very good-lookingfellow, but he had that stamp of man of fashion on him which all thecontamination of low habits and low associates had not effaced. Hisaddress was easy and unaffected, his voice pleasantly toned, his smilesufficiently ready; and his whole manner was an agreeable blending ofdeference with a sort of not ungraceful self-esteem. Negatives bestdescribe the class of men he belonged to, and any real excellencehe possessed was in not being a great number of things which form,unhappily, the social defects of a large section of humanity. He wasnever loud, never witty, never oracular, never anecdotic; and althoughthe slang of the turf and its followers clung to him, he threw out its"dialectics" so laughingly that he even seemed to be himself ridiculingthe quaint phraseology he employed.We cannot venture to affirm that our readers might have liked hiscompany, but we are safe in asserting that Lizzy Davis did so. Hepossessed that very experience of life--London life--that amused hergreatly. She caught up with an instinctive quickness the meaning ofthose secret springs which move society, and where, though genius andwealth are suffered to exercise their influence, the real power is alonecentred in those who are great by station and hereditary claims. She sawthat the great Brahmins of fashion maintained a certain exclusivenesswhich no pretensions ever breached, and that to this consciousness ofan unassailable position was greatly owing all the dignified reposeand serenity of their manner. She made him recount to her the style ofliving in the country houses of England,--the crowds of visitors thatcame and went, the field-sports, the home resources that filled up theday, while intrigues of politics or fashion went silently on beneaththe surface. She recognized that in this apparently easy and indolentexistence a great game was ever being played, and that all the workingsof ambition, all the passions of love and hate and fear and jealousy"were on the board."They had dined sumptuously. The equivocal position in which theyappeared, far from detracting from the deference of the hotel people,served but to increase their homage. Experience had shown that suchpersons as they were supposed to be spent most and paid best, and sothey were served on the most splendid plate; waiters in full dressattended them; even to the bouquet of hothouse flowers left on"Mademoiselle's" napkin, all were little evidences of that considerationof which Annesley Beecher well knew the meaning."Will you please to enlighten my ignorance on one point, Mr. Beecher?"said she, as they sat over their coffee. "Is it customary in this rigidEngland, of which you have told me so many things, for a young unmarriedlady to travel alone with a gentleman who is not even a relative?""When her father so orders it, I don't see that there can be much wrongin it," said he, with some hesitation."That is not exactly an answer to my question; although I may gatherfrom it that the proceeding is, at least, unusual.""I won't say it's quite customary," said Beecher; "but taking intoaccount that I am a very old and intimate friend of your father's--""There must, then, have been some very pressing emergency to make papaadopt such a course," interrupted she."Why so?" asked he. "Is the arrangement so very distasteful to you?""Perhaps not; perhaps I like it very well. Perhaps I find you veryagreeable, very amusing, very--What shall I say?""Respectful.""If you like that epithet, I have no objection to put it in yourcharacter. Yet still do I come back to the thought that papa couldscarcely have struck out this plan without some grave necessity. Now, Ishould like much to know what that is, or was." Beecher made no sign ofreply, and she quickly asked, "Do you know his reasons?""Yes," said he, gravely; "but I prefer that you should not question meabout them.""I can't help that, Mr. Beecher," said she, in that half-carelesstone she sometimes used. "Just listen to me for one moment," said she,earnestly, and fixing her eyes fully on him,--"just hear me attentively.From what I have gathered from your account of England and its habits, Iam certainly now doing that which, to say the least, is most unusual andunwarrantable. Now, either there is a reason so grave for this that itmakes a choice of evils imperative,--and, therefore, I ought to have mychoice,--or there is another even worse interpretation--at least, a morepainful one--to come.""Which is?" cried he."That I am not of that station to which such propriety attaches ofnecessity."She uttered these words with a cold sternness and determination thatactually made Beecher tremble. "It was Davis's daughter spoke there,"thought he. "They are the words of one who declares that, no matter whatbe the odds against her, she is ready to meet the whole world in arms.What a girl it is!" muttered he, with a sense of mingled fear andadmiration."Well, Mr. Beecher," said she, at length, "I do think you owe me alittle frankness; short as our acquaintance has been, I, at least, havetalked in all the freedom of old friendship. Pray show me that I havenot been indiscreet.""Hang me, if I know what to say or do!" cried Beecher, in direperplexity. "If I were to tell you why your father hurried away fromBrussels, he 'd bring me to book very soon, I promise you.""I do not ask that," interrupted she, eagerly. "It is upon the otherpoint my interest is most engaged." He looked blankly at her, for hereally did not catch to what she alluded. "I want you to tell me, inone word, who are the Davises? Who are we? If we are not recognizable bythat high world you have told me of, who, then, are our equals? Rememberthat by an honest answer to my question you give guidance and directionto my future life. Do not shrink from fear of giving me pain,--there isno such pain as uncertainty; so be frank."Beecher covered his face with his hands to think over his reply. Hedid not dare to look at her, so fearful was he of her reading his veryembarrassment."I will spare you, sir," said she, smiling half superciliously; "but ifyou bad known me a little longer or a little better, you had seen howneedless all this excessive caution on your part I have more of what youcall 'pluck' than you give me credit for.""No, by Jove! that you have n't," cried Beecher; "you have more realcourage than all the men I ever knew.""Show me, then, that you are not deficient in the quality, and give me aplain answer to a plain question. Who are we?""I have just told you," said Beecher, whose confusion now made himstammer and stutter at every word,--"I have just told you that yourfather never spoke to me about his relations. I really don't know hiscounty, nor anything about his family.""Then it only remains to ask, What are we? or, in easier words, Has myfather any calling or profession? Come, sir, so much you can certainlytell me.""Your father was a captain in a West India regiment, and, when I met himfirst, he was a man about town,--went to all the races, made his bets,won and lost, like the rest of us; always popular,--knew everybody.""A 'sporting character,' in short,--is n't that the name newspapers giveit?" said she, with a malicious twinkle of the eye."By Jove! how you hit a thing off at once!" exclaimed Beecher, in honestecstasy at her shrewdness."So, then, I am at the end of the riddle at last," said she, musingly,as she arose and walked the room in deep meditation. "Far better to havetold me so many a year ago; far better to have let me conform to thisstation when I might have done so easily and without a pang!" A bittersigh escaped her at the last word, and Beecher arose and joined her."I hope you are not displeased with me, my dear Miss Davis," said he,with a trembling voice; "I don't know what I'd not rather suffer thanoffend you.""You have not offended me," said she, coldly."Well, I mean, than I 'd pain you,--than I 'd say anything that shoulddistress you. You know, after all, it was n't quite fair to push me sohard.""Are you forgetting, sir," broke she in, haughtily, "that you havereally told me next to nothing, and that I am left to gather from mereinsinuations that there is something in our condition your delicacyshrinks from explaining?""Not a bit of it," chimed he in, quickly. "The best men in England areon the turf, and a good book on the Oaks is n't within reach of theincome-tax. Your father's dealings are with all the swells in thePeerage.""So there is a partnership in the business, sir," said she, with a quietirony; "and is the Honorable Mr. Beecher one of the company?""Well--ha--I suppose--I ought to say yes," muttered he, in deepconfusion. "We do a stroke of work together now and then--on the square,of course, I mean.""Pray don't expose the secrets of the firm, sir. I am even moreinterested than yourself that they should be conducted with discretion.There is only one other question I have to ask; and as it purelyconcerns myself, you 'll not refuse me a reply. Knowing our stationin life, as I now see you know it, by what presumption did you dare totrifle with my girlish ignorance, and lead me to fancy that I might yetmove in a sphere which in your heart you knew I was excluded from?"Overwhelmed with shame and confusion, and stunned by the embarrassmentof a dull man in a difficulty, Beecher stood, unable to utter a word."To say the least, sir, there was levity in this," said she, in a toneof sorrowful meaning; "but, perhaps, you never meant it so.""Never, upon my oath, never!" cried he, eagerly. "Whatever I said, Iuttered in all frankness and sincerity. I know London town just as wellas any man living, and I 'll stand five hundred to fifty there's notyour equal in it,--and that's giving the whole field against the odds.All I say is, you shall go to the Queen's Drawing-room--""I am not likely to do so, sir," said she, with a haughty gesture, andleft the room.CHAPTER XXXIV. AIX-LA-CHAPELLEThree days passed over,--three days varied with all the incidents thatgo to make up a longer existence,--and Beecher and his fair charge werestill in Aix. If they forbore to speak to each other of the strangesituation in which they found themselves, they were not the less full ofit. Neither telegraph nor letter came from Davis, and Beecher's anxietygrew hourly greater. There was scarcely an eventuality his mind had notpictured. Davis was arrested and carried off to prison in Brussels,--waswaylaid and murdered in the Ardennes,--was ill, dying in someunheard-of village,--involved in some other row, and obliged to keepsecret,--arrested on some old charge; in fact, every mishap that afertile fancy could devise had befallen him, and now only remained thequestion what was he himself to do with Lizzy Davis.Whether it was that her present life was an agreeable change from thediscipline of the Three Fountains, or that the new objects of interestabout her engaged her to the exclusion of much thought, or that somehigher philosophy of resignation supported her, but certain is itshe neither complained of the delay nor exhibited any considerableimpatience at her father's silence. She went about sightseeing, visitedchurches and galleries, strolled on the Promenade, before dinner, andfinished with the theatre at night, frankly owning that it was a kind ofdo-nothing existence that she enjoyed greatly. Her extraordinary beautywas already a town talk; and the passages of the hotel were crowded asshe went down to her carriage, and to her box at the opera were directedalmost every glass in the house. This, however, is a homage not alwaysrespectful; and in the daring looks of the men, and the less equivocalglances of the women, Beecher read the judgment that had been pronouncedupon her. Her manner, too, in public had a certain fearless gayety aboutit that was sure to be severely commented on, while the splendor of herdress was certain to be not more mercifully interpreted.To have the charge of a casket of jewels through the thieves' quarterof London was the constant similitude that rose to Beecher's mind as hedescended the stairs at her side. To be obliged to display her to thewondering gaze of some hundred idlers, the dissipated and debauchedloungers of a watering-place, men of bad lives and worse tongues; tomark the staring insolence of some, and the quizzical impertinenceof others; to see how narrowly each day they escaped some more overtoutrage from that officious politeness that is tendered to those inequivocal positions, were tortures that half maddened him. Nor could hewarn her of the peril they stood in, or dare to remonstrate about manylittle girlish ways which savored of levity. The scene of the theatrein Brussels was never off his mind, and the same one idea continuallyhaunted him, that poor Hamilton's fate might be his own.The characterless men of the world are always cowards as toresponsibility,--they feel that there is a flaw in their natures thatmust smash them if pressed upon; and so was it here. Beecher's life wasactual misery, and each morning he awoke the day seemed full of menaceand misfortune to him. In his heart, he knew that if an emergency arosehe should be found wanting; he 'd either not think of the right thing,or have pluck for it if he even thought it; and then, whatever troubleor mishap he came through, there still remained worse behind,--thesettlement with Grog himself at the end.Like most persons who seek the small consolation of falling back ontheir own foresight, he called to mind how often he had said to himselfthat nothing but ill could come of journeying with Grog Davis,--he knewit, he was sure of it. A fellow to conspire with about a "plant"--aman to concert with on a race or a "safe thing with the cards"--wasnot exactly a meet travelling-companion, and he fretted over the fatalweakness that had induced his acceptance of him. They had only juststarted, and their troubles had already begun! Even if Davis himselfwere there, matters might not be so bad. Grog was always ready to "turnout" and have a shot with any one. It was a sort of pastime he ratherliked when nothing else was stirring, it seemed like keeping his handin; but, confound the fellow! he had gone off, and left in his place onewho had a horror of hair-triggers, and shuddered at the very thought ofa shot-wound.He was far too conversant with the habits of demi-monde existence notto see that the plot was thickening, and fresh dangers clustering roundhim. The glances in the street were hourly growing more familiar,--thelooks were half recognitions. Half a dozen times in the morning,well-dressed and well-bearded strangers had bolted into theirsitting-room in mistake, and while apologizing for their blunder,delayed unnecessarily long over the explanation.The waiter significantly mentioned that Prince Bottoffsky was thenstopping at the hotel, with seven carriages and eighteen servants. Thesame intelligent domestic wondered they never went to see Count Czaptowitch's camellias,--"he had sent a bouquet of them that very day to herLadyship." And Beecher groaned in his spirit as the fellow produced it."I see how it's all to end," muttered he, as he paced the room, unableany longer to conceal the misery that was consuming him. "One of thoseconfounded foreigners will come swaggering up to talk to her on thePromenade, and then I'm 'in for it.' It's all Davis's fault. It'sall her fault. Why can't she look like other people,--dress likethem,--walk like them? What stuff and nonsense it is for her to begoing about the world like a Princess Royal! It was only last night shewore a Brussels lace shawl at the opera that cost five thousand francs;and when it caught on a nail in the box and was torn, she laughed, andsaid, 'Annette will be charmed with this disaster, for she was alwayscoveting this lace, and wondering when she was to have it.' That's thefine 'bring-ing-up' old Grog is so proud of! If she were a Countess inher own right, with ten thousand a year, she 'd be a bad bargain!"Ah, Beecher! your heart never went with you when you made this cruelspeech; you uttered it in spleen and bitterness, but not in sincerity;for already in that small compartment of your nature where a few honestaffections yet lingered she was treasured, and, had you known how todo it, you would have loved her. Poor devil as he was, Life was a hardbattle to him,--always over head and ears in debt; protested billsmeeting him at every moment; duns rising before him at every turn.Levity was to him, as to many, a mere mask over Fear, and he walked theworld in the hourly terror that any moment might bring him to shame andruin. If he were a few minutes alone, his melancholy was almostdespair; and over and over had he pictured to his mind a scene in thepolice-court, where he was called on to find full and sufficient bailfor his appearance on trial. From such sorrowing thoughts he made hisescape to rush into society--anywhere, anyhow; and, by the revulsion ofhis mind, came that rattling and boisterous gayety that made him seemthe most light-hearted fellow in existence. Such men are always makingbonfires of their household gods, and have nothing to greet them whenthey are at home.What a fascination must Lizzy Davis have exercised over such a mind!Her beauty and her gracefulness would not have been enough without hersplendid dressing, and that indescribable elegance of manner which wasnative to her. Then how she amused him!--what droll caricatures did shesketch of the queer originals of the place,--the bearded old colonels,or the pretentious loungers that frequented the "Cursaal"! How witty thelittle epigrams by which she accompanied them, and how charmingly at amoment would she sit down at the piano and sing for him anything, froma difficult "scena" from Verdi to some floating barcarole of Venice!She could--let us tell it in one breath--make him laugh; and oh, dearlyvalued reader! what would you or I give for the company of any one whocould do as much? The world is full of learned people and clever people.There are Bourse men, and pre-Raphaelite men, and Old-red-sandstone men,and Greek-particle men; but where are the pleasant people one used tochat with long ago, who, though talking of mere commonplaces, threw outlittle sparks of fun,--fireflies in the dark copses,--giving to whatthey said that smack of epigram that spiced talk but never over-seasonedit, whose genial sympathy sent a warm life-blood through every theme,and whose outspoken heartiness refreshed one after a cold bath of politeconventionalities? If they still exist upon this earth, they must behiding themselves, wisely seeing it is not an age to suit them; they liequiet under the ice, patiently hibernating till another summer may callthem forth to vitality.Now Lizzy Davis could make Beecher laugh in his lowest and gravestmoments; droll situations and comical conceits came in showers over hermind, and she gave them forth with all the tact of a consummate actress.Her mimicry, too, was admirable; and thus he who rarely reflected andnever read, found in her ready talents resources against all wearinessand ennui. What a girl she was!--how perfectly she would become any--thevery highest--station! what natural dignity in her manner!--and--Then,after a pause, he murmured, "What a fortune she'd make on the stage!Why, there's nothing to compare with her,--she's as much beyond them allin beauty as in genius!" And so he set about thinking how, by marryingher, a man might make a "deuced good thing of it." There's no sayingwhat Webster wouldn't offer; and then there was America, always a"safe card;" not that it would do for himself to think of such a thing.Lackington would never speak to him again. All his family would cuthim dead; he had n't an acquaintance would recognize him after suchdisgrace."Old Grog is so confoundedly well known," muttered he,--"thescoundrel is so notorious!" Still, there were fellows would n't mindthat,--hard-up men, who had done everything, and found all failure.He knew--"Let us see," said he to himself, beginning to count on hisfingers all the possible candidates for her hand. "There's CranshawCraven at Caen, on two hundred a year; he'd marry her, and neverask to see her if she 'd settle twenty thousand francs a year on him.Brownlow Gore would marry her, and for a mere five hundred too, for hewants to try that new martingale at Ems; he's certain he 'd break thebank with less. Foley would marry her; but, to be sure, he has a wifesomewhere, and she might object to that! I'd lay an even fifty," criedhe, in ecstasy at the bright thought, "Tom Beresford would marry herjust to get out of the Fleet!""What does that wonderful calculation mean?" cried she, suddenly, as shesaw him still reckoning on his fingers. "What deep process of reasoningis my learned guardian engaged in?""I 'd give you a long time to guess," said he, laughing."Am I personally concerned in it?" asked she."Yes, that you are!""Well," said she, after a pause, "you are counting over the days we havepassed, or are still to pass here?""No, not that!""You are computing, perhaps, one by one, all your fashionablefriends who would be shocked by my levity--that 's the phrase, Ibelieve,--meaning those outspoken impertinences you encourage me toutter about everything and everybody!""Far from it. I was--""Oh! of course, you were charmed," broke she in; "and so you ought tobe, when one performs so dangerous a trick to amuse you. The audiencealways applauds the rope-dancer that perils his neck; and you 'd beworse than ungrateful not to screen me when I 'm satirized. But it mayrelieve somewhat the load of obligation when I say that I utter thesethings just to please myself. I bear the world no ill-will, it is true;but I 'm very fond of laughing at it.""In the name and on behalf of that respectable community, let me returnyou my thanks," said he, bowing."Remember," said she, "how little I really know of what I ridicule, andso let my ignorance atone for my ill-nature; and now, to come back, whatwas it that you were counting so patiently on your fingers? Not myfaults, I'm certain, or you'd have had both hands.""I'm afraid I could scarcely tell you," said he, "though somehow Ifeel that if I knew you a very little longer, I could tell you almostanything.""I wish you could tell me that this pleasant time was coming. Whatis this?" asked she, as the waiter entered, and presented her with avisiting-card."Monsieur the Count desires to know if Mademoiselle will receive him,"said the man."What, how? What does this mean?" exclaimed Beecher, in terror andastonishment."Yes," said she, turning to the waiter; "say, 'With pleasure.'""Gracious mercy!" exclaimed Beecher, "you don't know what you 're doing.Have you seen this person before?""Never!""Never heard of him!""Never," said she, with a faint smile, for the sight of his terroramused her."But who is he, then? How has he dared--""Nay," said she, holding behind her back the visiting-card, which heendeavored to snatch from her hand,--"this is my secret!""This is intolerable!" cried Beecher. "What is your father to thinkof your admitting a person to visit you,--an utter stranger,--a fellowHeaven knows--"At this moment, as if to answer in the most palpable form the questionhe was propounding, a somewhat sprucely dressed man, middle-aged andcomely, entered; and, passing Beecher by with the indifference he mighthave bestowed on a piece of furniture, advanced to where Lizzy wasstanding, and, taking her band, pressed it reverently to his lips.So far from resenting the liberty, she smiled most courteously on him,and motioned to him to take a seat on the sofa beside her."I can't stand this, by Jove!" said Beecher, aloud; while, with anassumption of courage his heart little responded to, he walked straightup to the stranger. "You understand English, I hope?" said he, in veryindifferent French."Not a syllable," replied the other, in the same language."I only know 'All right';" and he laughed pleasantly as he uttered thewords in an imitation of English."Come, I 'll not torture you any longer," said Lizzy, laughing; "readthat." And she handed him the card, whereon, in her father's writing,there was, "See the Count; he'll tell you everything.--C. D.""I have heard the name before.--Count Lienstahl," said Beecher tohimself. "Has he seen your father? Where is he?" asked he, eagerly."He'll inform me on all, if you'll just give him time," said she; whilethe Count, with an easy volubility, was pouring out a flow of wordsperfectly unintelligible to poor Beecher.Whether it was the pleasure of the tidings he brought, or the deliciousenjoyment of once more hearing and replying in that charming tongue thatshe loved so dearly, but Lizzy ceased even to look at Beecher, and onlyoccupied herself with her new acquaintance.[Illustration: 384]Now, while we leave her thus pleasantly engaged, let us present thevisitor to our reader.Nothing could be less like the traditional "Continental Count" than theplump, close-shaven, blue-eyed gentlemen who sat beside Lizzy Davis,with an expression of bonhomie in his face that might have graced asquire of Devon. He was neither frogged nor moustached; his countenanceneither boded ill to the Holy Alliance, nor any close intimacy withbilliards or dice-boxes. A pleasant, easy-tempered, soft-natured manhe seemed, with a ready smile and a happy laugh, and an air of yieldinggood-humor about him that appeared to vouch for his being one none needever dispute with. If there were few men less generally known throughoutEurope, there was not one whose origin, family, fortune, and belongingwere wrapped in more complete obscurity. Some said he was a Pomeranian,others called him a Swede; many believed him Russian, and a few,affecting deeper knowledge, declared he was from Dalmatia. He was aCount, however, of somewhere, and as certainly was he one who had theentre to all the best circles of the Continent, member of its mostexclusive clubs, and the intimate of those who prided themselves onbeing careful in their friendships. While his manners were sufficientlygood to pass muster anywhere, there was about him a genial kindliness, asort of perennial pleasantry, that was welcome everywhere; he brought tosociety that inestimable gift of adhesiveness by which cold people andstiff people are ultimately enabled to approximate and understand eachother. No matter how dull and ungenial the salon, he was scarcely acrossthe doorway when you saw that an element of social kindliness had justbeen added, and in his little caressing ways and coaxing inquiries yourecognized one who would not let condescension crush nor coldness chillhim. If young people were delighted to see one so much their seniorindulging in all the gay and light frivolities of life, older folk weregratified to find themselves so favorably represented by one able todance, sing, and play like the youngest in company. So artfully, too,did he contribute his talent to society, that no thought of personaldisplay could ever attach to him. It was all good-nature; he played toamuse you,--he danced to gratify some one else; he was full of littleattentions of a thousand kinds, and you no more thought of repaymentthan you'd have dreamed of thanking the blessed sun for his warmth orhis daylight. Such men are the bonbons of humanity, and even they whodo not care for sweet things are pleased to see them.If his birth and origin were mysterious, far more so were his means oflife. Nobody ever heard of his agent or his banker. He neither owned norearned, and yet there he was, as well dressed, as well cared for, andas pleasant a gentleman as you could see. He played a little, but it wasnotorious that he was ever a loser. He was too constantly a winner inthe great game of life to be fortunate as a gambler, and he could wellafford to laugh at this one little mark of spitefulness in Fortune.Racing and races were a passion with him; but he loved sport for itself,not as a speculation,--so, at least, he said; and when he threw his armover your shoulder, and said anything in that tone of genial simplicitythat was special to him, I 'd like to have seen the man--or, still more,the woman--who would n't have believed him.The turf--like poverty--teaches one to know strange bed-fellows; andthis will explain how the Count and Grog Davis became acquaintances, andsomething more.The grand intelligence who discovered the great financial problem ofFrance--the Crdit Mobilier--has proclaimed to the world that thesecret lay in the simple fact that there were industrial energies whichneeded capital, and capital which needed industry, and that all heavowed to accomplish was to bring these two distant but all necessaryelements into close union and co-operation. Now, something of the samekind moved Grog and the Count to cement their friendship; each saw thatthe other supplied some want of his own nature, and before they hadpassed an hour together they ratified an alliance. An instinctwhispered to each, "We are going the same journey in life, let us traveltogether;" and some very profitable tours did they make in company!His presence now was on a special mission from Davis, whom he just metat Treves, and who despatched him to request his daughter to come on toCarlsruhe, where he would await her. The Count was charged to explain,in some light easy way of his own, why her father had left Brussels soabruptly; and he was also instructed to take Annesley Beecher intohis holy keeping, and not suffer him to fall into indiscretions, oradventure upon speculations of his own devising.Lizzy thought him "charming,"--far more worldly-wise people than Lizzyhad often thought the same. There was a bubbling fountain of good-humorabout him that seemed inexhaustible. He was always ready for any planthat promised pleasure. Unlike Beecher, who knew nobody, the Countwalked the street in a perpetual salutation,--bowing, hand-shaking,and sometimes kissing, as he went; and in that strange polyglot thathe talked he murmured as he went, "Ah, lieber Freund!"--"Comesta?"--"Addio!"--"Mon meilleur ami!" to each that passed; so thatveritably the world did seem only peopled with those who loved him.As for Beecher, notwithstanding a certain distrust at the beginning,he soon fell captive to a manner that few resisted; and though theintercourse was limited to shaking hands and smiling at each other, theCount's pleasant exclamation of "All right!" with a jovial slap on theshoulder, made him feel that he was a "regular trump," and a man "todepend on."One lurking thought alone disturbed this esteem,--he was jealous of hisinfluence over Lizzy; he marked the pleasure with which she listened tohim, the eager delight she showed when he came, her readiness to sing orplay for him. Beecher saw all these in sorrow and bitterness; and thoughtwenty times a day he asked himself, "What the deuce is it to me,--howcan it possibly matter to me whom she cares for?" the haunting dreadnever left his mind, and became his very torturer. But why should heworry himself about it at all? The fellow did what he liked with everyone. Rivers, the sulky training-groom, that would not have let a RoyalHighness see "the horse," actually took Klepper out and galloped him forthe Count. The austere landlady of the inn was smiles and courtesyto him; even to that unpolished class, the hackney coachmen, hisblandishments extended, and they vied with each other who should servehim."We are to start for Wiesbaden to-morrow," said Lizzy to Beecher."Why so,--who says so?""The Count""Si, si, andiamo,--all right!" cried the Count, laughing; and the marchwas ordered.CHAPTER XXXV. A FOREIGN COUNT.The announcement of Count Lienstahl's arrival at Wiesbaden was receivedwith rejoicing. "Now we shall open the season in earnest. We shall haveballs, picnics, races, hurdle-matches, gypsy parties, excursions byland and water. He 'll manage everything and everybody." Such were theexclamations that resounded along the Promenade as the party drove upto the hotel. Within less than an hour the Count had been to Beberichto visit the reigning Duke, he had kissed hands with half-a-dozen serenehighnesses, made his bow to the chief minister and the Governor ofWiesbaden, and come back to dinner all smiles and delight at thecondescension and kindness of the court and the capital.If Lienstahl's popularity was great, he only shared a very humbleportion of public attention when they appeared at the table d'hote.There Lizzy Davis attracted every look, and the fame of her beauty wasalready wide-spread. Such was the eagerness to obtain place at thetable that the most extravagant bribes were offered for a seat, and awell-known elegant of Vienna actually paid a waiter five louis to cedehis napkin to him and let him serve in his stead. Beecher was anythingbut gratified at these demonstrations. If his taste was offended, hisfears were also excited. "Something bad must come of it," was his ownmuttered reflection; and as they retired after dinner to take theircoffee, he showed very palpably his displeasure."Eh, caro mio,--all right?" said the Count, gayly, as he threw an armover his shoulder."No, by Jove!--all wrong. I don't like it. It's not the style of thing Ifancy." And here his confusion overwhelmed him, and he stopped abruptly;for the Count, seating himself at the piano, and rattling off a livelyprelude, began a well-known air from a popular French vaudeville, ofwhich the following is a rude version:--"With a lovely face beside you,You can't walk this world far,But from those who 've closely eyed you,Comes the question, Who are you?And though Dowagers will send youCutting looks and glances keen,The men will comprehend youWhen you say, 'C'est ma cousine.'"He was preparing for the second verse when Lizzy entered the room, and,turning at once to her, he poured forth some sentences with all thatvoluble rapidity he possessed."So," said she, addressing Beecher, "it seems that you are shocked orhorrified, or your good taste is outraged, by certain demonstrationsof admiration for me exhibited by the worthy public of this place;and, shall I own to you, I liked it I thought it very nice, and veryflattering, and all that, until I thought it was a little--a verylittle, perhaps, but still a little--impertinent Was that your opinion?"There was a blunt frankness about this question, uttered in suchpalpable honesty of intention that Beecher felt overwhelmed at once."I don't know the Continent like your friend there. I can't pretend tooffer you advice and counsel like him; but if you really ask me, I 'dsay, 'Don't dine below any more; don't go to the rooms of an evening;don't frequent the Promenade--"'"What would you say to my taking the veil, for I fancy I 've somevocation that way?" And then, turning to the Count, she said somethingin French, at which he laughed immoderately.Whether vexed with himself or with her, or, more probably still, annoyedby not being able to understand what passed in a foreign language,Beecher took his hat and left the room. Without his ever suspecting it,a new pang was just added to his former griefs, and he was jealous! Itis very rare that a man begins by confessing a sense of jealousy to hisown heart; he usually ascribes the dislike he feels to a rival to somedefect or some blemish in his nature. He is a coarse fellow; rude,vulgar, a coxcomb, or, worst of all, a bore. In some such dispositionas this Beecher quitted the town, and strolled away into the country.He felt he hated the Count, and yet he could not perceive why; Lienstahlpossessed a vast number of the qualities he was generally disposed tolike. He was gay, lively, light-hearted, never out of humor, never eventhoughtful; his was that easy temperament that seemed to adapt itselfto every phase of life. What was it, then? What could it be that hedisliked about him? It was somewhat "cool," too, of Grog, to send thisfellow over without even the courtesy of a line to himself. "Servehim right--serve them all right--if I were to cut my lucky;" and heruminated long and anxiously over the thought. His present position wasanything but pleasant or flattering to him. For aught he knew,the Count and Lizzy Davis passed their time laughing at his Englishignorance of all things foreign. By dint of a good deal of suchself-tormenting, he at last reached that point whereat the veryslightest additional impulse would have determined him to decamp fromhis party, and set out all alone for Italy. The terror of a day ofreckoning with Davis was, however, a dread that he could never shakeoff. Grog the unforgiving, the inexorable! Grog, whose greatest boastin his vainglorious moments was that, in the "long run," no man ever gotthe better of him, would assuredly bring him to book one day or other;and he knew the man's nature well enough to be aware that no fear ofpersonal consequences would ever balk him on the road to a vengeance.Sometimes the thought occurred to him that he would make a frank andfull confession to Lackington of all his delinquencies, even to thatterrible "count" by which the fame and fortune of his house might beblasted forever. If he could but string up his courage to this pitch,Lackington might "pull him through," Lackington would see that "therewas nothing else for it," and so on. It is marvellous what an apparentstrength of argument lies in those slang expressions familiar to certainorders of men. These conventionalities seem to settle at once questionswhich, if treated in more befitting phraseology, would present thegravest difficulties.He walked on and on, and at last gained a pine wood which skirted thebase of a mountain, and soon lost himself in its dark recesses. Gloomierthan the place itself was the tone of his reflections. All that he mighthave been, all that lay so easily within his reach, all that lifeonce offered him, contrasted bitterly with what he now saw himself.Conscience, it is true, suggested few of his present pangs; hebelieved--ay, sincerely believed--that he had been more "sinned againstthan sinning." Such a one had "let him in" here; such another "had soldhim" there. In his reminiscences he saw himself trustful, generous, andconfiding, while the world--the great globe that includes Tattersalls,Goodwood, Newmarket, and Ascot--was little better than a nest of knavesand vagabonds.Why could n't Lackington get him something abroad,--in the Brazils orLima, for instance? He was n't quite sure where they were; but they werefar away, he thought,--places too remote for Grog Davis to hunt him out,and whence he could give the great Grog a haughty defiance. They--howit would have puzzled him to say who "they" were--they couldn't refuseLackington if he asked. He was always voting and giving his proxies, anddoing all manner of things for them; he made a speech, too, last yearat Hoxton, and gave a lecture upon something that must have servedthem. Lackington would begin the old story about character; "but who hadcharacter nowadays?" "Take down the Court Guides," cried he, aloud, "andlet me give you the private life and adventures of each as youread out the names. Talk of me! why, what have I done equal to whatLockwood, Hepton, Bulkleigh, Frank Melton, and fifty more have done? No,no; for public life, now, they must do as a sergeant of the Ninety-fifthtold me t' other day, 'We 're obliged to take 'em little, sir, and gladto get 'em too!'"It might be that there was something grateful to his feelings,reassuring to his heart, in this reflection, for he walked along nowmore briskly, and his head higher than before. Without being aware, hehad already gone some miles from the town, and now found himself in oneof those long grassy alleys which traversed the dense wood in variousdirections. As he looked down the narrow road which seemed like thevast aisle of some Gothic cathedral, he felt a sort of tremulous motionbeneath his feet; and then, the moment after, he could detect themeasured tramp of a horse at speed. A slight bend of the alley hadhitherto shut out the view; but, suddenly, a dark object came sweepinground the turn and advancing towards him.[Illustration: 392]Half to secure a position, and half with the thought of watching whatthis might portend, Beecher stepped aside into the dense brushwood atthe side of the alley, and which effectually hid him from view. He hadbarely time to make his retreat when a horse swept past him at fullstride, and with one glance he recognized him as "Klepper." It wasRivers, too, who rode him, sitting high over the saddle and with hishands low, as if racing. Now, it was but that very morning Rivers hadtold him that the horse was not "quite right,"--a bit heavy or so aboutthe eyes,--"out of sorts" he called it; and there he was now, flyingalong at the top of his speed in full health and condition. It neededbut the fortieth part of this to suggest a suspicion to such a mind ashis, and with the speed of lightning there flashed across him the notionof a "cross." He, Annesley Beecher, was to be "put into the hole," tobe "squared," and "nobbled," and all the rest of it! It did not, indeed,occur to him how very unprofitably such an enterprise would reward itsvotaries, that it would be a most gratuitous iniquity to "push him tothe wall," that all the ingenious malevolence in the world could nevermake the venture "pay;" his self-conceit smothered these reasonings, andhe determined to watch and to see how the scheme was to be developed.He had not to wait long in suspense; at the bend of the alley where thehorse had disappeared, two horsemen were now seen slowly approachinghim. As they drew nearer, Beecher could mark that they were in close,and what seemed confidential conversation. One he quickly recognized tobe the Count; the other, to his amazement, was Spicer, of whose arrivalat Aix he had not heard anything. They moved so slowly past the spotwhere he was standing that he could gather some of the words thatescaped them, although being in French. The sound of his own namequickly caught his ear. It was the Count spoke as they came up,--"He is a pauvre sire, this Beecher, and I don't yet see what use hecan be to us.""Davis likes him, or, at least, he wants him," replied Spicer, "andthat's enough for us. Depend upon it, Grog makes no mistakes." The otherlaughed; but what he replied was lost in the distance?It was some time ere Beecher could summon resolution to leave the placeof his concealment and set out towards the town. Of all the sentimentsthat swayed and controlled him, none had such a perfect mastery overhis nature as distrust. It was, in fact, the solitary lesson his life'sexperience had taught him. He fancied that he could trace every mistakehe had ever made, every failure he had ever incurred, to some unluckymovement of credulity on his own part, and that "believing" was the onegreat error of his whole life. He had long been of opinion that highstation and character had no greater privileges than the power theypossessed of imposing a certain trustfulness in their pledges, and thatthe great "pull" a duke had over a "leg" was that his Grace would bebelieved in preference. But it also appeared to him that rogues weregenerally true to each other; now, if this last hope were to be takenaway, what was there left in life to cling to? Spicer had said, "Daviswants him." What did that mean?--what could it mean? Simply that Grogfound him, not an associate or colleague, but a convenient tool. What anintolerable insult, that he, the Honorable Annesley Beecher, whose greatconnections rambled through half Debrett, was to be accounted a mereoutpost sentry in the corps of Grog Davis!His anger increased as he went along. The wound to his self-esteem wasin the very tenderest spot of his nature. Had any man ever sacrificedso much to be a sharp fellow as he had? Who had, like him, given upfriends, station, career, and prospects? Who had voluntarily surrenderedthe society of his equals, and gone down to the very dregs of mankind,just to learn that one great secret? And was it to be all in vain?Was all his training and teaching to go for nothing? Was he, afterdescending to the ranks, to discover that he never could learnthe manual exercise? How often, in the gloomiest hours of hisdisappointment, had he hugged the consolation to his heart, that GrogDavis knew and valued him! "Ask G. D. if I'm a flat," was the proudrejoinder he would hurl at any attempt to depreciate his shrewdness.What was to become of him, then, if the bank that held all his fortunewere to fail? If Beecher deemed a sharp fellow the most enviable of allmortals, so he regarded a dupe as the meanest and most miserable, andthe very thought of such a fate was almost maddening. "No, confound me!they sha'n't have it to say that they 'landed' A. B.; they shall neverboast they nobbled me," cried he, warming with the indignation thatworked within him. "I 'm off, and this time without beat of drum. Davismay do his worst. I'll lie by snug for a year or two. There must be manya safe spot in Germany or Italy, where a man may defy detection." Andthen he ran over in his mind all the successful devices he had seenadopted for disguising a man's appearance. Howard Vane had a wig andwhiskers that left him unrecognized by his own mother; Crofton Campbelltravelled with Inspector Field in search of himself, all by means of anose. It was wonderful what science was accomplishing every day for thehappiness and welfare of mankind!The plan of escape was not without its difficulties, however. First ofall, he had no money. Davis had given him merely enough to pay railroadfares and the charges incidental to the road, and he was living at thehotel on credit. This was a serious obstacle, but it was also one whichhad so often before occurred in Beecher's experience that he was not somuch dismayed by it as many another might have been. "Money was alwaysto be had somehow," was a golden rule of his philosophy, the somehowmeaning that it resolved itself into a simple question of skill andaddress of the individual in want of it Aix was a considerable town,much frequented by strangers, and must, doubtless, possess all thecivilizing attributes of other cities,--namely, Jews, money-lenders, anddiscounters. Then, the landlord of the inn; it was always customary togive him the preference in these cases. He 'd surely not refuse anadvance of a few hundred francs to a man who came accompanied as he was.Klepper alone was good security for ten times more than he needed. Mustit be confessed that he felt elevated in his own esteem when he hadresolved upon this scheme? It savored of shrewdness,--that greattouchstone of capacity which he revered so highly. "They shall see ifI'm a flat, this time," chuckled he to himself as he went along; andhe stepped out briskly in the excitement of self-approval. Then he wentover in his mind all the angry commentaries that would be passed uponhis flight,--the passionate fury of Grog, the amazement of Spicer,the almost incredulous surprise of the Count,--till at last he came toLizzy; and then, for the first time in all his calculations, a senseof shame sent the color to his cheek, and he blushed till his face grewcrimson. "Ay, by Jove! what will she think!" muttered he, in a voiceof honest truthfulness. How he should appear to her--how he should standin her estimation--after such an ignoble desertion, was a thought notto be encountered by self-praises of his cunning. What would her "pluck"say to his "cowardice," was a terrible query.CHAPTER XXXVI. A COUNTRY VISITLet us now return to the Hermitage, and the quiet lives of those whodwelt there. Truly, to the traveller gazing down from some lofty pointof the Glengariff road upon that lowly cottage deep buried in its beechwood, and only showing rare glimpses of its trellised walls, nothingcould better convey the idea of estrangement from the world and itsambitions. From the little bay, where the long low waves swept inmeasured cadence on the sands, to the purple-clad mountains behind, thescene was eminently calm and peaceful. The spot was precisely one tosuggest the wisdom of that choice which prefers tranquil obscurity tothe struggle and conflict of the great world. What a happy existencewould you say was theirs, who could drop down the stream of a lifesurrounded with objects of such beauty, free to indulge each risingfancy, and safe from all the collisions of mankind!--how would one bedisposed to envy the unbroken peacefulness that no ambitions ruffled, norude disappointments disturbed! And yet such speculations as these areever faulty, and wherever the human heart throbs, there will be foundits passions, its hopes and fears. Beneath that quiet roof there dweltall the elements that make the battle of life; and high aspirings andignoble wishes, and love and fear, and jealousy, and wealth-seekinglived there, as though the spot were amidst the thundering crash ofcrowded streets and the din of passing thousands!Sybella Kellett had been domesticated there about two months,and between Lady Augusta and herself there had grown a sort ofintimacy,--short, indeed, of friendship, but in which each recognizedgood qualities in the other.Had Miss Kellett been older, less good-looking, less grace-ful inmanner, or generally less attractive, it is just possible that--we sayit with all doubt and deference--Lady Augusta might have been equallydisposed to feel satisfied. She suspected "Mr. Dunn must have somewhatmistaken the object of her note," or "overlooked the requirements theysought for." Personal attractions were not amongst the essentials shehad mentioned. "My Lord," too, was amazed at his recommending a"mere girl,"--she couldn't be more than "twenty,"--and, consequently,"totally deficient in the class of knowledge he desired."Two months,--no very long period,--however, sufficed to show both fatherand daughter that they had been, to some extent, mistaken. Not only hadshe addressed herself to the task of an immense correspondence, butshe had drawn out reports, arranged prospectuses, and entered into mostcomplicated financial details with a degree of clearness that elicitedmarked compliment from the different bodies with whom this intercoursewas maintained. The Glengariff Joint Stock Company, with itshalf-million capital, figured largely in the public journals. Landscapesof the place appeared in the various illustrated papers, and cleverlywritten magazine articles drew attention to a scheme that promised tomake Ireland a favored portion of the empire. Her interest once excited,Sybella Kellett's zeal was untiring.Already she anticipated the time when the population of that poorvillage--now barely subsisting in direst poverty--should become thrivingand happy. The coast-fisheries--once a prolific source of wealth--wereto be revived; fishing-craft and tackle and curing-houses were all tobe provided; means of transporting the proceeds to the rich marketsof England procured; she had also discovered traces of lead in theneighborhood; and Dunn was written to, to send down a competent personto investigate the matter. In fact, great as was her industry, it seemedonly second to an intelligence that adapted itself to every fresh demandand every new exigency, without a moment's interruption. To the old Lordher resources appeared inexhaustible, and gradually he abandoned thelead and guidance he had formerly given to his plans, and submittedeverything to her will and dictation. It did not, indeed, escape hisshrewdness that her zeal was more warmly engaged by the philanthropythan by the profit of these projects. It was to the advancement of thepeople, the relief of their misery, the education of their children, thecare of their sick, that she looked as the great reward of all thatthey proposed. "What a lesson we shall teach the rest of Ireland if we'succeed'!" was the constant exclamation she uttered. "How we shall besought after to explain this and reveal that! What a proud day for uswill it be when Glengariff shall be visited as the model school of theempire!"Thus fed and fostered by her hopes, her imagination knew no bounds,and the day seemed even too short for the duties it exacted. Even LadyAugusta could not avoid catching some of the enthusiasm that animatedher, only restraining her expectations, however, by the cautious remark,"I wonder what Mr. Dunn will say. I am curious to know how he willpronounce upon it all."The day at last came when this fact was to be ascertained, and the postbrought the brief but interesting intelligence that Mr. Davenport Dunnwould reach the Hermitage for dinner.Lord Glengariff would have felt excessively offended could any one havesupposed him anxious or uneasy on the score of Dunn's coming. That agreat personage like himself should be compelled occasionally in lifeto descend to the agencies of such people was bad enough, but that heshould have any misgivings about his co-operation or assistance, wasreally intolerable; and yet, we blush to confess, these were preciselythe thoughts which troubled his Lordship throughout the whole of thatlong day."Not that Dunn has ever forgotten himself with me,--not that he hasever shown himself unmindful of our respective stations,--so much I mustsay," were the little scraps of consolation that he repeated over andover to himself, while grave doubts really oppressed him that we hadfallen upon evil days, when men of that stamp usurped almost all theinfluence that swayed society. No easy matter was it, either, to resolvewhat precise manner to assume towards him. A cold and dignified bearingmight possibly repel all confidence, and an easy familiarity be justas dangerous as surrendering the one great superiority his positionconferred. It was true his Lordship had never yet experienced anydifficulty on such a score,--of all men, he possessed a consummate senseof his own dignity, and suffered none to infringe it; but "this fellowDunn had been spoiled." Great men--greater men than Lord Glengariffhimself--had asked him to dinner. He had passed the thresholds ofcertain fine houses in Piccadilly, and well-powdered lackeys in ParkLane had called "Mr. Dunn's carriage." Now, the Irishman that has soaredto the realm of whitebait with a minister, or even a Star and Garterluncheon with a Secretary of State, becomes, to the eyes of hishome-bred countrymen, a very different person from the celebrity of mereCastle attentions and Phoenix Park civilities. Dunn was this, and more.He lounged into the Irish Office as into his own lodgings, and hewalked into the most private chambers of Downing Street as if by right.Consulted or not, he had the reputation of holding the patronage of allIreland in his hands; and assuredly they who attained promotion were notslow in testifying to what quarter they owed their gratitude. Some ofthat mysterious grandeur that clung to the old religions of the Greeksseems to hover round the acts of a great Government, till the Ministers,like Priests or Augurs, appear less equals and fellow-men than stewardsand dispensers of immense bounties intrusted to their keeping. There wasabout Dunn's manner much to foster this illusion. He was a blending ofmystery with the deepest humility, but with a very evident desire thatyou should neither believe one nor the other. It was the same consciouspower looming through the affected modesty of his pretensions thatoffended Lord Glengariff, and made him irritable in all his intercoursewith him.Let us take a passing glance at Lady Augusta. And why, may we ask, hasshe taken such pains about her toilette to-day? Not that her dress isunusually rich or costly, but she has evidently made a study of the"becoming," and looks positively handsome. She remembered something of afuchsia in her hair, long, long ago; and now, by mere caprice of course,she has interwoven one in those dark clusters, never glossier normore silky. Her calm, cold features, too, have caught up a gentlerexpression, and her voice is softer and lower. Her maid can make nothingof it. Lady Augusta has been so gracious and so thoughtful, and askedabout her poor old sick grandmother. Well, these sunlights are meant toshow what the coldest landscapes may become when smiled on by brighterskies!And Sybella. Pale and melancholy, and in mourning, she, too, has caughtup a sense of pleasure at the coming visit, and a faint line of colortinges her white cheek. She is very glad that Mr. Dunn is expected. "Shehas to thank him for many kindnesses; his prompt replies to her letters;his good nature to poor Jack, for whom he has repeatedly written to theHorse Guards; not to speak of the words of encouragement and hope he hasaddressed to herself. Yes, he is, indeed, her friend; perhaps her onlyfriend in the world."And now they are met in the drawing-room, waiting with anxiety for somesounds that may denote the great man's coming. The three windows open tothe ground; the rich sward, spangled here and there with carnations orrich-scented stocks, slopes down towards a little river, from the bridgeover which a view is caught of the Glen-gariff road; and to this spoteach as silently loitered, and as listlessly turned back again without aword."We are waiting for Mr. Dunn, Augusta, ain't we?" asked Lord Glengariff,as if the thought had just suddenly struck him for the first time."Yes," replied she, gravely; "he promised us his company to-day atdinner.""Are you quite sure it was to-day he mentioned?" said he, with anaffected indifference in his tone."Miss Kellett can inform us with certainty.""He said Thursday, and in time for dinner," said Sybella, not a littlepuzzled by this by-play of assumed forgetfulness."The man who makes his own appointments ought to keep them. I am fiveminutes beyond the half-hour," said Lord Glengariff, as he looked at hiswatch."I suspect you are a little fast," observed Lady Augusta."There!--I think I heard the crack of a postilion's whip," criedSybella, as she went outside the window to listen. Lady Augustafollowed, and was soon at her side."You appear anxious for Mr. Dunn's coming. Is he a very intimatefriend of yours, Miss Kellett?" said she, with a keen, quick glance ofher dark eyes."He was the kind friend of my father, when he lived, and, since hisdeath, he has shown himself not less mindful of me. There--I hear thehorses plainly! Can't you hear them now, Lady Augusta?""And how was this kindness evidenced,--in your own case I mean?" saidLady Augusta, not heeding her question."By advice, by counsel, by the generous interference which procured forme my present station here, not to speak of the spirit of his letters tome.""So then you correspond with him?" asked she, reddening suddenly."Yes," said she, turning her eyes fully on the other. And thus theystood for some seconds, when, with a slight, but very slight, motion ofimpatience, Lady Augusta said,--"I was not aware--I mean, I don't remember your having mentioned thiscircumstance to me.""I should have done so if I thought it could have had any interest foryou," said Sybella, calmly. "Oh, there is the carriage coming up thedrive; I knew I was not mistaken."Lady Augusta made no reply, but returned hastily to the house. Bellapaused for a few seconds, and followed her.No sooner was Mr. Dunn's carriage seen approaching the little bridgeover the stream than Lord Glengariff rang to order dinner."It will be a rebuke he well merits," said he, "to find the soup on thetable as he drives up."There was something more than a mere movement of irritation in this;his Lordship regarded it as a fine stroke of policy, by which Dunn'sarrival, tinged with constraint and awkwardness, should place thatgentleman at a disadvantage during the time he stayed, Lord Glengariff'sfavorite theory being that "these people were insufferable when at theirease."Ah, my Lord, your memory was picturing the poor tutor of twenty yearsbefore, snubbed and scoffed at for his ungainly ways and ill-madegarments,--the man heavy in gait and awkward in address, sulky whenforgotten, and shy when spoken to,--this was the Davenport Dunn of yourthoughts; there the very door he used to creep through in bashfulconfusion, yonder the side-table where he dined in a mockery ofconsideration. Little, indeed, were you prepared for him whose assuredvoice was already heard outside giving orders to his servant, and whonow entered the drawing-room with all the ease of a man of the world."Ah, Dunn, most happy to see you here. No accident, I trust, occurredto detain you," said Lord Glengariff, meeting him with a well-assumedcordiality, and then, not waiting for his reply, went on: "My daughter,Lady Augusta, an old acquaintance--if you have not forgotten her. MissKellett you are acquainted with."Mr. Dunn bowed twice, and deeply, before Lady Augusta, and then, passingacross the room, shook hands warmly with Sybella."How did you find the roads, Dunn?" asked his Lordship, still fishingabout for some stray word of apology; "rather heavy, I fear, at thisseason.""Capital roads, my Lord, and excellent horses. We came along at a ratewhich would have astonished the lumbering posts of the Continent.""Dinner, my Lord," said the butler, throwing wide the folding-doors."Will you give Lady Augusta your arm, Dunn?" said Lord Glengariff, as heoffered his own to Miss Kellett."We have changed our dinner-room, Mr. Dunn," said Lady Augusta, as theywalked along; thus by a mere word suggesting "bygones and long ago.""And with advantage, I should say," replied he, easily, as he surveyedthe spacious and lofty apartment into which they had just entered. "Theold dinner-room was low-ceilinged and gloomy.""Do you really remember it?" asked she, with a pleasant smile."An over-good memory has accompanied me through life, Lady Augusta,"said he. And then, as he remarked the rising color of her cheek,quickly added, "It is rarely that the faculty treats me to such gratefulrecollections as the present."Lord Glengariffs table was a good specimen of country-house living. Allthe materials were excellent, and the cookery reasonably good; his winewas exquisite,--the years and epochs connoisseurship loves to dwellupon; but Mr. Dunn ate sparingly and drank little. He had passed fortywithout gourmand tastes, and no man takes to epicurism after that. HisLordship beheld, not without secret dissatisfaction, his curdiest salmondeclined, his wonderful "south-down" sent away scarcely tasted, and,horror of horrors! saw water mixed with his 1815 claret as if it were a"little Bordeaux wine" at a Swiss table d'hte."Mr. Dunn has no appetite for our coarse country fare, Augusta," saidLord Glengariff; "you must take him over the cliffs, to-morrow, and lethim feel the sharp Glengariff air. There's nothing but hunger for it.""Pardon me, my Lord, if I say that I accept with gratitude the proposedremedy, though I don't acknowledge a just cause for it. I am always apoor eater.""Tell him of Beverley, Augusta, tell him of Beverley," said my Lord."Oh, it was simply a case similar to your own," said she, hesitatingly,"and, in all probability, incurred in the same way. The Duke ofBeverley, a very hard-worked man, as you know, always at Downing Streetat ten, and never leaving it till night, came here two years ago, topass a few weeks with us, and although hale and stout, to look at, couldeat nothing,--that is, he cared for nothing. It was in vain we put inrequisition all our little culinary devices to tempt him; he sat downwith us, and, like yourself, would fain persuade us that he dined, buthe really touched nothing; and, in utter despair, I determined to trywhat a course of open air and exercise would do.""She means eight hours a day hard walking, Dunn," chimed in LordGlengariff; "a good grouse-shooter's pace, too, and cross country.""Well, confess that my remedy succeeded," said she, triumphantly."That it did. The Duke went back to town fifteen years younger. No oneknew him; the Queen did not know him. And to this day he says, 'WheneverI'm hipped or out of sorts, I know what a resource I have in theGlengariff heather.'"It is possible that Davenport Dunn listened with more of interest tothis little incident because the hero of it was a Duke and a CabinetMinister.Assuredly the minor ills of life, the petty stomachic miseries, and suchlike, are borne with a more becoming patience when we know that they areshared by peers and great folk. Not by you, valued reader, nor even byme,--we have no such weaknesses,--but by the Davenport Dunns of thisworld, one of whom we are now treating. It was pleasant, too, to feelthat he not only had a ducal ailment, but that he was to be cured likehis Grace! And so he listened eagerly, as Lady Augusta went on to tellof the various localities, strange and unpronounceable, that they usedto visit, and how his Grace loved to row across such an arm of the lake,and what delight he took in the ascent of such a mountain. "But youshall judge for yourself, Mr. Dunn," said she, smiling, "and I nowengage you for to-morrow, after breakfast." And with that she rose, and,accompanied by Sybella, passed into the drawing-room. Dunn was about tofollow, when Lord Glengariff called out, "I'm of the old school, Dunn,and must have half an hour with my bottle before I join the ladies."We do not stop to explain--perhaps we should not succeed to our wishesif we tried--why it was that Dunn was more genial, better satisfied, andmore at his ease than when the dinner began; but so it was that as hefilled the one glass of claret be meant to indulge in, he felt that hehad been exaggerating to his own mind the disagreeables of this visit,and that everybody was kinder, pleasanter, and more natural than he hadexpected."Jesting apart, Dunn," said his Lordship, "Augusta is right. What yourequire is rest,--perfect repose; never to read or write a letterfor three weeks, not look at a newspaper, nor receive a telegraphicdespatch. Let us try if Glengariff cannot set you up. The fact is, wecan't spare you.""Your opinion is too flattering by half, my Lord; but really, anyone--I mean any one whose views are honest, and whose intentions areupright--can complete the work I have begun. There is no secret,--nomystery in it.""Come, come, this is over-modest. We all know that your head alonecould carry on the vast number of these great schemes which are nowin operation amongst us. Could you really tell the exact number ofcompanies of which you are Director?""I 'm afraid to say that I could," said Dunn, smiling."Of course you could n't. It is marvellous, downright marvellous, howyou get through it. You rise early, of course?""Yes, my Lord, at five, summer and winter; light my own fire, andsit down to the desk till eight; by that time I have finished mycorrespondence on business topics. I then take a cup of tea and a littledry toast. This is my preparation for questions of politics, whichusually occupy me till eleven. From that hour till three I receivedeputations,--heads of companies, and such like. I then take my ride,weather permitting, and usually contrive to call at the Lodge, till nighdinner-hour. If alone, my meal is a frugal one, and soon despatched;and then begins the real work of the day. A short nap of twenty minutesrefreshes me, and I address myself with energy to my task. In thesequiet hours, undisturbed and uninterrupted,--for I admit none, notone, at such seasons,--my mind is clear and unclouded, and I can work,without a sense of fatigue, till past midnight; it has even happenedthat morning has broke upon me without my being aware of it.""No health, no constitution, could stand that, Dunn," said LordGlengariff, with a voice artfully modulated to imply deep interest."Men are mere relays on the road of life; when one sinks, weariedor worn out, a fresh one comes forth ready to take his place in thetraces.""That may be--that may be, in the mass of cases; but there areexceptional men, Dunn,--men who--men, in fact, whose faculties have suchan adaptiveness to the age we live in--do you perceive my meaning?--menof the situation, as the French say." Here his Lordship began to feelthat he was getting upon very ticklish ground, and by no means sure howhe was to get safely back again, when, with a violent plunge, he said,"That fellow Washington was one of those men, Louis Napoleon is another,and you--I don't hesitate to say it--you are also an instance of what Imean."Dunn's pale face flushed up as he muttered some broken words ofdepreciating meaning."The circumstances, I am aware, are different. You have not torevolutionize a country, but you have undertaken just as hard a task: toremodel its social state,--to construct out of the ruined materials ofa bankrupt people the elements of national wealth and greatness. Letno man tell me, sir, that this is not a bolder effort than the other.Horse, foot, and dragoons, as poor Grattan used to say, won't aidyou here. To your own clear head and your own keen intellect must youtrust.""My dear Lord," broke in Dunn, in a voice not devoid of emotion, "youexaggerate both my labor and my capacity. I saw that the holders ofIrish property were not the owners, and I determined that they shouldbe so. I saw that the people were improvident, less from choice thannecessity, and I gave them banks. I saw land unproductive for want ofcapital, and I established the principle of loans for drainage and otherimprovements. I perceived that our soil and our climate favor certainspecies of cultivation, and as certainly deny some others. I popularizedthis knowledge.""And you call this nothing! Why, sir, where's the statesman can pointto such a list of legislative acts? Peel himself has left no such legacybehind him.""Ah, my Lord, this is too flattering,--too flattering by half." And Dunnsipped his wine and looked down. "By the way, my Lord," said he, aftera pause, "how has my recommendation in the person of Miss Kellettsucceeded?""A very remarkable young woman,--a singularly gifted person indeed,"said the old Lord, pompously. "Some of her ideas are tinctured, itis true, with that canting philanthropy we are just now infectedwith,--that tendency to discover all the virtue in rags and all thevice in purple; but, with this abatement to her utility, I must say shepossesses a very high order of mind. She comes of a good family, doesn'tshe?""None better. The Kelletts of Kellett's Court were equal to any gentryin this county.""And left totally destitute?""A mere wreck of the property remains, and even that is so cumbered withclaims and so involved in law that I scarcely dare to say that they havean acre they can call their own.""Poor girl! A hard case,--a very hard case. We like her much, Dunn. Mydaughter finds her very companionable; her services, in a business pointof view, are inestimable. All those reports you have seen are hers, allthose drawings made by her hand.""I am aware, my Lord, how much zeal and intelligence she has displayed,"said Dunn, who had no desire to let the conversation glide into thegreat Glengariff scheme, "and I am also aware how gratefully she feelsthe kindness she has met with under this roof.""That is as it should be, Dunn, and I am rejoiced to hear it. It is inno spirit of self-praise I say it, but in simple justice,--we do--mydaughter and myself, both of us--do endeavor to make her feel that herposition is less that of dependant than--than--companion.""I should have expected nothing less from your Lordship nor LadyAugusta," said Dunn, gravely."Yes, yes; you knew Augusta formerly; you can appreciate her high-mindedand generous character, though I think she was a mere child when you sawher first.""Very young indeed, my Lord," said Dunn, coloring faintly."She is exactly, however, what she then promised to be,--an Arden, agenuine Arden, sir; no deceit, no double; frank, outspoken; too much so,perhaps, for our age of mock courtesy, but a noble-hearted girl, and onefit to adorn any station."There was an honest, earnest sincerity in the old Lord's manner thatmade Dunn listen with respect to the sentiments be uttered, thoughin his heart the epithet "girl," as applied to Lady Augusta, seemedsomewhat ill chosen."I see you take no wine, so that, if you have no objection, we'll jointhe ladies.""Your Lordship was good enough to tell me that I was to make myselfperfectly at home here; may I begin at once to avail myself of yourkindness, and say that for this evening I beg to retire early? I have anumber of letters to read, and some to answer.""Really, Lady Augusta will feel quite offended if you slight hertea-table.""Nay, my Lord. It is only for this evening, and I am sure you will makemy excuses becomingly.""It shall be as you please," said the old Lord, with a rather stiffcourtesy."Thank you, my Lord; thank you. I assure you it is very rarely thesacrifice to duty costs me so keenly. Goodnight."CHAPTER XXXVII. "A MAN IN REQUEST"The bountifully spread breakfast-table of the following morning was notdestined to be graced by Mr. Dunn's presence. A clerk had arrivedearly in the morning with a mass of correspondence from Dublin, anda Government messenger, armed with an ominous-looking red box, camepost-haste about an hour later, while a request for a cup of tea inhis own room explained that Mr. Dunn was not to make his appearance inpublic."This savors of downright slavery," said Lady Augusta, whose morningtoilette was admirably devised."To me it savors of downright humbug," said Lord Glengariff, pettishly."No one shall tell me that a man has not time to eat his meals like agentleman. A Secretary of State does n't give himself such airs. Why, Iprotest, here comes another courier! what can this fellow be?""A messenger from the Home Office has just arrived for Mr. Dunn," saidMiss Kellett, entering the room."Our little cottage is become like a house in Whitehall Gardens," saidLord Glengariff, angrily. "I have no doubt we ought to feel excessivelyflattered by the notoriety the newspapers are certain to accord us.""Mr. Dunn is more to be pitied than any of us," said Lady Augusta,compassionately."I suspect he'd not agree with you," said his Lordship, bitterly. "Irather opine that Mr. Dunn has another and a very different estimate ofhis present position.""Such a life is certainly not enviable. Perhaps I'm wrong, though," saidshe, quickly; "Miss Kellett does not seem of my mind."Sybella blushed slightly, and in some embarrassment said, "Certainminds find their best happiness in great labor; Mr. Dunn's may be one ofthese.""Pulteney found time for a cast with the hounds, and Charles Foxhad leisure for his rubber of whist. It is these modern fellows haveintroduced the notion that 'the House' is like a 'mill at Manchester.'There goes one with his despatches," cried he, as a mounted messengerrode off from the door. "I 'd wager a trifle that if they never came tohand the world would just jog on its course as pleasantly, and no onethe worse for the mishap.""With Mr. Dunn's compliments, my Lord," said a servant, placing severalopen letters on the table; "he thought your Lordship would like to seethe latest news from the Crimea."While Lord Glengariff took out his spectacles, his face grew crimson,and he seemed barely able to restrain a burst of passionate indignation.As the servant closed the door, he could no longer contain himself, butbroke out: "Just fancy their sending off these despatches to this fellowDunn. Here am I, an Irish peer, of as good blood and ancient family asany in my country, and I might as well expect to hear Buckingham Palacewas fitted up for my town residence when next I went to London, as lookfor an attention of this sort. If I had n't it here under my own eyes,and saw the address, 'Davenport Dunn, Esq.,' 'on her Majesty's service,'I 'd say flatly it was impossible.""May I read some of them?" asked Lady Augusta, wishing by any means toarrest this torrent of angry attack."Yes, read away," cried he, laying down his spectacles. "Miss Kellett,too, may indulge her curiosity, if she has any, about the war.""I have a dearer interest at stake there," said Sybella, blushing."I see little here we have not already read in the 'Times,'" said LadyAugusta, perusing the paper before her. "The old story of rifle-pits,sorties against working parties, the severity of the duty, and thebadness of the commissariat.""This is interesting," broke in Sybella. "It is an extract from aprivate letter of some one high in command. It says: 'The discontentof our allies increases every day; and as every post from France onlyrepeats how unpopular the war is in that country, I foresee that nothingshort of some great fait d'armes, in which the French shall have allthe glory, will induce the Imperial Government to continue the struggle.The satisfaction felt in France at the attacks of the English journalson our own army, its generalship, and its organization, are alreadywearing out, and they look now for some higher stimulant to the nationalvanity.'""Who writes this?" cried Lord Glengariff, eagerly."The name is not given," said she. "The despatch goes on merely to say,'Your Lordship would do well to give these words the considerationthey seem to deserve.' But here again, 'the coolness of the Marshalincreases, and our intercourse is neither frank nor confidential.'""All this sounds badly," said Lord Glengariff. "Our only progress wouldseem to be in ill-will with our ally. I suppose the end of it will be,we shall be left to continue the struggle alone.""Would that it were so!" burst in Sybella. "A great orator said t' otherday in the House, that coalitions were fatal; Englishmen never likedthem. He only spoke of those alliances where parties agree to mergetheir differences and unite for some common object; but far moreperilous are the coalitions where nations combine, the very contestthat they wage being a field to evoke ancient rivalries and smoulderingjealousies. I 'd rather see our little army alone, with its face tothe foe and its back to the sea, than I 'd read of our entrance intoSebastopol side by side with the legions of France."The passionate enthusiasm of the moment had carried her away, and shegrew pale and heart-sick at her unwonted boldness as she finished."I hope Mr. Dunn may be able to benefit by your opinions on strategy,"said Lady Augusta, as she rose from the table."What was it Lady Augusta said?" cried Lord Glengariff, as she left theroom."I scarcely heard her aright, my Lord," said Sybella, whose face was nowcrimson.It was the first moment in her life in which dependence had exposed herto insult, and she could not collect her faculties, or know what to do."These things," said Lord Glengariff, pushing the despatchescontemptuously away, "add nothing to our knowledge. That writer in the'Times' gives us everything we want to know, and gives it better too.Send them back to Dunn, and ascertain, if you can, when we are likely tosee him. I want him to come down to the bay; he ought to see the harborand the coast. Manage this, Miss Kellett,--not from me, of course, butin your own way,--and let me know."Lord Glengariff now left the room, and Sybella was once more deep in thedespatches.Dry and guarded as they were,--formal, with all the stamp of officialaccuracy,--they yet told of the greatest and grandest struggle of ourage. It was a true war of Titans, with the whole world for spectators.The splendid heroism of our army seemed even eclipsed by the unbrokenendurance of daily hardship,--that stern and uncomplaining courage thatfaced death in cold blood, and marched to the fatal trenches with thesteadfast tramp of a forlorn hope."No conscript soldiers ever bore themselves thus," cried she,in ecstasy. "These are the traits of personal gallantry, not thedisciplined bravery that comes of the serried file and the roll of thedrum."With all her anxieties for his fate, she gloried to think "dear Jack"was there,--that he was bearing his share of their hardships, andreaping his share of their glory. And oh! if she could but read mentionof his name; if she could hear of him quoted for some act of gallantry,or, better still, some trait of humanity and kindness,--that he hadrescued a wounded comrade, or succored some poor maimed and forlornenemy!How hard was it for her on that morning, full of these themes, toaddress herself to the daily routine of her work! The grand panoramaof war continued to unroll itself before her eyes, and the splendidspectacle of the contending armies revealed itself like a picture beforeher. The wondrous achievements she had read of reminded her of those oldhistories which had been the delight of her childhood, and she gloriedto think that the English race was the same in daring and chivalry as ithad shown itself centuries back!She tried hard to persuade herself that the peaceful triumphs of art,the great discoveries of science, were finer and grander developments ofhuman nature; but with all her ingenuity they seemed inglorious and poorbeside the splendid displays of heroism."And now to my task," said she, with a sigh, as she folded up the map ofthe Crimea, on which she was tracing the events of the war.Her work of that morning was the completion of a little "Memoir" ofGlengariff and its vicinity, written in that easy and popular stylewhich finds acceptance in our periodicals, and meant to draw attentionto the great scheme for whose accomplishment a company was to be formed.Lord Glengariff wished this sketch should be completed while Dunn wasstill there, so that it might be shown him, and his opinion be obtainedupon it.Never had her task seemed so difficult, never so uncongenial; and thoughshe labored hard to summon up all her former interest in the greatenterprise, her thoughts would stray away, in spite of her, to theindented shores of the Crimea, and the wild and swelling plains aroundSebastopol. Determined to see if change of place might not effect somechange of thought, she carried her papers to a little summer-house onthe river-side, and once more addressed herself resolutely to her work.With an energy that rarely failed her, she soon overcame the littledistraction, and wrote away rapidly and with ease. She at last reachedthat stage in her essay where, having enumerated all the advantages ofthe locality, she desired to show how nothing was wanting to completeits celebrity and recognition but the touch of some of those greatfinancial magicians whose great privilege it is to develop the wealthand augment the resources of their fellow-men. She dwelt earnestly and,indeed, eloquently on the beauty of the scenery. She knew it in everyvarying aspect of its coloring, and she lingered over a description ofwhich the reality had so often captivated her. Still, even here, thefostering hand of taste might yet contribute much. The stone pine andthe ilex would blend favorably with the lighter foliage of the ash andthe hazel, and many a fine point of view was still all but inaccessiblefor want of a footpath. How beautifully, too, would the tasteful cottageof some true lover of the picturesque peep from amidst the evergreenoaks that grew down to the very shore. While she wrote, a shadow fellover her paper. She looked up, and saw Mr. Dunn. He had strolled byaccident to the spot, and entered unperceived by her.[Illustration: 414]"What a charming place you have chosen for your study, Miss Kellett!"said he, seating himself at the table. "Not but I believe," continuedhe, "that when once deeply engaged in a pursuit, one takes littleaccount of surrounding objects. Pastorals have been composed in garrets,and our greatest romancer wrote some of his most thrilling scenes amidthe noise and commonplace interruptions of a Court of Sessions.""Such labors as mine," said she, smiling, "neither require nor deservethe benefit of a chosen spot.""You are engaged upon Glengariff," said he; "am I at liberty to look?"And he took the paper from the table as he spoke. At first he glancedhalf carelessly at the lines; but as he read on he became moreattentive, and at last, turning to the opening pages, he read withmarked earnestness and care."You have done this very well,--admirably well," said he, as he laid itdown; "but shall I be forgiven if I make an ungracious speech?""Say on," said she, smiling good-naturedly."Well, then," said he, drawing a long breath, "you are pleading animpossible cause. They who suggested it were moved by the success ofthose great enterprises which every day develops around us, and which,by the magic word 'Company,' assume vitality and consistence; theyspeculated on immense profits just as they could compute a problem inarithmetic. It demanded so much skill and no more. You--I have no needthat you should tell me so--were actuated by very different motives. Youwanted to benefit a poor and neglected peasantry, to disseminate amongstthem the blessings of comfort and civilization; you were eager for thephilanthropy of the project, they for its gain.""But why, as a mere speculation, should it be a failure?" broke she in."There are too many reasons for such a result," said he, with amelancholy smile. "Suffice it if I give you only one. We Irish are notin favor just now. While we were troublesome and rebellious, there wasan interest attached to us,--we were dangerous; and even in thesarcasms of the English press there lurked a secret terror of some greatconvulsion here which should shake the entire empire. We are prosperousnow, and no longer picturesque. Our better fortune has robbed us of thetwo claims we used to have on English sympathy; we are neither drollnor ragged, and so they can neither laugh at our humor nor sneer at ourwretchedness. Will not these things show you that we are not likelyto be fashionable? I say this to you; to Lord Glengariff I will speakanother language. I will tell him that his scheme will not attractspeculators. I myself cannot advocate it. I never link my name withdefeats. He will be, of course, indignant, and we shall part on badterms. He is not the first I have refused to make rich."There was a tone of haughty assumption in the way he spoke these wordsthat astonished Sybella, who gazed at him without speaking."Are you happy here?" asked he, abruptly."Yes,--that is, I have been so up to this--""In short, until I had robbed you of an illusion," said he, interruptingher. "Ah, how many a pang do these 'awakenings' cost us in life!"muttered he, half to himself. "Every one has his ambitions of onesort or other, and fancies his goal the true one; but, his faith oncedisturbed, how hard it is to address himself earnestly to anothercreed!""If it be duty," broke she in, "and if we have the consciousness of anhonest breast and a right intention--""That is to say, if we gain a verdict in the court where we ourselvessit as judge," said he, with a suddenness that surprised her. "I, forinstance, have my own sense of what is right and just; am I quite sureit is yours? I see certain anomalies in our social condition, greathardships, heavy wrongs; if I address myself to correct them, am I socertain that others will concur with me? The battle of life, like everyother conflict, is one in which to sustain the true cause one must domany a cruel thing. It is only at last, when success has crowned allyour efforts, that the world condescends to say you have done well.""You, of all men, can afford to await this judgment patiently.""Why do you say that of me?" asked he, eagerly."Because, so long as I can remember, I have seen your name associatedwith objects of charity and benevolence; and not these alone, but withevery great enterprise that might stimulate the efforts and develop theresources of the country.""Some might say that personal objects alone influenced me," said he, ina low voice."How poor and narrow-minded would be such a judgment!" replied she,warmly. "There is an earnestness in high purpose no self-seeking couldever counterfeit.""That is true,--quite true," said he; "but are you so certain that theworld makes the distinction? Does not the vulgar estimate confound thephilanthropist with the speculator? I say this with sorrow." said he,painfully, "for I myself am the victim of this very injustice." Hepaused for a few seconds, and then rising, he said, "Let us stroll alongthe river-side; we have both worked enough for the day." She arose atonce, and followed him. "It is ever an ungracious theme,--one's self,"said he, as they walked along; "but, somehow, I am compelled to talk toyou, and, if you will allow me, confidentially." He did not wait for areply, but went on: "There was, in the time of the French Regency, aman named Law, who, by dint of deep study and much labor, arrived at thediscovery of a great financial scheme; so vast, so comprehensive, andso complete was it, that not only was it able to rescue the conditionof the State from bankruptcy, but it disseminated through thetrading-classes of the nation the sound principles of credit on whichalone commerce can be based. Now, this man--a man of unquestionablegenius and, if benefits to one's species gave a just title to thename, a philanthropist--lived to see the great discovery he had madeprostituted to the basest arts of scheming speculators. From the Prince,who was his patron, to the humblest agent of the Bourse, he met nothingbut duplicity, falsehood, and treachery, and he ended in being drivenin shame and ignominy from the land he had succeeded in rescuing fromimpending rain! You will say that the people and the age explain much ofthis base ingratitude; but, believe me, nations and eras are wonderfullyalike. The good and evil of this world go on repeating themselves incycles with a marvellous regularity. The fate which befell Law mayovertake any who will endeavor to imitate him; there is but onecondition which can avert this catastrophe, and that is success. Lawhad too long deferred to provide for his own security. Too much occupiedwith his grand problem, he had made himself neither rich nor great,so that when the hour of adversity came no barriers of wealth orpower stood between him and his enemies. Had he foreseen thiscatastrophe,--had he anticipated it,--he might have so dovetailed hisown interests with those of the State that attack upon one involved thefate of the other. But Law did nothing of the kind; he made friendsof Princes, and with the fortune that attaches to such friendships, hefell!" For some minutes he walked along at her side without speaking,and then resumed: "With all these facts before me, I, too, see thatLaw's fate may be my own!""But have you--" When she had gone thus far, Sybella stopped, andblushed deeply, unable to continue."Yes," said he, answering what might have been her words,--"yes, it wasmy ambition to have been to Ireland what Law was to France,--notwhat calumny and injustice have pictured him, remember, but the greatreformer, the great financier, the great philanthropist,--to make thisfaction-torn land a great and united nation. To develop the resourcesof the richest country in Europe was no mean ambition, and he who evenaspired to it was worthy of a better recompense than attack and insult.""I have seen none of these," broke she in. "Indeed, so long as Iremember, I can call to mind only eulogies of your zeal, praises of yourintelligence, and the grandeur of your designs.""There are such, however," said he, gloomily; "they are the first lowmurmurings, too, of a storm that will come in full force hereafter! Letit come," muttered he, below his breath. "If I am to fall, it shall belike Samson, and the temple shall fall with me."Sybella did not catch his words, but the look of his features as hespoke them made her almost shudder with terror."Let us turn back," said she; "it is growing late."Without speaking, Dunn turned his steps towards the cottage, and walkedalong in deep thought."Mr. Hankes has come, sir," said Dunn's servant, as he reached the door.And without even a word, Dunn hastened to his own room.CHAPTER XXXVIII. MR. DAVENPORT DUNN IN MORE MOODS THAN ONEAlthough Mr. Hankes performs no very conspicuous part in our story,he makes his appearance at the Hermitage with a degree of pomp andcircumstance which demand mention. With our reader's kind leave,therefore, we mean to devote a very brief chapter to that gentleman andhis visit.As in great theatres there is a class of persons to whose peculiar skilland ability are confided all the details of "spectacle," all those grandeffects of panoramic splendor which in a measure make the action of thedrama subordinate to the charms of what, more properly, ought to be mereaccessories; so modern speculation has called to its aid its ownspecial machinists and decorators,--a gifted order of men, capable ofsurrounding the dryest and least promising of enterprises with all thepictorial attractions and attractive graces of the "ballet"If it be a question of a harbor or dock company, the prospectus isheaded with a colored print, wherein tall three-deckers mingle withclose-reefed cutters, their gay buntings fluttering in the breeze as thelight waves dance around the bows; from the sea beneath to the cloudsabove, all is motion and activity,--meet emblems of the busy shorewhere commerce lives and thrives. If it be a building speculation, thearchitecture is but the background of a brilliant "mall," where splendidequipages and caracoling riders figure, with gay parasols and sleekpoodles intermixed.One "buys in" to these stocks with feelings far above "five percent."A sense of the happiness diffused amongst thousands of ourfellow-creatures--the "blessings of civilization," as we like to callthe extension of cotton prints--cheer and animate us; and while layingout our money advantageously, we are crediting our hearts with alarge balance on the score of philanthropy. To foster this commendabletendency, to feed the tastes of those who love, so to say, to "shoot atFortune with both barrels," an order of men arose, cunning in all thedevices of advertisement, learned in the skill of capitals, and adroitin illustrations.Of these was Mr. Hankes. Originally brought up at the feet of GeorgeRobins, he was imported into Ireland by Mr. Davenport Dunn as his chiefman at business,--the Grand Vizier of Joint Stock Companies and allindustrial speculations.If Dr. Pangloss was a good man for knowing what wickedness was, Mr.Hankes might equally pretend to skill in all enterprises, since he hadexperienced, for a number of years, every species of failure anddefeat The description of his residences would fill half a column of anewspaper. They ranged from Brompton to Boulogne, and took in everythingfrom Wilton Crescent to St John's Wood. He had done a little ofeverything, too, from "Chief Commissioner to the Isthmus"--we neverheard of what isthmus--to Parliamentary Agent for the friends of Jewishemancipation. With a quickness that rarely deceived him, Dunn saw hiscapabilities. He regarded him as fighting fortune so bravely with allthe odds against him, that he ventured to calculate what such a manmight be, if favorably placed in the world. The fellow who could bringdown his bird with a battered old flint musket might reasonably enoughdistinguish himself if armed with an Enfield rifle. The venture was not,however, entirely successful; for though Hankes proved himself a veryclever fellow, he was only really great under difficulties. It waswith the crash of falling fortunes around him--amidst debt, bankruptcy,executions, writs, and arrests--Hankes rose above his fellows, anddisplayed all the varied resources of his fertile genius. The Spartanvigor of his mind assorted but badly with prosperity, and Hankeswaxed fat and indolent, affected gorgeous waistcoats and chains, andimperceptibly sank down to the level of those decorative arts we havejust alluded to.The change was curious: it was as though Gerard or Gordon Cumming shouldhave given up lion-hunting and taken to teach piping bullfinches!Every venture of Davenport Dunn was prosperous. All his argosies wereborne on favoring winds, and Hankes saw his great defensive armor hungup to rust and to rot. Driven in some measure, therefore, to cut out hispath in life, he invented that grand and gorgeous school of enterprisewhose rashness and splendor crush into insignificance all the punyattempts of commonplace speculators. He only talked millions; thousandshe ignored. He would accept of no names on the direction of his schemessave the very highest in rank. If he crossed the Channel, his hasterequired a special steamer. If he went by rail, a special train awaitedhim. The ordinary world, moving along at its tortoise pace, was shockedat the meteor course that every now and then shot across the hemisphere,and felt humiliated in their own hearts by the comparison.Four smoking posters, harnessed to the neatest and lightest oftravelling-carriages, had just deposited Mr. Hankes at the Hermitage;and he now sat in Mr. Dunn's dressing-room, arranging papers andassorting documents in preparation for his arrival.It was easy to perceive that as Dunn entered the room he was very farfrom feeling pleased at his lieutenant's presence there."What was there so very pressing, Mr. Hankes," said he, "that could nothave awaited my return to town?""A stormy meeting of the Lough Allen Tin Company yesterday, sir,--avery stormy meeting indeed. Shares down to twenty-seven and aneighth,--unfavorable report on the ore, and a rumor--mere rumor, ofcourse--that the last dividend was paid out of capital.""Who says this?" asked Dunn, angrily."The 'True Blue,' sir, hinted as much in the evening edition, and thesuggestion was at once caught up by the Tory Press.""Macken--isn't that the man's name--edits the 'True Blue'?""Yes, sir; Michael Macken.""What answer shall I give him, then?" asked Hankes."Tell him--explain to him that the exigencies of party--No, that won'tdo. Send down Harte to conduct his election, let him be returned forthe borough, and tell Joe Harte to take care to provide a case that willunseat him on a petition; before the petition comes on, we shall havethe sale completed. The Colonel shall be taught that our tactics aresomewhat sharper than his own."Hankes smiled approvingly at this stratagem of his chief, and really forthe moment felt proud of serving such a leader. Once more, however,did he turn to his dreary note-book and its inexorable bead-roll ofdifficulties; but Dunn no longer heard him, for he was deep in hisprivate correspondence, tearing open and reading letter after letterwith impatient haste. "What of the Crimea--what did you say, there?"cried Dunn, stopping suddenly, and catching at the sound of that oneword."That report of the 'Morning Post' would require a promptcontradiction.""What report?" asked Dunn, quickly."Here's the paragraph." And the other read from a newspaper before him:"'Our readers, we feel assured, will learn with satisfaction that theGovernment is at this moment in negotiation for the services of Mr.Davenport Dunn in the Crimea. To any one who has followed the sadstory of our Commissariat blunders and shortcomings, the employment ofthis--the first administrative mind of our day--will be matter for justgratification. We have only to turn our eyes to the sister country, andsee what success has attended his great exertions there, to anticipatewhat will follow his labors in the still more rugged field of theCrimea.'"This is from the 'Examiner': 'We are sorry to hear, and upon theauthority that assumes to be indisputable, that a grave difficulty hassuspended, for the time at least, the negotiation between the Governmentand Mr. Daren-port Dunn; the insistence on the part of that gentleman ofsuch a recognition for his services as no Administration could dare topromise being the obstacle.'"'Punch' has also his say: 'Mr. Davenport Dunn's scheme is now beforethe cabinet It resolves itself into this: The Anglo-French allianceto be conducted on the principles of a Limited Liability Company. Forpreference shares, address Count Morny in Paris, or Dowb at Balaklava.'""So much for official secrecy and discretion. This morning brings me theoffer from the Minister of this appointment; and here is the whole pressof England speculating, criticising, and ridiculing it, forty-eighthours before the proposal is made me! What says the great leadingjournal?" added he, opening a broad sheet before him. "Very brief, andvery vague," muttered he. "'No one knows better than the accomplishedindividual alluded to, how little the highest honors in the power of theCrown to bestow could add to the efficiency of that zeal, or the purposeof that guidance he has so strenuously and successfully devoted to theadvancement of his country.' Psha!" cried he, angrily, as he threw downthe paper, and walked to the window.Hankes proceeded to read aloud one of those glowing panegyrics certainpopular journals loved to indulge in, on the superior virtue, capacity,and attainments of the middle classes. "Of these," said the writer,"Mr. Dunn is a good specimen. Sprung from what may be called the veryhumblest rank--""Who writes that? What paper is it?""The 'Daily Tidings.'""You affect to know all these fellows of the press. It is your prideto have been their associate and boon companion. I charge you, then, nomatter for the means or the cost, get that man discharged; follow himup too; have an eye upon him wherever he goes, and wherever he obtainsemployment. He shall learn that a hungry stomach is a sorry recompensefor the pleasure of pointing a paragraph. Let me see that you make anote of this, Mr. Hankes, and that you execute it also."It was something so new for Hankes to see Dunn manifest any theslightest emotion on the score of the press, whether its comments tookthe shape of praise or blame, that he actually stared at him with a sortof incredulous astonishment."If I were born a Frenchman, an Italian, or even a German," said Dunn,with a savage energy of voice, "should I be taunted in the midst of mylabors that my origin was plebeian? Would the society in which I move bereminded that they accept me on sufferance? Would the cheer that greetedmy success be mingled with the cry, 'Remember whence you came'? I tellyou, sir," and here he spoke with the thickened utterance of intensepassion,--"I tell you, sir, that with all the boasted liberty of ourinstitutions, we cultivate a social slavery in these islands, to whichthe life of a negro is freedom in comparison!"A sharp tap at the door interrupted him, and he cried, "Come in." It wasa servant to say dinner was on the table, and his Lordship was waiting."Please to say I am indisposed,--a severe headache. I hope his Lordshipwill excuse my not appearing to-day," said he, with evident confusion;and then, when the servant withdrew, added: "You may go down to the inn.I suppose there is one in the village. I shall want horses to-morrow,and relays ready on the road to Killarney. Give the orders, and ifanything else occurs to my recollection, I 'll send you word in theevening."Whether it was that Mr. Hankes had been speculating on the possiblechances of dining with "my Lord" himself, or that the prospect of theinn at Glengariff was little to his taste, but he assuredly gatheredup his papers in a mood that indicated no peculiar satisfaction, andwithdrew without a word.A second message now came to inquire what Mr. Dunn would like totake for his dinner, and conveying Lord Glengariffs regrets for hisindisposition."A little soup--some fish, if there be any--nothing else," said Dunn,while he opened his writing-desk and prepared for work. Not noticing theinterruption of the servant as he laid the table, he wrote away rapidly;at last he arose, and, having eaten a few mouthfuls, reseated himself athis desk. His letter was to the Minister, in answer to the offer ofthat morning's post. There was a degree of dexterity in the way that heconveyed his refusal, accompanying it by certain suggestive hints, vagueand shadowy of course, of what the services of such a man as himselfmight possibly accomplish, so as to indicate how great was the lossto the State by not being fortunate enough to secure such highacquirements. The whole wound up with a half-ambiguous regret that,while the Ministry should accept newspaper dictation for theirappointments, they could not also perceive that popular will should beconsulted in the rewards extended to those who deserted their privateand personal objects to devote their energies to the cause of theempire."Whenever such a Government shall arise," wrote he, "the Ministrywill find few refusals to the offers of employment, and men will alikeconsult their patriotism and their self-esteem in taking office underthe Crown; nor will there be found, in the record of replies to aMinisterial proffer, one such letter as now bears the signature of yourLordship's"Very devoted and very obedient servant,"Davenport Dunn."This history does not profess to say how Mr. Dunn's apology was receivedby his noble host. Perhaps, however, we are not unwarranted in supposingthat Lord Glengariffs temper was sorely and severely tested; one thingis certain, the dinner passed off with scarcely a word uttered at thetable, and a perfect stillness prevailed throughout the cottage.After some hours of hard labor, Dunn opened his window to enjoy thefresh air of the night, tempered slightly as it was with a gentlesea-breeze. If our western moonlights have not the silver lustre ofGreece, of which old Homer himself sings, they have, in compensation,a mellow radiance of wondrous softness and beauty. Objects are lesssharply defined and picked out, it is true, but the picture gainsin warmth of color, and those blended effects where light and shadowalternate. The influences of Nature--the calm, still moonlight; themeasured march of the long, sweeping waves upon the strand; thosebrilliant stars, "so still above, so restless in the water"--have amarvellous power over the hard-worked men of the world. They are amidstthe few appeals to the heart which they can neither spurn nor reject.Half hidden by the trees, but still visible from where he sat, Dunncould mark the little window of his humble bedroom twenty years ago! Ay!there was the little den to which he crept at night, his heart full ofmany a sorrow; the "proud man's contumely" had eaten deep into him, andeach day brought some new grievance, some new trial to be endured, whilethe sight of her he loved--the young and haughty girl--goaded him almostto madness.One after another came all the little incidents of that long-forgottentime crowding to his memory; and now he bethought him how noiselessly heused to glide down those stairs, and, stealing into the wood, meet herin her morning's walk, and how, as with uncovered head, he bowed toher, she would bestow upon him one of her own half-saucy smiles,--moremockery than kindness. He called to mind the day, too, he had climbedthe mountain to gather a bouquet of the purple heath,--she said sheliked it,--and how, after a great effort of courage, he ventured tooffer it to her. She took it half laughingly from his hand, and then,turning to her pet goat beside her, gave it him to eat. He could haveshot himself that morning, and yet there he was now, to smile over theincident!As he sat, the sounds of music floated up from the open window of theroom beneath. It was the piano, the same he used to hear long ago, whenthe Poet himself of the Melodies came down to pass a few days at theHermitage. A low, soft voice was now singing, and as he bent down hecould hear the words of poor Griffin's beautiful song:--"A place in thy memory, dearest,Is all that I claim;To pause and look back as thou nearestThe sound of my name."What a strange thrill did the words send through him! They came, as itwere, to fill up the whole story of the past, embodying the unspokenprayer his love-sick heart once was filled with. For that "smile andkind word when we meet," had he once pined and longed, and where was thespirit now that had once so yearned for love? A cold shudder passed overhim, and he felt ill. He sat for a long while so deep in reflection thathe did not notice the music had ceased, and now all was still and silentaround. From the balcony outside his window a little winding stair leddown to the lawn beneath; and down this he now took his way, resolvingto stroll for half an hour or so before bedtime.Walking carelessly along, he at last found himself on the banks ofthe river, close to the spot where he had met Miss Kellett that samemorning. How glad he would have been to find her there again! That longmorning's ramble had filled him with many a hopeful thought--he knew,with the instinct that in such men as himself rarely deceives--thathe had inspired her with a sort of interest in him, and it warmed hisself-esteem to think that he could be valued for something besides"success." The flutter of a white dress crossing the little rusticbridge caught his eye at this moment, and he hurried along the path. Hesoon gained sufficiently upon the retiring figure to see it was a lady.She was strolling quietly along, stopping at times to catch the effectsof the moonlight on the landscape.Dunn walked so as to make his footsteps heard approaching, and sheturned suddenly and exclaimed, "Oh, Mr. Dunn, who would have thought tosee you here?""A question I might almost have the hardihood to retort, Lady Augusta,"said he, completely taken by surprise."As for me," said she, carelessly, "it is my usual walk every evening. Istroll down to the shore round by that rocky headland, and rarely returnbefore midnight; but you," added she, throwing a livelier interestinto her tone, "they said you were poorly, and so overwhelmed withbusiness it was hopeless to expect to see you.""Work follows such men as myself like a destiny," said he, sighing; "andas the gambler goes on to wager stake after stake on fortune, so do wehazard leisure, taste, happiness, all, to gain--I know not what in theend.""Your simile points to the losing gamester," said she, quickly; "buthe who has won, and won largely, may surely quit the table when hepleases.""It is true," said he, after a pause,--"it is true, I have had luck withme. The very trees under whose branches we are walking, could they butspeak, might bear witness to a time when I strolled here as poor and ashopeless as the meanest outcast that walks the high-road. I had not oneliving soul to say, 'Be of good cheer, your time will come yet.' Mycase had even more than the ordinary obstacles to success; for fate hadplaced me where every day, every hour of my life, should show me thedisparity between myself and those high-born great to whose station Iaspired. If you only knew, Lady Augusta," added he, in a tone tremulouswith emotion, "what store I laid on any passing kindness,--the simplestword, the merest look,--how even a gesture or a glance lighted hopewithin my heart, or made it cold and dreary within me, you 'd wonderthat a creature such as this could nerve itself to the stern work oflife.""I was but a child at the time you speak of," said she, looking downbashfully; "but I remember you perfectly.""Indeed!" said he, with an accent that implied pleasure."So well," continued she, "that there is not a spot in the wood where weused to take our lesson-books in summer, but lives still associated inmy mind with those hours, so happy they were!""I always feared that I had left very different memories behind mehere," said he, in a low voice."You were unjust, then," said she, in a tone still lower,--"unjust toyourself and to us."They walked on without speaking, a strange mysterious consciousness thateach was in the other's thoughts standing in place of converse betweenthem. At length, stopping suddenly in front of a little rocky cavern,over which aquatic plants were drooped, she said, "Do you remembercalling that 'Calypso's grotto'? It bears no other name still.""I remember more," said he; and then stopped in some confusion."Some girlish folly of mine, perhaps," broke she in hurriedly; "butonce for all, let me ask forgiveness for many a thoughtless word, manya childish wrong. You, who know all tempers and moods of men as fewknow them, can well make allowances for natures spoiled as ourswere,--pampered and flattered by those about us, living in a littleworld of our own here. And yet, do not think me silly when I own thatI would it were all back again. The childish wrong. You, who know alltempers and moods of men as few know them, can well make allowances fornatures spoiled as ours were--pampered and nattered by those about us,living in a little world of our own here. And yet, do not think me sillywhen I own that I would it were all back again. The childhood and thelessons, ay, the dreary Telemachus, that gave me many a headache, andthe tiresome hours at the piano, and the rest of it." She glanced acovert glance at Dunn, and saw that his features were a shade darker andgloomier than before. "Mind," said she, quickly, "I don't ask youto join in this wish. You have lived to achieve great successes--to becourted, and sought after, and caressed. I don't expect you to careto live over again hours which perhaps you look back to with a sort ofhorror.""I dare not well tell you how I look back to them," said he, in ahalf-irresolute manner.Had there been any to mark it, he would have seen that her cheek flushedand her dark eyes grew darker as he spoke these words. She was far tooskilful a tactician to disturb, even by a syllable, the thoughts sheknew his words indicated; and again they sauntered along in silence,till they found themselves standing on the shore of the sea."How is it that the sea, like the sky, seems ever to inspire the wishthat says, 'What lies beyond that?'" said Dunn, dreamily."It comes of that longing, perhaps, for some imaginary existence out ofthe life of daily care and struggle--""I believe so," said he, interrupting. "One is so apt to forget thatanother horizon is sure to rise to view,--another bourne to be passed!"Then suddenly, as if with a rapid change of thought, he said, "What acharming spot this is to pass one's days in,--so calm, so peaceful, soundisturbed!""I love it!" said she, in a low, murmuring voice, as though speaking toherself."And I could love it too," said he, ardently, "if fortune would butleave me to a life of repose and quiet.""It is so strange to hear men like yourself--men who in a measure maketheir own fate,--always accuse Destiny. Who is there, let me ask," saidshe, with a boldness the stronger that she saw an influence followed herwords,--"who is there who could with more of graceful pride retire fromthe busy cares of life than he who has worked so long, so successfully,for his fellow-men? Who is there who, having achieved fortune, friends,station--Why do you shake your head?" cried she, suddenly."You estimate my position too flatteringly, Lady Augusta," saidhe, slowly, and like one laboring with some painful reflection. "Offortune--if that mean wealth--I have more than I need. Friends--what theworld calls such--I suppose I may safely say I possess my share of. Butas to station, by which I would imply the rank which stamps a certaingrade in society, and carries with it a prestige--""It is your own whenever you care to demand it," broke she in. "It isnot when the soldier mounts the breach that his country showers itshonours on him--it is when, victory achieved, he comes back great andtriumphant. You have but to declare that your labours are completed,your campaign finished, to meet any, the proudest, recognition yourservices could claim. You know my father," said she, suddenly changingher voice to a tone at once confidential and intimate--"you know howinstinctively, as it were, he surrounds himself with all the prejudicesof his order. Well, even he, as late as last night, said to me, 'Dunnought to be one of us, Augusta. We want men of his stamp. The lawyersoverbear us just now. It is men of wider sympathies lets technical lessnarrowed, that we need. He ought to be one of us.' Knowing what a greatadmission that was for one like him, I ventured to ask how this was tobe accomplished. 'Ministers are often the last to ratify the judgmentthe public' he pronounced.""Well, and what said you to that," asked Dunn, eagerly."Let him only open his mind to Lady Augusta," said she. "If he but havethe will I promise to show him the way."Dunn uttered no reply, but with bent-down head walked along, deep inthought."May I ask you to lend me your arm, Mr. Dunn?" said Lady Augusta, inher gentlest of voices; and Dunn's heart beat with a strange, proudsignificance as he gave it.They spoke but little as they returned to the cottage.CHAPTER XXXIX. "A LETTER TO JACK"Long after the other inhabitants of the Hermitage were fast locked insleep, Sybella Kellett sat at her writing-desk. It was the time--theonly time--she called her own, and she was devoting it to a letter toher brother. Mr. Dunn had told her on that morning that an opportunityoffered to send anything she might have for him, and she had arranged alittle packet--some few things, mostly worked by her own hands--for thepoor soldier in the Crimea.As one by one she placed the humble articles in the box, her tears fellupon them--tears half pleasure and half sorrow--for she thoughthow "poor dear Jack" would feel as each new object came before him,reminding him of some thoughtful care, some anticipation of this or thatcasualty; and when at last all seemed packed and nothing forgotten, shearose and crossed the room towards a little shelf, from which she took asmall volume, and, kissing it twice fervently, laid it in the box. Thisdone, she knelt down, and with her head between her hands, close pressedand hidden, prayed long and fervently. If her features wore a look ofsadness as she arose, it was of sadness not without hope; indeed,her face was like one of those fair Madonnas which Raphael has leftus,--faces where trustfulness is more eminently the characteristic thanany other quality.Her long letter was nearly completed, and she sat down to add the lastlines to it. It had grown into a sort of Journal of her daily life, itscares and occupations, and she was half shocked at the length to whichit extended. "I am not," wrote she, "so unreasonable as to ask you towrite as I have done, but it would be an unspeakable pleasure if youwould let me give the public some short extracts from the letters yousend me, they are so unlike those our papers teem with. The tone ofcomplaint is, I know, the popular one. Some clever correspondentshave struck the key-note with success, and the public only listen witheagerness where the tale is of sufferings which might have been spared,and hardships that need not have been borne. But you, dear Jack,have taken another view of events, and one which, I own, pleasesme infinitely more. You say truly, besides, that these narratives,interesting as no doubt they are to all at home here, exercise a banefulinfluence on the military spirit of our army. Men grow to care toomuch for newspaper distinction, too little for that noble esprit decamaraderie which is the finest enthusiasm of the service. I could nothelp feeling as if I heard your voice as I read, 'I wish they would n'tgo on telling us about muddy roads, raw coffee, wet canvas, and shortrations; we don't talk of these things so much amongst ourselves; wecame out here to thrash the Russians, and none of us ever dreamed it wasto be done without rough usage.' What you add about the evil effectsof the soldier appealing to the civilian public for any redress ofhis grievances, real or imaginary, is perfectly correct. It is a greatmistake."You must forgive my having shown your last letter to Mr. DavenportDunn, who cordially joins me in desiring that you will let me send it tothe papers. He remarks truly, that the Irish temperament of making theludicrous repay the disagreeable is wanting in all this controversy, andthat the public mind would experience a great relief if one writer wouldcome forth to show that the bivouac fire is not wanting in pleasantstories, nor even the wet night in the trenches without its burst oflight-hearted gayety."Mr. Dunn fully approves of your determination not to 'purchase.' Itwould be too hard if you could not obtain your promotion from the ranksafter such services as yours; so he says, and so, I suppose, I ought toconcur with him; but as this seven hundred pounds lies sleeping atthe banker's while your hard life goes on, I own I half doubt if he beright. I say this to show you, once for all, that I will acceptnothing of it I am provided for amply, and I meet with a kindness andconsideration for which I was quite unprepared. Of course, I endeavorto make my services requite this treatment, and do my best to merit thegood-will shown me."I often wonder, dear Jack, when we are to meet, and where. Two moreisolated creatures there can scarcely be on earth than ourselves, andwe ought, at least, to cling to each other. Not but I feel that, in thusstruggling alone with fortune, we are storing up knowledge of ourselves,and experiences of life that will serve us hereafter. When I read inyour letters how by many a little trait of character you can endearyourself to your poor comrades, softening the hardship of their lot bycharms and graces acquired in another sphere from theirs, I feel doublystrong in going forth amongst the poor families of our neighborhood, anddoubly hopeful that even I may carry my share of comfort to some poorerand more neglected."The last object I have placed in your box, dearest Jack,--it will bethe first to reach your hands,--is my prayer-book. You have often heldit with me, long, long ago! Oh, if I dared to wish, it would be for thattime again, when we were children, with one heart between us. Let uspray, my dear brother, that we may live to meet and be happy as we thenwere; but if that is not to be,--if one be destined to remain alone awanderer here,--pray, my dearest brother, that the lot fall not to me,who am weak-hearted and dependent."The day is already beginning to break, and I must close this. Myheartfelt prayer and blessings go with it over the seas. Again andagain, God bless you."Why was it that still she could not seal that letter, but sat gazingsadly on it, while at times she turned to the open pages of poor Jack'slast epistle to her?CHAPTER XL. SCHEMES AND PROJECTSThe post-horses ordered for Mr. Dunn's carriage arrived, duly, at breakof day; but from some change of purpose, of whose motive this veracioushistory can offer no explanation, that gentleman did not take hisdeparture, but merely despatched a messenger to desire Mr. Hankes wouldcome over to the Hermitage."I shall remain here to-day, Hankes," said he, carelessly, "and notimpossibly to-morrow also. There's something in the air here suits me,and I have not felt quite well latterly."Mr. Hankes bowed; but not even his long-practised reserve could concealthe surprise he felt at this allusion to health or well-being. Positiveillness he could understand,--a fever or a broken leg were intelligibleills; but the slighter casualties of passing indispositions wereweaknesses that he could not imagine a business mind could descendto, no more than he could fancy a man's being turned from pursuing hiscourse because some one had accidentally jostled him in the streets.Dunn was too acute a reader of men's thoughts not to perceive theimpression his words had produced; but with the indifference he everbestowed upon inferiors, he went on:--"Forward my letters here till you hear from me; there's nothing so verypressing at this moment that cannot wait my return to town. Stay--I wasto have had a dinner on Saturday; you'll have to put them off. Cloweswill show you the list; and let some of the evening papers mentionmy being unavoidably detained in the south,--say nothing aboutindisposition.""Of course not, sir," said Hankes, quite shocked at such an indiscretionbeing deemed possible."And why, 'of course,' Mr. Hankes?" said Dunn, slowly. "I never knew itwas amongst the prerogatives of active minds to be exempt from ailment.""A bad thing to speak about, sir,--a very bad thing, indeed," saidHankes, solemnly. "You constantly hear people remark, 'He was never thesame man since that last attack.'""Psha!" said Dunn, contemptuously."I assure you, sir, I speak the sense of the community. The old adagesays, 'Two removes are as bad as a fire,' and in the same spirit I wouldsay, 'Two gouty seizures are equal to a retirement'.""Absurdity!" said Dunn, angrily. "I never have acknowledged--I neverwill acknowledge--any such accountability to the world.""They bring us 'to book' whether we will or not," said Hankes, sturdily.Dunn started at the words, and turned away to hide his face; and wellwas it he did so, for it was pale as ashes, even to the lips, which wereactually livid."You may expect me by Sunday morning, Hankes,"--he spoke without turninground,--"and let me have the balance-sheet of the Ossory Bank to lookover. We must make no more advances to the gentry down there; we mustrestrict our discounts.""Impossible, sir, impossible! There must be no discontent--for thepresent, at least," said Hankes; and his voice sunk to a whisper.Dunn wheeled round till he stood full before him, and thus they remainedfor several seconds, each staring steadfastly at the other."You don't mean to say, Hankes--" He stopped."I do, sir," said the other, slowly, "and I say it advisedly.""Then there must be some gross mismanagement, sir," said Dunn,haughtily. "This must be looked to! Except that loan of forty-seventhousand pounds to Lord Lacking-ton, secured by mortgage on the estateit went to purchase, with what has this Bank supplied us?""Remember, sir," whispered Hankes, cautiously glancing around the roomas he spoke, "the loan to the Viscount was advanced by ourselves at sixper cent, and the estate was bought in under your own name; so that, infact, it is to us the Bank have to look as their security.""And am I not sufficient for such an amount, Mr. Hankes?" said he,sneeringly."I trust you are, sir, and for ten times the sum. Time is everythingin these affairs. The ship that would float over the bar at high waterwould stick fast at half-flood.""The 'Time' I am anxious for is a very different one," said Dunn,reflectively. "It is the time when I shall no longer be harassed withthese anxieties. Life is not worth the name when it excludes the thoughtof all enjoyment.""Business is business, sir," said Mr. Hankes, with all the solemnitywith which such men deliver platitudes as wisdom."Call it slavery, and you 'll be nearer the mark," broke in Dunn. "Forwhat or for whom, let me ask you, do I undergo all this laborious toil?For a world that at the first check or stumble will overwhelm me withslanders. Let me but afford them a pretext, and they will debit me withevery disaster their own recklessness has caused, and forget to creditme with all the blessings my wearisome life has conferred upon them.""The way of the world, sir," sighed Hankes, with the same stereotypedphilosophy."I know well," continued Dunn, not heeding the other's commonplace,"that there are men who would utilize the station which I have acquired;they'd soon convert into sterling capital the unprofitable gains thatI am content with. They 'd be cabinet ministers, peers, ambassadors,colonial governors. It's only men like myself work without wages.""'The laborer is worthy of his hire,' says the old proverb." Mr. Hankeswas not aware of the authority, but quoted what he believed a popularsaying."Others there are," continued Dunn, still deep in his own thoughts,"that would consult their own ease, and, throwing off this drudgery,devote what remained to them of life to the calm enjoyments of a home."Mr. Hankes was disposed to add, "Home, sweet home;" but he coughed downthe impulse, and was silent.Dunn walked the room with his arms crossed on his breast and his headbent down, deep in his own reflections, while his lips moved, as ifspeaking to himself. Meanwhile Mr. Hankes busied himself gatheringtogether his papers, preparatory to departure."They 've taken that fellow Redlines. I suppose you 've heard it?" saidhe, still sorting and arranging the letters."No," said Dunn, stopping suddenly in his walk; "where was heapprehended?""In Liverpool. He was to have sailed in the 'Persia,' and had his placetaken as a German watchmaker going to Boston.""What was it he did? I forget," said Dunn, carelessly."He did, as one may say, a little of everything; issued false scripon the Great Coast Railway, sold and pocketed the price of some thirtythousand pounds' worth of their plant, mortgaged their securities, andcooked their annual accounts so cleverly that for four years nobody hadthe slightest suspicion of any mischief.""What was it attracted the first attention to these frauds, Hankes?"said Dunn, apparently curious to hear an interesting story."The merest accident in the world. He had sent a few lines to the Dukeof Wycombe to inquire the character and capacity of a French cook.Pollard, the Duke's man of business, happened to be in the room when thenote came, and his Grace begged he would answer it for him. Pollard, asyou are aware, is Chairman of the Coast Line; and when he saw the name'Lionel Redlines,' he was off in a jiffy to the Board room with thenews.""One would have thought a little foresight might have saved him fromsuch a stupid mistake as this," said Dunn, gravely. "A mode of livingso disproportioned to his well-known means must inevitably have elicitedremark.""At any other moment, so it would," said Hankes; "but we live in agambling age, and no one can say where, when, the remedy be curativeor poisonous." Then, with a quick start round, he said, "Hankes, doyou remember that terrific accident which occurred a few years ago inFrance,--at Angers, I think the place was called? A regiment in marchingorder had to cross a suspension-bridge, and coming on with the measuredtramp of the march, the united force was too much for the strength ofthe structure; the iron beams gave way, and all were precipitated intothe stream below. This is an apt illustration of what we call credit. Itwill bear, and with success, considerable pressure if it be irregular,dropping, and incidental. Let the forces, however, be at onceconsentaneous and united,--let the men keep step,--and down comes thebridge! Ah, Hankes, am I not right?""I believe you are, sir," said Hankes, who was not quite certain that hecomprehended the illustration."His Lordship is waiting breakfast, sir," said a smartly dressed footmanat the door."I will be down in a moment. I believe, Hankes, we have not forgottenanything? The Cloyne and Carrick Company had better be wound up; andthat waste-land project--let me have the papers to look over. You thinkwe ought to discount those bills of Barrington's?""I'm sure of it, sir. The people at the Royal Bank would take themto-morrow.""The credit of the Bank must be upheld, Hankes. The libellous articlesof those newspapers are doing us great damage, timid shareholders assailus with letters, and some have actually demanded back their deposits. Ihave it, Hankes!" cried he, as a sudden thought struck him,--"I have it!Take a special train at once for town, and fetch me the balance-sheetand the list of all convertible securities. You can be back here--letus see--by to-morrow at noon, or, at latest, to-morrow evening. By thattime I shall have matured my plan.""I should like to hear some hint of what you intend," said Hankes."You shall know all to-morrow," said he, as he nodded a good-bye, anddescended to the breakfast-room. He turned short, however, at the footof the stairs, and returned to his chamber, where Hankes was stillpacking up his papers. "On second thoughts, Hankes, I believe I hadbetter tell you now," said he. "Sit down."And they both eat down at the table, end never moved from it for anhour. Twice--even thrice--there cane messages from below, requestingMr. Dunn's presence at the breakfast-table, but a hurried "Yes,immediately," was his reply, and he came not.At last they rose? Hankes the first, saying, as he looked at his watch,"I shall just be in time. It is a great idea, a very great idea indeed,and does you infinite credit.""It ought to have success, Hankes," said he, calmly."Ought, Sir! It will succeed. It is as fine a piece of tactics as I everheard of. Trust me to carry it out, that's all.""Remember, Hankes, time is everything. Goodby!"CHAPTER XLI. "A COUNTRY WALK"What a charming day was that at the Hermitage,--every one pleased,happy, and good-humored! With a frankness that gave universalsatisfaction, Mr. Dunn declared he could not tear himself away.Engagements the most pressing, business appointments of the deepestmoment, awaited him on every side, but, "No matter what it cost," saidhe, "I will have my holiday!" Few flatteries are more successful thanthose little appeals to the charms and fascinations of a quiet homecircle; and when some hard-worked man of the world, some eminent leaderat the Bar, or some much-sought physician condescends to tell us thatthe world of clients must wait while he lingers in our society, theassurance never fails to be pleasing. It is, indeed, complimentary tofeel that we are, in all the easy indolence of leisure, enjoyingthe hours of one whose minutes are valued as guineas; our own valueinsensibly rises at the thought, and we associate ourselves in ourestimate of the great man. When Mr. Davenport Dunn had made thisgraceful declaration, he added another, not less gratifying, that he wascompletely at his Lordship's and Lady Augusta's orders, as regarded thegreat project on which they desired to have his opinion."The best way is to come down and see the spot yourself, Dunn. We 'llwalk over there together, and Augusta will acquaint you with our notionsas we go along.""I ought to mention," said Dunn, "that yesterday, by the merest chance,I had the opportunity of looking over a little sketch of your project.""Oh, Miss Kellett's!" broke in Lady Augusta, coloring slightly. "It isvery clever, very prettily written, but scarcely practical, scarcelybusiness-like enough for a prosaic person like myself. A question ofthis kind is a great financial problem, not a philanthropic experiment.Don't you agree with me?""Perfectly," said he, bowing."And its merits are to be tested by figures, and not by Utopian dreamsof felicity. Don't you think so?"He bowed again, and smiled approvingly."I am aware," said she, in a sort of half confusion, "what rashness itwould be in me to say this to any one less largely minded than yourself;how I should expose myself to the censure of being narrow-hearted andworldly, and so forth; but I am not afraid of such judgments from you.""Nor have you need to dread them," said he, in a voice a little above awhisper."Young ladies, like Miss Kellett, are often possessed by the ambition--avery laudable sentiment, no doubt--of distinguishing themselves by theseopinions. It is, as it were, a 'trick of the time' we live in, and, withthose who do not move in 'society,' has its success too."The peculiar intonation of that one word "society" gave the whole pointand direction of this speech. There was in it that which seemed to say,"This is the real tribunal! Here is the one true court where claimsare recognized and shams nonsuited." Nor was it lost upon Mr. DavenportDunn. More than once--ay, many a time before--had he been struck by thereference to that Star Chamber of the well-bred world. He had even hearda noble lord on the Treasury benches sneer down a sturdy championof Manchesterism, by suggesting that in a certain circle, where thehonorable gentleman never came, very different opinions prevailed fromthose announced by him.While Dunn was yet pondering over this mystic word, Lord Glengariff cameto say that, as Miss Kellett required his presence to look over somepapers in the library, they might stroll slowly along till he overtookthem.As they sauntered along under the heavy shade of the great beech-trees,the sun streaking at intervals the velvety sward beneath their feet,while the odor of the fresh hay was wafted by on a faint light breeze,Dunn was unconsciously brought back in memory to the "long, long ago,"when he walked the self-same spot in a gloom only short of despair. Whocould have predicted the day when he should stroll there, with her athis side, her arm within his own, her voice appealing in tonesof confidence and friendship? His great ambitions had grown with hissuccesses, and as he rose higher and higher, his aims continued tomount upwards; but here was a sentiment that dated from the time of hisobscurity, here a day-dream that had filled his imagination when fromimagination alone could be derived the luxury of triumph, and now it wasrealized, and now--Who is to say what strange wild conflict went on within that heart whereworldliness felt its sway for once disputed? Did there yet linger there,in the midst of high ambitions, some trait of boyish love, or was itthat he felt this hour to be the crowning triumph of his long life oftoil?"If I were not half ashamed to disturb your revery," said Lady Augusta,smiling, "I'd tell you to look at that view yonder. See where the coaststretches along there, broken by cliff and headland, with those rockyislands breaking the calm sea-line, and say if you saw anything finer inyour travels abroad?""Was I in a revery? have I been dreaming?" cried he, suddenly, notregarding the scene, but turning his eyes fully upon herself. "Andyet you 'd forgive me were I to confess to you of what it was I wasthinking.""Then tell it directly, for I own your silence piqued me, and I stoppedspeaking when I perceived I was not listened to.""Perhaps I am too confident when I say you would forgive me?""You have it in your power to learn, at all events," said she,laughingly."But not to recall my words if they should have been uttered rashly,"said he, slowly."Shall I tell you a great fault you have,--perhaps your greatest?" askedshe, quickly."Do, I entreat of you.""And you pledge yourself to take my candor well, and bear me no maliceafterwards?""It is a coldness,--a reserve almost amounting to distrust, which seemsactually to dominate in your temper. Be frank with me, now, and sayfairly, was not this long alley reylying all the thoughts of long ago,and were you not summing up the fifty-one little grudges you had againstthat poor silly child who used to torment and fret you, and, insteadof honestly owning all this, you fell back upon that stern dignity ofmanner I have just complained of? Besides," added she, as though hurriedaway by some strong impulse, "if it would quiet your spirit to know youwere avenged, you may feel satisfied.""As how?" asked he, eagerly, and not comprehending to what she pointed."Simply thus," resumed she. "As I continued to mark and read of yourgreat career in life, the marvellous successes which met you in each newenterprise, how with advancing fortune you ever showed yourself equal tothe demand made upon your genius, I thought with shame and humiliationover even my childish follies, how often I must have grieved--have hurtyou! Over and over have I said, 'Does he ever remember? Can he forgiveme?' And yet there was a sense of exquisite pleasure in the midst ofall my sorrow as I thought over all these childish vanities, and said tomyself, 'This man, whom all are now flattering and fawning upon, was thesame I used to irritate with my caprices, and worry with my whims!'""I never dreamed that you remembered me," said he, in a voice tremulouswith delight."Your career made a romance for me," said she, eagerly. "I could repeatmany of those vigorous speeches you made,--those spirited addresses.One, in particular, I remember well; it was when refusing the offer ofthe Athlone burgesses to represent their town; you alluded so happilyto the cares which occupied you,--less striking than legislative duties,but not less important,--or, as you phrased it, yours was like thepart of those 'who sound the depth and buoy the course that thunderingthree-deckers are to follow.' Do you remember the passage? And again,that proud humility with which, alluding to the wants of the poor, yousaid, 'I, who have carried my musket in the ranks of the people!' Let metell you, sir," added she, playfully, "these are very haughty avowals,after all, and savor just as much of personal pride as the insolentdeclarations of many a pampered courtier!"Dunn's face grew crimson, and his chest swelled with an emotion ofintense delight."Shall I own to you," continued she, still running on with what seemedan irrepressible freedom, "that it appears scarcely real to me to behere talking to you about yourself, and your grand enterprises, and yourimmense speculations. You have been so long to my mind the great geniusof wondrous achievements, that I cannot yet comprehend the condescensionof your strolling along here as if this world could spare you."If Dunn did not speak, it was that his heart was too full for words; buthe pressed the round arm that leaned upon him closer to his side, andfelt a thrill of happiness through him."By the way," said she, after a pause, "I have a favor to ask of you:papa would be charmed to have a cast of Marochetti's bust of you, andyet does not like to ask for it. May I venture--""Too great an honor to me," muttered Dunn. "Would you--I mean, wouldhe--accept--""Yes, I will, and with gratitude; not but I think the likeness hard andharsh. It is, very probably, what you are to that marvellous worldof politicians and financiers you live amongst, but not such as yourfriends recognize you,--what you are to-day, for instance.""And what may that be," asked he, playfully."I was going to say an impudence, and I only caught myself in time.""Do, then, let me hear it," said he, eagerly, "for I am quite ready tocap it with another.""Yours be the first, then," said she, laughing. "Is it not customary toput the amendment before the original motion?"Both Mr. Dunn and his fair companion were destined to be rescued fromthe impending indiscretion by the arrival of Lord Glengariff, who,mounted on his pony, suddenly appeared beside them."Well, Dunn," cried he, as he came up, "has she made a convert of you?Are you going to advocate the great project here?"Dunn looked sideways towards Lady Augusta, who, seeing his difficulty,at once said, "Indeed, papa, we never spoke of the scheme. I doubt ifeither of us as much as remembered there was such a thing.""Well, I'm charmed to find that your society could prove so fascinating,Augusta," said Lord Glengariff, with some slight irritation of manner,"but I must ask of Mr. Dunn to bear with me while I descend to the verycommonplace topic which has such interest for me. The very spot we standon is admirably suited to take a panoramic view of our little bay, thevillage, and the background. Carry your eyes along towards the rockypromontory on which the stone pines are standing; we begin there."Now, most worthy reader, although the noble Lord pledged himself tobe brief, and really meant to keep his word, and although he fanciedhimself to be graphic,--truth is truth,--he was lamentably prolixand confused beyond all endurance. As for Dunn, he listened withan exemplary patience; perhaps his thoughts were rambling awayelsewhere,--perhaps he was compensated for the weariness by theoccasional glances which met him from eyes now downcast, now bent softlyupon him. Meanwhile the old Lord floundered on, amidst crescentsand bathing-lodges, yacht stations and fisheries, aiding his memoryoccasionally with little notes, which, as he contrived to mistake, onlyserved to make the description less intelligible. At length he had gotso far as to conjure up a busy, thriving, well-to-do watering-place,sought after by the fashionable world that once had loved Brighton orDieppe. He had peopled the shore with loungers, and the hotels withvisitors; equipages were seen flocking in, and a hissing steamer inthe harbor was already sounding the note of departure for Liverpool orHolyhead, when Dunn, suddenly rousing himself from what might have beena revery, said, "And the money, my Lord,--the means to do all this?""The money--the means--we look to you, Dunn, to answer that question.Our scheme is a great shareholding company of five thousand--no,fifty--nay, I 'm wrong. What is it, Augusta?""The exact amount scarcely signifies much, my Lord. The excellence ofthe project once proved, money can always be had. What I desired to knowwas, if you already possessed the confidence of some great capitalistfavorable to the undertaking, or is it simply its intrinsic merits whichrecommend it?""Its own merits, of course," broke in Lord Glengariff, hastily. "Arethey not sufficient?""I am not in a position to affirm or deny that opinion," said Dunn,gravely. "Let me see," added he, to himself, while he drew a pencil fromhis pocket, and on the back of a letter proceeded to scratch certainfigures. He continued to calculate thus for some minutes, when at lasthe said: "If you like to try it, my Lord, with an advance of say twentythousand pounds, there will be no great difficulty in raising the money.Once afloat, you will be in a position to enlist shareholders easilyenough." He spoke with all the cool indifference of one discussing theweather."I must say, Dunn," cried Lord Glengariff, with warmth, "this is a verynoble--a very generous offer. I conclude my personal security--""We can talk over all this at another time, my Lord," broke in Dunn,smiling. "Lady Augusta will leave us if we go into questions of bondsand parchments. My first care will be to send you down Mr. Steadman, avery competent person, who will make the necessary surveys; his report,too, will be important in the share market.""So that the scheme enlists your co-operation, Dunn,--so that we haveyou with us," cried the old Lord, rubbing his hands, "I have no fearsas to success.""May we reckon upon so much?" whispered Lady Augusta, while a long,soft, meaning glance stole from her eyes.Dunn bent his head in assent, while his face grew crimson."I say, Augusta," whispered Lord Glengariff, "we have made a capitalmorning's work of it--eh?""I hope so, too," said she. And her eyes sparkled with an expression oftriumph."There is only one condition I would bespeak, my Lord. It is this: themoney market at this precise moment is unsettled, over-speculationhas already created a sort of panic, so that you will kindly give me alittle time--very little will do--to arrange the advance. Three weeksago we were actually glutted with money, and now there are signs of whatis called tightness in discounts.""Consult your own convenience in every respect," said the old Lord,courteously."Nothing would surprise me less than a financial crisis over here,"said Dunn, solemnly. "Our people have been rash in their investmentslatterly, and there is always a retribution upon inordinate gain!"Whether it was the topic itself warmed him, or the gentle pressureof Lady Augusta's arm as in encouragement of his sentiments, but Dunncontinued to "improve the occasion" as they strolled along homeward,inveighing in very choice terms against speculative gambling, anddeploring the injury done to honest, patient industry by those examplesof wealth acquired without toil and accumulated without thrift. Hereally treated the question well and wisely, and when he passed fromthe mere financial consideration to the higher one of "morals" and theinfluence exerted upon national character, he actually grew eloquent.Let us acknowledge that the noble Lord did not participate in all hisdaughter's admiration of this high-sounding harangue, nor was he withouta sort of lurking suspicion that he was listening to a lecture uponhis, own greed and covetousness; he, however, contrived to throw in atintervals certain little words of concurrence, and in this way occupiedthey arrived at the Hermitage.It is not always that the day which dawns happily continues bright andunclouded to its close; yet this was such a one. The dinner passed offmost agreeably, the evening in the drawing-room was delightful. LadyAugusta sang prettily enough to please even a more critical ear thanMr. Dunn's, and she had a tact, often wanting in better performers,to select the class of music likely to prove agreeable to her hearers.There is a very considerable number of people who like pictures forthe story and music for the sentiment, and for these high art is lessrequired than something which shall appeal to their peculiar taste.But, while we are confessing, let us own that if Mr. Dunn liked "themelodies," it assuredly added to their charm to hear them sung by apeer's daughter; and as he lay back in his well-cushioned chair, anddrank in the sweet sounds, it seemed to him that he was passing a verycharming evening.Like many other vulgar men in similar circumstances, he wondered at theease and unconstraint he felt in such choice company! He could not helpcontrasting the tranquil beatitude of his sensations with what he hadfancied must be the coldness and reserve of such society. He was, as hemuttered to himself, as much at home as in his own house; and truly, aswith one hand in his breast, while with the fingers of the other he beattime,--and all falsely,--he looked the very ideal of his order."Confound the fellow!" muttered the old peer, as he glanced at him overhis newspaper, "he is insufferably at his ease amongst us!"And Sybella Kellett, where was she all this time--or have we forgottenher? Poor Sybella! she had been scarcely noticed at dinner, scarcelyspoken to in the drawing-room, and she had slipped unperceived away toher own room.They never missed her.CHAPTER XLII. THE GERM OF A BOLD STROKEIf Mr. Davenport Dunn had passed a day of unusual happiness and ease,the night which followed was destined to be one of intense labor andtoil. Scarcely had the quiet of repose settled down upon the Hermitage,than the quick tramp of horses, urged to their sharpest trot, washeard approaching, and soon after Mr. Hankes descended from histravelling-carriage at the door.Dunn had been standing at his open window gazing into the stillobscurity of the night, and wondering at what time he might expect him,when he arrived."You have made haste, Hankes," said he, not wasting a word insalutation. "I scarcely looked to see you before daybreak.""Yes, sir; the special train behaved well, and the posters did theirpart as creditably. I had about four hours altogether in Dublin, butthey were quite sufficient for everything.""For everything?" repeated Dunn."Yes; you'll find nothing has been forgotten. Before leaving Cork, Itelegraphed to Meekins of the 'Post,' and to Browne of the 'Banner,'to meet me on my arrival at Henrietta Street. Strange enough, they bothwere anxiously waiting for some instructions on the very question atissue. They came armed with piles of provincial papers, all writtenin the same threatening style. One in particular, the 'Upper OssoryBeacon,' had an article headed, 'Who is our Dionysius?'""Never mind that," broke in Dunn, impatiently. "You explained to themthe line to be taken?""Fully, sir. I told them that they were to answer the attacks weakly,feebly, deprecating in general terms the use of personalities, andthrowing out little appeals for forbearance, and so on. On the questionof the Bank, I said, 'Be somewhat more resolute; hint that certainaspersions might be deemed actionable; that wantonly to assail credit isan offence punishable at law; and then dwell upon the benefits alreadydiffused by these establishments, and implore all who have the interestof Ireland at heart not to suffer a spirit of faction to triumph overtheir patriotism.'""Will they understand the part?" asked Dunn, more impatiently thanbefore."Thoroughly; Browne, indeed, has a leader already 'set up'--""What do I care for all these?" broke in Dunn, peevishly. "Surely no manknows better than yourself that these fellows are only the feathers thatshow where the wind blows. As to any influence they wield over publicopinion, you might as well tell me that the man who sweats a guinea cansway the Stock Exchange."Hankes shook his head dissentingly, but made no reply."You have brought the Bank accounts and the balance-sheet?""Yes, they are all here.""Have you made any rough calculation as to the amount--" He stopped."Fifty thousand ought to cover it easily--I mean with what they havethemselves in hand. The first day will be a heavy one, but I don'tsuspect the second will, particularly when it is known that we arediscounting freely as ever.""And now as to the main point?" said Dunn."All right, sir. Etheridge's securities give us seventeen thousand; wehave a balance of about eleven on that account of Lord Lackington; Idrew out the twelve hundred of Kellett's at once; and several othersmall sums, which are all ready.""It is a bold stroke!" muttered Dunn, musingly."None but an original mind could have hit upon it, sir. I used tothink the late Mr. Robins a very great man, sir,--and he was a greatman,--but this is a cut above him.""Let us say so when it has succeeded, Hankes," said Dunn, with ahalf-smile.As he spoke, he seated himself at the table, and, opening a massiveaccount-book, was soon deep in its details. Hankes took a place besidehim, and they both continued to con over the long column of figurestogether."We stand in a safer position than I thought, Hankes," said Dunn,leaning back in his chair."Yes, sir; we have been nursing this Ossory Bank for some time. Youremember, some time ago, saying to me, 'Hankes, put condition on thathorse, we 'll have to ride him hard before the season is over'?""Well, you have done it cleverly, I must say," resumed Dunn. "Thisconcern is almost solvent.""Almost, sir," echoed Hankes."What a shake it will give them all, Hankes," said Dunn, gleefully,"when it once sets in, as it will and must, powerfully! The Provincialwill stand easily enough.""To be sure, sir.""And the Royal, also; but the 'Tyrawley'--""And the 'Four Counties,'" added Hankes. "Driscoll is ready with fourthousand of the notes 'to open the ball,' as he says, and when Terry'sname gets abroad it will be worse to them than a placard on the walls.""I shall not be sorry for the 'Four Counties.' It was Mr. Morris, thechairman, had the insolence to allude to me in the House, and ask if itwere true that the Ministry had recommended Mr. Davenport Dunn as a fitobject for the favors of the Crown? That question, sir, placed my claimin abeyance ever since. The Minister, pledged solemnly to me, had torise in his place and say 'No.' Of course he added the stereotypedsarcasm, 'Not that, if such a decision had been come to, need theCabinet have shrunk from the responsibility through any fears of thehonorable gentleman's indignation.'""Well, Mr. Morris will have to pay for his joke now," said Hankes. "I 'mtold his whole estate is liable to the Bank.""Every shilling of it. Driscoll has got me all the details.""Lushington will be the great sufferer by the 'Tyrawley,'" continuedHankes."Another of them, Hankes,--another of them," cried Dunn, rubbing hishands joyfully. "Tom Lushington--the Honorable Tom, as they calledhim--blackballed me at 'Brookes's. They told me his very words: 'It'sbad enough to be "Dunned," as we are, out of doors, but let us, atleast, be safe from the infliction at our Clubs.' A sorry jest, butwitty enough for those who heard it.""I don't think he has sixpence.""No, sir; nor can he remain a Treasury Lord with a fiat of bankruptcyagainst him. So much, then, for Tom Lushington! I tell you, Hankes,"said he, spiritedly, "next week will have its catalogue of shipwrecks.There's a storm about to break that none have yet suspected.""There will be some heavy sufferers," said Hankes gravely."No doubt, no doubt," muttered Dunn. "I never heard of a battle withoutkilled and wounded. I tell you, sir, again," said he, raising his voice,"before the week ends the shore will be strewn with fragments; we alonewill ride through the gale unharmed. It is not fully a month sinceI showed the Chief Secretary here--ay, and his Excellency, also--theinsolent but insidious system of attack the Government journals maintainagainst me, the half-covert insinuations, the impertinent queries,pretended inquiries for mere information's sake. Of course, I got foranswer the usual cant about 'freedom of the press,' 'liberty of publicdiscussion,' with the accustomed assurance that the Government hadnot, in reality, any recognized organ; and, to wind up, there was thelaughing question, 'And what do you care, after all, for these fellows?'But now I will show what I do care,--that I have good and sufficientreason to care,--that the calumnies which assail me are directed againstmy material interests; that it is not Davenport Dunn is 'in cause,' butall the great enterprises associated with his name; that it is not anindividual, but the industry of a nation, is at stake; and I will say tothem, 'Protect me, or--' You remember the significant legend inscribedon the cannon of the Irish Volunteers, 'Independence or--' Take my wordfor it, I may not speak as loudly as the nine-pounder, but my fire willbe to the full as fatal!"Never before had Hankes seen his chief carried away by any sense ofpersonal injury; he had even remarked, amongst the traits of his greatbusiness capacity, that a calm contempt for mere passing opinion was hischaracteristic, and he was sorely grieved to find that such equanimitycould be disturbed. With his own especial quickness Dunn saw what waspassing in his lieutenant's mind, and he added hastily,--"Not that, of all men, I need care for such assaults; powerful evento tyranny as the press has become amongst us, there is one thing morepowerful still, and that is--Prosperity! Ay, sir, there may be cavil andcontroversy as to your abilities; some may condemn your speech, or carpat your book, they may cry down your statecraft, or deny your diplomacy;but there is a test that all can appreciate, all comprehend, and thatis--Success. Have only that, Hankes, and the world is with you.""There's no denying that," said Hankes, solemnly."It is the gauge of every man," resumed Dunn,--"from him that presidesover a Railway Board to him that sways an Empire. And justly so, too,"added he, rapidly. "A man must be a consummate judge of horseflesh thatcould pick out the winner of the Oaks in a stable; but the scrubbiestvarlet on the field can see who comes in first on the day of the race!Have you ever been in America, Hankes?" asked he, suddenly."Yes; all over the States. I think I know Cousin Jonathan as well as Iknow old John himself.""You know a very shrewd fellow, then," muttered Dunn; "over-shrewd,mayhap.""What led you to think of that country now?" asked the other, curiously."I scarcely know," said Dunn, carelessly, as he walked the room inthoughtfulness; then added, "If no recognition were to come of theseservices of mine, I 'd just as soon live there as here. I should, atleast, be on the level of the best above me. Well," cried he, in ahigher tone, "we have some trumps to play out ere it come to that."Once more they turned to the account books and the papers before them,for Hankes had many things to explain and various difficulties tounravel. The vast number of those enterprises in which Dunn engaged hadeventually blended and mingled all their interests together. Estates andshipping, and banks, mines, railroads, and dock companies had so ofteninterchanged their securities, each bolstering up the credit of theother in turn, that the whole resembled some immense fortress, where thegarrison, too weak for a general defence, was always hastening to someone point or other,--the seat of immediate attack. And thus an Irishdraining-fund was one day called upon to liquidate the demands upon asub-Alpine railroad, while a Mexican tin-mine flew to the rescue of ahosiery scheme in Balbriggan! To have ever a force ready on the pointassailed was Dunn's remarkable talent, and he handled his masses like agreat master of war.Partly out of that indolent insolence which power begets, he hadlatterly been less mindful of the press, less alive to the strictures ofjournalism, and attacks were made upon him which, directed as they wereagainst his solvency, threatened at any moment to assume a dangerousshape. Roused at last by the peril, he had determined on playing a boldgame for fortune; and this it was which now engaged his thoughts, andwhose details the dawning day saw him deeply considering. His now greattheory was that a recognized station amongst the nobles of the land wasthe one only security against disaster. "Once amongst them," said he,"they will defend me as one of their order." How to effect this grandobject had been the long study of his life. But it was more,--itwas also his secret! They who fancied they knew the man, thoroughlyunderstood the habits of his mind, his passions, his prejudices, and hishopes, never as much as suspected what lay at the bottom of them all. Heassumed a sort of manner that in a measure disarmed their suspicion; heaffected pride in that middle station of life he occupied, and seemed toglory in those glowing eulogies of commercial ability and capacity whichit was the good pleasure of leading journalists just then to deliver.On public occasions he made an even ostentatious display of thesesentiments, and Davenport Dunn was often quoted as a dangerous man foran hereditary aristocracy to have against them.Such was he who now pored over complicated details of figures, intricateand tangled schemes of finance; and yet, while his mind embraced them,with other thoughts was he picturing to himself a time when, proudamongst the proudest, he would take his place with the great nobles ofthe land. It was evident that another had not regarded this ambition asfanciful or extravagant. Lady Augusta--the haughty daughter of oneof the haughtiest in the peerage--as much as said, "It was a fair andreasonable object of hope; then none could deny the claims he preferred,nor any affect to undervalue the vast benefits he had conferred on hiscountry." There was something so truly kind, so touching too, in thegenerous tone she assumed, that Dunn dwelt upon it again and again.Knowing all the secret instincts of that mysterious brotherhood as shedid, Dunn imagined to himself all the advantage her advice and counselscould render him. "She can direct me in many ways, teaching me how totreat these mysterious high-priests as I ought What shall I do to secureher favor? How enlist it in my cause? Could I make her partner in theenterprise?" As the thought flashed across him, his cheek burned asif with a flame, and he rose abruptly from the table and walked tothe window, fearful lest his agitation might be observed. "That weresuccess, indeed!" muttered he. "What a strong bail-bond would it be whenI called two English peers my brothers-in-law, and an earl for my wife'sfather! This would at once lead me to the very step of the 'Order.' Howmany noble families would it interest in my elevation! The Ardens arethe best blood of the south, connected widely with the highest in bothcountries. Is it possible that this could succeed?" He thought of theold Earl and his intense pride of birth, and his heart misgave him; butthen, Lady Augusta's gentle tones and gentler looks came to his mind,and he remembered that though a peer's daughter, she was penniless,and--we shame to write it--not young. The Lady Augusta Arden marries themillionnaire Mr. Dunn, and the world understands the compact There aremany such matches every season."What age would you guess me to be, Hankes?" said he, suddenly turninground."I should call you--let me see--a matter of forty-five or forty-six,sir.""Older, Hankes,--older," said he, with a smile of half-pleasure."You don't look it, sir, I protest you don't. Sitting up all night andworking over these accounts, one might, perhaps, call you forty-six; butseeing you as you come down to breakfast after your natural rest, youdon't seem forty.""This same life is too laborious; a man may follow it for the ten ortwelve years of his prime, but it becomes downright slavery after that.""But what is an active mind like yours to do, sir?" asked Hankes."Take his ease and rest himself.""Ease!--rest! All a mistake, sir. Great business men can't exist in thatlethargy called leisure.""You are quite wrong, Hankes; if I were the master of some venerable olddemesne, like this, for instance, with its timber of centuries' growth,and its charms of scenery, such as we see around us here, I 'd ask nobetter existence than to pass my days in calm retirement, invite a strayfriend or two to come and see me, and with books and other resourceshold myself aloof from stocks and statecraft, and not so much as ask howare the Funds or who is the Minister.""I 'd be sorry to see you come to that, sir, I declare I should," saidHankes, earnestly."You may live to see it, notwithstanding," said Dunn, with a placidsmile."Ah, sir," said Hankes, "it's not the man who has just conceived sucha grand idea as this "--and he touched the books before him--"ought totalk about turning hermit.""We'll see, Hankes,--we'll see," said Dunn, calmly. "There come thepost-horses--I suppose for you.""Yes, sir; I ordered them to be here at six. I thought I should have hada couple of hours in bed by that time; but it does n't signify, I cansleep anywhere.""Let me see," said Dunn, calculating. "This is Tuesday; now, Fridayought to be the day, the news to reach me on Thursday afternoon; you cansend a telegraphic message and then send on a clerk. Of course, you willknow how to make these communications properly. It is better I shouldremain here in the interval; it looks like security.""Do you mean to come over yourself, sir?""Of course I do. You must meet me there on Friday morning. Let Mrs.Hailes have the house in readiness in case I might invite any one.""All shall be attended to ir," said Hankes. "I think I'll despatchWilkins to you with the news; he's an awful fellow to exaggerate eviltidings.""Very well," said Dunn. "Good-night, or, I opine, rather, good-morning."And he turned away into his bedroom.CHAPTER XLIII. THE GARDENFrom the moment that Mr. Davenport Dunn announced he would stillcontinue to enjoy the hospitality of the Hermitage, a feeling ofintimacy grew up between himself and his host that almost savored ofold friendship. Lord Glengariff already saw in the distance wealth andaffluence; he had secured a co-operation that never knew failure,--theone man whose energies could always guarantee success.It was true, Dunn had not directly pledged himself to anything; he hadlistened and questioned and inquired and reflected, but given nothinglike a definite opinion, far less a promise. But, as the old Lord said,"These fellows are always cautious, always reserved; and whenever theydo not oppose, it may be assumed that they concur. At all events, wemust manage with delicacy; there must be no haste, no importunity; thebest advocacy we can offer to our plans is to make his visit here asagreeable as possible." Such was the wise counsel he gave his daughteras they strolled through the garden after breakfast, talking over thecharacter and the temperament of their guest."By George, Gusty!" cried Lord Glengariff, after a moment's silence, "Icannot yet persuade myself that this is 'Old Davy,' as you and the girlsused to call him long ago. Of all the miraculous transformations I haveever witnessed, none of them approaches this!""It is wonderful, indeed!" said she, slowly."It is not that he has acquired or increased his stock ofknowledge,--that would not have puzzled me so much, seeing the lifeof labor he has led,--but I go on asking myself what has become of hisformer self, of which not a trace nor vestige remains? Where is hisshy, hesitating manner, his pedantry, his suspicion,--where the intenseeagerness to learn what was going on in the house? You remember how hisprying disposition used to worry us?""I remember," said she, in a low voice."There is something, now, in his calm, quiet deportment very likedignity. I protest I should--seeing him for the first time--call him awell-bred man.""Certainly," said she, in the same tone."As little was I prepared for the frank and open manner in which hespoke to me of himself.""Has he done so?" asked she, with some animation."Yes; with much candor, and much good sense too. He sees the obstacleshe has surmounted in life, and he just as plainly perceives those thatare not to be overcome.""What may these latter be?" asked she, cautiously."It is pretty obvious what they are," said he, half pettishly,--"hisfamily; his connections; his station, in fact.""How did he speak of these,--in what terms, I mean?""Modestly and fairly. He did not conceal what he owned to feel ascertain hardships, but he was just enough to acknowledge that our socialsystem was a sound one, and worked well.""It was a great admission," said she, with a very faint smile."The Radical crept out only once," said the old Lord, laughing at therecollection. "It was when I remarked that an ancient nobility, likea diamond, required centuries of crystallization to give it lustre andcoherence. 'It were well to bear in mind, my Lord,' said he, 'that itbegan by being only charcoal.'"She gave a low, quiet laugh, but said nothing."He has very sound notions in many things,--very sound, indeed. I wish,with all my heart, that more of the class he belongs to were animatedwith his sentiments. He is no advocate for pulling down; moderate,reasonable changes,--changes in conformity with the spirit of the age,in fact,--these he advocates. As I have already said, Gusty, these menare only dangerous when our own exclusiveness has made them so. Treatthem fairly, admit them to your society, listen to their arguments,refute them, show them where they have mistaken us, and they are notdangerous.""I suppose you are right," said she, musingly."Another thing astonishes me: he has no pride of purse about him; atleast, I cannot detect it. He talks of money reasonably and fairly,acknowledges what it can and what it cannot do--""And what, pray, is that?" broke she in, hastily."I don't think there can be much dispute on that score!" said he, ina voice of pique. "The sturdiest advocate for the power of wealth neverpresumed to say it could make a man,--one of us!" said he, after apause, that sent the blood to his face."But it can, and does, every day," said she, resolutely. "Our peerage isinvigorated by the wealth as well as by the talent of the class beneathit; and if Mr. Dunn be the millionnaire that common report proclaimshim, I should like to know why that wealth, and all the influence thatit wields, should not be associated with the institutions to which weowe our stability.""The wealth and the influence if you like, only not himself," said theEarl, with a saucy laugh. "My dear Augusta," he added, in a gentle tone,"he is a most excellent and a very useful man--where he is. The agesuits him, and he suits the age. We live in stirring times, when thesesharp intellects have an especial value.""You talk as if these men were your tools. Is it not just possible youmay be theirs?" said she, impatiently."What monstrous absurdity is this, child!" replied he, angrily. "Itis--it is downright--" he grew purple in the endeavor to find the rightword,--"downright Chartism!""If so, the Chartists have more of my sympathy than I was aware of."Fortunately for both, the sudden appearance of Dunn himself put an endto a discussion which each moment threatened to become perilous,and whose unpleasant effects were yet visible on their faces. LordGlengariff had not sufficiently recovered his composure to do morethan salute Mr. Dunn; while Lady Augusta's confusion was even yet moremarked. They had not walked many steps in company, when Lord Glengariffwas recalled to the cottage by the visit of a neighboring magistrate,and Lady Augusta found herself alone with Mr. Dunn."I am afraid, Lady Augusta," said he, timidly, "my coming up wasinopportune. I suspect I must have interrupted some confidentialconversation.""No, nothing of the kind," said she, frankly. "My father and I werediscussing what we can never agree upon, and what every day seems towiden the breach of opinion between us, and I am well pleased that yourarrival should have closed the subject.""I never meant to play eavesdropper, Lady Augusta," said he, earnestly;"but as I came up the grass alley I heard my own name mentionedtwice. Am I indiscreet in asking to what circumstance I owe the honor ofengaging your attention?""I don't exactly know how to tell you," said she, blushing. "Not,indeed, but that the subject was one on which your own sentiments wouldbe far more interesting than our speculations; but in repeating whatpassed between us, I might, perhaps, give an undue weight to opinionswhich merely came out in the course of conversation. In fact, Mr. Dunn,"said she, hastily, "my father and I differ as to what should constitutethe aristocracy of this kingdom, and from what sources it should beenlisted.""And was used as an illustration?" said Dunn, bowing low, but withoutthe slightest trace of irritation."You were," said she, in a low but distinct voice."And," continued he, in the same quiet tone, "Lady Augusta Ardencondescended to think and to speak more favorably of the class I belongto than the Earl her father. Well," cried he, with more energy ofmanner, "it is gratifying to me that I found the advocacy in the quarterthat I wished it. I can well understand the noble Lord's prejudices;they are not very unreasonable; the very fact that they have takencenturies to mature, and that centuries have acquiesced in them, wouldgive them no mean value. But I am also proud to think that you, LadyAugusta, can regard with generosity the claims of those beneath you.Remember, too," added he, "what a homage we render to your order whenmen like myself confess that wealth, power, and influence are all littlecompared with recognition by you and yours.""Perhaps," said she, hesitatingly, "you affix a higher value on thesedistinctions than they merit.""If you mean so far as they conduce to human happiness, I agree withyou; but I was addressing myself solely to what are called the ambitionsof life.""I have the very greatest curiosity to know what are yours," said she,abruptly."Mine! mine!" said Dunn, stammering, and in deep confusion. "I have butone.""Shall I guess it? Will you tell me, if I guess rightly?"I will, most faithfully.""Your desire is, then, to be a Cabinet Minister; you want to be wherethe administrative talents you possess will have their fitting influenceand exercise.""No, not that!" sighed he, heavily."Mere title could never satisfy an ambition such as yours; of that I amcertain," resumed she. "You wouldn't care for such an empty prize.""And yet there is a title, Lady Augusta," said he, dropping his voice,which now faltered in every word,--"there is a title to win which hasbeen the guiding spirit of my whole life. In the days of my poverty andobscurity, as well as in the full noon of my success, it never ceasedto be the goal of all my hopes. If I tremble at the presumption of evenapproaching this confession, I also feel the sort of desperate couragethat animates him who has but one throw for fortune. Yes, Lady Augusta,such a moment as this may not again occur. I know you sufficiently wellto feel that when one, even humble as I am, dares to avow--"A quick step in the walk adjoining startled both, and they looked up. Itwas Sybella Eellett, who came up with a sealed packet in her hand."A despatch, Mr. Dunn," said she; "I have been in search of you all overthe garden." He took it with a muttered "Thanks," and placed it unreadin his pocket Miss Eellett quickly saw that her presence was notdesired, and with a hurried allusion to engagements, was moving away,when Lady Augusta said,--"Wait for me, Miss Kellett; Mr. Dunn must be given time for his letters,or he will begin to rebel against his captivity." And with this shemoved away."Pray don't go, Lady Augusta," said he. "I 'm proof against businessappeals to-day." But she was already out of hearing.[Illustration:  462]Amongst the secrets which Davenport Dunn had never succeeded inunravelling, the female heart was pre-eminently distinguished. Theveriest young lady fresh from her governess or the boarding-school wouldhave proved a greater puzzle to him than the most intricate statementof a finance minister. Whether Lady Augusta had fully comprehended hisallusion, or whether, having understood it, she wished to evade thesubject, and spare both herself and him the pain of any mortifyingrejoinder, were now the difficult questions which he revolved over andover in his mind. In his utter ignorance of the sex, he endeavored tosolve the problem by the ordinary guidance of his reason, taking noaccount of womanly reserve and delicacy, still less of that "finesse" ofintelligence which, with all the certainty of an instinct, can divine atonce in what channel feelings will run, and how their course can be mostsafely directed."She must have seen to what I pointed," said he; "I spoke out plainlyenough,--perhaps too plainly. Was that the mistake I made? Was mydeclaration too abrupt? and if so, was it likely she would not haveuttered something like reproof? Her sudden departure might have thissignification, as though to say, 'I will spare you any comment; Iwill seem even not to have apprehended you.' In the rank to which shepertains, I have heard, a chief study is, how much can be avoided ofthose rough allusions which grate upon inferior existences; how to makelife calm and peaceful, divesting it so far as may be of the irritationsthat spring out of hasty words and heated tempers. In her high-brednature, therefore, how possible is it that she would reason thus, andsay, 'I will not hurt him by a direct refusal; I will not rebuke thepresumption of his wishes. He will have tact enough to appreciate myconduct, and return to the topic no more! 'And yet, how patiently shehad heard me up to the very moment of that unlucky interruption. Withouta conscious sense of encouragement I had never dared to speak as I did.Yes, assuredly, she led me on to talk of myself and my ambitions as I amnot wont to do. She went even further. She overcame objections which,to myself, had seemed insurmountable. She spoke to me like one taking adeep, sincere interest in my success; and was this feigned? or, if real,what meant it? After all, might not her manner be but another phaseof that condescension with which her 'Order' listen to the plots andprojects of inferior beings,--something begotten of curiosity as much asof interest?"In this fashion did he guess and speculate and question on a difficultywhere even wiser heads have guessed and speculated and questioned justas vaguely.At last he was reminded of the circumstance which had interrupted theirconverse,--the despatch. He took it from his pocket and looked at theaddress and the seal, but never opened it, and with a kind of half-smilereplaced it in his pocket.CHAPTER I. THE TELEGRAPHIC DESPATCH
When Mr. Davenport Dunn entered the drawing-room before dinner on that
day, his heart beat very quickly as he saw Lady Augusta Arden was there
alone. In what spirit she remembered the scene of the morning,--whether
she felt resentment towards him for his presumption, was disposed to
scoff down his pretensions, or to regard them, if not with favor,
with at least forgiveness, were the themes on which his mind was yet
dwelling. The affable smile with which she now met him did more to
resolve these doubts than all his casuistry.
"Was it not very thoughtful of me," said she, "to release you this
morning, and suffer you to address yourself to the important things
which claimed your attention? I really am quite vain of my self-denial."
"And yet, Lady Augusta," said he, in a low tone, "I had felt more
flattered if you had been less mindful of the exigency, and been more
interested in what I then was speaking of."
"What a selfish speech!" said she, laughing. "Now that my forbearance
has given you all the benefits it could confer, you turn round and say
you are not grateful for it. I suppose," added she, half pettishly, "the
despatch was not very pressing after all, and that this was the cause of
some disappointment."
"I am unable to say," replied he, calmly.
"What do you mean? Surely, when you read it--"
"But I have not read it,--there it is still, just as you saw-it," said
he, producing the packet with the seal unbroken.
"But really, Mr. Dunn," said she, and her face flushed up as she spoke,
"this does not impress me with the wonderful aptitude for affairs men
ascribe to you. Is it usual to treat these messages so cavalierly?"
"It never happened with me till this morning, Lady Augusta," said he, in
the same low tone. "Carried away by an impulse which I will not try to
account for, I had dared to speak to you of myself and of my future in a
way that showed how eventful to both might prove the manner in which you
heard me."
"Well, Dunn," cried Lord Glengariff, entering, "I suppose you have made
a day of work of it; we have never seen you since breakfast."
"On the contrary, my Lord," replied he, in deep confusion, "I have taken
my idleness in the widest sense. Never wrote a line,--not looked into a
newspaper."
"Wouldn't even open a telegraphic message which came to his hands this
morning," said Lady Augusta, with a malicious drollery in her glance
towards him.
"Incredible!" cried my Lord.
"Quite true, I assure your Lordship," said Dunn, in deeper confusion,
and not knowing what turn to give his explanation.
"The fact is," broke in Lady Augusta, hurriedly, "Mr. Dunn was so
implicit in his obedience to our prescription of perfect rest and
repose, that he made it a point of honor not even to read a telegram
without permission."
"I must say it is very flattering to us," said Lord Glengariff; "but now
let us reward the loyalty, and let him see what his news is."
Dunn looked at Lady Augusta, who, with the very slightest motion of her
head, gave consent, and he broke open the despatch.
Dunn crushed the paper angrily in his hand when he finished reading it,
and muttered some low words of angry meaning.
"Nothing disagreeable, I trust?" asked his Lordship.
"Yes, my Lord, something even worse than disagreeable," said he; then
flattening out the crumpled paper, he held it to him to read.
Lord Glengariff, putting on his spectacles, perused the document slowly,
and then, turning towards Dunn, in a voice of deep agitation, said,
"This is very disastrous indeed; are you prepared for it?"
Without attending to the question, Dunn took the despatch from Lord
Glengariff, and handed it to Lady Augusta.
"A run for gold!" cried she, suddenly. "An attempt to break the Ossory
Bank! What does it all mean? Who are they that make this attack?"
"Opponents--some of them political, some commercial, a few, perhaps, men
personally unfriendly,--enemies of what they call my success!" and he
sighed heavily on the last word. "Let me see," said he, slowly, after a
pause; "to-day is Thursday--to-morrow will be the 28th--heavy payments
are required for the Guatemala Trunk Line,--something more than forty
thousand pounds to be made up. The Parma Loan, second instalment, comes
on the 80th."
"Dinner, my Lord," said a servant, throwing open the door.
"A thousand pardons, Lady Augusta," said Dunn, offering his arm. "I am
really shocked at obtruding these annoyances upon your notice. You
see, my Lord," added he, gayly, "one of the penalties of admitting the
'working-men of life' into your society."
It was only as they passed on towards the dinner-room that Lord
Glengariff noticed Miss Kellett's absence.
"She has a headache or a cold, I believe," said Lady Augusta,
carelessly; and they sat down to dinner.
So long as the servants were present the conversation ranged over
commonplace events and topics, little indeed passing, since each seemed
too deeply impressed with grave forebodings for much inclination for
mere talking. Once alone--and Lord Glengariff took the earliest moment
to be so--they immediately resumed the subject of the ill-omened
despatch.
"You are, at all events, prepared, Dunn?" said the Earl; "this onslaught
does not take you by surprise?"
"I am ashamed to say it does, my Lord," said he, with a painful smile.
"I was never less suspectful of any malicious design upon me. I was, for
the first time perhaps in all my life, beginning to feel strong in the
consciousness that I had faithfully performed my allotted part in
the world, advanced the great interests of my country and of humanity
generally. This blow has, therefore, shocked me deeply."
"What a base ingratitude!" exclaimed Lady Augusta, indignantly.
"After all," said Dunn, generously, "let us remember that I am not
a fair judge in my own cause. Others have taken, it may be, another
reading of my character; they may deem me narrow-minded, selfish,
and ambitious. My very success--I am not going to deny it has been
great--may have provoked its share of enmity. Why, the very vastness
and extent of my projects were a sort of standing reproach to petty
speculators and small scheme-mongers."
"So that it has really come upon you unawares?" said the Earl, reverting
to his former remark.
"Completely so, my Lord. The tranquil ease and happiness I have enjoyed
under this roof--the first real holiday in a long life of toil--are the
best evidences I can offer how little I could have anticipated such a
stroke."
"Still I fervently hope it will not prove more than inconvenience," said
he, feelingly.
"Not even so much, my Lord, as regards money. I cannot believe that the
movement will be general. There is no panic in the country, rents are
paid, prices remunerating, markets better than we have seen them for
years; the sound sense and intelligence of the people will soon detect
in this attack the prompting of some personal malice. In all likelihood
a few thousands will meet the whole demand."
"I am so glad to hear you say so!" said Lady Augusta, smiling. "Really,
when I think of all our persuasions to detain you here, I never could
acquit us of some sort of share in any disaster your delay might have
occasioned."
"Oh, Dunn would never connect his visit here with such consequences,
I 'm certain," said the Earl.
"Assuredly not, my Lord," said he; and as his eyes met those of Lady
Augusta, he grew red, and felt confused.
"Are your people--your agents and men of business, I mean," said the
Earl--"equal to such an emergency as the present, or will they have to
look to you for guidance and direction?"
"Merely to meet the demand for gold is a simple matter, my Lord,"
said Dunn, "and does not require any effort of mind or forethought. To
prevent the back-water of this rushing flood submerging and engulfing
other banking-houses; to defend, in a word, the lines of our rivals and
enemies; to save from the consequences of their recklessness the very
men who have assailed us,--these are weighty cares!"
"And are you bound in honor to take this trouble in their behalf?"
"No, my Lord, not in honor any more than in law, but bound by the debt
we owe to that commercial community by whose confidence we have acquired
fortune. My position at the head of the great industrial movement in
this country imposes upon me the great responsibility that 'no injury
should befall the republic' Against the insane attacks of party hate,
factious violence, or commercial knavery, I am expected to do my duty,
nay, more, I am expected to be provided with means to meet whatever
emergency may arise,--defeat this scheme, expose that, denounce the
other. Am I wrong in calling these weighty cares?"
Self-glorification was not usually one of Davenport Dunn's
weaknesses,--indeed, "self," in any respect, was not a theme on which
he was disposed to dwell,--and yet now, for reasons which may better be
suspected than alleged, he talked in a spirit of even vain exultation
of his plans, his station, and his influence. If it was something to
display before the peer claims to national respect, which, if not so
ancient, were scarcely less imposing than his own, it was more pleasing
still to dilate upon a theme to which the peer's daughter listened so
eagerly. It was, besides, a grand occasion to exhibit the vast range of
resources, the widespread influences, and far-reaching sympathies of
the great commercial man, to show him, not the mere architect of his own
fortune, but the founder of a nation's prosperity. While he thus held
forth, and in a strain to which fervor had lent a sort of eloquence, a
servant entered with another despatch.
"Oh! I trust this brings you better news," cried Lady Augusta, eagerly;
and, as he broke the envelope, he thanked her with a grateful look.
"Well?" interposed she, anxiously, as he gazed at the lines without
speaking,--"well?"
"Just as I said," muttered Dunn, in a deep and suppressed voice,--"a
systematic plot, a deep-laid scheme against me."
"Is it still about the Bank?" asked the Earl, whose interest had been
excited by the tenor of the recent conversation.
"Yes, my Lord; they insist on making me out a bubble speculator, an
adventurer, a Heaven knows what of duplicity and intrigue. I would
simply ask them: 'Is the wealth with which this same Davenport Dunn has
enriched you real, solid, and tangible; are the guineas mint-stamped;
are the shares true representatives of value?' But why do I talk of
these people? If they render me no gratitude, they owe me none,--my
aims were higher and greater than ever they or their interests
comprehended." From the haughty defiance of his tone, his voice fell
suddenly to a low and quick key, as he said: "This message informs me
that the demand upon the Ossory to-morrow will be a great concerted
movement. Barnard, the man I myself returned last election for the
borough, is to head it; he has canvassed the county for holders of
our notes, and such is the panic that the magistrates have sent for an
increased force of police and two additional companies of infantry. My
man of business asks, 'What is to be done?'"
"And what is to be done?" asked the Earl.
"Meet it, my Lord. Meet the demand as our duty requires us."
There was a calm dignity in the manner Dunn spoke the words that had its
full effect upon the Earl and his daughter. They saw this "man of the
people" display, in a moment of immense peril, an amount of cool courage
that no dissimulation could have assumed. As they could, and did indeed
say afterwards, when relating the incident, "We were sitting at the
dessert, chatting away freely about one thing or another, when the
confirmed tidings arrived by telegraph that an organized attack was to
be made against his credit by a run for gold. You should really
have seen him," said Lady Augusta, "to form any idea of the splendid
composure he manifested. The only thing like emotion he exhibited was
a sort of haughty disdain, a proud pity, for men who should have thus
requited the great services he had been rendering to the country."
It is but just to own that he did perform his part well; he acted it,
too, as theatrical critics would say, "chastely;" that is, there was no
rant, no exaggeration,--not a trait too much, not a tint too strong.
"I wish I knew of any way to be of service to you in this emergency,
Dunn," said the Earl, as they returned to the drawing-room; "I'm no
capitalist, nor have I a round sum at my command--"
"My dear Lord," broke in Dunn, with much feeling, "of money I can
command whatever amount I want. Baring, Hope, Rothschild, any of them
would assist me with millions, if I needed them, to-morrow, which
happily, however, I do not. There is still a want which they cannot
supply, but which, I am proud to say, I have no longer to fear. The
kind sympathy of your Lordship and Lady Augusta has laid me under an
obligation--" Here Mr. Dunn's voice faltered; the Earl grasped his hand
with a generous clasp, and Lady Augusta carried her handkerchief to her
eyes as she averted her head.
"What a pack of hypocrites!" cries our reader, in disgust. No, not
so. There was a dash of reality through all this deceit. They were
moved,--their own emotions, the tones of their own voices, the workings
of their own natures, had stirred some amount of honest sentiment in
their hearts; how far it was alloyed by less worthy feeling, to what
extent fraud and trickery mingled there, we are not going to tell
you,--perhaps we could not, if we would.
"You mean to go over to Kilkenny, then, to-morrow, Dunn?" asked his
Lordship, after a painful pause.
"Yes, my Lord, my presence is indispensable."
"Will you allow Lady Augusta and myself to accompany you? I believe and
trust that men like myself have not altogether lost the influence they
once used to wield in this country, and I am vain enough to imagine I
may be useful."
"Oh, my Lord, this overwhelms me!" said Dunn, and covered his eyes with
his hand.
CHAPTER II. "THE RUN FOR GOLD"
The great Ossory Bank, with its million sterling of paid-up capital, its
royal charter, its titled directory, and its shares at a premium, stood
at the top of Patrick Street, Kilkenny, and looked, in the splendor of
its plate-glass windows and the security of its iron railings, the very
type of solvency and safety. The country squire ascended the hall-door
steps with a sort of feeling of acquaintanceship, for he had known the
Viscount who once lived there in days before the Union, and the farmer
experienced a sense of trustfulness in depositing his hard-earned gains
in what he regarded as a temple of Croesus. What an air of prosperity
and business did the interior present! The massive doors swung
noiselessly at the slightest touch, meet emblem of the secrecy that
prevailed, and the facility that pervaded all transactions, within. What
alacrity, too, in that numerous band of clerks who counted and cashed
and checked unceasingly! How calmly they passed from desk to desk, a
word, a mere whisper, serving for converse; and then what a grand and
mysterious solemnity about that back office with its double doors,
within which some venerable cashier, bald-headed and pursy, stole
at intervals to consult the oracle who dwelt within! In the spacious
apartment devoted to cash operations, nothing denoted the former destiny
of the mansion but a large fireplace, with a pretentious chimney-piece
of black oak, over which a bust of our gracious Queen now figured, an
object of wonderment and veneration to many a frieze-coated gazer.
On the morning of the 12th August, to which day we have brought our
present history, the street in front of the Bank presented a scene of no
ordinary interest. From an early hour people continued to pour in, till
the entire way was choked up with carriages and conveyances of every
description, from the well-equipped barouche of the country gentleman to
the humblest "shandradan" of the petty farmer. Sporting-looking fellows
upon high-conditioned thoroughbreds, ruddy old squires upon cobs,
and hard-featured country-folk upon shaggy ponies, were all jammed up
together amidst a dense crowd of foot passengers. A strong police-force
was drawn up in front of the Bank, although nothing in the appearance of
the assembled mass seemed to denote the necessity for their presence.
A low murmur of voices ran through the crowd as each talked to his
neighbor, consulting, guessing, and speculating, as temperament
inclined: some were showing placards and printed notices they had
received through the post; some pointed to newspaper paragraphs; others
displayed great rolls of notes; but all talked with a certain air of
sadness that appeared to presage coming misfortune. As ten o'clock drew
nigh, the hour for opening the Bank, the excitement rose to a painful
pitch; every eye was directed to the massive door, whose gorgeous brass
knocker shone with a sort of insolent brilliancy in the sun. At every
moment watches were consulted, and in muttered whispers men broke their
fears to those beside them. Some could descry the heads of people
moving about in the cash-office, where a considerable bustle appeared to
prevail; and even this much of life seemed to raise the spirits of the
crowd, and the rumor ran quickly on every side that the Bank was about
to open. At last the deep bell of the town-hall struck ten. At each fall
of the hammer all expected to see the door move, but it never stirred;
and now the pent-up feeling of the multitude might be marked in a sort
of subdued growl,--a low, ill-boding sound, that seemed ta come out
of the very earth. As if to answer the unspoken anger of the crowd,--a
challenge accepted ere given,--a heavy crash was heard, and the police
proceeded to load with ball in the face of the people,--a demonstration
whose significance there was no mistaking. A cry of angry defiance burst
from the assembled mass at the sight, but as suddenly was checked again
as the massive door was seen to move, and then, with a loud bang, fly
wide open. The rush was now tremendous. With some vague impression that
everything depended upon being amongst the first, the people poured in
with all the force of a mighty torrent. Each, fighting his way as if for
life itself, regardless of the cries of suffering about him, strove to
get forward; nor could all the efforts of the police avail to restrain
them in the slightest. Bleeding, wounded, half suffocated, with bruised
faces and clothes torn to tatters, they struggled on,--no deference
to age, no respect to condition. It was a fearful anarchy, where every
thought of the past was lost in the present emergency. On they poured,
breathless and bloody, with gleaming eyes and faces of demoniacal
meaning; they pushed, they jostled, and they tore, till the first line
gained the counter, against which the force behind now threatened to
crush them to death.
What a marvellous contrast to the storm-tossed multitude, steaming and
disfigured, was the calm attitude of the clerks within the counter!
Not deigning, as it seemed, to bestow a glance upon the agitated scene
before them, they moved placidly about, pen behind the ear, in voices of
ordinary tone, asking what each wanted, and counting over the proffered
notes with all the impassiveness of every-day habit. "Gold for these,
did you say?" they repeated, as though any other demand met the ear!
Why, the very air rang with the sound, and the walls gave back the cry.
From the wild voice of half-maddened recklessness to the murmur that
broke from fainting exhaustion, there was but one word,--"Gold!" A
drowning crew, as the surging waves swept over them, never screamed for
succor with wilder eagerness than did that tangled mass shout, "Gold,
gold!"
In their savage energy they could scarcely credit that their demands
should be so easily complied with; they were half stupefied at the
calm indifference that met their passionate appeal. They counted and
recounted the glittering pieces over and over, as though some trick were
to be apprehended, some deception to be detected. When drawn or pulled
back from the counter by others eager as themselves, they might be seen
in corners, counting over their money, and reckoning it once more. It
was so hard to believe that all their terrors were for nothing, their
worst fears without a pretext. Even yet they couldn't imagine but that
the supply must soon run short, and they kept asking those that came
away whether they, too, had got their gold. Hour after hour rolled
on, and still the same demand, and still the same unbroken flow of the
yellow tide continued. Some very large checks had been presented; but no
sooner was their authenticity acknowledged than they were paid. An agent
from another bank arrived with a formidable roll of "Ossory" notes, but
was soon seen issuing forthwith two bursting little bags of sovereigns.
Notwithstanding all this, the pressure never ceased for a moment; nay,
as the day wore on, the crowds seemed to have grown denser and more
importunate; and when the half-exhausted clerks claimed a few minutes'
respite for a biscuit and a glass of wine, a cry of impatience burst
from the insatiable multitude. It was three o'clock. In another hour the
Bank would close, as many surmised, never to open again. It was evident,
from the still increasing crowd and the excitement that prevailed, how
little confidence the ready payments of the Bank had diffused. They who
came forth loaded with gold were regarded as fortunate, while they
who still waited for their turn were in all the feverish torture of
uncertainty.
A little after three the crowd was cleft open by the passage of a large
travelling-barouche, which, with four steaming posters, advanced slowly
through the dense mass.
"Who comes here with an earl's coronet?" said a gentleman to his
neighbor, as the carriage passed. "Lord Glengariff, and Davenport Dunn
himself, by George!" cried he suddenly.
The words were as quickly caught up by those at either side, and the
news, "Davenport Dunn has arrived," ran through the immense multitude.
If there was an eager, almost intense anxiety to catch a glimpse of him,
there was still nothing that could indicate, in the slightest degree,
the state of popular feeling towards him. Slightly favorable it might
possibly have been, inasmuch as a faint effort at a cheer burst forth at
the announcement of his name; but it was repressed just as suddenly, and
it was in a silence almost awful that he descended from the carriage at
the private door of the Bank.
"Do, I beg of you, Mr. Dunn," said Lady Augusta, as he stood to assist
her to alight; "let me entreat of you not to think of us. We can be most
comfortably accommodated at the hotel."
"By all means, Dunn. I insist upon it," broke in the Earl.
"In declining my poor hospitality, my Lord," said Dunn, "you will grieve
me much, while you will also favor the impression that I am not in a
condition to offer it."
"Ah! quite true,--very justly observed. Dunn is perfectly right,
Augusta. We ought to stop here." And he descended at once, and gave his
hand to his daughter.
Lady Augusta turned about ere she entered the house, and looked at the
immense crowd before her. There was something of almost resentfulness
in the haughty gaze she bestowed; but, let us own, the look, whatever it
implied, well became her proud features; and more than one was heard to
say, "What a handsome woman she is!"
This little incident in the day's proceedings gave rise to much
conjecture, some auguring that events must be grave and menacing when
Dunn's own presence was required, others inferring that he came to give
assurance and confidence to the Bank. Nor was the appearance of Lord
Glen-gariff less open to its share of surmise; and many were the
inquiries how far he was personally interested,--whether he was a large
stockholder of the concern, or deep in its books as debtor. Leaving the
speculative minds who discussed the subject without doors, let us
follow Mr. Dunn, as, with Lady Augusta on his arm, he led the way to the
drawing-room.
The rooms were handsomely furnished, that to the back opening upon a
conservatory filled with rich geraniums, and ornamented with a pretty
marble fountain, now in full play. Indeed, so well had Dunn's orders
been attended to, that the apartments which he scarcely occupied for
above a day or so in a twelvemonth had actually assumed the appearance
of being in constant use. Books, prints, and newspapers were scattered
about, fresh flowers stood in the vases, and recent periodicals lay on
the tables.
"What a charming house!" exclaimed Lady Augusta; and, really, the
approbation was sincere, for the soft-cushioned sofas, the perfumed
air, the very quiet itself, were in delightful contrast to the heat and
discomfort of a journey by "rail."
It was in vain Dunn entreated his noble guests to accept some luncheon;
they peremptorily refused, and, in fact, declared that they would only
remain there on the condition that he bestowed no further thought upon
them, addressing himself entirely to the weighty cares around him.
"Will you, at least, tell me at what hour you'd like dinner, my Lord?
Shall we say six?"
"With all my heart. Only, once more, I beg, never think of us. We are
most comfortable here, and want for nothing."
With a deep bow of obedience, Dunn moved towards the door, when suddenly
Lady Augusta whispered a few rapid words in her father's ear.
"Stop a moment, Dunn!" cried the Earl. "Augusta is quite right. The
observation is genuine woman's wit She says I ought to go down along
with you, to show myself in the Bank; that my presence there will have a
salutary effect. Eh, what d'ye think?"
"I am deeply indebted to Lady Augusta for the suggestion," said
Dunn, coloring highly. "There cannot be a doubt that your Lordship's
countenance and support at such a moment are priceless."
"I 'm glad you think so, glad she thought of it," muttered the Earl, as
he arranged his white locks before the glass, and made a sort of hasty
toilet for his approaching appearance in public.
To judge from the sensation produced by the noble Lord's appearance
in the Bank, Lady Augusta's suggestion was admirable. The arrival of
a wagon-load of bullion could scarcely have caused a more favorable
impression. If Noah had been an Englishman, the dove would have brought
him not an olive-branch but a lord. I say it in no spirit of sarcasm or
sneer, for, coteris paribus, lords are better company than commoners;
I merely record it passingly, as a strong trait of our people and our
race. So was it now, that from the landed gentleman to the humblest
tenant-farmer, the Earl's presence seemed a fresh guarantee of solvency.
Many remarked that Dunn looked pale,--some thought anxious; but all
agreed that the hearty-faced, white-haired old nobleman at his side was
a perfect picture of easy self-satisfaction.
They took their seats in the cash-office, within the counter, to be seen
by all, and see everything that went forward. If Davenport Dunn regarded
the scene with a calm and unmoved indifference, his attention being, in
fact, more engrossed by his newspaper than by what went on around, Lord
Glengariff's quick eye and ear were engaged incessantly. He scanned the
appearance of each new applicant as he came up to the table; he listened
to his demand, noted its amount, and watched with piercing glance what
effect it might produce on the cashier. Nor was he an unmoved spectator
of the scene; for while he simply contented himself with an angry stare
at the frieze-coated peasant, he actually scowled an insolent defiance
when any of higher rank or more pretentious exterior presented himself,
muttering in broken accents beneath his breath, "Too bad, too bad!"
"Gross ingratitude!" "A perfect disgrace!" and so on.
He was at the very climax of his indignation, when a voice from the
crowd addressed him with "How d' ye do, my Lord? I was not aware you
were in this part of the country."
He put up his double eyeglass, and speedily recognized the Mr. Barnard
whom Dunn mentioned as so unworthily requiting all he had done for him.
"No, sir," said the Earl, haughtily; "and just as little did I expect to
see you here on such an errand as this. In my day, country gentlemen
were the first to give the example of trust and confidence, and not
foremost in propagating unworthy apprehensions."
"I'm not a partner in the Bank, my Lord, and know nothing of its
solvency," said the other, as he handed in two checks over the counter.
"Eight thousand six hundred and forty-eight. Three thousand, twelve,
nine, six," said the clerk, mechanically. "How will you have it, sir?"
"Bank of Ireland notes will do."
Dunn lifted his eyes from the paper, and then, raising his hat, saluted
Mr. Barnard.
"I trust you left Mrs. Barnard well?" said he, in a calm voice.
"Yes, thank you--well--quite well," said Barnard, in some confusion.
"Will you remember to tell her that she shall have the acorns of
the Italian pines next week? I have heard of their arrival at the
Custom-house."
While Barnard muttered a very confused expression of thanks, the
old Earl looked from one to the other of the speakers in a sort of
bewilderment. Where was the angry indignation he had looked for from
Dunn,--where the haughty denunciation of a black ingratitude?
"Why, Dunn, I say," whispered he, "isn't this Barnard the fellow you
spoke of,--the man you returned to Parliament t' other day?"
"The same, my Lord," replied Dunn, in a low, cautious voice. "He is here
exacting a right,--a just right,--and no more. It is not now, nor in
this place, that I would remind him how ungraciously he has treated me.
This day is his. Mine will come yet."
Before Lord Glengariff could well recover from the astonishment of this
cold and calculating patience, Mr. Hankes pushed his way through the
crowd, with an open letter in his hand.
It was a telegram just received, with an account of an attack made by
the mob on Mr. Dunn's house in Dublin. Like all such communications, the
tidings were vague and unsatisfactory: "A terrific attack by mob on
No. 18. Windows smashed, and front door broken, but not forced. Police
repulsed; military sent for."
"So much for popular gratitude, my Lord," said Dunn, as he handed the
slip of paper to the Earl. "Fortunately, it was never the prize on which
I had set my heart. Mr. Hankes," said he, in a bland, calm voice, "the
crowd seems scarcely diminished outside. Will you kindly affix a notice
on the door, to state that, to convenience the public, the Bank will on
this day continue open till five o'clock?"
"By Heaven! they don't deserve such courtesy!" cried the old Lord,
passionately. "Be as just as you please, but show them no generosity. If
it be thus they treat the men who devote their best energies, their very
lives, to the country, I, for one, say it is not a land to live in, and
I spurn them as countrymen!"
"What would you have, my Lord? The best troops have turned and fled
under the influence of a panic; the magic words, 'We are mined!' once
routed the very column that had stormed a breach! You don't expect to
find the undisciplined masses of mankind more calmly courageous than the
veterans of a hundred fights."
A wild hoarse cheer burst forth in the street at this moment, and
drowned all other sounds.
"What is it now? Are they going to attack us here?" cried the Earl.
The cry again arose, louder and wilder, and the shouts of "Dunn forever!
Dunn forever!" burst from a thousand voices.
"The placard has given great satisfaction, sir," said Hankes,
reappearing. "Confidence is fully restored."
And, truly, it was strange to see how quickly a popular sentiment spread
its influence; for they who now came forward to exchange their notes
for gold no longer wore the sturdy air of defiance of the earlier
applicants, but approached half reluctantly, and with an evident sense
of shame, as though yielding to an ignoble impulse of cowardice and
fear. The old Earl's haughty stare and insolent gaze were little
calculated to rally the diffident; for with his double eyeglass he
scanned each new-comer with the air of a man saying, "I mark, and I 'll
not forget you!"
What a contrast was Dunn's expression,--that look so full of gentle pity
and forgiveness! Nothing of anger, no resentfulness, disfigured the
calm serenity of his pale features. He had a word of recognition--even
a smile and a kind inquiry--for some of those who now bashfully tried
to screen themselves from notice. The great rush was already over; a
visible change had come over that vast multitude who so lately clamored
aloud for gold. The very aspect of that calm, unmoved face was a
terrible rebuke to their unworthy terror.
"It's nigh over, sir," whispered Hankes to his chief, as he stood with
his massive gold watch in the hollow of his hand. "Seven hundred only
have been paid out in the last twelve minutes. The battle is finished!"
The vociferous cheering without continued unceasingly, and yells for
Dunn to come forth and show himself filled the air.
"Do you hear them?" asked Lord Glengariff, looking eagerly at Dunn.
"Yes, my Lord. It is a very quick reaction. Popular opinion is generally
correct in the main; but it is rare to find it reversing its own
judgments so suddenly."
"Very dispassionately spoken, sir," said the old Lord, haughtily; "but
what if you had been unprepared for this onslaught to-day,--what if
they had succeeded in compelling you to suspend payments?"
"Had such been possible, my Lord, we would have richly deserved any
reverse that might have befallen us. What is it, Hankes?" cried he, as
that gentleman endeavored to get near him.
"You'll have to show yourself, sir; you must positively address them in
a few words from the balcony."
"I do not think so, Hankes. This is a mere momentary burst of popular
feeling."
"Not at all, sir. Listen to them now; they are shouting madly for you.
To decline the call will be taken as pride. I implore you to come out,
if only for a few minutes."
"I suppose he is right, Dunn," said Lord Glengariff, half doggedly.
"For my own part, I have not the slightest pretension to say how popular
demonstrations--I believe that is the word for them--are to be treated.
Street gatherings, in my day, were called mobs, and dispersed by horse
police; our newer civilization parleys to them and flatters them. I
suppose you understand the requirements of the times we live in."
The clamor outside was now deafening, and by its tone seemed, in some
sort, to justify what Hankes had said, that Dunn's indifference to their
demands would be construed into direct insult.
"Do it at once!" cried Hankes, eagerly, "or it will be too late. A few
words spoken now will save us thirty thousand pounds to-morrow."
This whisper in Dunn's ear decided the question, and, turning to the
Earl, he said, "I believe, my Lord, Mr. Hankes is right; I ought to show
myself."
"Come along, then," said the old Lord, heartily; and he took his arm
with an air that said, "I 'll stand by you throughout."
Scarcely had Dunn entered the drawing-room, than Lady Augusta met him,
her cheek flushed and her eyes flashing. "I am so glad," cried she,
"that you are going to address them. It is a proud moment for you."
When the window opened, and Davenport Dunn appeared on the balcony, the
wild roar of the multitude made the air tremble; for the cry was taken
up by others in remote streets, and came echoing back, again and again.
I have heard that consummate orators--men practised in all the arts of
public speaking--have acknowledged that there is no such severe test,
in the way of audience, as that mixed assemblage called a mob, wherein
every class has its representative, and every gradation its type. Now,
Dunn was not a great public speaker. The few sentences he was obliged
to utter on the occasions of his health being drunk cost him no uncommon
uneasiness; he spoke them, usually, with faltering accents and much
diffidence. It happens, however, that the world is often not displeased
at these small signs of confusion--these little defects in oratorical
readiness--in men of acknowledged ability, and even prefer them to the
rapid flow and voluble ease of more practised orators. There is, so to
say, a mock air of sincerity in the professions of a man whose feelings
seem fuller than his words,--something that implies the heart to be
in the right place, though the tongue be but a poor exponent of
its sentiments; and lastly, the world is always ready to accept the
embarrassment of the speaker as an evidence of the grateful emotions
that are swaying him. Hence the success of country gentlemen in the
House; hence the hearty cheers that follow the rambling discursiveness
of bucolic eloquence!
If Mr. Dunn was not an orator, he was a keen and shrewd observer, and
one fact he had noticed, which was that the shouts and cries of
popular assemblages are to an indifferent speaker pretty much what
an accompaniment is to a bad singer,--the aids by which he surmounts
difficult passages and conceals his false notes. Mr. Hankes, too, well
understood how to lead this orchestra, and had already taken his place
on the steps of the door beneath.
Dunn stood in front of the balcony, Lord Glengariff at his side and a
little behind him. With one hand pressed upon his heart, he bowed deeply
to the multitude. "My kind friends," said he, in a low voice, but
which was audible to a great distance, "it has been my fortune to have
received at different times of my life gratifying assurances of sympathy
and respect, but never in the whole course of a very varied career do I
remember an occasion so deeply gratifying to my feelings as the present.
(Cheers, that lasted ten minutes and more.) It is not," resumed he, with
more energy,--"it is not at a moment like this, surrounded by brave
and warm hearts, when the sentiments of affection that sway you are
mingled with the emotions of my own breast, that I would take a dark or
gloomy view of human nature, but truth compels me to say that the attack
made this day upon my credit--for I am the Ossory Bank--(loud and wild
cheering)--yes, I repeat it, for the stability of this institution
I am responsible by all I possess in this world. Every share, every
guinea, every acre I own are here! Far from me to impute ungenerous or
unworthy motives to any quarter; but, my worthy friends, there has been
foul play--(groans)--there has been treachery--(deeper groans)--and my
name is not Davenport Dunn but it shall be exposed and punished.
(Cries of "More power to ye," and hearty cheers, greeted this solemn
assurance.)
"I am, as you are well aware, and I glory in declaring it, one of
yourselves. (Here the enthusiasm was tremendous.) By moderate abilities,
hard work, and unflinching honesty--for that is the great secret--I have
become that you see me to-day! (Loud cheering.) If there be amongst you
any who aspire to my position, I tell him that nothing is easier than to
attain it. I was a poor scholar--you know what a poor scholar is--when
the generous nobleman you see now at my side first noticed me. (Three
cheers for the Lord were proposed and given most heartily.) His generous
patronage gave me my first impulse in life. I soon learned how to do the
rest. ("That ye did;" "More power and success to ye," here ran through
the mob.) Now, it was at the table of that noble Lord--enjoying
the first real holiday in thirty years of toil--that I received a
telegraphic despatch, informing me there would be a run for gold upon
this Bank before the week was over. I vow to you I did not believe it.
I spurned the tidings as a base calumny upon the people, and as I handed
the despatch to his Lordship to read, I said, 'If this be possible--and
I doubt it much--it is the treacherous intrigue of an enemy, not the
spontaneous movement of the public.' (Here Lord Glengariff bowed an
acquiescence to the statement, a condescension on his part that speedily
called for three vociferous cheers for "the Lord," once more.)
"I am no lawyer," resumed Dunn, with vigor,--"I am a plain man of the
people, whose head was never made for subtleties; but this I tell you,
that if it be competent for me to offer a reward for the discovery of
those who have hatched this conspiracy, my first care will be on my
return to Dublin to propose ten thousand pounds for such information
as may establish their guilt! (Cheering for a long time followed these
words.) They knew that they could not break the Bank,--in their hearts
they knew that our solvency was as complete as that of the Bank of
England itself,--but they thought that by a panic, and by exciting
popular feeling against me, I, in my pride of heart and my conscious
honesty, might be driven to some indignant reaction; that I might turn
round and say, Is this the country I have slaved for? Are these the
people for whose cause I have neglected personal advancement, and
disregarded the flatteries of the great? Are these the rewards of days
of labor and nights of anxiety and fatigue?"
They fancied, possibly, that, goaded by what I might have construed into
black ingratitude, I would say, like Coriolanus, 'I banish you!' But
they little knew either you or me, my warm-hearted friends! (Deafening
cheers.) They little knew that the well-grounded confidence of a nation
cannot be obliterated by the excitement of a moment. A panic in the
commercial, like a thunder-storm in the physical world, only leaves the
atmosphere lighter, and the air fresher than before; and so I say to
you, we shall all breathe more freely when we rise to-morrow,--no longer
to see the dark clouds overhead, nor hear the rumbling sounds that
betoken coming storm.
"I have detained you too long. ("No, no!" vociferously broke forth.) I
have spoken also too much about myself. ("Not a bit; we could listen to
ye till mornin'," shouted a wild voice, that drew down hearty laughter.)
But, before I go, I wish to say, that, hard pressed as we are in the
Bank--sorely inconvenienced by the demands upon us--I am yet able to ask
your excellent Mayor to accept of five hundred pounds from me for the
poor of this city--(what a yell followed this announcement! plainly
indicating what a personal interest the tidings seemed to create )--and
to add--(loud cheers)--and to add--(more cheers)--and to add," cried he,
in his deepest voice, "that the first toast I will drink this day shall
be, The Boys of Kilkenny!"
It is but justice to add that Mr. Dunn's speech was of that class of
oratory that "hears" better than it reads, while his audience was also
less critically disposed than may be our valued reader. At all events,
it achieved a great success; and within an hour after its delivery
hawkers cried through the streets of the city, "The Full and True
Account of the Run for Gold, with Mr. Dunn's Speech to the People;" and,
sooth to say, that though the paper was not "cream laid," and though
many of the letters were upside down, the literature had its admirers,
and was largely read. Later on, the city was illuminated, two immense
letters of D. D. figuring in colored lamps in front of the town-hall,
while copious libations of whiskey-punch were poured forth in honor
of the Man of the People. In every rank and class, from the country
gentleman who dined at the club-house, to the smallest chop-house in
John Street, there was but one sentiment,--that Dunn was a fine fellow,
and his enemies downright scoundrels. If a few of nicer taste and more
correct feeling were not exactly pleased with his speech, they wisely
kept their opinions to themselves, and let "the Ayes have it," who
pronounced it to be manly, above-board, modest, and so forth.
Throughout the entire evening Mr. Hankes was everywhere, personally
or through his agents; his care was to collect public sentiment, to
ascertain what popular opinion thought of the whole events of the
morning, and to promote, so far as he could with safety, the flattering
estimate already formed of his chief. Scarcely half an hour elapsed
without Dunn's receiving from his indefatigable lieutenant some small
scrap of paper, with a few words hastily scrawled in this fashion:--
"Rice and Walsh's, Nine o'clock.--Company in the coffee-room
enthusiastic; talk of a public dinner; some propose portrait in
town-hall."
"A quarter to Ten, Judy's, Rose Inn Street.--Comic song, with a
chorus:--
"'If for gold ye run,
Says the Shan van Voght;
If for gold ye run,
I'll send for Davy Dunn,
He's the boy to show ye fun,
Says the Shan van Voght!'"
"Eleven o'clock, High Street.--Met the Dean, who says, 'D. D. is an
honor to us; we are all proud of him.' The county your own when you want
it."
"Twelve o'clock.--If any one should venture to ask for gold to-morrow,
he will be torn to pieces by the mob."
Assuredly it was a triumph; and every time that the wild cheers from
the crowds in the street broke in upon the converse in the drawing-room,
Lady Augusta's eyes would sparkle as she said, "I don't wonder at your
feeling proud of it all!"
And he did feel proud of it. Strange as it may seem, he was as proud
as though the popularity had been earned by the noblest actions and the
most generous devotion. We are not going to say why or wherefore this.
And now for a season we take our leave of him to follow the fortunes
of some others whose fate we seem to have forgotten. We have the less
scruple for deserting Davenport Dunn at this moment, that we leave him
happy, prospering, and in good company.
CHAPTER III. A NOTE FROM DAVIS
Am I asking too much of my esteemed reader, if I beg of him to remember
where and how I last left the Honorable Annesley Beecher? for it is to
that hopeful individual and his fortunes I am now about to return.
If it be wearisome to the reader to have his attention suddenly drawn
from the topic before him, and his interest solicited for those he has
well-nigh forgotten, let me add that it is almost as bad for the writer,
who is obliged to hasten hither and thither, and, like a huntsman with a
straggling pack, to urge on the tardy, correct the loiterer, and repress
the eager.
When we parted with Annesley Beecher, he was in sore trouble and anxiety
of mind; a conviction was on him that he was "squared," "nobbled,"
"crossed," "potted," or something to the like intent and with a like
euphonious designation. "The Count and Spicer were conspiring to put him
in a hole!" As if any "hole" could be as dark, as hopeless, and as deep
as the dreary pitfall of his own helpless nature!
His only resource seemed flight; to break cover at once and run for it,
appeared the solitary solution of the difficulty. There was many a spot
in the map of Europe which offered a sanctuary against Grog Davis. But
what if Grog were to set the law in motion, where should he seek refuge
then? Some one had once mentioned to him a country with which no treaty
connected us with regard to criminals. It began, if he remembered
aright, with an S; was it Sardinia or Sweden or Spain or Sicily or
Switzerland? It was surely one of them, but which? "What a mass of
rubbish, to be sure," thought he, "they crammed me with at Rugby, but
not one solitary particle of what one could call useful learning! See
now, for instance, what benefit a bit of geography might be to me!" And
he rambled on in his mind, concocting an educational scheme which would
really fit a man for the wear and tear of life.
It was thus reflecting he entered the inn and mounted to his room; his
clothes lay scattered about, drawers were crammed with his wearables,
and the table covered with a toilet equipage, costly, and not yet paid
for. Who was to pack all these? Who was to make up that one portmanteau
which would suffice for flight, including all the indispensable and
rejecting the superfluous? There is a case recorded of a Frenchman who
was diverted from his resolve on suicide by discovering that his pistols
were not loaded, and, incredible as it may seem, Beecher was deterred
from his journey by the thought of how he was to pack his trunk; He had
never done so much for himself since he was born, and he did n't
think he could do it; at all events, he wasn't going to try. Certain
superstitious people are impressed with the notion that making a will
is a sure prelude to dying; so others there are who fancy that, by
the least effort on their own behalf, they are forecasting a state of
poverty in which they must actually work for subsistence.
How hopelessly, then, did he turn over costly waistcoats and embroidered
shirts, gaze on richly cut and crested essence-bottles and boot-boxes,
whose complexity resembled mathematical instruments! In what manner they
were ever conveyed so far he could not imagine. The room seemed actually
filled with them. It was Rivers had "put them up;" but Rivers could no
longer be trusted, for he was evidently in the "lay" against him.
He sighed heavily at this: it was a dreary, hopeless sigh over the
depravity of the world and mankind in general. "And what a paradise it
might be," he thought, "if people would only let themselves be cheated
quietly and peaceably, neither threatening with their solicitors, nor
menacing with the police. Heaven knew how little he asked for: a safe
thing now and then on the Derby, a good book on the Oaks; he wanted
no more! He bore no malice nor ill-will to any man breathing; he never
wished to push any fellow to the wall. If ever there was a generous
heart, it beat in his bosom; and if the world only knew the
provocation he had received! No matter, he would never retaliate,--he 'd
die game, be a brick to the last;" and twenty other fine things of the
same sort that actually brought the tears to his own eyes over his own
goodness.
Goodness, however, will not pack a trunk, nor will moral qualities,
however transcendent, fold cravats and dress-coats, and he looked very
despondently around him, and thought over what he half fancied was the
only thing he could n't do. So accustomed had he been of late to seek
Lizzy Davis's counsel in every moment of difficulty, that actually,
without knowing it, he descended now to the drawing-room, some vague,
undefined feeling impelling him to be near her.
She was singing at the piano, all alone, as he entered; the room, as
usual, brilliantly lighted up as if to receive company, rare flowers and
rich plants grouped tastefully about, and "Daisy"--for she looked
that name on this occasion--in one of those charming "toilettes" whose
consummate skill it is to make the most costly articles harmonize into
something that seems simplicity itself. She wore a fuchsia in her
hair, and another--only this last was of coral and gold elaborately
and beautifully designed--on the front of her dress, and, except these,
nothing more of ornament.
"Tutore mio," said she, gayly, as he entered, "you have treated me
shamefully; for, first of all, you were engaged to drive with me to
the Kreutz Berg, and, secondly, to take me to the opera, and now,
at half-past nine, you make your appearance. How is this, Monsieur?
Expliquez-vous."
"Shall I tell the truth?" said he.
"By all means, if anything so strange should n't embarrass you."
"Well, then, I forgot all about both the drive and the opera. It's all
very well to laugh," said he, in a tone of half pique; "young ladies,
with no weightier cares on their hearts than whether they ought to wear
lilac or green, have very little notion of a man's anxieties. They fancy
that life is a thing of white and red roses, soft music and bouquets;
but it ain't."
"Indeed! are you quite sure?" asked she, with an air of extreme
innocence.
"I suspect I am," said he, confidently; "and there's not many a man
about town knows more of it than I do."
"And now, what may be the cares, or, rather, for I don't want to be
curious, what sort of cares are they that oppress that dear brain? Have
you got any wonderful scheme for the amelioration of mankind to which
you see obstacles? Are your views in politics obstructed by ignorance
or prejudice? Have you grand notions about art for which the age is not
ripe; or are you actually the author of a wonderful poem that nobody has
had taste enough to appreciate?"
"And these are your ideas of mighty anxieties, Miss Lizzy?" said he,
in a tone of compassionate pity. "By Jove! how I'd like to have nothing
heavier on my heart than the whole load of them."
"I think you have already told me you never were crossed in love?"
"Well, nothing serious, you know. A scratch or so, as one may say,
getting through the bushes, but never a cropper,--nothing like a regular
smash."
"It would seem to me, then, that you have enjoyed a singularly fortunate
existence, and been just as lucky in life as myself."
Beecher started at the words. What a strange chaos did they create
within him! There is no tracing the thoughts that came and went, and
lost themselves in that poor bewildered head. The nearest to anything
like, consistency was the astonishment he felt that she--Grog Davis's
daughter--should ever imagine she had drawn a prize in the world's
lottery.
"Yes, Mr. Beecher," said she, with the ready tact with which she often
read his thoughts and answered them, "even so. I do think myself very,
very fortunate! And why should I not? I have excellent health, capital
spirits, fair abilities, and, bating an occasional outbreak of anger, a
reasonably good temper. As regards personal traits, Mr. Annesley Beecher
once called me beautiful; Count Lienstahl would say something twice
as rapturous; at all events, quite good-looking enough not to raise
antipathies against me at first sight; and lastly, but worth all the
rest, I have an intense enjoyment in mere existence; the words 'I live'
are to me, 'I am happy.' The alternations of life, its little incidents
and adventures, its passing difficulties, are, like the changeful
aspects of the seasons, full of interest, full of suggestiveness,
calling out qualities of mind and resources of temperament that in
the cloudless skies of unbroken prosperity might have lain unused and
unknown. And now, sir, no more sneers at my fancied good fortune; for,
whatever you may say, I feel it to be real."
There was that in her manner--a blended energy and grace--which went
far deeper into Beecher's heart than her mere words, and he gazed at
her slightly flushed cheek and flashing eyes with something very nearly
rapture; and he muttered to himself, "There she is, a half-bred 'un, and
no training, and able to beat them all!"
This time, at all events, she did not read his thoughts; as little,
perhaps, did she care to speculate about them. "By the by," said she,
suddenly approaching the chimney and taking up a letter, "this has
arrived here, by private hand, since you went out, and it has a
half-look of papa's writing, and is addressed to you."
Beecher took it eagerly. With a glance he recognized it as from Grog,
when that gentleman desired to disguise his hand.
"Am I correct?" asked she,--"am I correct in my guess?"
He was too deep in the letter to make her any reply. Its contents were
as follows:--
"Dear B.,--They 've kicked up such a row about that affair
at Brussels that I have been obliged to lie dark for the
last fortnight, and in a confoundedly stupid hole on the
right bank of the Rhine. I sent over Spicer to meet the
Baron, and take Klepper over to Nimroeguen and Magdeburg,
and some other small places in Prussia. They can pick up in
this way a few thousand florins, and keep the mill going. I
gave him strict orders not to see my daughter, who must know
nothing whatever of these or any like doings. The Baron she
might see, for he knows life thoroughly, and if he is not a
man of high honor, he can assume the part so well that it
comes pretty much to the same thing. As to yourself, you
will, on receipt of this, call on a certain Lazarus Stein,
Juden Gasse, Nov 41 or 42, and give him your acceptance for
two thousand gulden, with which settle your hotel bill, and
come on to Bonn, where, at the post-office, you will find a
note, with my address. Tramp, you see, has won the
Cotteswold, as I prophesied, and 'Leo the Tenth' nowhere.
Cranberry must have got his soup pretty hot, for he has come
abroad, and his wife and the children gone down to Scotland.
As to your own affairs, Ford says you are better out of the
way; and if anything is to be done in the way of
compromise, it must be while you are abroad. He does not
think Strich can get the rule, and you must n't distress
yourself for an extra outlawry or two. There will be some
trouble about the jewels, but I think even that matter may
be arranged also. I hope you keep from the tables, and I
look for a strict reckoning as to your expenses, and a
stricter book up as regards your care of my daughter. 'All
square' is the word between pal and pal, and there never
was born the man did n't find that to be his best policy
when he dealt with
"Your friend,
"Christopher Davis.
"To while away the time in this dreary dog-hole, I have been
sketching out a little plan of a martingale for the
roulette-table. There's only one zero at Homburg, and we can
try it there as we go up. There's a flaw in it after the
twelfth 'pass,' but I don't despair of getting over the
difficulty. Old Stein, the money-changer, was upwards of
thirty years croupier at the Cursaal, and get him to tell
you the average runs, black and red, at rouge-et-noir, and
what are the signs of an intermitting game; and also the
six longest runs he has ever known. He is a shrewd fellow,
and seeing that you come from me will be confidential.
"There has been another fight in the Crimea, and somebody
well licked. I had nothing on the match, and don't care a
brass farthing who claimed the stakes.
"Tell Lizey that I 'm longing to see her, and if I didn't
write it is because I 'm keeping everything to tell her when
we meet. If it was n't for her picture, I don't know what
would have become of me since last Tuesday, when the rain
set in."
Beecher re-read the letter from the beginning; nor was it an easy matter
for him to master at once all the topics it included. Of himself and his
own affairs the information was vague and unsatisfactory; but Grog knew
how to keep him always in suspense,--to make him ever feel that he was
swimming for his life, and he himself the only "spar" he could catch at.
"Bring me to book about my care of his daughter!" muttered he, over and
over, "just as if she was n't the girl to take care of herself. Egad! he
seems to know precious little about her. I 'd give a 'nap' to show her
this letter, and just hear what she 'd say of it all. I suppose she 'd
split on me. She 'd go and tell Davis, 'Beecher has put me up to
the whole "rig;"' and if she did--What would happen then?" asked he,
replying to the low, plaintive whistle which concluded his meditation.
"Eh--what! did I say anything?" cried he, in terror.
"Not a syllable. But I could see that you had conjured up some
difficulty which you were utterly unable to deal with."
"Well, here it is," said he, boldly. "This letter is from your father.
It's all full of private details, of which you know nothing, nor would
you care to hear; but there is one passage--just one--that I'd greatly
like to have your opinion upon. At the same time I tell you, frankly, I
have no warranty from your father to let you see it; nay, the odds are
he 'd pull me up pretty sharp for doing so without his authority."
"That's quite enough, Mr. Beecher, about your scruples. Now, mine go
a little further still; for they would make me refuse to learn anything
which my father's reserve had kept from me. It is a very easy rule of
conscience, and neither hard to remember nor to follow."
"At all events, he meant this for your own eye," said Beecher, showing
her the last few lines of the letter.
She read them calmly over; a slight trembling of the lip--so slight that
it seemed rather like a play of light over her face--was the only sign
of emotion visible, and then, carefully folding the letter, she gave it
back, saying, "Yes, I had a right to see these lines."
"He is fond of you, and proud of you, too," said Beecher. A very
slight nod of her head gave an assent to his remark, and she was silent.
"We are to leave this at once," continued he, "and move on to Bonn,
where we shall find a letter with your father's address, somewhere,
I take it, in that neighborhood." He waited, hoping she would say
something, but she did not speak. And then he went on:
"And then you will be once more at home,--emancipated from this tiresome
guardianship of mine."
"Why tiresome?" asked she, suddenly.
"Oh, by Jove! I know I' m very slow sort of fellow as a ladies' man;
have none of the small talents of those foreigners; couldn't tell Mozart
from Verdi; nor, though I can see when a woman is well togged, could I
tell you the exact name of any one part of her dress."
"If you really did know all these, and talked of them, I might have
found you very tiresome," said she, in that half-careless voice she
used when seeming to think aloud. "And you," asked she, suddenly, as
she turned her eyes fully upon him,--"and you, are you to be emancipated
then,--are you going to leave us?"
"As to that," replied he, in deep embarrassment, "there 'a a sort of
hitch in it I ought, if I did the right thing, to be on my way to Italy
now, to see Lackington,--my brother, I mean. I came abroad for that; but
Gr--your father, I should say--induced me to join him, and so, with
one thing and the other, here I am, and that's really all I know about
it."
"What a droll way to go through life!" said she, with one of her low,
soft laughs.
"If you mean that I have n't a will of my own, you 're all wrong," said
he, in some irritation. "Put me straight at my fence, and see if I won't
take it. Just say, 'A. B., there's the winning-post,' and mark whether I
won't get my speed up."
What a strange glance was that which answered this speech! It implied no
assent; as little did it mean the reverse. It was rather the look of one
who, out of a maze of tangled fancies, suddenly felt recalled to life
and its real interests. To poor Beecher's apprehension it simply seemed
a sort of half-compassionate pity, and it made his cheek tingle with
wounded pride.
"I know," muttered he to himself, "that she thinks me a confounded fool;
but I ain't. Many a fellow in the ring made that mistake, and burned his
fingers for it after."
"Well," said she, after a moment or so of thought, "I am ready; at
least, I shall be ready very soon. I 'll tell Annette to pack up and
prepare for the road."
"I wish I could get you to have some better opinion of me, Miss Lizzy,"
said he, seriously. "I'd give more than I 'd like to say, that you
'd--you 'd--"
"That I'd what?" asked she, calmly.
"That you 'd not set me down as a regular flat," said he, with energy.
"I 'm not very certain that I know what that means; but I will tell
you that I think you very good tempered, very gentle-natured, and very
tolerant of fifty-and-one caprices which must be all the more wearisome
because unintelligible. And then, you are a very fine gentleman,
and--the Honor-Able Annesley Beecher." And holding out her dress in
minuet fashion, she courtesied deeply, and left the room.
"I wish any one would tell me whether I stand to win or not by that
book," exclaimed Beecher, as he stood there alone, nonplussed and
confounded. "Would n't she make a stunning actress! By Jove! Webster
would give her a hundred a week, and a free benefit!" And with this
he went off into a little mental arithmetic, at the end of which he
muttered to himself, "And that does not include starring it in the
provinces!"
With the air of a man whose worldly affairs went well, he arranged his
hair before the glass, put on his hat, gave himself a familiar nod, and
went out.
CHAPTER IV. LAZARUS, STEIN, GELDWECHSLER
The Juden Gasse, in which Beecher was to find out the residence of
Lazarus Stein, was a long, straggling street, beginning in the town and
ending in the suburb, where it seemed as it were to lose itself. It was
not till after a long and patient search that Beecher discovered a small
door in an old ivy-covered wall, on which, in irregular letters, faint
and almost illegible, stood the words, "Stein, Geldwechsler."
As he rang stoutly at the bell, the door opened, apparently of itself,
and admitted him into a large and handsome garden. The walks were
flanked by fruit-trees in espalier, with broad borders of rich flowers
at either side; and although the centre spaces were given up to the
uses of a kitchen garden, the larger beds, rich in all the colors of the
tulip and ranunculus, showed how predominant was the taste for flowers
over mere utility. Up one alley, and down another, did Beecher saunter
without meeting any one, or seeing what might mean a habitation; when,
at length, in a little copse of palm-trees, he caught sight of a smalt
diamond-paned window, approaching which, he found himself in front of
a cottage whose diminutive size he had never seen equalled, save on
the stage. Indeed, in its wooden framework, gaudily painted, its quaint
carvings, and its bamboo roof, it was the very type of what one sees
in a comic opera. One sash of the little window lay open, and showed
Beecher the figure of a very small old man, who, in a long dressing-gown
of red-brown stuff, and a fez cap, was seated at a table, writing. A
wooden tray in front of him was filled with dollars and gold pieces in
long stately columns, and a heap of bank-notes lay pressed under a heavy
leaden slab at his side. No sooner had Beecher's figure darkened the
window than the old man looked up and came out to meet him, and, taking
off his cap with a deep reverence, invited him to enter. If the size of
the chamber, and its curious walls covered over with cabinet pictures,
might have attracted Beecher's attention at another moment, all his
wonderment, now, was for the little man himself, whose piercing black
eyes, long beard, and hooked nose gave him an air of almost unearthly
meaning.
"I suppose I have the honor to speak to Mr. Stein?" said he, in English,
"and that he can understand me in my own tongue?"
"Yaas,--go on," said the old man.
"I was told to call upon you by Captain Davis; he gave me your address."
"Ah, der Davis--der Davis--a vaary goot man--my vaary dear friend. You
are der rich Englander that do travel wit him,--eh?"
"I am travelling with him just now," said Beecher, laughing slightly;
"but as to being rich,--why, we 'll not dispute about it."
"Yaas, here is his letter. He says, Milord will call on you hisself, and
so I hold myself--how you say 'bereit?'--ready--hold myself ready to see
you. I have de honor to make you very mush welcome to my poor house."
Beecher thanked him courteously, and, producing Davis's letter,
mentioned the amount for which he desired to draw.
The old man examined the writing, the signature, and then the seal,
handing the document back when he had finished, muttering to himself,
"Ah, der Davis--der Davis!"
"You know my friend very intimately, I believe?" asked Beecher.
"I belief I do,--I belief I do," said he, with a low chuckle to himself.
"So he mentioned to me and added one or two little matters on which I
was to ask you for some information. But first this bill,--you can let
me have these two thousand florins?"
"And what do he do now, der Davis?" asked the Jew, not heeding the
question.
"Well, I suppose he rubs on pretty much the same as ever," said Beecher,
in some confusion.
"Yaas--yaas--he rub on--and he rub off, too, sometimes--ha! ha! ha!"
laughed out the old man, with a fiendish cackle. "Ach, der Davis!"
Without knowing in what sense to take the words, Beecher did not exactly
like them; and as little was he pleased with that singular recurrence
to "der Davis," and the little sigh that followed. He was growing
impatient, besides, to get his money, and again reverted to the
question.
"He look well? I hope he have de goot gesundheit--what you call it?"
"To be sure he does; nothing ever ails him. I never heard him complain
of as much as a headache.
"Ach, der Davis, der Davis!" said the old man, shaking his head.
Seeing no chance of success by his direct advances, Beecher thought he
'd try a little flank attack by inducing a short conversation, and so he
said, "I am on my way to Davis, now, with his daughter, whom he left in
my charge."
"Whose daughter?" asked the Jew.
"Davis's,--a young lady that was educated at Brussels."
"He have no daughter. Der Davis have no daughter."
"Has n't he, though? Just come over to the 'Four Nations,' and I 'll
show her to you. And such a stunning girl too!"
"No, no, I never belief it--never; he did never speak to me of a
daughter."
"Whether he did or not--there she is, that's all I know."
The Jew shook his head, and sought refuge in his former muttering of
"Ach, der Davis!"
"As far as not telling you about his daughter, I can say he never told
me, and I fancy we were about as intimate as most people; but the fact
is as I tell you."
Another sigh was all his answer, and Beecher was fast reaching the limit
of his patience.
"Daughter, or no daughter, I want a matter of a couple of thousand
florins,--no objection to a trifle more, of course,--and wish to know
how you can let me have them."
"The Margraf was here two week ago, and he say to me, 'Lazarus,' say
he,--'Lazarus, where is your goot friend Davis?' 'Highness,' say I, 'dat
I know not.' Den he say, 'I will find him, if I go to Jerusalem;' and I
say, 'Go to Jerusalem.'"
"What did he want with him?"
"What he want?--what every one want, and what nobody get, except how he
no like--ha! ha! ha! Ach, der Davis!"
Beecher rose from his seat, uncertain how to take this continued
inattention to his demand. He stood for a moment in hesitation, his eyes
wandering over the walls where the pictures were hanging.
"Ah! if you do care for art, now you suit yourself, and all for a
noting! I sell all dese,--dat Gerard Dow, dese two Potters, de leetle
Cuyp,--a veritable treasure, and de Mieris,--de best he ever painted,
and de rest, wit de land-schaft of Both, for eighty tousand seven
hundred florins. It is a schenk--a gift away--noting else."
"You forget, my excellent friend Stein," said Beecher, with more
assurance than he had yet assumed, "that it was to receive and not spend
money I came here this morning."
"You do a leetle of all de two--a leetle of both, so to say," replied
the Jew. "What moneys you want?"
"Come, this is speaking reasonably. Davis's letter mentions a couple of
thousand florins; but if you are inclined to stretch the amount to five,
or even four thousand, we 'll not fall out about the terms."
"How you mean--no fall out about de terms?" said the other, sharply.
"I meant that for a stray figure or so, in the way of discount, we
should n't disagree. You may, in fact, make your own bargain."
"Make my own bargain, and pay myself too," muttered the Jew. "Ach, der
Davis, how he would laugh!--ha! ha! ha!"
"Well, I don't see much to laugh at, old gent, except it be at my own
folly, to stand here so long chaffering about these paltry two thousand
florins. And now I say, 'Yea or nay, will you book up, or not?'"
"Will you buy de Cuyp and de Wouvermans and de Ostade?--dat is the
question."
"Egad, if you furnish the ready, I 'll buy the Cathedral and the
Cursaal. I 'm not particular as to the investment when the cash is
easily come at."
"De cash is very easy to come at," said the Jew, with a strange grin.
"You 're a trump, Lazarus!" cried Beecher, in ecstasy at his good
fortune. "If I had known you some ten years ago, I 'd have been
another man to-day. I was always looking out for one really fair,
honester-hearted fellow to deal with, but I never met with him till
now."
"How you have it,--gold or notes?" said Lazarus.
"Well, a little of both, I think," said Beecher, his eyes greedily
devouring the glittering little columns of gold before him.
"How your title?--how your name?" asked Stein, taking up a pen.
"My name is Annesley Beecher. You may write me the 'Honorable Annesley
Beecher.'"
"Lord of--"
"I 'm not Lord of anything. I'm next in succession to a peerage, that's
all."
"He call you de Viscount--I forget de name."
"Lackington, perhaps?"
"Yaas, dat is de name; and say, give him de moneys for his bill. Now,
here is de acceptance, and here you put your sign, across dis."
"I 'll write Annesley Beecher, with all my heart; but I 'll not write
myself Lackington."
"Den you no have de moneys, nor de Cuyp, nor de Ostade," said the Jew,
replacing the pen in the ink-bottle.
"Just let me ask you, old boy, how would it benefit you that I should
commit a forgery? Is that the way you like to do business?"
"I do know myself how I like my business to do, and no man teach me."
"What the devil did Davis mean, then, by sending me on this fool's
errand? He gave me a distinct intimation that you 'd cash my
acceptance--"
"Am I not ready? You never go and say to der Davis dat I refuse it! Ah,
der Davis!" and he sighed as if from the very bottom of his heart.
"I'll tell him, frankly, that you made it a condition I was to sign a
name that does not belong to me,--that I 'll tell him."
"What care he for dat? Der Davis write his own name on it and pay it
hisself."
"Oh! and Davis was also to indorse this bill, was he?" asked Beecher.
"I should tink he do; oderwise I scarce give you de moneys."
"That, indeed, makes some difference. Not, in reality, that it would
n't be just as much a forgery; but if the bill come back to Grog's own
hands--"
"Ach, der Grog,--ha! ha! ha! 'Tis so long dat I no hear de name,--Grog
Davis!" and the Jew laughed till his eyes ran over.
"If there's no other way of getting at this money--"
"Dere is no oder way," said Lazarus, in a tone of firmness..
"Then good-morning, friend Lazarus, for you 'll not catch me spoiling
a stamp at that price. No, no, old fellow. I 'm up to a thing or two,
though you don't suspect it. I only rise to the natural fly, and no
mistake."
"I make no mistake; I take vaary goot care of dat," said Lazarus,
rising, and taking off his fez, to say adieu. "I wish you de vaary goot
day."
Beecher turned away, with a stiff salutation, into the garden. He was
angry with Davis, with himself, and with the whole world. It was a
rare event in his life to see gold so much within his reach and yet not
available, just for a scruple--a mere scruple--for, after all, what was
it else? Writing "Lackington" meant nothing, if Lack-ington were never
to see, much less to pay the bill. Once "taken up," as it was sure to
be by Grog, what signified it if the words across the acceptance were
Lackington or Annesley Beecher? And yet, what could Davis mean by
passing him off as the Viscount? Surely, for such a paltry sum as a
couple of thousand florins, it was not necessary to assume his brother's
name and title. It was some "dodge," perhaps, to acquire consequence in
the eyes of his friend Lazarus that he was the travelling-companion of
an English peer; and yet, if so, it was the very first time Beecher had
known him yield to such a weakness. He had a meaning in it, that much
was certain, for Grog made no move in the game of life without a plan!
"It can't be," muttered Beecher to himself,--"it can't be for the sake
of any menace over me for the forgery, because he has already in his
hands quite enough to push me to the wall on that score, as he takes
care to remind me he might any fine morning have me 'up' on that
charge." The more Beecher ruminated over what possible intention
Davis might have in view, the more did he grow terrified, lest, by any
short-comings on his own part, he might thwart the great plans of his
deep colleague.
"I never met his equal yet to put a fellow in a cleft stick," muttered
Beecher, as he walked to and fro in intense agitation, "and he's just
the man also, whenever anything goes wrong, not to listen to a word of
explanation. 'Why didn't you do as I bade you?' or, 'As I ordered you?'
for that's his phrase generally. 'Who told you that you had any option
in the matter? Did I take you into consultation? Play up to my
hand!' that's his cry. 'Play up to my hand, and never mind your own!'
Well, I have been doing so some ten or twelve years back, and a nice
game I've made of it! Break with him!--of course I'd break with him,
if any one would tell me how! Egad, sometimes I begin to think that
transportation and the rest of it would not be a bit harder to bear
than old Grog's tyranny! It wears one out,--it positively drains a man's
nature dry!" There are volcanic throes, that, however they may work
and struggle, throw up no lava; so with Beecher. All his passionate
indignation could not rouse him to action, although his actual suffering
might have prompted energy to any amount. He took out Davis's letter and
re-read it. One line which had escaped his attention before, now caught
his eye on the blank leaf. It ran thus: "Take care that you do not delay
at Aix after receipt of this. Benson's fellows are after you." A cold
shudder came over Beecher as he perused the line. Benson's fellows
meant bailiffs, detectives, or something of the like. Benson was a
money-lender of the most inveterate villany,--a fellow who had pursued
more men of station and condition than any one living. He was the
terror of the "swells." To be in Benson's hands meant ruin in its most
irretrievable shape; and at the very moment he stood there his minions
were on his track!
Ere he was well aware of it, he was back at the little window of the
cottage.
"I must have this money on your own terms, Stein," said he. "I find that
Davis has some urgent need of my presence. I can't delay here another
day."
"How many tousend gulden, milord?" asked the Jew respectfully, as he
dipped his pen in the ink-bottle.
"Davis says two--I should like to say four, or even five."
"Five if you wish it, milord; to me is it all as one--five, fifteen, or
fifty; whatever sum you want."
Beecher put his hand on the other's wrist to detain him while he took
a moment's counsel with himself. Never had such a golden opportunity
as this presented itself. Never before had he seen the man who so
generously proffered his services. It was ask and have. Was he to reject
such good fortune?--was he to turn his back on the very first piece of
luck that had ever befallen him? What heartburnings might he be storing
up for future years when he looked back to the time that, with a word,
he might have made his fortune!
"But are you quite sure, friend Lazarus, that if I say eight or ten
thousand,--for I don't want more,--Davis will be as willing to back the
bill?"
"I am quite sure."
"Well, now, I am not so very certain of that; and as it is Davis will
have to book up, it might be safer, perhaps, that I did n't go beyond
the amount he mentions,--eh?"
"As you will,--as you please yourself. I only say, dere is der Herr
Davis's name; he send it to me and say, 'Milord will do de rest.'"
"So that he sent you a blank acceptance?" cried Beecher, in amazement.
"Yaas, Just as you see,--'Christopher Davis,' and de flourish as usual.
Ach, der Davis!" and he sighed once more.
The man who held Grog's signature on a blank stamp assumed no common
shape in Annesley Beecher's eyes, and he continued to gaze on the old
man with a strange sense of awe and astonishment. If he had not the
document there before him on the table, he would not have believed it.
The trustful courage of Van Amburgh, who used to place his head in the
lion's mouth, seemed poor in comparison with such heroic boldness as
this; and he gazed at the writing in a sort of fascination.
"And Grog actually sent you that over by letter?" asked he again.
"Yaas, as you see," was the calm answer.
"Well, here goes then, Abraham--Lazarus, I mean; make it out for a
matter of--five--no, eight--hang it, let as say ten thousand florins
when we are about it! Ten thousand, at six months,--eh?"
"Better at tree months,--we can always renew," said Stein, calmly.
"Of course; and by that time we may want a little more liquor in the
decanter,--eh! old boy?" said Beecher, laughing joyfully.
"To be sure, vaary mush more liquor as you want it."
"What a brick!" said Beecher, clapping him on the shoulder in all the
ecstasy of delight.
"Dere!" said the Jew, as he finished writing, "all is done; only to say
where it be paid,--what bank at London."
"Well, that is a bit of a puzzle, I must own!" said Beecher, rubbing his
chin with an air of doubt and hesitation.
"Where do de Lord Lackington keep his account?" asked the Jew; and the
question was so artfully posed that Beecher Answered promptly,--
"Harmer and Gore's, Lombard Street, or Pall Mall, whichever you like."
"Hanper and Gore. I know dem vaary well,--that will do; you do sign your
name dere."
"I wish I could persuade you that Annesley Beecher would be
enough,--eh?"
"You write de name as der Davis say, and no oder!"
"Here goes, then! 'In for a penny,' as the proverb says," muttered he;
and in a bold, dashing hand, wrote "Lackington" across the bill.
[Illustration: 058]
"Ah!" said the Jew, as he examined it with his glass, and scanned every
letter over and over; "and now, vat you say for de Cuyp, and de Mieris,
and de Ostade,--vill you take 'era all, as I say?"
"I 'll think over it,--I 'll reflect a bit first, Master Stein. As for
pictures, they 're rather an encumbrance when a man has n't a house to
hang them in."
"You have de vaary fine house in town, and an oder vaary fine house in
de country, beside a what you call box--shoot-box--"
"Nothing of the kind, Lazarus. I haven't a thing as big as the crib
we are standing in. Your mind is always running upon my brother; but
there's a wide difference between our fortunes, I assure you. He drew
the first ticket in the lottery of life; and, by the way, that reminds
me of something in Grog's letter that I was to ask you." And Beecher
took the epistle from his pocket and ran his eye over it. "Ah! here it
is! 'Ask Stein what are the average runs at rouge-et-noir, what are
the signs of an intermitting game, and what are the longest runs he
remembers on one color?' Can you answer me these?"
"Some of dem I have here," said Stein, taking down from a shelf a small
vellum-bound volume, fastened with a padlock and chain, the key of which
he wore attached to his watch. "Here is de grand 'arcanum,'" said he,
laughing; "here are de calculs made in de experience of forty-one
year! Where is de man in Europe can say as mush as dat? In dis book is
recounted de great game of de Duc de Brancas, where he broke de bank
every night of de week till Saturday,--two million tree hundred tousand
francs! Caumartin, the first croupier, shot hisself, and Nogeot go mad.
He reckon de moneys in de casette, for when he say on Friday night,
'Monseigneur,' say he, 'we have not de full sum here,--there's one
hundred and seventy tousand francs too little,' de Duc reply, 'Never
mind, mon cher Monsieur Nogeot, I am noways pressed,--don't distress
yourself,--only let it be pay before I go home to bed.' Nogeot lose his
reason when he hear it. Ah! here is de whole 'Greschichte,' and here de
table of chances."
Beecher gazed on the precious volume as Aladdin might have done on the
lamp. It was the mystic key to untold riches. With that marvellous
book a man needed no more in life; there lay all the "cabals," all the
"martingales," that years of intense toil and deep study had discovered.
To win that knowledge, too, what hearts had been broken, what
desolation, what death! It was a record of martyrs in his eyes, and he
really regarded it with a sort of rapturous veneration.
Old Lazarus did not fail to detect the expression of wonderment and
admiration. He saw depicted there the glowing ecstasy that all
the triumphs of high art could not call up. The vigorous energy of
Wouvermans, the glowing coloring of Cuyp, the mellow richness of Mieris,
had not touched that nature which now vibrated in every chord to the
appeal of Fortune. It was the submissive worship of a devotee before
some sacred relic! Stein read that gaze, and tracked its every motive;
and with a solemn gesture he clasped the volume and locked it.
"But you are surely going to show me--I mean, you are about to tell me
the answer to these questions?"
Stein shook his head dubiously, as he said: "Dat is my Kleinod, my
idol,--in dat book lie de secret of secrets, and I say to myself,
'Lazarus, be poor, be destitute, be houseless to-morrow, and you know
how to get rich if you will.' De great law of Chances--de rule dat guide
what we call 'Luck'--dere it is written! I have but to say I will have,
and I have! When I die, I will burn it, or have it lay wit me in my
grave."
"It's not possible you could do this!" cried Beecher, in horror: far
less of indignation had it cost him to hear that any one should carry
out of the world with him the cure of cancer, of cholera, or some such
dread scourge of poor humanity. The black-hearted selfishness of such a
crime seemed without a parallel, and for a second or two, as he
looked at the decrepid object before him, and saw the lonely spot, the
isolation, and the propitious moment, a strange wild thought flashed
across his mind that it might be not only pardonable, but praiseworthy,
to seize upon and carry it off by force.
Whether the old man read what was passing within him is hard to say, but
he returned the other's look as steadily and as fiercely, and Beecher
felt abashed and cowed.
"I' ll tell you what, Stein," said he, after a pause, "I 'll buy that
same old volume of yours, just for the curiosity of the thing, and I 'll
make you a sporting offer,--I 'll give you ten thousand francs for it!"
A low wailing whistle of utter contempt was all the Jew replied.
"Well, it's a splendid bid, if you come to think of it; for, just
suppose it be everything you say--and I own I can't believe it is,--but
suppose it were, who is to guarantee the continuance of these great
public play-tables? All the Governments of Europe are setting their
faces against them,--not a year passes without one or two being closed.
This very spring there was a talk of suppressing play at Baden. Who can
tell what the first outbreak of fanatic zeal may effect?"
"No, no. So long as men live, dey will do tree tings,--make love, make
war, and gamble. When dey give up dese, de world shut up."
There was a truthful force about this Beecher felt could not be
gainsaid, and he stood silent and confuted. There was another appeal
that he had not tried, and he resolved to neglect nothing that gave
even the faintest chance of success. He addressed himself to the Jew's
goodness of heart,--to the benevolence that he knew must have its home
in his nature. To what end, therefore, should he carry to the grave, or
destroy, a secret that might be a blessing to thousands? He depicted,
not without knowledge, some of the miseries of the man "forgotten
of Fortune,"--the days of fevered anxiety,--the nights of agonizing
torture, as, half maddened by his losses, he played wildly, recklessly
on,--suicide in all its darkest forms ever present to his aching
faculties, while all this time one glance within that little book would
save him. And he wound up all by a burst of enthusiastic praise of a man
who could thus transmit happiness to generations unborn.
"I never wish to sell dat book. I mean it alway to die wit myself! but
if you will give me one tousand pounds, it is yours. If you delay, I
will say two tousands."
"Done--I take it. Of course a bill will do--eh?"
"Yaas, I will take a bill,--a bill at tree months. When it is yours, I
will tell you dat you are de luckiest man in all Europe. You have dere,
in dat leetle volume, all man strive for, fight for, cheat for, die
for!"
As he said this, he sat down again at his desk to write the acceptance
Beecher was to sign; while the other, withdrawing into the window
recess, peered eagerly into the pages of the precious book.
"Mind," said the Jew, "you no let any one see de 'Cabal.' If it be once
get abroad, de bank will change de play. You just carry in your head
de combinations, and you, go in, and win de millions dat you want at de
time."
"Just so," said Beecher, in ecstasy, the very thought of the golden
cataract sending a thrill of rapture through him. "I suppose, however, I
may show it to Davis?"
"Ach, der Davis, yaas,--der Davis can see it," said the Jew, with a
laugh whose significance it were very hard to interpret. "Dere now,"
said Stein, handing him the pen, "write de name dere as on de oder."
"Still Lackington, I suppose--eh?" asked Beecher.
"Yaas,--just de same," said Stein, gravely.
"'Just as good for a sheep as a lamb,' as the proverb says," muttered
Beecher. And he dashed off the name with a reckless flourish. "I 'll
tell you one thing, Master Stein," said he, as he buttoned up the magic
volume in the breast of his coat, "if this turn out the good dodge
you say it is, I 'll behave handsomely to you. I pledge you my word of
honor, I'll stand to you for double--treble the sum you have got written
there. You don't know the fellow you're dealing with,--very few know
him, for the matter of that,--but though he has got a smart lesson
or two in life, he has good stuff in him still; and if--I say if,
because, of course, all depends on that--if I can give the bank
at Hamburg a spring in the air with the aid of this, I 'll not forget
you, old boy."
"You make dem all spring in de air!--Ems, Wiesbaden, Baden--all go up
togeder!" And the Jew laughed with the glee of a demon.
"Not that I want to hurt any one,--not that I 'd like to squeeze a
fellow too hard," broke in Beecher, suddenly, for a quick thrill of
superstitious fear--the gambler's innate conscience--shot through him,
and made him tremble to think that by a chance word or thought he might
disgust the Fortune he would propitiate. "No, no; my motto is, 'Live
and let live!' There's room for us all!" And with the utterance of a
sentiment he believed so truly generous, he took leave of the Jew, and
departed.
CHAPTER V. A VILLAGE NEAR THE RHINE
It was at a little village called Holbach, about fifteen miles from
the right bank of the Rhine, Grog Davis had taken up his quarters while
awaiting the arrival of his daughter. Near as it was to that great
high-road of Europe, scarcely out of earshot of whizzing steamers and
screaming trains, the spot was wonderfully secluded and unvisited.
A little trout-stream, known to a few, who treasured the secret like
fishermen, made the inn resorted to in the months of May and June; but
for the rest of the year the "Golden Hook" had few customers, and the
landlord almost abdicated his functions till spring came round again.
The house, originally intended for a mill, was built over the river
itself, so that the indolent angler might actually have fished from the
very window. The pine-clad mountains of Nassau enclosed the narrow glen,
which straggled irregularly along for miles, now narrowing to a mere
strip, now expanding into little plains of fertile meadow-land, with
neat cottages and speckled cattle scattered around them. A narrow belt
of garden flanked the river, on whose edge a walk of trellised vines
was fashioned,--a charming spot in the sultry heat of summer, with its
luxuriant shade above and the rippling stream below. Davis had seen
the place years before in some hurried Journey; but his retentive mind
carried a full memory of the spot, and he soon found that it comprised
all he was in search of,--it was easy of access, secret, and cheap.
Only too well pleased to meet with a guest at this dead season of the
year, they gave up to him the choicest apartment, and treated him with
every solicitude and attention.
His table was supplied well, almost luxuriously; the good wine of
Ettleberg given in liberal profusion; the vine alley converted into a
pistol gallery for his use; and all for such a sum per diem as would
not have satisfied a waiter at the Clarendon. But it was the calm
seclusion, the perfect isolation that gratified him most. Let him
stroll which way he would, he never chanced upon a traveller. It was
marvellous, indeed, how such a place could have escaped that prying
tribe of ramblers which England each year sends forth to wrangle,
dispute, and disparage everything over Europe; and yet here were
precisely the very objects they usually sought after,--beautiful
scenery, a picturesque peasantry, and a land romantic in all its traits
and traditions.
Not that Grog cared for these: rocks, waterfalls, ruins, leafy groves,
or limpid streams made no appeal to him, He lived for the life of men,
their passions and their ambitions. He knew some people admired this
kind of thing, and there were some who were fond of literature; others
liked pictures; others, again, fancied old coins. He had no objection.
They were, if not very profitable, at least, harmless tastes. All he
asked was, not to be the companion of such dreamers. "Give me the fellow
that knows life," would he say; and I am afraid that the definition of
that same "life" would have included some things scarcely laudable.
If the spot were one to encourage indolence and ease, Davis did not
yield to this indulgence. He arose early; walked for health; shot with
the pistol for practice; studied his martingale for the play-table; took
an hour with the small-sword with an old matre d'armes whom he found
in the village; and, without actually devoting himself to it as a task,
practised himself in German by means of conversation; and, lastly, he
thought deeply and intently over the future. For speculations of this
kind he had no mean capacity. If he knew little of the human heart in
its higher moods, he understood it well in its shortcomings and its
weaknesses; to what temptations a man might yield, when to offer them,
and how, were mysteries he had often brooded over. In forecastings of
this order, therefore, Davis exercised himself. Strange eventualities,
"cases of conscience," that I would fain believe never occurred to you,
dear reader, nor to me, arose before him, and he met them manfully.
The world is generous in its admiration of the hard-worked minister,
toiling night-long at his desk, receiving and answering his twenty
despatches daily, and rising in the House to explain this, refute that,
confirm the other, with all the clearness of an orator and all the
calmness of a clerk; but, after all, he is but a fly-wheel in that
machine of government of which there are some hundred other component
parts, all well fitting and proportioned. Prcis writers and private
secretaries cram, colleagues advise him. The routine of official life
hedges him in his proper groove; and if not overcome by indolence or
affected by zeal, he can scarcely blunder. Not so your man of straits
and emergency, your fellow living by his wits, and wresting from the
world, that fancies it does not want him, reward and recognition. It
is no marvel if a proud three-decker sail round the globe; but very
different is our astonishment if a cockboat come safely from the China
Seas, or brave the stormy passage round the Cape. Such a craft as this
was Grog, his own captain: himself the crew, he had neither owner nor
underwriter; and yet, amidst the assembled navies of the world, he would
have shown his bunting!
The unbroken calm of his present existence was most favorable to these
musings, and left him to plan his campaign in perfect quiet Whether the
people of the inn regarded him as a great minister in disgrace come,
by hard study, to retrieve a lost position, a man of science deeply
immersed in some abstruse problem, or a distinguished author seeking
isolation for the free exercise of his imagination, they treated him
not only with great respect, but a sort of deference was shown in their
studious effort to maintain the silence and stillness around. When he
was supposed to be at his studies, not a voice was heard, not a footfall
on the stairs. There is no such flattery to your man of scapes and
accidents, your thorough adventurer, as that respectful observance that
implies he is a person of condition. It is like giving of free will
to the highwayman the purse he expected to have a fight for. Davis
delighted in these marks of deference, and day by day grew more eager in
exacting them.
"I heard some noise outside there this morning, Carl," said he to the
waiter; "what was the meaning of it?" For a moment or two the waiter
hesitated to explain; but after a little went on to speak of a stranger
who had been a resident of the inn for some months back without ever
paying his bill; the law, singularly enough, not giving the landlord
the power of turning him adrift, but simply of ceasing to afford him
sustenance, and waiting for some opportunity of his leaving the house to
forbid his re-entering it. Davis was much amused at this curious piece
of legislation, by which a moneyless guest could be starved out but
not expelled, and put many questions as to the stranger, his age,
appearance, and nation. All the waiter knew was that he was a
venerable-looking man, portly, advanced in life, with specious manners,
a soft voice, and a benevolent smile; as to his country, he could n't
guess. He spoke several languages, and his German was, though peculiar,
good enough to be a native's.
"But how does he live?" said Davis; "he must eat."
"There's the puzzle of it!" exclaimed Carl; "for a while he used to
watch while I was serving a breakfast or a dinner, and sallying out of
his room, which is at the end of the corridor, he 'd make off, sometimes
with a cutlet,--perhaps a chicken,--now a plate of spinach, now an
omelette, till, at last, I never ventured upstairs with the tray without
some one to protect it. Not that even this always sufficed, for he was
occasionally desperate, and actually seized a dish by force."
"Even these chances, taken at the best, would scarcely keep a man
alive," said Davis.
"Nor would they; but we suspect he must have means of getting out at
night and making a 'raid' over the country. We constantly hear of fowls
carried off; cheese and fruit stolen. There he is now, creeping along
the gallery. Listen! I have left some apples outside."
With a gesture to enforce caution, Davis arose, and placed a
percussion-cap on a pistol, a motion of his hand sufficing to show that
the weapon was not loaded.
"Open the door gently," said he; and the waiter, stealing over
noiselessly, turned the handle. Scarcely had the door been drawn back,
when Grog saw the figure of a man, and snapped off the pistol. At the
same moment he sprang from the spot, and rushed out to the corridor. The
stranger, to all seeming, was not even startled by the report, but was
gravely occupied in examining his sleeve to see if he had been struck.
He lifted up his head, and Davis, with a start, cried out,--
"What, Paul!--Paul Classon! Is this possible!"
"Davis--old fellow!--do I see you here?" exclaimed the other, in a deep
and mellow voice, utterly devoid of irritation or even excitement.
"Come in,--come in here, Paul," said Davis, taking him by the arm; and
he led him within the room. "Little I suspected on whom I was playing
this scurvy trick."
"It was not loaded," said the other, coolly.
"Of course not"
"I thought so," said he, with an easy smile; "they 've had so many
devices to frighten me."
"Come, Paul, old fellow, pour yourself out a tumbler of that red wine,
while I cut you some of this ham; we 'll have plenty of time for talk
afterwards."
The stranger accepted the invitation, but without the slightest show of
eagerness or haste. Nay, he unfolded his napkin leisurely, and fastened
a corner in one buttonhole, as some old-fashioned epicures have a trick
of doing. He held his glass, too, up to the light, to enjoy the rich
color of the wine, and smacked his lips, as he tasted it, with the air
of a connoisseur.
"A Burgundy, Davis, eh?" asked he, sipping again.
"I believe so. In truth, I know little about these wines."
"Oh, yes, a 'Pomard,' and very good of its kind. Too loaded, of course,
for the time of year, except for such palates as England rears."
Davis had now covered his friend's plate with ham and capon, and, at
last, was pleased to see him begin his breakfast.
We are not about to impose upon our reader the burden of knowing more of
Mr. Classon than is requisite for the interests of our story; but while
he eats the first regular meal he has tasted for two months and more,
let us say a word or so about him. He was a clergyman, whose life
had been one continued history of mischances. Occasionally the sun of
prosperity would seem disposed to shine genially on his head; but for
the most part his lot was to walk with dark and lowering skies above
him.
[Illustration: 068]
If he held any preferment, it was to quarrel with his rector, his dean,
or his bishop; to be cited before commissions, tried by surrogates,
pronounced contumacious, suspended, and Heaven knows what else. He was
everlastingly in litigation with churchwardens and parish authorities,
discovering rights of which he was defrauded, and privileges of which he
was deprived. None like him to ferret out Acts of Edward or Henry, and
obsolete bequests of long-buried founders of this, that, or t'other, of
which the present guardians were little better than pickpockets. Adverse
decisions and penalties pressing on him, he grew libellous, he spoke,
wrote, and published all manner of defamatory things, accused every
one of peculation, fraud, and falsehood, and, as the spirit of attack
strengthened in him by exercise, menaced this man with prosecution, and
that with open exposure. Trials by law, and costs accumulated against
him, and he was only out of jail here, to enter it again there. From the
Courts "above" he soon descended to those "below;" he became dissipated
and dissolute, his hireling pen scrupled at nothing, and he assailed
anything or any one, to order. Magistrates "had him up" as the author
of threatening letters or begging epistles. To-day he was the mock
secretary of an imaginary charity; tomorrow he 'd appear as a distressed
missionary going out to some island in the Pacific. He was eternally
before the world, until the paragraph that spoke of him grew to be
headed by the words, "The Reverend Paul Classon again!" or, more
briefly, "Paul Classon's last!" His pen, all this while, was his sole
subsistence; and what a bold sweep it took!--impeachment of Ministers,
accusation of theft, forgery, intimation of even worse crimes against
the highest names in the realm, startling announcements of statesmen
bribed, ambassadors corrupted, pasquinades against bishops and judges,
libellous stories of people in private life, prize fights, prophetic
almanacs, mock missionary journals, stanzas to celebrate quack
remedies,--even street ballads were amongst his literary efforts; while,
personally, he presided at low singing-establishments, and was the
president of innumerable societies in localities only known to the
police. It was difficult to take up a newspaper without finding him
either reported drunk and disorderly in the police-sheet, obstructing
the thoroughfare by a crowd assembled to hear him, having refused to pay
for his dinner or his bed, assaulted the landlady, or, crime of crimes,
used intemperate language to "G 493." At last they got actually tired
of trying him for begging, and imprisoning him for battery; the law was
wearied out; but the world also had its patience exhausted, and Paul saw
that he must conquer a new hemisphere. He came abroad.
What a changeful life was it now that he led,--at one time a tutor, at
another a commissionaire for an hotel, a railway porter, a travelling
servant, a police spy, the doorkeeper of a circus company, editor of
an English journal, veterinary, language master, agent for patent
medicines, picture-dealer, and companion to a nervous invalid, which,
as Paul said, meant a furious maniac. There is no telling what he went
through of debt and difficulty, till the police actually preferred
passing him quietly over the frontier to following up with penalty so
incurable an offender. In this way had he wandered about Europe for
years, the terror of legations, the pestilence of charitable committees.
Contributions to enable the Rev. Paul Classon to redeem his clothes, his
watch, his divinity library, to send him to England, to the Andes, to
Africa, figured everywhere. I dare not say how often he had been rescued
out of the lowest pit of despondency, or snatched like a brand from the
burning; in fact, he lived in a pit, and was always on fire.
"I am delighted," said Davis, as he replenished his friend's plate,--"I
am delighted to see that you have the same good, hearty appetite as of
old, Paul."
"Ay, Kit," said he, with a gentle sigh, "the appetite has been more
faithful than the dinner; on the same principle, perhaps, that the last
people who desert us are our creditors!"
"I suspect you 've had rather a hard time of it," said Davis,
compassionately.
"Well, not much to complain of,--not anything that one would call
hardships," said Classon, as he pushed his plate from him and proceeded
to light a cigar; "we 're all stragglers, Kit, that's the fact of it."
"I suppose it is; but it ain't very disagreeable to be a straggler with
ten thousand a year."
"If the having and enjoying were always centred in the same individual,"
said Classon, slowly, "what you say would be unanswerable; but it's not
so, Kit. No, no; the fellows who really enjoy life never have anything.
They are, so to say, guests on a visit to this earth, come to pass a few
months pleasantly, to put up anywhere, and be content with everything."
Grog shook his head dissentingly, and the other went on, "Who knows the
truth of what I am saying better than either of us? How many broad acres
did your father or mine bequeath us? What debentures, railroad shares,
mining scrip, or mortgages? And yet, Kit, if we come to make up the
score of pleasant days and glorious nights, do you fancy that any
noble lord of them all would dispute the palm with us? Oh," said he,
rapturously, "give me the unearned enjoyments of life,--pleasures that
have never cost me a thought to provide, nor a sixpence to pay for! Pass
the wine, Kit,--that bottle is better than the other;" and be smacked
his lips, while his eyes closed in a sort of dreamy rapture.
"I 'd like to hear something of your life, Paul," said Davis. "I often
saw your name in the 'Times' and the 'Post,' but I 'd like to have your
own account of it."
"My dear Kit, I 've had fifty lives. It's the man you should
understand,--the fellow that is here;" and he slapped his broad chest
as he spoke. "As for mere adventures, what are they? Squalls that never
interfere with the voyage,--not even worth entering in the ship's log."
"Where's your wife, Paul?" asked Davis, abruptly, for he was half
impatient under the aphorizing tone of his companion.
"When last I heard of her," said Classon, slowly, as he eyed his glass
to the light, "she was at Chicago,--if that be the right prosody of
it,--lecturing on 'Woman's Rights.' Nobody knew the subject better than
Fanny."
"I heard she was a very clever woman," said Davis.
"Very clever," said Classon; "discursive; not always what the French
call 'consequent,' but, certainly, clever, and a sweet poetess." There
was a racy twinkle in that reverend eye as he said the last words, so
full of malicious drollery that Davis could not help remarking it;
but all Classon gave for explanation was, "This to her health and
happiness!" and he drained off a bumper. "And yours, Kit,--what of her?"
asked he.
"Dead these many years. Do you remember her?"
"Of course I do. I wrote the article on her first appearance at the
Surrey. What a handsome creature she was then! It was I predicted her
great success; it was I that saved her from light comedy parts, and told
her to play Lady Teazle!"
"I 'll show you her born image to-morrow,--her daughter," said Davis,
with a strange choking sensation that made him cough; "she's taller than
her mother,--more style also."
"Very difficult, that,--very difficult, indeed," said Classon, gravely.
"There was a native elegance about her I never saw equalled; and then
her walk, the carriage of the head, the least gesture, had all a certain
grace that was fascination."
"Wait till you see Lizzy," said Davis, proudly; "you 'll see these all
revived."
"Do you destine her for the boards, Kit?" asked Classon, carelessly.
"For the stage? No, of course not," replied Davis, rudely.
"And yet these are exactly the requirements would fetch a high price
just now. Beauty is not a rare gift in England; nor are form and
symmetry; but, except in the highly born, there is a lamentable
deficiency in that easy gracefulness of manner, that blended dignity and
softness, that form the chief charm of woman. If she be what you say,
Kit,--if she be, in short, her mother's daughter,--it is a downright
insanity not to bring her out."
"I 'll not hear of it! That girl has cost me very little short of ten
thousand pounds,--ay, ten thousand pounds,--schooling, masters, and
the rest of it. She 's no fool, so I take it; it ain't thrown away! As
regards beauty, I'll stake fifteen to ten, in hundreds, that, taking
your stand at the foot of St. James's Street on a drawing-room day,
you don't see her equal. I'm ready to put down the money to-morrow, and
that's giving three to two against the field! And is that the girl I 'm
to throw away on the Haymarket? She's a Derby filly, I tell you, Paul,
and will be first favorite one of these days."
"Faustum sit augurium!" said Classon, as he raised his glass in a
theatrical manner, and then drained it off. "Still, if I be rightly
informed, the stage is often the antechamber to the peerage. The
attractions that dazzle thousands form the centre of fascination for
some one."
"She may find her way to a coronet without that," said Davis, rudely.
"Ah, indeed!" said Paul, with a slight elevation of the eyebrow;
but though his tone invited a confidence, the other made no further
advance's.
"And now for yourself, Classon, what have you been at lately?" said
Davis, wishing to change the subject.
"Literature and the arts. I have been contributing to a London weekly,
as Crimean correspondent, with occasional letters from the gold
diggings. I have been painting portraits for a florin the head, till
I have exhausted all the celebrities of the three villages near us. My
editor has, I believe, run away, however, and supplies have ceased for
some time back."
"And what are your plans now?"
"I have some thoughts of going back to divinity. These newly invented
water-cure establishments are daily developing grander proportions; some
have got German bands, some donkeys, some pleasure-boats, others rely
upon lending libraries and laboratories; but the latest dodge is a
chaplain."
"But won't they know you, Paul? Have not the newspapers 'blown you'?"
"Ah, Davis, my dear friend," said he, with a benevolent smile, "it's far
easier to live down a bad reputation than to live up to a good one. I
'd only ask a week--one week's domestication with the company of these
places--to show I was a martyred saint. I have, so to say, a perennial
fount of goodness in my nature that has never failed me."
"I remember it at school," said Davis, dryly.
"You took the clever line, Kit, 'suum cuique;' it would never have
suited me. You were born to thrive upon men's weaknesses, mine the
part to have a vested interest in their virtues."
"If you depend upon their virtues for a subsistence, I 'm not surprised
to see you out at elbows," said Davis, roughly.
"Not so, Kit,--not so," said the other, blandly, in rebuke. "There 's a
great deal of weak good-nature always floating about life. The world is
full of fellows with 'Pray take me in' written upon them."
"I can only vouch for it very few have come in my way," said Davis, with
a harsh laugh.
"So much the better for them," said Paul, gravely.
A pause of considerable duration now ensued between them, broken, at
last, by Davis abruptly saying, "Is it not a strange thing, it was only
last night I was saying to myself, 'What the deuce has become of Holy
Paul?--the newspapers have seemingly forgotten him. It can't be that he
is dead.'"
"Lazarus only sleepeth," said Classon; "and, indeed, my last eleven
weeks here seem little other than a disturbed sleep."
Continuing his own train of thought, Davis went on, "If I could chance
upon him now, he's just the fellow I want, or, rather, that I may want."
"If it is a lampoon or a satire you 're thinking of, Kit, I 've given
them up; I make no more blistering ointments, but turn all my skill to
balsams. They give no trouble in compounding, and pay even better. Ah,
Davis, my worthy friend, what a mistake it is to suppose that a man must
live by his talents, while his real resource is his temperament. For a
life of easy enjoyment, that blessed indolence that never knew a care,
it is heart, not head, is needed."
"All I can say is, that with the fellows I 've been most with, heart had
very little to do with them, and the best head was the one that least
trusted his neighbors."
"A narrow view, my dear friend,--a narrow view, take my word for it; as
one goes on in life he thinks better of it."
A malicious grin was all the answer Davis made to this remark. At last
he turned his eyes full upon the other, and in a low but distinct voice
said: "Let us have no more of this, Paul. If we are to play, let us
play, as the Yankees say, without the 'items,'--no cheating on either
side. Don't try the Grand Benevolence dodge with me,--don't. When I said
awhile ago, I might want you, it was no more than I meant. You may be
able to render me a service,--a great service."
"Say how," said Classon, drawing his chair nearer to him,--"say how,
Kit, and you'll not find the terms exorbitant."
"It's time enough to talk about the stakes when we are sure the match
will come off," said Davis, cautiously. "All I 'll say for the present
is, I may want you."
Classon took out a small and very greasy-looking notebook from his
waistcoat-pocket, and with his pencil in hand, said, "About what time
are you likely to need me? Don't be particular as to a day or a week,
but just in a rough-guessing sort of way say when."
"I should say in less than a month from this time,--perhaps within a
fortnight."
"All right," said Classon, closing his book, after making a brief note.
"You smile," said he, blandly, "at my methodical habits, but I have been
a red-tapist all my life, Kit I don't suppose you 'll find any man's
papers, letters, documents, and so forth, in such trim order as
mine,--all labelled, dated, and indexed. Ah! there is a great philosophy
in this practical equanimity; take my word for it, there is."
"How far are we from Neuwied here?" asked Davis, half pettishly; for
every pretension of his reverend friend seemed to jar upon his nerves.
"About sixteen or eighteen miles, I should say?"
"I must go or send over there to-morrow," continued Davis. "The
postmaster sends me word that several letters have arrived,--some to my
address, some to my care. Could you manage to drive across?"
"Willingly; only remember that once I leave this blessed sanctuary I may
find the door closed against my return. They 've a strange legislation
here--"
"I know--I 've heard of it," broke in Davis. "I 'll guarantee
everything, so that you need have no fears on that score. Start at
daybreak, and fetch back all letters you find there for me or for the
Honorable Annesley Beecher."
"The Honorable Annesley Beecher!" said Classon, as he wrote the name
in his note-book. "Dear me! the last time I heard that name was--let
me see--fully twelve years ago. It was after that affair at Brighton.
I wrote an article for the 'Heart of Oak,' on the 'Morality of our
Aristocracy.' How I lashed their vices! how I stigmatized their lives of
profligacy and crime!"
"You infernal old hypocrite!" cried Davis, with a half-angry laugh.
"There was no hypocrisy in that, Kit. If I tell you that a statue is
bad in drawing, or incorrect in anatomy, I never assert thereby that I
myself have the torso of Hercules or the limbs of Antinous."
"Leave people's vices alone, then; they 're the same as their debts; if
you're not going to pay them, you 've no right to talk about them."
"Only on public grounds, Kit Our duty to society, my dear friend, has
its own requirements!"
"Fiddlestick!" said Davis, angrily, as he pushed his glass from before
him; then, after a moment, went on: "Do you start early, so as to be
back here before evening,--my mind is running on it. There's three
naps," said he, placing the gold pieces on the table. "You'll not want
more."
"Strange magnetism is the touch of gold to one's palm," said Classon,
as he surveyed the money in the hollow of his hand. "How marvellous
that these bits of stamped metal should appeal so forcibly to my inner
consciousness!"
"Don't get drunk with them, that's all," said Davis, with a
stern savagery of manner, as he arose from his seat. "There's my
passport,--you may have to show it at the office. And now, good-bye, for
I have a long letter to write to my daughter."
Classon poured the last of the Burgundy into a tumbler, and drank it
off, and hiccuping out, "I'll haste me to the Capitol!" left the room.
CHAPTER VI. IMMINENT TIDINGS
It was a very wearisome day to Davis as he waited for the return of
Paul Classon. Grog's was not a mind made for small suspicions or petty
distrusts,--he was a wholesale dealer in iniquity, and despised minute
rogueries; yet he was not altogether devoid of anxiety as hour, by hour
went over, and no sign of Classon. He tried to pass the time in
his usual mode. He shot with the pistol, he fenced, he whipped the
trout-stream, he went over his "martingale" with the cards, but somehow
everything went amiss with him. He only hit the bull's-eye once in three
shots; he fenced wide; a pike carried off his tackle; and, worst of all,
he detected a flaw in the great "Cabal," that, if not remediable, must
render it valueless.
"A genuine Friday, this!" muttered he, as he sauntered up a little
eminence, from which a view might be had of the road for above a mile.
"And what nonsense it is people saying they 're not superstitions!
I suppose I have as little of that kind of humbug about me as my
neighbors; yet I would n't play half-crowns at blind-hookey today. I'd
not take the favorite even against a chance horse. I'd not back myself
to leap that drain yonder; and why? Just because I 'm in what the French
call guignon. There's no other word for it that ever I heard. These
are the days Fortune says to a man, 'Shut up, and don't book a bet!'
It's a wise fellow takes the warning. I know it so well that I always
prepare for a run against me, and as sure as I am here, I feel that
something or other is going wrong elsewhere. Not a sign of him,--not a
sign!" said he, with a heavy sigh, as he gazed long and earnestly along
the line of road. "He has n't bolted, that I'm sure of; he'd not 'try
that on' with me. He remembers to this very hour a licking I gave him
at school. I know what it is, he's snug in a wine 'Schenke.' He's in for
a big drink, the old beast, as if he could n't get blind drunk when he
came home. I think I see him holding forth to the boors, and telling
them what an honor it is to them to sit in his company; that he took a
high class at Oxford, and was all but Bishop of--Eh, is that he? No,
it 's going t' other way. Confounded fool!--but worse fool myself for
trusting him. That's exactly what people would say: 'He gave Holy Paul
three naps, and expected to see him come back sober!' Well, so I did;
and just answer me this: Is not all the work of this world done by
rogues and vagabonds? It suits them to be honest for a while; they ride
to order so long as they like the stable. Not a sign of him!" And with a
comfortless sigh he turned back to the house.
"I wish I knew how Lizzy was to-night!" muttered he, as he rested his
head on his hand, and sat gazing at her picture. "Ay, that is your
own saucy smile, but the world will take that out of you, and put a
puckered-up mouth and hard lines in its place, that it will, confound
it! And those eyes will have another kind of brightness in them, too,
when they begin to read life glibly. My poor darling, I wish you could
stay as you are. Where are you now, I wonder? Not thinking of old Kit, I
'm certain! And yet, maybe, I wrong her,--maybe she is just dwelling on
long--long ago--home, and the rest of it. Ay, darling, that's what the
lucky ones have in life, and never so much as know their luck in having
it. By Jove! she is handsome!" cried he, as he held up the miniature
in ecstasy before him. "'If she's so beautiful, Mr. Ross, why don't
she come to the Drawing-room?' say the Court people. Ay, you'll see her
there yet, or I'm not Kit Davis! Don't be impatient, ladies; make your
running while the course is your own, for there's a clipper coming. I'd
like to see where they'll be when Lizzy takes the field."
And now, in his pride, he walked the room, with head erect and arms
folded. It was only for a very short space, however, that these
illusions withdrew him from his gloomier reveries; for, with a start,
he suddenly recurred to all the anxieties of the morning, and once more
issued forth upon the high-road to look out for Classon. The setting sun
sent a long golden stream of light down the road, on which not a living
thing was to be seen. Muttering what were scarcely blessings on the head
of his messenger, he strolled listlessly along. Few men could calculate
the eventualities of life better or quicker than Davis. Give him the man
and the opportunities, and he would speedily tell you what would be the
upshot. He knew thoroughly well how far experience and temperament mould
the daring spirit, and how the caution that comes of education tames
down the wild influences suggested by temptation.
"No," said he to himself, "though he had my passport and three Napoleons
besides, he has not levanted. He is far too deep a fellow for that."
At last a low rumbling sound came up from the distance; he stopped
and listened. It came and went at intervals, till, at last, he could
distinctly mark the noise of wheels, and the voice of a man urging on
his horse. Davis quickened his pace, till, in the gray half-light, he
descried a little one-horse carriage slowly advancing towards him. He
could only see one man in it; but as it came nearer, he saw a heap of
clothes, surmounted by what indicated the presence of another in the
bottom of the conveyance, and Grog quickly read the incident by the aid
of his own anticipation. There, indeed, lay Paul Classon, forgetful of
the world and all its cares, his outstretched arm almost touching the
wheel, and the heavy wooden shoe of the peasant grazing his face.
[Illustration:  080]
"Has he got the letters? Where are they?" cried Davis, eagerly, to the
driver.
"They're in his hat"
Grog snatched it rudely from his head, and found several letters of
various sizes and shapes, and with what, even in that dim light, seemed
a variety of addresses and superscriptions.
"Are you certain none have fallen out or been lost on the road?" said
Davis, as he reckoned them over.
"That I am," said the man; "for at every jolt of the wagon he used to
grip his hat and hold it fast, as if it was for very life, till we
came to the last village. It was there he finished off with a flask of
Laubthaler that completely overcame him."
"So, then, he was sober on leaving Neuwied?"
"He was in the so-called 'bemuzzed' state!" said the man, with a
half-apologetic air.
"Take him down to the inn; throw him into the hay-yard--or the river, if
you like," said Davis, contemptuously, and turned away.
Once in his own room, the candles lighted, the door locked, Davis sat
down to the table on which the letters were thrown. Leisurely he took
them up one by one and examined their superscriptions.
"Little news in these," said he, throwing three or four to one side;
"the old story,--money-seeking." And he mumbled out, "'Your acceptance
being duly presented this day at Messrs. Haggitts and Drudge's, and no
provision being made for payment of the same--' It's like the burden of
an old song in one's ears. Who is this from? Oh, Billy Peach, with some
Doncaster news. I do wonder will the day ever come that will bring
me good tidings by the post; I 've paid many a pound in my life for
letters, and I never yet chanced upon one that told me my uncle Peter
had just died, leaving me all his estates in Jamaica, or that my aunt
Susan bequeathed to me all her Mexican stock and the shares in four
tin-mines. This is also from Peach, and marked 'Immediate;'" and he
broke it open. It contained only these lines: "Dark is the word for
a week or two still. On Tuesday your name will appear amongst the
passengers for New York by the 'Persia.' Saucy Sal is a dead break-down,
and we net seven hundred safe; Pot did it with a knitting-needle while
they were plaiting her. What am I to do about the jewels?"
Davis's brow darkened as he crushed the paper in his hand, while he
muttered, "I wish these infernal fools had not been taught to write! He
ought to know that addressing me Captain Christopher never deceived a
'Detective' yet. And this is for the Honorable Annesley Beecher,"
said he, reading aloud the address, "'care of Captain Christopher,
Coblentz--try Bingen--try Neuwied.' A responsible-looking document this;
it looks like a despatch, with its blue-post paper and massive seal;
and what is the name here, in the corner? 'Davenport Dunn,' sure
enough,--'Davenport Dunn.' And with your leave, sir, we 'll see what you
have to say," muttered he, as he broke the seal of the packet. A very
brief note first met his eyes; it ran thus:--
"Dear Sir,--While I was just reading a very alarming account
of Lord Lackington's illness in a communication from Messrs.
Harmer and Gore, the post brought me the enclosed letter for
yourself, which I perceive to be in her Ladyship's hand; I
forward it at once to Brussels, in the hope that it may
reach you there. Should her Ladyship's tidings be better
than I can fain persuade myself to hope, may I presume to
suggest that you should lose no time in repairing to Italy.
I cannot exaggerate the peril of his Lordship's state; in
fact, I am hourly expecting news of his death; and, the
peculiar circumstances of the case considered, it is
highly important you should possess yourself of every
information the exigencies of the event may require. I beg
to enclose you a bank post-bill for two-hundred pounds,
payable at any banker's on your signature, and have the
honor to be, with sincere respect,
"Your humble Servant,
"Davenport Dunn.
"P. S.--I have reason to know that certain claims are now
under consideration, and will be preferred erelong, if
suitable measures be not adopted to restrain them."
"From which side do you hold your brief, Master Davenport Dunn? I should
like to know that!" said Davis, as he twice over read aloud this
postscript. He looked at Lady Lackington's letter, turned it over,
examined the seal and the postmark, and seemed to hesitate about
breaking it open. Was it that some scruple of conscience arrested his
hand, and some mysterious feeling that it was a sisterly confidence he
was about to violate? Who knows! At all events, if there was a struggle
it was a brief one, for he now smashed the seal and spread the open
letter before him.
With a muttered expression of impatience did he glance over the four
closely written pages indited in the very minutest of hands and the
faintest possible ink. Like one addressing himself, however, to a severe
task, he set steadily to work, and for nigh an hour never rose from the
table. We have no right, as little have we the wish, to inflict upon our
reader any portion of the labor this process of deciphering cost Davis,
so that we will briefly state what formed the substance of the epistle.
The letter was evidently begun before Lord Lackington had been taken
ill, for it opened with an account of Como and the company at the Villa
d'Este, where they had gone to resume the water-cure. Her Ladyship's
strictures upon the visitors, their morals, and their manners, were
pleasantly and flippantly thrown off. She possessed what would really
seem an especial gift of her class,--the most marvellous use of the
perceptive faculties,--and could read not alone rank and condition, but
character and individuality, by traits of breeding and manner that would
have escaped the notice of hundreds of those the world calls shrewd
observers. This fragment, for it was such, was followed, after a
fortnight, by a hastily written passage, announcing that Lord Lackington
had been seized with an attack resembling apoplexy, and for several
hours remained in great danger. She had detained the letter to give the
latest tidings before the post closed, and ultimately decided on not
despatching it till the next day. The following morning's communication
was a minute account of medical treatment, the bleedings, the
blisterings, the watchings, and the anxieties of a sick-bed, with all
the vacillating changes that mark the course of malady, concluding with
these words: "The doctors are not without hopes, but confess that their
confidence is rather based on the great strength and energy of his
constitution than upon any success that has attended their treatment,
from which I may say that up to this no benefit has accrued. So well
as I can interpret his utterance, he seems very anxious to see you, and
made an effort to write something to you, which, of course, he could not
accomplish. Come out here, therefore, as quickly as possible; the route
by Lucerne is, they tell me, the shortest and speediest. If I were to
give my own opinion, it would be that he is better and stronger than
yesterday; but I do not perceive the doctors disposed to take this
view." After this came a lengthened statement of medical hopes and
fears, balanced with all the subtle minuteness known to "the Faculty."
They explained to a nicety how if that poor watch were to stop it could
not possibly be from any fault of theirs, but either from some vice in
its original construction, or some organic change occasioned by
time. They demonstrated, in fact, that great as was their art, it was
occasionally baffled; but pointed with a proud humility to the onward
progress of science, in the calm assurance that, doubtless, we should
one day know all these things, and treat them as successfully as we
now do--I am afraid to say what. One thing, however, was sufficiently
clear,--Lord Lackington's case was as bad as possible, his recovery
almost hopeless. On the turn-down of the last page was the following,
written in evident haste, if not agitation: "In opening the letters
which have arrived since his illness, I am astonished to find many
referring to some suit, either meditated or actually instituted, against
our right to the title. Surely some deep game of treachery is at work
here. He never once alluded to such a possibility to myself, nor had I
the slightest suspicion that any pretended claim existed. One of these
letters is from Mr. Davenport Dunn, who has, I can see from the tone
in which he writes, been long conversant with the transaction, and as
evidently inclines to give it a real or feigned importance. Indeed, he
refers to a 'compromise' of some sort or other, and strongly impresses
the necessity of not letting the affair proceed further. I am actually
distracted by such news coming at such a moment. Surely Lackington
could never have been weak enough to yield to mere menace, and have thus
encouraged the insolent pretensions of this claim? As you pass through
London, call at Fordyce's, somewhere in Furnival's Inn, and, just in
course of conversation, showing your acquaintance with the subject,
learn all you can on the matter. Fordyce has all our papers, and must
necessarily know what weight is due to these pretensions. Above all,
however, hasten out here; there is no saying what any day--any hour--may
produce. I have no one here to give me a word of advice, or even
consolation; for, though Lady Grace is with us, she is so wrapped up in
her new theological studies--coquetting with Rome as she has been all
the summer--that she is perfectly useless.
"Have you any idea who is Terence Driscoll? Some extraordinary notes
bearing this signature, ill-written and ill-spelt, have fallen into my
hands as I rummaged amongst the papers, and they are all full of this
claim. It is but too plain Lackington suffered these people to terrify
him, and this Driscoll's tone is a mixture of the meanest subserviency
and outrageous impertinence. It is not unlikely Fordyce may know him. Of
course, I need not add one word of caution against your mention of
this affair, even to those of your friends with whom you are in closest
intimacy. It is really essential not a hint of it should get abroad.
"I have little doubt, now, looking back on the past, that anxiety
and care about this matter have had a large share in bringing on
Lackington's attack. He had been sleepless and uneasy for some time
back, showing an eagerness, too, about his letters, and the greatest
impatience if any accident delayed the post Although all my maturer
thoughts--indeed, my convictions--reject attaching any importance to
this claim, I will not attempt to conceal from you how unhappy it has
made me, nor how severely it has affected my nerves."
With one more urgent appeal to lose not an hour in hastening over the
Alps, the letter concluded; the single word "weaker," apparently written
after the letter was sealed, giving a deep meaning to the whole.
Davis was not satisfied with one perusal of the latter portion of this
letter, but read it over carefully a second time; after which, taking a
sheet of paper, he wrote down the names of Fordyce and Terence Driscoll.
He then opened a Directory, and running his eye down a column, came to
"Fordyce and Fraude, 7 Furnivats Inn, solicitors." Of Terence Driscolls
there were seventeen, but all in trade,--tanners, tinmen, last-makers,
wharfingers, and so on; not one upon whom Davis could fix the likelihood
of the correspondence with the Viscount. He then walked the room, cigar
in mouth, for about an hour, after which he sat down and wrote the note
to Beecher which we have given in a former chapter, with directions
to call upon Stein, the moneylender, and then hasten away from Aix as
speedily as possible. This finished, he addressed another and somewhat
longer epistle to Lazarus Stein himself, of which latter document this
true history has no record.
We, perhaps, owe an apology to our reader for inverting in our narrative
the actual order of these events. It might possibly have been more
natural to have preceded the account of Beecher's reception of the
letter by the circumstances we have just detailed. We selected the
present course, however, to avoid the necessity of that continual change
of scene, alike wearisome to him who reads as to him who writes; and as
we are about to sojourn in Mr. Davis's company for some time to come,
we have deferred the explanation to a time when it should form part of a
regular series of events. Nor are we sorry at the opportunity of asking
the reader to turn once again to that brief note, and mark its
contents. Though Davis was fully impressed with the conviction that Lord
Lackington's days were numbered; though he felt that, at any moment,
some chance rumor, some flying report might inform Beecher what great
change was about to come over his fortunes,--yet this note is written in
all the seeming carelessness of a gossiping humor: he gives the latest
news of the turf, he alludes to Beecher's new entanglements at home, to,
his own newly discovered martingale for the play-table, trusting to the
one line about "Benson's people" to make Beecher hasten away from Aix,
and from the chance of hearing that his brother was hopelessly ill.
While Grog penned these lines, he would have given--if he had it--ten
thousand pounds that Beecher was beside him. Ay, willingly had he given
it, and more, too, that Beecher might be where no voice could whisper
to him the marvellous change that any moment might cause in his destiny.
Oh, ye naturalists, who grow poetical over the grub and the butterfly,
what is there, I ask ye, in the transformation at all comparable with
that when the younger brother, the man of strait and small fortune,
springs into the peer, exchanging a life of daily vicissitudes, cheap
dinners and duns, dubious companionships and high discounts, for the
assured existence, the stately banquets, the proud friendships, the pomp
and circumstance of a lord? In a moment he soars out of the troubled
atmosphere of debts and disabilities, and floats into the balmy region
whose very sorrows never wear an unbecoming mourning.
Grog's note was thus a small specimen of what the great Talleyrand used
to call the perfection of despatch writing, "not the best thing that
could be said on the subject, but simply that which would produce
the effect you desired." Having sent off this to Beecher, he then
telegraphed to his man of business, Mr. Peach, to ascertain at Fordyce's
the latest accounts of Lord Lackington's health, and answer "by wire."
It was far into the night when Davis betook himself to bed, but not to
sleep. The complications of the great game he was playing had for him
all the interest of the play-table. The kind of excitement he gloried
in was to find himself pitted against others,--wily, subtle, and
deep-scheming as himself,--to see some great stake on the board, and to
feel that it must be the prize of the best player. With the gambler's
superstition, he kept constantly combining events with dates and eras,
recalling what of good or ill-luck had marked certain periods of his
life. He asked himself if September had usually been a fortunate month;
did the 20th imply anything; what influence might Holy Paul exert over
his destiny; was he merely unlucky himself, or did he bring evil fortune
upon others? If he suffered himself to dwell upon such "vain auguries"
as these, they still exerted little other sway over his mind than to
nerve it to greater efforts; in fact, he consulted these signs as a
physician might investigate certain symptoms which, if not of moment
enough to call for special treatment, were yet indicative of hidden
mischief.
His gambling experiences had given him the ready tact, by a mere glance
around the table, to recognize those with whom the real struggle
should be waged; to detect, in a second, the deep head, the crafty
intelligence, that marvellous blending of caution with rashness that
make the gamester; and in the same spirit be now turned over in thought
each of those with whom he was now about to contend, and muttered
the name of Davenport Dunn over and over. "Could we only 'hit it off'
together, what a game might we not play!" was his last reflection ere he
fell off to sleep.
CHAPTER VII. A DISCURSIVE CONVERSATION
Davis was surprised, and something more, as he entered the
breakfast-room the next morning to find the Rev. Paul Classon already
seated at the table, calmly arranging certain little parallelograms of
bread-and-butter and sardines. No signs of discomfiture or shame showed
themselves in that calmly benevolent countenance. Indeed, as he arose
and extended his hand there was an air of bland protection in the
gesture perfectly soothing.
"You came back in a pretty state last night," said Davis, roughly.
"Overtaken, Kit,--overtaken. It was a piece of good news rather than the
grape juice did the mischief. As the poet says,--
"'Good tidings flowed upon his heart
Like a sea o'er a barren shore,
And the pleasant waves refreshed the spot
So parched and bleak before.'
"The fact is, Kit, you brought me luck. Just as I reached the
Post-Office, I saw a letter addressed to the Rev. Paul Classon,
announcing that I had been accepted as Chaplain to the great Hydropathic
Institution at Como! and, to commemorate the event, I celebrated in wine
the triumphs of water! You got the letters all safely?"
"Little thanks to you if I did; nor am I yet certain how many may have
dropped out on the road."
"Stay,--I have a memorandum here," said Paul, opening his little
note-book. "Four, with London post-marks, to Captain Christopher;
two from Brussels for the same; a large packet for the Hon. Annesley
Beecher. That's the whole list."
"I got these!" said Grog, gruffly; "but why, might I ask, could you not
have kept sober till you got back here?"
"He who dashes his enthusiasm with caution, waters the liquor of life.
How do we soar above the common ills of existence save by yielding to
those glorious impulses of the heart, which say, 'Be happy!'"
"Keep the sermon for the cripples at the water-cure," said Davis,
savagely. "When are you to be there?"
"By the end of the month. I mentioned the time myself. It would be as
soon, I thought, as I could manage to have my divinity library out from
England."
The sly drollery of his eye, as he spoke, almost extorted a half-smile
from Davis.
"Let me see," muttered Grog, as he arose and lighted his cigar, "we are,
to-day, the 21st, I believe. No, you can't be there so early. I shall
need you somewhere about the first week in October; it might chance to
be earlier. You mustn't remain here, however, in the interval. You'll
have to find some place in the neighborhood, about fifteen or twenty
miles off."
"There's Hchst, on the Lahn, a pleasant spot, eighteen miles from
this."
"Hchst be it; but, mark me, no more of last night's doings."
"I pledge my word," said Paul, solemnly. "Need I say, it is as good as
my bond?"
"About the same, I suspect; but I 'll give you mine too," said Davis,
with a fierce energy. "If by any low dissipation or indiscretion of
yours you thwart the plans I am engaged in, I 'll leave you to starve
out the rest of your life here."
"'So swear we all as liegemen true, So swear to live and die!'" cried
out Paul, with a most theatrical air in voice and gesture.
"You know a little of everything, I fancy," said Davis, in a more
good-humored tone. "What do you know of law?"
"Of law?" said Paul, as he helped himself to a dish of smoking
cutlets,--"if it be the law of debtor and creditor, false arrest,
forcible possession, battery, or fraudulent bankruptcy, I am
indifferently well skilled. Nor am I ignorant in divorce cases, separate
maintenance, and right of guardianship. Equity, I should say, is my weak
point."
"I believe you," said Davis, with a grin, for he but imperfectly
understood the speech. "But it is of another kind of law I 'm speaking.
What do you know about disputed title to a peerage? Have you any
experience in such cases?"
"Yes; I have ransacked registries, rummaged out gravestones in my time.
I very nearly burned my fingers, too, with a baptismal certificate that
turned out to be--what shall I call it?--unauthentic!"
"You forged it!" said Grog, gruffly.
"They disputed its correctness, and, possibly, with some grounds for
their opinion. Indeed," added he, carelessly, "it was the first thing of
the kind I had ever done, and it was slovenly--slovenly."
"It would have been transportation!" said Davis, gravely.
"With hard labor," added Classon, sipping his tea.
"At all events, you understand something of these sort of cases?"
"Yes; I have been concerned, one way or another, with five. They
are interesting when you take to them; there are so many, so to say,
surprises; always something turning up you never looked for,--somebody's
father that never had a child, somebody's mother that never was married.
Then people die,--say a hundred and fifty years ago,--and no proof
of the death can be made out; or you build wonderfully upon an act
of Parliament, and only find out at the last hour that it has been
repealed. These traits give a great deal of excitement to the suit. I
used to enjoy them much when I was younger." And Mr. Classon sighed as
if he had been calling up memories of cricket-matches, steeple-chases,
or the polka,--pleasures that advancing years had rudely robbed him of.
Davis sat deep in thought for some time. Either he had not fully made up
his mind to open an unreserved confidence with his reverend friend, or
which is perhaps as likely, he was not in possession of such knowledge
as might enable him to state his case.
"These suits, or actions, or whatever you call them," said he, at
length, "always drag on for years,--don't they?"
"Of course they do; the lawyers take care of that. There are trials at
bar, commissions, special examinations before the Masters, arguments
before the peers, appeals against decisions; in fact, it is a question
of the purse of the litigants. Like everything else, however, in this
world, they 've got economy-struck. I remember the time--it was the
Bancroft case--they gave me five guineas a day and travelling expenses
to go out to Ravenna and take the deposition of an old Marchess,
half-sister of the Dowager, and now, I suppose, they 'd say the service
was well paid with one half. Indeed, I may say I had as good as accepted
a sort of engagement to go out to the Crimea and examine a young
fellow whom they fancy has a claim to a peerage, and for a mere
trifle,--fifteen shillings a day and expenses. But they had got my
passport stopped here, and I could n't get away."
"What was the name of the claimant?"
"Here it is," said he, opening his note-book. "Charles Conway, formerly
in the 11th Hussars, supposed to be serving as orderly on the staff
of General La Marmora. I have a long letter of instructions Froode
forwarded me, and I suspect it is a strong case got up to intimidate."
"What is the peerage sought for?" asked Davis, with an assumed
indifference.
"I can tell you in five minutes if you have any curiosity on the
subject," said Paul, rising. "The papers are all in my writing-desk."
"Fetch them," said Davis, as he walked to the window and looked out.
Classon soon re-entered the room with a large open letter in his hand.
"There's the map of the country!" said he, throwing it down on the
table. "What would you call the fair odds in such a case, Kit,--a
private soldier's chance of a peerage that has been undisturbed since
Edward the Third?"
"About ten thousand to one, I 'd call it."
"I agree with you, particularly since Froode is in it. He only takes
up these cases to make a compromise. They 're always 'settled.' He's a
wonderful fellow to sink the chambers and charge the mine, but he never
explodes,--never!"
"So that Froode can always be squared, eh?" asked Davis.
"Always." Classon now ran his eyes over the letter, and, mumbling
the lines half aloud, said, "In which case the Conways of Abergeldy,
deriving from the second son, would take precedence of the Beecher
branch.' The case is this," added he, aloud: "Viscompt Lackington's
peerage was united to the estates by an act of Edward; a motion for a
repeal of this was made in Elizabeth's time, and lost--some aver the
reverse; now the claimant, Conway, relies upon the original act, since
in pursuit of the estates he invalidates the title. It's a case to
extort money, and a good round sum too. I 'd say Lord Lack-ington might
give twenty thousand to have all papers and documents of the claim
surrendered into his hands."
"A heavy sum, twenty thousand," muttered Davis, slowly.
"So it is, Kit; but when you come to tot up suits at Nisi Prius, suits
in Equity, searches at the Herald's office, and hearings before the
Lords, you 'll see it is a downright saving."
"But could Lackington afford this? What is he worth?"
"They call the English property twelve thousand a year, and he has a
small estate in Ireland besides. In fact, it is out of that part of the
property the mischief has come. This Conway's claim was discovered in
some old country-house there, and Froode is only partially instructed in
it."
"And now, Paul," said Davis, slowly, "if you got a commission to square
this here affair and make all comfortable, how would you go about it?"
"Acting for which party, do you mean?" asked Paul.
"I mean for the Lackingtons."
"Well, there are two ways. I 'd send for Froode, and say, 'What's the
lowest figure for the whole?' or I'd despatch a trusty fellow to the
Crimea to watch Conway, and see what approaches they are making to him.
Of course they'll send a man out there, and it ought n't to be hard
to get hold of him, or, if not himself, of all his papers and
instructions."
"That looks business-like," said Grog, encouragingly.
"After all, Kit, these things, in ninety-nine cases out of the hundred,
are only snaps of the percussion-cap. There 's scarcely a peerage in
England is not menaced with an attempt of the kind; but such is the
intermarriage--such the close tie of affinity between them--they stand
manfully to the fellow in possession. They know in their hearts, if once
they let the world begin to pick out a stone here or there, the whole
wall may come tumbling down, and so they say, 'Here 's one of us since
Henry II.'s time going to be displaced for some upstart fellow none of
us ever heard of.' What signifies legitimacy that dates seven centuries
back, in favor of one probably a shoemaker or a house-painter? They
won't stand that, Kit, and reasonably enough, too. I suppose you've
heard all about this case from Beecher?"
"Well, I have heard something about it," said Grog, in confusion, for
the suddenness of the question disconcerted him; "but he don't care
about it."
"Very likely not. If Lackington were to have a son, it would n't concern
him much."
"Not alone that, but he does n't attach any importance to the claim; he
says it's all got up to extort money."
"What of that? When a highwayman stops you with the same errand, does
n't the refusal occasionally provoke him to use force? I know very few
things so hard to deal with as menaces to extort money. Life is, after
all, very like the game the Americans call 'Poker,' where the grand
secret is, never to 'brag' too far on a bad hand. What was your part
in this business, Kit?" asked he, after a brief silence.
"How do you mean by my part?" rejoined Davis, gruffly.
"I mean, how were you interested? Do you hold any of Lackington's
paper?--have you got any claims on the reversion?--in a word, does it in
any way concern you which king reigns in Israel?"
"It might, or it might not," said Grog, dryly. "Now for a question to
you. Could you manage to get employed in the affair,--to be sent out
after this Conway,--or is it too late?"
"It might, or it might not," said Classon, with a significant imitation
of the other's tone and manner. Davis understood the sarcasm in a
moment, and in a voice of some irritation said,--
"Don't you try to come the whip-hand over me, Holy Paul. If there
be anything to do in this matter, it is I, and not you, will be
paymaster; so much for this, so much for that,--there's the terms!"
"It is such dealings I like best," said Classon, blandly "Men would
have benefited largely in this world had probity been parcelled out as
task-work instead of being made daily labor."
"I suspect that neither you nor I would have had much employment either
way," said Davis, with a bitter laugh. "But come, you must be stirring.
You 'll have to be off out of this before the afternoon. The Rhine
steamer touches at Neuwied at three, and I expect my daughter by this
boat. I don't want her to see you just yet awhile, Paul. You 'll start
for Hchst, put up at the inn there, and communicate with me at once, so
that I may be able to reckon upon you when needed. It were as well, too,
that you'd write a line to Froode, and say that on second thoughts that
expedition to the Crimea might suit; explore the way, in fact, and let
me know the tidings. As to terms," said Grog,--for the other's blank
look expressed hesitation,--"if I say, 'Go,' you shall say 'For
what?'"
"I do love these frank and open dealings," said Paul, warmly.
"Look here!" said Davis, as the other was about to leave the room;
"old Joe Morris, of Mincing Lane, made his fortune by buying up all the
forged bills of exchange he could lay hands on, well knowing that the
fellows he could hang or transport any day would be trusty allies. Now,
I have all my life committed every critical thing to somebody or other
that no other living man would trust with a sixpence. They stood to me
as I stood to them, and they knew why. Need I tell you that why?"
"No necessity in the world to do so," said Paul, blandly.
"That 's enough," said Davis. "Come to me when you're ready, and I'll
have some cash for you."
CHAPTER VIII. A FAMILY MEETING.
Along a road pleasantly shaded by linden-trees, Davis strolled
leisurely that afternoon to meet his daughter. It was a mellow autumnal
day,--calm, silent, and half sombre,--one of those days in which the
tranquil aspect of nature has an influence of sad but soothing import,
and even the least meditative minds are led to reflection. Down the
deep valley, where the clear trout-stream eddied along, while the
leafy chestnut-trees threw their shadows over the water; over the
rich pasture-lands, where the spotted cattle roamed; high up the blue
mountains, whose snowy summits mingled with the clouds,--Davis wandered
with his eyes, and felt, he knew not why or how, a something of calming,
subduing effect upon a brain racked with many a scheme, wearied with
many a plot.
As he gazed down upon that fair scene where form and color and odor
were blended into one beauteous whole, a struggling effort of fancy sent
through his mind the question, "Is this, after all, the real prize of
life? Is this peaceful existence worth all the triumphs that we strive
and fight for?" And then came the thought, "Could this be lasting, what
would a nature like mine become, thus left in rust and disuse? Could I
live? or should I enjoy life without that eternal hand-to-hand conflict
with my fellow-men, on which skill and ready wit are exercised?" He
pondered long over this notion, nor could he satisfy himself with any
conclusion.
He thought he could remember a time when he would thoroughly have liked
all this,--when he could have taken leave of the busy world without one
regret, and made the great race of life a mere "walk over;" but now that
he had tasted the poisonous fascination of that combat, where man is
pitted against man, and where even the lust of gain is less stimulating
than a deadly sense of jealous rivalry, it was too late--too late! How
strange, too, did it seem to him, as he looked back upon his wild and
stormy life, with all its perils and all its vicissitudes, to think
that an existence so calm, so uneventful, and so safe, could yet be
had,--that a region existed where craft could find no exercise, where
subtlety might be in disuse! It was to him like a haven that he was
rejoiced to know,--a harbor whose refuge, some one day or other, he
would search out; but there was yet one voyage to make,--one grand
venture,--which, if successful, would be the crowning fortune of his
life!
The sharp crack, crack of a postilion's whip started him from his
musings, and, looking up, he saw a post-carriage approaching at full
speed. He waved his hat as the carriage came near for the men to draw
up, and the next moment Lizzy Davis was in her father's arms. He kissed
her twice, and then, holding her back, gazed with proud delight at her
beautiful features, never more striking than in that moment of joyful
meeting.
"How well you are looking, Lizzy!" said he, with a thick utterance.
"And you too, dear papa," said she, caressingly. "This quiet rural life
seems to have agreed wonderfully with you. I declare you look five years
younger for it, does he not, Mr. Beecher?"
"Ah, Beecher, how are you?" cried Davis, warmly shaking the other's
hand. "This is jolly, to be all together again," said he, as, drawing
his daughter's arm within his own, and taking Beecher on the other side,
he told the postilions to move forward, while they would find their way
on foot.
"How did you ever hit upon this spot?" asked Beecher; "we could n't find
it on the map."
"I came through here some four-and-twenty years ago, and I never forget
a place nor a countenance. I thought at the time it might suit me, some
one day or other, to remember, and you see I was right. You are grown
fatter, Lizzy; at least I fancy so. But come, tell me about your life at
Aix,--was it pleasant? was the place gay?"
"It was charming, papa!" cried she, in ecstasy; "had you only been
with us, I could not have come away. Such delightful rides and drives,
beautiful environs, and then the Cursaal of an evening, with all its
odd people,--not that my guardian, here, fancied so much my laughing at
them."
"Well, you did n't place much restraint upon yourself, I must say."
"I was reserved even to prudery; I was the caricature of Anglo-Saxon
propriety," said she, with affected austerity.
"And what did they think of you, eh?" asked Davis trying to subdue the
pride that would, in spite of him, twinkle in his eye.
"I was the belle of the season. I assure you it is perfectly true!"
"Come, come, Lizzy--"
"Well, ask Mr. Beecher. Be honest now, and confess frankly, were you
not sulky at driving out with me the way the people stared? Didn't you
complain that you never expected to come home from the play without a
duel or something of the kind on your hands? Did you not induce me
to ruin my toilette just to escape what you so delicately called 'our
notoriety'? Oh, wretched man! what triumphs did I not relinquish out of
compliance to your taste for obscurity!"
"By Jove! we divided public attention with Ferouk Khan and his wives. I
don't see that my taste for obscurity obtained any brilliant success."
"I never heard of such black ingratitude!" cried she, in mock
indignation. "I assure you, pa, I was a martyr to his English notions,
which, to me, seem to have had their origin in Constantinople."
"Poor Beecher!" said Davis, laughingly.
"Poor Beecher, no, but happy Beecher, envied by thousands. Not indeed,"
added she, with a smile, "that his appearance at this moment suggests
any triumphant satisfaction. Oh, papa, you should have seen him when
the Russian Prince Ezerboffsky asked me to dance, or when the Archduke
Albrecht offered me his horses; or, better still, the evening the
Margrave lighted up his conservatory just to let me see it."
"Your guardianship had its anxieties, I perceive," said Davis, dryly.
"I think it had," said Beecher, sighing. "There were times I 'd have
given five thousand, if I had it, that she had been safe under your own
charge."
"My dear fellow, I'd have given fifty," said Davis, "if I did n't know
she was just in as good hands as my own." There was a racy heartiness in
this speech that thrilled through Beecher's heart, and he could scarcely
credit his ears that it was Grog spoke it. "Ay, Beecher," added he, as
he drew the other's arm closer to his side, "there was just one man--one
single man in Europe--I 'd have trusted with the charge."
"Really, gentlemen," said Lizzy, with a malicious sparkle of the eye,
"I am lost in my conjectures whether I am to regard myself as a sort of
human Koh-i-noor--a priceless treasure--or something so very difficult
to guard, so perilous to protect, as can scarcely be accounted a
flattery. Say, I entreat of you, to which category do I belong?"
"A little to each, I should say,--eh, Beecher?" cried Grog, laughingly.
"Oh, don't appeal to him, papa. He only wants to vaunt his heroism
the higher, because the fortress he guarded was so easy of assault!"
Beecher was ill-fitted to engage in such an encounter, and stammered out
some commonplace apology for his own seeming want of gallantry.
"She's too much for us, Beecher,--too much for us. It's a pace we can't
keep up," muttered Grog in the other's ear. And Beecher nodded a ready
assent to the speech.
"Well," said Lizzy, gayly, "now that your anxieties are well over, I
do entreat of you to unbend a little, and let us see the lively,
light-hearted Mr. Annesley Beecher, of whose pleasant ways I have heard
so much."
"I used to be light-hearted enough once, eh, Davis?" said Beecher, with
a sigh. "When you saw me first at the Derby--of, let me see, I don't
remember the year, but it was when Danby's mare Petrilla won,--with
eighteen to one 'given and taken' against her, the day of the
race,--Brown Davy, the favorite, coming in a bad third,--he died the
same night."
"Was he 'nobbled'?" asked Lizzy, dryly.
"What do you mean?" cried Grog, gruffly. "Where did you learn that
word?"
"Oh, I'm quite strong in your choice vocabulary," said she, laughingly;
"and you are not to fancy that in the dissipations of Aix I have
forgotten the cares of my education. My guardian there set me a task
every morning,--a page of Burke's Peerage and a column of the 'Racing
Calendar;' and for the ninth Baron of Fitzfoodle, or the fifteenth
winner of the Diddlesworth, you may call on me at a moment."
The angry shadow on Davis's brow gradually faded away, and he laughed a
real, honest, and good-humored laugh.
"What do you say to the Count, Lizzy?" asked he next. "There was a fine
gentleman, wasn't he?"
"There was the ease and the self-possession of good breeding without the
manners. He was amusing from his own self-content, and a sort of latent
impression that he was taking you in, and when one got tired of that, he
became downright stupid."
"True as a book, every word of it!" cried Beecher, in hearty gratitude,
for he detested the man, and was envious of his small accomplishments.
"His little caressing ways, too, ceased to be flatteries, when you saw
that, like the cheap bonbons scattered at a carnival, they were made for
the million."
"Hit him again, he has n't got no friends!" said Beecher, with an
assumed slang in his tone.
"But worst of all was that mockery of good nature,--a false air of
kindliness about him. It was a spurious coinage, so cleverly devised
that you looked at every good guinea afterwards with distrust."
"How she knows him,--how she reads him!" cried Davis, in delight.
"He was very large print, papa," said she, smiling.
"Confound me!" cried Beecher, "if I didn't think you liked him, you used
to receive him so graciously; and I'll wager he thinks himself a prime
favorite with you."
"So he may, if it give him any pleasure," said she, with a careless
laugh.
Davis marked the expression of Beecher's face as she said these words;
he saw how that distrustful nature was alarmed, and he hastened to
repair the mischief.
"I am sure you never affected to feel any regard for him, Lizzy?" said
Davis.
"Regard for him!" said she, haughtily; "I should think not! Such people
as he are like the hired horses that every one uses, and only asks that
they should serve for the day they have taken them."
"There, Beecher," said Davis, with a laugh. "I sincerely hope she's not
going to discuss your character or mine."
"By Jove! I hope not." And in the tone in which Beecher uttered this
there was an earnestness that made the other laugh heartily.
"Well, here we are. This is your home for the present," said Davis, as
he welcomed them to the little inn, whose household were all marshalled
to receive them with fitting deference.
The arrangements within doors were even better than the picturesque
exterior promised; and when Lizzy came down to dinner, she was in
raptures about her room, its neatness even to elegance, and the glorious
views that opened before the windows.
"I'm splendidly lodged too," said Beecher; "and they have given me a
dressing-room, with a little winding-stair to the river, and a bath in
the natural rock. It is downright luxury, all this."
Davis smiled contentedly as he listened. For days past had he been
busied with these preparations, determined to make the spot appear in
all its most favorable colors. Let us do him justice to own that his
cares met a full success. Flowers abounded in all the rooms; and the
perfumed air, made to seem tremulous by the sounds of falling water,
was inexpressibly calming after the journey. The dinner, too, would
have done honor to a more pretentious "hostel;" and the Steinberger, a
cabinet wine, that the host would not part with except for "love as well
as money," was perfection. Better than all these,--better than the
fresh trout with its gold and azure speckles,--better than the delicate
Rehbraten with its luscious sauce,--better than the red partridges in
their bed of truffles, and a dessert whose grapes rivalled those of
Fontainebleau,--better, I say, than all, was the happy temper of the
hour! Never were three people more disposed for enjoyment. To Lizzy, it
was the oft dreamed-of home, the quiet repose of a spot surrounded
with all the charm of scenery, coming, too, just as the dissipations
of gayety had begun to weary and pall upon her. To Beeeher, it was the
first moment of all his life in which he tasted peace. Here were neither
duns nor bailiffs. It was a Paradise where no writ had ever wandered,
nor the word "outlawry" had ever been uttered. As for Davis, if he had
not actually won his game, he held in his hand the trump card that he
knew must gain it. What signified, now, a day or even a week more or
less; the labor of his long ambition was all but completed, and he saw
the goal reached that he had striven for years to attain.
Nor were they less pleased with each other. Never had Lizzy seemed to
Beecher's eyes more fascinating than now. In all the blaze of full dress
she never looked more beautiful than in that simple muslin, with
the sky-blue ribbon in her glossy hair, and the boquet of moss
roses coquettishly placed above her ear, for--I mention it out of
accuracy--she wore her hair drawn back, as was the mode about a
century ago, and was somewhat ingenious in her imitation of that
mock-shepherdess coiffure so popular with fine ladies of that time.
She would have ventured on a "patch" if it were not out of fear for
her father; not, indeed, that the delicate fairness of her skin, or the
dazzling brilliancy of her eyes, needed the slightest aid from art.
Was it with some eye to keeping a toilette that she wore a profusion of
rings, many of great price and beauty? I know not her secret; if I did,
I should assuredly tell it, for I suspect none of her coquetries were
without their significance. To complete Beecher's satisfaction, Davis
was in a mood of good humor, such as he had never seen before.
Not a word of contradiction, not one syllable of disparagement fell from
his lips, that Beecher usually watched with an utmost childish terror,
dreading reproof at every moment, and not being over certain when
his opinions would pass without a censure. Instead of this, Grog was
conciliating even to gentleness, constantly referred to Beecher what
he thought of this or that, and even deferred to his better judgment on
points whereon he might have been supposed to be more conversant. Much
valued reader, has it ever been your fortune in life to have had your
opinions on law blandly approved of by an ex-Chancellor, your notions
of medicine courteously confirmed by a great physician, or your naval
tactics endorsed by an admiral of the fleet? If so, you can fully
appreciate the ecstasy of Annesley Beecher as he found all his
experiences of the sporting world corroborated by the "Court above."
This was the gold medal he had set his heart on for years,--this the
great prize of all his life; and now he had won it, and he was really
a "sharp fellow." There is an intense delight in the thought of having
realized a dream of ambition, of which, while our own hearts gave us the
assurance of success, the world at large only scoffed at our attempting.
To be able to say, "Yes, here I am, despite all your forebodings and all
your predictions,--I knew it was 'in me'!" is a very proud thing, and
such a moment of vaingloriousness is pardonable enough.
How enjoyable at such a moment of triumph was it to hear Lizzy sing and
play, making that miserable old piano discourse in a guise it had
never dreamed of! She was in one of those moods wherein she blended
the wildest flights of fancy with dashes of quaint humor, now breathing
forth a melody of Spohr's in accents of thrilling pathos, now hitting
off in improvised doggerel a description of Aix and its company,
with mimicries of their voice and manner irresistibly droll. In these
imitations the Count, and even Beecher himself, figured, till Grog,
fairly worn out with laughter, had to entreat her to desist.
As for Beecher, he was a good-tempered fellow, and the little raillery
at himself took nothing from the pleasure of the description, and he
laughed in ready acknowledgment of many a little trait of his own manner
that he never suspected could have been detected by another.
"Ain't she wonderful,--ain't she wonderful?" exclaimed Grog, as she
strolled out into the garden, and left them alone together.
"What I can't make out is, she has no blank days," said Beecher. "She
was just as you saw her there, the whole time we were at Aix; and while
she's rattling away at the piano, and going on with all manner of fun,
just ask her a serious question,--I don't care about what,----and she'll
answer you as if she had been thinking of nothing else for the whole day
before."
"Had she been born in your rank of life, Beecher, where would she
be be now,--tell me that?" said Davis; and there was an almost fierce
energy in the words as he spoke them.
"I can tell you one thing," cried Beecher, in a transport of
delight,--"there's no rank too high for her this minute."
"Well said, boy,--well said," exclaimed Davis, warmly; "and here's to
her health."
"That generous toast and cheer must have been in honor of myself," said
Lizzy, peeping in at the window, "and in acknowledgment I beg to invite
you both to tea."
CHAPTER IX. A SAUNTER BY MOONLIGHT.
Lizzy Davis had retired to her room somewhat weary after the day's
journey, not altogether unexcited by her meeting with her father. How
was it that there was a gentleness, almost a tenderness, in his manner
she had never known before? The short, stern address, the abrupt
question, the stare piercing and defiant of one who seemed ever to
distrust what he heard, were all replaced by a tone of quiet and easy
confidence, and a look that bespoke perfect trustfulness.
"Have I only seen him hitherto in moments of trial and excitement; are
these the real traits of his nature; is it the hard conflict of life
calls forth the sterner features of his character; and might he, in
happier circumstances, be ever kind and confiding, as I see him now?"
What a thrill of ecstasy did the thought impart! What a realization
of the home she had often dreamed of! "He mistakes me, too," said she,
aloud, "if he fancies that my heart is set upon some high ambition.
A life of quiet obscurity, in some spot peaceful and unknown as this,
would suffice for all my wishes. I want no triumphs,--I covet no
rivalries." A glance at herself in the glass at this moment sent the
deep color to her cheek, and she blushed deeply. Was it that those
bright, flashing eyes, that fair and haughty brow, and those lips
tremulous with proud significance gave a denial to these words? Indeed,
it seemed as much, for she quickly added, "Not that I would fly the
field, or ingloriously escape the struggle--Who's there?" cried she,
quickly, as a low tap came to the door.
"It is I, Lizzy. I heard you still moving about, and I thought I 'd
propose half an hour's stroll in the moonlight before bed. What do you
say to it?"
"I should like it of all things, papa," cried she, opening the door at
once.
"Throw a shawl across your shoulders, child," said he; "the air is not
always free from moisture. We 'll go along by the river-side."
A bright moon in a sky without a cloud lit up the landscape, and by the
strongly marked contrast of light and shadow imparted a most striking
effect to a scene wild, broken, and irregular. Fantastically shaped
rocks broke the current of the stream; at every moment gnarled and
twisted roots straggled along the shelving banks, and in the uncertain
light assumed goblin shapes and forms, the plashing stream, as it
rushed by, appearing to give motion to the objects around. Nor was the
semblance all unreal, for here and there a pliant branch rose and fell
on the surging water like the arm of some drowning swimmer.
[Illustration: 108]
The father and daughter walked along for some time in utter silence, and
the thoughts of each filled with the scene before them. Lizzy fancied
it was a conflict of river gods,--some great Titanic war, where angry
giants were the combatants; or again, as fairer forms succeeded, they
seemed a group of nymphs bathing in the soft moonlight. As for Grog, it
reminded him of a row at Ascot, where the swell-mob smashed the police;
and so strikingly did it call up the memory of the event that he laughed
aloud and heartily.
"Do tell me what you are laughing at, papa," said she, entreatingly.
"It was something that I saw long ago,--something I was reminded of by
those trees yonder, bobbing up and down with the current."
"But what was it?" asked she, more eagerly; for even yet the memory kept
him laughing.
"Nothing that could interest you, girl," said he, bluntly; and then, as
if ashamed of the rudeness of his speech, he added, "Though I have seen
a good deal of life, Lizzy, there's but little of it I could recall for
either your benefit or instruction."
Lizzy was silent; she wished him to speak on, but did not choose to
question him. Strangely enough, too, though be shunned the theme, he had
been glad if she had led him on to talk of it.
After a long pause he sighed heavily, and said: "I suppose every one, if
truth were told, would have rather a sad tale to tell of the world when
he comes to my age. It don't improve upon acquaintance, I promise you.
Not that I want to discourage you about it, my girl. You 'll come to
my way of thinking one of these days, and it will be quite soon enough."
"And have you really found men so false and worthless as you say?"
"I'll tell you in one word the whole story, Lizzy. The fellows that are
born to a good station and good property are all fair and honest, if
they like it; the rest of the world must be rogues, whether they like it
or not."
"This is a very disenchanting picture you put before me." "Here 's how
it is, girl," said he, warming with his subject. "Every man in the world
is a gambler; let him rail against dice, racing, cards, or billiards, he
has a game of his own in his heart, and he's playing for a seat in
the Cabinet, a place in the colonies, a bishopric, or the command of a
regiment. The difference is, merely, that your regular play-man admits
chance into his calculations, the other fellows don't; they pit pure
skill against the table, and trust to their knowledge of the game."
She sighed deeply, but did not speak.
"And the women are the same," resumed he: "some scheming to get their
husbands high office, some intriguing for honors or Court favor; all of
them ready to do a sharp thing,--to make a hit on the Stock Exchange."
"And are there none above these mean and petty subterfuges?" cried she,
indignantly.
"Yes; the few I have told you,--they who come into the world to claim
the stakes. They can afford to be high-minded, and generous, and
noble-hearted, as much as they please. They are booked 'all right,'
and need never trouble their heads about the race; and that is the real
reason, girl, why these men have an ascendancy over all others. They are
not driven to scramble for a place; they have no struggles to encounter;
the crowd makes way for them as they want to pass; and if they have
anything good, ay, or even good-looking, about them, what credit don't
they get for it!"
"But surely there must be many a lowly walk where a man with contentment
can maintain himself honorably and even proudly?"
"I don't know of them, if there be," said Davis, sulkily. "Lawyers,
parsons, merchants, are all, I fancy, pretty much alike,--all on 'the
dodge.'"
"And Beecher,--poor Beecher?" broke in Lizzy. And there was a blended
pity and tenderness in the tone that made it very difficult to say what
her question really implied.
"Why do you call him poor Beecher?" asked he, quickly. "He ain't so poor
in one sense of the word."
"It was in no allusion to his fortune I spoke. I was thinking of him
solely with reference to his character."
"And he is poor Beecher, is he, then?" asked Davis, half sternly.
If she did not reply, it was rather in the fear of offending her father,
whose manner, so suddenly changing, apprised her of an interest in the
subject she had never suspected.
"Look here, Lizzy," said he, drawing her arm more closely to his side,
while he bespoke her attention; "men born in Beecher's class don't
need to be clever; they have no necessity for the wiles and schemes and
subtleties that--that fellows like myself, in short, must practise. What
they want is good address, pleasing manners,--all the better if they be
good-looking. It don't require genius to write a check on one's banker;
there is no great talent needed to say 'Yes,' or 'No,' in the House of
Lords. The world--I mean their own world--likes them all the more if
they have n't got great abilities. Now Beecher is just the fellow to
suit them."
"He is not a peer, surely?" asked she, hastily.
"No, he ain't yet, but he may be one any day. He is as sure of the
peerage as--I am not! and then, poor Beecher--as you called him awhile
ago--becomes the Lord Viscount Lackington, with twelve or fourteen
thousand a year! I tell you, girl, that of all the trades men follow,
the very best, to enjoy life, is to be an English lord with a good
fortune."
"And is it true, as I have read," asked Lizzy, "that this high station,
so fenced around by privileges, is a prize open to all who have talent
or ability to deserve it,--that men of humble origin, if they be
gifted with high qualities, and devote them ardently to their country's
service, are adopted, from time to time, into that noble brotherhood?"
"All rubbish; don't believe a word of it. It's a flam and a humbug,--a
fiction like the old story about an Englishman's house being his castle,
or that balderdash, 'No man need criminate himself.' They 're always
inventing 'wise saws' like these in England, and they get abroad, and
are believed, at last, just by dint of repeating. Here 's the true state
of the case," said he, coming suddenly to a halt, and speaking with
greater emphasis. "Here I stand, Christopher Davis, with as much wit
under the crown of my hat as any noble lord on the woolsack, and I might
just as well try to turn myself into a horse and be first favorite for
the Oaks, as attempt to become a peer of Great Britain. It ain't to be
done, girl,--it ain't to be done!"
"But, surely, I have heard of men suddenly raised to rank and title for
the services--"
"So you do. They want a clever lawyer, now and then, to help them on
with a peerage case; or, if the country grows forgetful of them, they
attract some notice by asking a lucky general to join them; and even
then they do it the way a set of old ladies would offer a seat in the
coach to a stout-looking fellow on a road beset with robbers,--they hope
he 'll fight for 'em; but, after all, it takes about three generations
before one of these new hands gets regularly recognized by the rest."
"What haughty pride!" exclaimed she; but nothing in her tone implied
reprobation.
"Ain't it haughty pride?" cried he; "but if you only knew how it is
nurtured in them, how they are worshipped! They walk down St. James's
Street, and the policeman elbows me out of the way to make room for
them; they stroll into Tattersall's, and the very horses cock their
tails and step higher as they trot past; they go into church, and the
parson clears his throat and speaks up in a fine round voice for them.
It's only because the blessed sun is not an English institution, or he
'd keep all his warmth and light for the peerage!"
"And have they, who render all this homage, no shame for their
self-abasement?"
"Shame! why, the very approach to them is an honor. When a lord in the
ring at Newmarket nods his head to me and says, 'How d' ye do, Davis?'
my pals--my acquaintances, I mean--are twice as respectful to me for the
rest of the day. Not that I care for that," added he, sternly; "I know
them a deuced sight better than they fancy!--far better than they
know me!"
Lizzy fell into a revery; her thoughts went back to a conversation she
had once held with Beecher about the habits of the great world, and all
the difficulties to its approach.
"I wish I could dare to put a question to you, papa," said she, at last.
"Do so, girl. I 'll do my best to answer it"
"And not be angry at my presumption,--not be offended with me?"
"Not a bit. Be frank with me, and you 'll find me just as candid."
"What I would ask, then, is this,--and mind, papa, it is in no mere
curiosity, no idle indulgence of a passing whim I would ask it, but for
sake of self-guidance and direction,--who are we?--what are we?"
The blood rose to Davis's face and temples till he became crimson;
his nostrils dilated, and his eyes flashed with a wild lustre. Had the
bitterest insult of an enemy been hurled at his face before the open
world, his countenance could not have betrayed an expression of more
intense passion.
"By heaven!" said he, with a long-drawn breath, "I did n't think there
was one in Europe would have asked me that much to my face. There's no
denying it, girl, you have my own pluck in you."
"If I ever thought it would have moved you so--"
"Only to make me love you the more, girl,--to make me know you for my
own child in heart and soul," cried he, pressing her warmly to him.
"But I would not have cost you this emotion, dearest pa--"
"It's over now; I am as cool as yourself. There 's my hand,--there
's not much show of nervousness there. 'Who are we?'" exclaimed he,
fiercely, echoing her question. "I 'd like to know how many of that
eight-and-twenty millions they say we are in England could answer such a
question? There's a short thick book or two tells about the peerage and
baronetage, and says who are they; but as for the rest of us--" A wave
of the hand finished the sentence. "My own answer would be that of
many another: I 'm the son of a man who bore the same name, and who,
if alive, would tell the same story. As to what we are, that's another
question," added he, shrewdly; "though, to be sure, English life
and habits have established a very easy way of treating the matter.
Everybody with no visible means of support, and who does nothing for his
own subsistence, is either a gentleman or a vagrant. If he be positively
and utterly unable to do anything for himself, he 's a gentleman; if he
can do a stroke of work in some line or other, he 's only a vagrant."
"And you, papa?" asked she, with an accent as calm and unconcerned as
might be.
"I?--I am a little of both, perhaps," said he, after a pause.
A silence ensued, long enough to be painful to each; Lizzy did not dare
to repeat her question, although it still remained unanswered, and Davis
knew well that he had not met it frankly, as he promised. What a severe
struggle was that his mind now endured! The hoarded secret of his whole
life,--the great mystery to which he had sacrificed all the happiness of
a home, for which he had consented to estrange himself from his child,
training her up amidst associations and habits every one of which
increased the distance between them,--there it was now on his lip; a
word might reveal it, and by its utterance might be blasted all the
fondest hopes his heart had ever cherished. To make Lizzy a lady, to
surround her not only with all the wants and requirements of station,
but to imbue her mind with sentiments and modes of thought such as befit
that condition, had been the devoted labor of his life. For this he had
toiled and struggled, contrived, plotted, and schemed for years long.
What terrible scenes had he not encountered, with what desperate
characters not associated! In the fearful commerce of the play-table
there was not a dark passion of the human heart he had not explored,--to
know men in their worst aspects, in their insolence of triumph, the
meanness of their defeat, in their moments of avarice, in their waste;
to read their natures so that every start or sigh, a motion of the
finger, a quivering of the lip should have its significance; to
perceive, as by an instinct, wherein the craft or subtlety of each lay,
and by the same rapid intuition to know his weak point also! Men have
won high collegiate honors with less intensity of study than he gave to
this dark pursuit; men have come out of battle with less peril to life
than he faced every day of his existence, and all for one object,--all
that his daughter might breathe an atmosphere from which he must live
excluded, and know a world whose threshold he should never pass. Such
was the terrible conflict that now raged within him as he reviewed the
past, and saw to what a narrow issue he had reduced his one chance of
happiness. "There she stands now," thought he, "all that my fondest
hopes had ever fashioned her; and who is to say what one word--one
single word uttered by my lips--may not make of that noble nature, pure
and spotless as it is? How will she bear to hear that her station is
a deception, her whole life a lie,--that she is the daughter of Grog
Davis, the leg?" Heaven knows with what dexterous artifices he had often
met this difficulty as it used to present itself to his mind, how he
had seen in what way he could extricate himself, how reconcile his own
shortcomings with her high-soaring tastes and habits! Whatever such
devices he had ever conceived, none came to his aid now; not one offered
him the slightest assistance.
Then came another thought,--"How long is this deception to be carried
on? Am I to wait?" said he, "and if so, for what? Ay, there's the
question, for what? Is it that some other may break the news to her,
and tell her whose daughter she is?" In that world he knew best he could
well imagine with what especial malice such a tale would be revealed.
Not that slander need call imagination to its aid. Alas! his life had
incidents enough for malignity to gloat over!
His stout arm shook, and his strong frame trembled with a sort of
convulsive shudder as these thoughts flashed across his mind.
"Are you cold, dearest pa? Are you ill?" asked she, eagerly.
"No. Why do you ask?" said he, sternly.
"You trembled all over; I was afraid you were not well."
"I 'm never ill," said he, in the same tone. "There 's a bullet in me
somewhere about the hip--they can't make out exactly where--gives me
a twinge of pain now and then. Except that, I never knew what ailment
means."
"In what battle?"
"It was n't a battle," broke he in; "it was a duel. It's an old story
now, and not worth remembering. There, you need not shudder, girl;
the fellow who shot me is alive, though, I must say, he has n't a very
graceful way of walking. Do you ever read the newspapers,--did they
allow you ever to read them at school?"
"No; but occasionally I used to catchy a glance at them in the
drawing-room. It was a kind of reading fascinated me intensely, it was
so real. But why do you ask me?"
"I don't know why I asked the question," muttered he, half moodily, and
hung his head down. "Yes, I do," cried he, after a pause. "I wanted to
know if you ever saw my name--our name--in the public prints."
"Once,--only once, and very long ago, I did, and I asked the governess
if the name were common in England, and she said, 'Yes.' I remember
the paragraph that attracted me to this very hour. It was the case of
a young man--I forget the name--who shot himself in despair, after some
losses at play, and the narrative was headed, 'More of Grog Davis!'"
Davis started back, and, in a voice thick and hoarse with passion, cried
out,--
"And then? What next?" The words were uttered in a voice so fearfully
wild that Lizzy stood in a sort of stupefied terror, and unable to
reply. "Don't you hear me, girl?" cried he. "I asked you what came
next."
"There was an account of an inquest,--some investigation as to how the
poor fellow had met his death. I remember little about that. I was only
curious to learn who this Grog Davis might be--"
"And they could n't tell you, it seems!"
"No; they had never heard of him."
"Then I 'll tell you, girl. Here he stands before you."
"You! papa--you--dearest pa! Oh, no, no!" cried she, imploringly, as
she threw herself on his neck and sobbed bitterly,--"oh no! I 'll not
believe it."
"And why not believe it? What was there in that same story that should
prejudice me? There, there, girl, if you give way thus, it will offend
me,--ay, Lizzy, offend me."
She raised her head from his shoulder, dried her eyes, and stood calm
and unmoved before him. Her pale face, paler in the bright moonlight,
now showed not a trace of passion or emotion.
Davis would have given his right hand at that moment that she had been
led into some burst of excitement, some outbreak of passionate feeling,
which, in rebuking, might have carried him away from all thoughts about
himself; but she was cold and still and silent, like one who has heard
some terrible tidings, but yet has summoned up courage for the trial.
There was that in her calm, impassive stare that cut him to the very
heart; nor could any words have reproached him so bitterly as that
steadfast look.
"If you don't know who we are, you know what we are, girl. Is that not
so?" cried he, in a thick and passionate tone. "I meant to have told it
you fifty times. There was n't a week in the last two years that I did
n't, at least, begin a letter to you about it I did more: I cut all
the things out of the newspapers and made a collection of them, and
intended, some day or other, you should read them. Indeed, it was only
because you seemed so happy there that, I spared you. I felt the day
must come, though. Know it you must, sooner or later, and better from me
than another I mean better for the other; for, by heaven! I 'd have shot
him who told you. Why don't you speak to me, girl? What's passing in
your mind?"
"I scarcely know," said she, in a hollow voice. "I don't quite feel sure
I am awake!"
"Yes!" cried he, with a terrible oath, "you are awake; it was the past
was the dream! When you were the Princess, and every post brought you
some fresh means of extravagance,--that was the dream! The world went
well with myself in those days. Luck stood to me in whatever I touched.
In all I ventured I was sure to come right, as if I had made my bargain
with Fortune. But the jade threw me over at last, that she did. From the
hour I went in against Hope's stables at Rickworth,--that's two years
and eleven days to-day,--I never won a bet! The greenest youngsters from
Oxford beat me at my own weapons. I went on selling,--now a farm, now a
house, now a brood mare. I sent the money all to you, girl, every guinea
of it. What I did myself I did on tick till the September settling at
Cottiswoode, and then it was all up. I was ruined!"
"Ruined!" echoed she, while she grasped his arm and drew him closer to
her side; "you surely had made friends--"
"Friends are capital things when the world goes well with you, but
friends are fond of a good cook and iced champagne, and they don't fancy
broken boots and a bad hat. Besides, what credit is to the merchant,
luck is to one of us. Let the word get abroad luck is against you; let
them begin to say, 'There 's that poor devil Davis in for it again; he's
so unlucky!'--once they say that, you are shunned like a fellow with the
plague; none will associate with you, none give you a helping hand or a
word of counsel. Why, the grooms wouldn't gallop if I was on the ground,
for fear my bad luck might strain a sinew and slip a ligament! And they
were right too! Smile if you like, girl,--I am not a very superstitious
fellow,--but nobody shall persuade me there ain't such a thing as luck.
Be that as it may, mine turned,--I was ruined!"
"And were there none to come to your aid? You must surely have lent a
helping hand to many--"
"Look here, girl," said he; "now that we are on this subject, you may as
well understand it aright. If a gentleman born--a fellow like Beecher,
there--comes to grief, there's always plenty of others ready to serve
him; some for the sake of his family, some for his name, some because
there's always the chance that he may pay one day or other. Snobs, too,
would help him, because he 's the Honorable Annesley Beecher; but it's
vastly different when it's Grog Davis is in case. Every one rejoices
when a leg breaks down."
"A leg is the slang for--for--"
"For a betting man," interposed Davis. "When a fellow takes up the turf
as a profession, they call him 'a leg,'--not that they 'd exactly say it
to his face!" added he, with a smile of intense sarcasm.
"Go on," said she, faintly, after a slight pause.
"Go on with what?" cried he, rudely. "I've told you everything. You
wanted to know what I was, and how I made my living. Well, you know it
all now. To be sure, the newspapers, if you read them, could give
you more precise details; but there's one thing, girl, they could n't
blink,--there's not one of them could say that what my head planned
overnight my hand was not ready to defend in the morning! I can't always
throw a main, but I 'll hit my man,--and at five-and-thirty paces, if he
don't like to stand closer."
"And what led you to this life, papa? Was it choice?"
"I have told you enough already; too much, mayhap," said he, doggedly.
"Question me no more!"
Had Davis but seen the face of her at his side, what a terrible shock
it would have given him, hard and stern as he was! She was pale as
marble,--even the lips were colorless; while along her cheeks a heavy
tear stole slowly along. It was the only one she shed, but it cost an
agony.
"And this is the awaking from that glorious dream I have long been lost
in?--this the explanation of that life of costly extravagance, where
every wish was answered, every taste pampered. This is the reverse of
that medal which represented me as noble by birth and high in station!"
If these were the first bitter thoughts that crossed her mind, her next
were to ask herself why it was that the tidings had not humiliated her
more deeply. "How is it that while I see and hear all this," cried she,
"I listen in a spirit of defiance, not defeat? Is it that in my heart I
dare to arraign the decrees the world has adopted for its guidance? Do
I presume to believe that I can play the rebel successfully against the
haughtiest aristocracy of Europe?--There is yet one question, papa,"
said she, slowly and deliberately, "that I would wish to ask you. It is
the last I will ever put, leaving to your own discretion to answer it
or not. Why was it--I mean, with what object did you place me where by
habit and education I should contract ideas of life so widely different
from those I was born to?"
"Can't you guess?" said he, rudely.
"Mayhap I do guess the reason," said she, in a low but unbroken voice.
"I remember your saying one night to Mr. Beecher, 'When a colt has a
turn of speed, he 's always worth the training.'"
Davis grew crimson; his very ears tingled as the blood mounted to his
head. Was it shame, was it anger, was it a strange pride to see the
traits of his own heart thus reflected on his child, or was it a
blending of all three together? At all events, he never uttered a word,
but walked slowly along at her side.
A low faint sigh from Lizzy suddenly aroused him, and he said, "Are you
ill,--are you tired, girl?"
"I 'd like to go back to the house," said she, calmly but weakly. He
turned without a word, and they walked on towards the inn.
"When I proposed this walk, Lizzy, I never meant it to have been so sad
a one."
"Nor yours the fault if it is so," said she, drearily.
"I could, it is true, have kept you longer in the dark. I might have
maintained this deception a week or two longer."
"Oh, that were useless; the mistake was in not--No matter--it was
never a question wherein I could have a voice. Has n't the night grown
colder?"
"No; it's just what it was when we came out," said he, gruffly. "Now
that you know all this affair," resumed he, after a lapse of some
minutes, "there 's another matter I 'd like to talk over; it touches
yourself, too, and we may as well have it now as later. What about
Beecher; he has been paying you attentions, hasn't he?"
"None beyond what I may reasonably expect from one in his position
towards me."
"Yes, but he has, though. I sent over Lienstahl to report to me, and
he says that Beecher's manner implied attachment, and yours showed no
repugnance to him. Is this true?"
"It may be, for aught I know," said she, indifferently. "Mr. Beecher
probably knows what he meant. I certainly can answer for myself, and
will say that whatever my manner might imply, my heart--if that be the
name for it--gave no concurrence to what the Count attributed to me."
"Do you dislike him?"
"Dislike? No; certainly not; he is too gentle, too obliging, too
conciliating in manner, too well bred to create dislike. He is not very
brilliant--"
"He 'll be a peer," broke in Davis.
"I suspect that all his views of life are deeply tinged with prejudice?"
"He'll be a peer," continued Davis.
"He has been utterly neglected in education."
"He don't want it."
"I mean that to suit the station he fills--"
"He has got the station; he's sure of it; he can't be stripped of it.
In one word, girl, he has, by right and birth, rank and fortune, such
as ten generations of men like myself, laboring hard every hour of their
lives, could never win. He 'll be a peer of England, and I know of no
title means so much."
"But of all his failings," said Lizzy, who seemed to take little heed
of her father's interruptions, while steadily following out her own
thoughts,--"of all his failings, he has none greater or more pernicious
than the belief that it is a mark of intelligence to outwit one's
neighbor; that cunning is a high quality, and craft means genius."
"These might be poor qualities to gain a living with," said Davis, "but
I tell you, once for all, he does n't need to be brilliant, or witty, or
any other nonsense of that kind. He 'll have the right to go where all
the cleverness of the world couldn't place him, to live in a set where,
if he could Write plays like Shakspeare, build bridges like Brunel, or
train a horse like John Scott, it would n't avail him a brass farthing;
and if you only knew, child, what these people think of each other, and
what the world thinks of them, you 'd see it's the best stake ever was
run for."
Lizzy never replied a word; every syllable of her father's speech was,
as it were, "filtering down" into her mind, and she brooded long over
the thoughts thus suggested. Thus, walking along in silence, side by
side, they drew nigh the house. They had now gained the little garden
before the door, and were standing in the broad full moonlight, face to
face, Davis saw that her eyes were red and her cheeks marked by tears;
but an impassive calm, and a demeanor subdued even to coldness, seemed
to have succeeded to this emotion. "Oh, my poor girl," broke he out, in
a voice of deepest feeling, "if I did n't know the world so well,--if I
did n't know how little one gains by indulging affection,--if I did
n't know, besides, how you yourself will think of all this some ten or
twelve years hence, I could n't have the heart for it."
"And--must--it--be?" faltered she out, in a broken accent.
Davis threw his arm around her, and, pressing her to him, sobbed
bitterly. "There, there," cried he, "go in,--go in, child; go to bed,
and get some sleep." And with this he turned quickly away and left her.
CHAPTER X. A RIDE TO NEUWIED
Long before Lizzy had composed herself to sleep--for her heart was torn
by a first sorrow, and she lay restless and fevered--her father, mounted
on a post-horse, was riding away towards the Rhine. He had desired that
the reply to his telegraphic message should be addressed to him at the
post-office of Neuwied, and thither he was now bent. It is a strange
thing, that when the affections of men of this stamp are deeply
moved,--when their sensibilities, long dulled and hardened by the
rubs of life, are once evoked,--the feelings excited are less those of
gentleness and tenderness than an almost savage desire for some personal
conflict. Urging his horse to full speed, Davis spared neither whip nor
spur. Alone upon that solitary road, he asked himself aloud if he were
less alone in the broad, bleak world? "Is not the 'field' against
me wherever I go? I never heard of the fellow that had not some
'moorings'--some anchorage--except myself." But a brief hour ago and
there was one who loved him with all her heart,--who saw, or fancied she
saw, a rich mine of generous qualities in his rough manners and blunt
address,--who pictured to her mind what such a nature might have been
under happier circumstances and with better culture. "And now," cried
he, aloud,--"now she knows me for what I am, how will she bear this?
Will she sink under it, will it crush her, or has she enough of my own
blood in her veins to meet it courageously? Oh! if she only knew the
world as I do,--what a mean coward it is, how it bullies the weak and
truckles to the strong, how it frowns down the timid and simpers to the
sturdy! Every man--ay, and every woman--can sell his life dearly; and
strange it is, one only learns the value of this secret too late. Let
a fellow start with it, and see what it does for him. I went at them
single-handed; I went down all alone into the ring, and have they
beaten me? I had no honorable or right honorable friends to pick me
out of a scrape. It would be hard to find three men, with good hats on
them, would bail me to the amount of ten pounds; and here I am to-day
just as ready to face them all as ever."
What canting nonsense do we occasionally read in certain quarters
to disparage mere personal courage,--"mere personal courage"! We are
reminded that the ignoble quality is held in common with the bull-dog,
and that in this essential he is our master; we are reminded that it is
a low and vulgar attribute that neither elevates nor enlightens, that
the meanest creatures are often gifted with it, and the noblest natures
void of it. To all this we give a loud and firm denial; and we affirm as
steadfastly, that without it there is neither truth nor manliness. The
self-reliance that makes a man maintain his word, be faithful to his
friendships, and honorable in his dealings, has no root in a heart that
shakes with craven fear. The life of a coward is the voyage of a ship
with a leak,--eternal contrivance, never-ceasing emergency. All thoughts
dashed with a perpetual fear of death, what room is there for one
generous emotion, one great or high-hearted ambition?
What a quality must that be, I would ask, that gives even to such
a nature as this man's a sort of rugged dignity? Yes, with all his
failings and short-comings, and I am not going to hide one of them, his
personal courage lifted him out of that category of contempt to which
his life assigned him. How well the world understands such men to be
the fer natur of humanity! It may shun, deprecate, disparage, but it
never despises them. If then of such value be a gift that makes even
the bad appear tolerable, there is this evil in the quality, that it
disposes men like Davis to be ever on the attack. Their whole policy of
life is aggressive.
It was about eight o'clock, on a mellow autumnal morning, as Grog
reached Neuwied, and rode down the main street, already becoming
thronged with the peasantry for the market: Guiding his horse carefully
through the booths of flaunting wares, gay stalls of rural finery, and
stands of fruit, he reached the little inn where he meant to breakfast.
The post was not to open for an hour, so that he ordered his meal to be
at once got ready, and looked also to the comfort of his beast, somewhat
blown by a long stage. His breakfast had been laid in the public room,
in which two travellers were seated, whose appearance, even before he
heard them speak, proclaimed them to be English. They were both
young, fresh-looking, and well favored; that stamp of half-modesty,
half-boldness, so essentially British, was on them, and, notwithstanding
the entrance of a stranger, they talked away in their native language
with all the fearless security your genuine John Bull feels that no
confounded foreigner can understand him. It is but fair to admit that
Grog's beard and moustaches, his frogged and braided grass-green coat,
and his blue spectacles made him resemble anything on earth rather than
a subject of Queen Victoria.
In the mere glance Grog bestowed upon them as he passed, he saw the
class to which they pertained,--young Oxford or Cambridge men, "out"
for their vacation,--an order for which he ever entertained a supreme
contempt. He despised their mock shrewdness, their assumed craft, and
that affectation of being "fast men," which in reality never soared
above running up a bill at the pastrycook's, thrashing a townsman, and
giving a stunning wine-party at their rooms. To what benefit could such
miniature vices be turned? It was only "punting" with the Evil One, and
Grog thought so and avoided them.
Deep in the "mysterious gutturals" of the "Cologne Gazette," or busily
discussing his carbonadoed beefsteak, Davis gave no heed to the
bald, disjointed chat of his neighbors; broken phrases reached him
at intervals about proctors and the "little go," the stroke oar of
Brazennose, or some new celebrity of the ballet, when suddenly the name
of Annesley Beecher startled him. He now listened attentively, and heard
one of them relating to the other that while waiting for his arrival
at Aix la-Chapelle, he had devoted himself to watching Beecher and "the
stunning girl" that was with him. It appeared from what he said that all
Aix was wildly excited by curiosity on her account. That she was neither
wife, sister, nor mistress, none disputed. Who was she, then? or what
could be the explanation of that mysterious companionship? "You should
have seen her at the rooms," continued the narrator; "she used to make
her appearance about eleven--rarely before--dressed with a magnificence
that threw all the little German royalties into the shade,--such lace
and ornaments! They said, of course, it was all false; I can only tell
you that old Lady Bamouth got beside her one night just to examine her
scarf, and she proclaimed it real Brussels, and worth I can't say how
much; and for the recovery of an opal that fell out of her bracelet one
night Beecher gave six hundred francs next morning."
"Then it was the money was false," broke in the other; "Beecher is
ruined, he hasn't sixpence,--at least I've always heard him mentioned as
a fellow regularly cleaned out years ago."
"He was before my day," resumed the first; "but I heard the same story
you did. But what's the meaning of calling a fellow ruined that can go
about the world stopping at first-rate hotels, having carriages, horses,
opera-boxes? Why, the waiter at Aix told me that he paid above five
hundred florins for flowers. This girl, whoever she was, was wild about
moss-roses and pink hyacinths, and they fetched them from Rotterdam for
her. Pretty well that for a ruined man!"
"Perhaps it was she herself had the money," suggested the other, half
carelessly.
"That's possible, too; I know that whenever she came down to the wells
and took a glass of the waters, she always gave a gold piece to the girl
that served her."
"Then she was not a lady by birth; that trait is quite sufficient to
decide the point."
Davis started as if he had been stung; here, from the lips of these raw
youths, was he to receive a lesson in life, and be told that all the
cost and splendor by which he purposed to smooth over the difficult
approaches to society were fatal blunders and no more,--that the
very extravagance so imposing in one of acknowledged station becomes
"suspect" in those of dubious rank. Like all men of quick resentments,
he soon turned the blame from himself to others. It was Lizzy's fault.
What right had she to draw upon herself all the censorious tongues of
a watering-place? Why should she have attracted this foolish notoriety?
After all, she was new to life and the world, and might be pardoned;
but Beecher,--it was just the one solitary thing he did know,--Beecher
ought to have warned her against this peril; he ought to have guarded
against it himself. Why should such a girl be exposed to the insolent
comments of fellows like these? and he measured them deliberately, and
thought over in his mind how little trouble it would cost him to put two
families into mourning,--mayhap, to throw a life-long misery into
some happy home, and change the whole destinies of many he had never
seen,--never should see! There was, however, this difficulty, that in
doing so he drew a greater publicity upon her,--all whose interests
required secrecy and caution. "'Till she have the right to another name
than mine, she must not be the talk of newspapers," said he to himself;
and, like many a prudent reflection, it had its sting of pain.
These meditations were rudely cut short by the sound of his own name.
It was the elder of the two young men who was discussing the duel
at Brussels, and detailing, with all the influence of his superior
experience, the various reasons "why no man was called upon to meet
such a fellow as Davis." "I talked it over with Stan worth and Ellis,
and they both agreed with me."
"But what is to be done?" asked the younger.
"You hand him over to the police, or you thrash him right well with a
horsewhip, pay five pounds penalty for the assault, and there's an end
on't."
"And is 'Grog' as they call him, the man to put up with that mode of
treatment?"
"What can he do? Notoriety must ruin him. The moment it gets abroad that
a wolf has been seen near a village, all turn out for the pursuit."
Had he who uttered this sentiment only cast his eyes towards the
stranger at the table in the corner, he would have seen, by the
expression of the features, that his simile was not a bad one. Davis
shook with passion, and his self-control, to sit still and listen, was
almost like a fit.
"All the more ungenerous, then, would be the conduct," said the younger,
"to resent a personal wrong by calling in others to your aid."
"Don't you see, George," broke in the other, "that men have their beasts
of prey like other animals, and agree to hunt them down, out of common
security, for the mischief he causes, and the misery he spreads through
the world? One of these fellows in his lair is worse than any tiger that
ever crouched in a jungle. And as to dealing with him, as Ellis says,
do you ever talk of giving a tiger fair play,--do you make a duel of it,
with equal weapons; or do you just shoot him down when you can and how
you can?"
Davis arose and drew himself up, and there was a moment of irresolution
in his mind, of which, could the two travellers-have read the secret,
they would almost as soon have smoked their cigars in the den of a wild
beast. And yet there they sat, puffing indolently away the blue cloud,
scarcely deigning a passing glance at Grog, as he proceeded to leave the
room.
Anatomists assure us that if we but knew the delicate tissues by which
the machinery of our life is carried on, how slight the fibres, how
complex the functions on which vitality depends, we should not have
courage to move, or even speak, lest we should destroy an organization
so delicate and sensitive. In like manner, did we but know in life the
perils over which we daily pass, the charged mines over which we walk,
the volcanoes that are actually throbbing beneath our feet, what terrors
would it give to mere existence! It was on the turn of a straw how Davis
decided,--a word the more, a look from one of them, a laugh, might have
cost a life. With a long-drawn breath, the sigh of a pent-up emotion,
Grog found himself in the open air; there was a vague feeling in his
mind of having escaped a peril, but what or where or how he could n't
remember.
He sat down in the little porch under the clustering vines; the
picturesque street, with its carved gables and tasteful balconies,
sloped gently down to the Rhine, which ran in swift eddies beneath. It
was a fair and pleasant scene, nor was its influence all lost upon
him. He was already calmed. The gay dresses and cheerful faces of the
peasants, as they passed and repassed, their merry voices, their hearty
recognitions and pleasant greetings, gave a happier channel to his
thoughts. He thought of Lizzy,--how she would like it, how enjoy it!
and then a sudden pang shot through his heart, and he remembered that
she, too, was no longer the same. The illusion that had made her life a
fairy tale was gone,--dissipated forever. The spell that gave the charm
to her existence was broken! What was all the cultivation of mind,--what
the fascinations by which she moved the hearts of all around her,--what
the accomplishments by which she adorned society, if they only marked
the width of that chasm that separated her from the well-born and the
wealthy? To be more than their equal in grace, beauty, and genius, less
than their inferior in station, was a sad lesson to learn, and this the
last night had taught her.
"Ay," muttered he, below his breath, "she knows who she is now, but she
has yet to learn all that others think of her." How bitterly, at that
instant, did he reproach himself for having revealed his secret! A
thousand times better to have relinquished all ambition, and preserved
the warm and confiding love she bore him. "We might have gone to
America,--to Australia. In some far-away country I could easily earn
subsistence, and no trace of my former life follow me. She, at least,
would not have been lost to me,--her affection would have clung to me
through every trial. Mere reverse of fortune--for such and no more had
it seemed--would never have chilled the generous glow of her woman's
heart, and I need not have shocked her self-love, nor insulted her
dignity, by telling her that she was the gambler's daughter."
As he was thus musing, the two travellers came out and seated themselves
in the porch; the elder one, needing a light for his cigar, touched
his hat to Davis, and muttered some broken words of German, to request
permission to light it from him. Grog bowed a stiff acquiescence; and
the younger said, "Not over-courteous,--a red Jew, I take it!"
"A travelling jeweller, I fancy," said the other; "twig the smart
watch-chain."
Oh, young gentlemen, how gingerly had you trod there if you only knew
how thin was the ice under your feet, and how cold the depth beneath
it! Davis arose and walked down the street. The mellow notes of a bugle
announced the arrival of the post, and the office must now open in a few
minutes. Forcing his way through the throng to the open window, he asked
if there were any letters for Captain Christopher? None. Any for Captain
Davis? None. Any for the Hon. Annesley Beecher? The same reply. He was
turning away in disappointment, when a voice called out, "Wait! here's
a message just come in from the Telegraph-office. Please to sign the
receipt for it." He wrote the name C. Christopher boldly, and pushed his
way through the crowd once more.
If his heart throbbed painfully with the intensity of anxiety, his
fingers never trembled as he broke the seal of the despatch. Three brief
lines were all that were there; but three brief lines can carry the
tidings of a whole destiny. We give it as it stood:--
"William Peach to Christopher, Neuwied, in Nassau.
"The Viscount died yesterday, at four p. m. Lawyers want A. B.'s address
immediately.
"Proceedings already begun."
Davis devoured the lines four--five times over, and then muttered
between his teeth, "Safe enough now,--the match as good as over!"
"I say, George," said one of the young travellers to his companion, "our
friend in the green frock must have got news of a prize in the lottery.
Did you ever see anything like his eyes? They actually lit up the blue
spectacles."
"Clap the saddle on that black horse," cried Grog, as he passed into the
stable; "give him a glass of Kirsch-wasser and bring him round to the
door."
"He knows how to treat an old poster," said the ostler; "it's not the
first ride he has taken on a courier's saddle."
CHAPTER XI. HOW GROG DAVIS DISCOURSED, AND ANNESLEY BEECHER LISTENED
When Davis reached the little inn at evening, he was surprised to learn
that Annesley Beecher had passed the day alone. Lizzy complained of
headache, and kept her room. Grog listened to this with a grave, almost
stern look; he partly guessed that the ailment was a mere pretext; he
knew better to what to attribute her absence. They dined tte--tte;
but there was a constraint over each, and there was little of that
festive enjoyment that graced the table on the day before. Beecher was
revolving in his mind all the confessions that burdened his conscience
about Stein and the mystical volume he had bought from him; the large
sums he had drawn for were also grievous loads upon his heart, and he
knew not in what temper or spirit Davis would hear of them. Grog, too,
had many things in his head; not, indeed, that he meant to reveal them,
but they were like secret instructions to his own heart, to be referred
to for guidance and direction.
They sipped their wine under the trellised vines, and smoked their
cigars in an atmosphere fragrant with the jessamine and the rose, the
crystal river eddying along at their feet, and the purple mountain
glowing in the last tints of declining day. "We want Lizzy to enliven
us," said Davis, after a long silence on both sides. "We 're dull and
heavy without her."
"By Jove! it does make a precious difference whether she's here or not,"
said Beecher, earnestly.
"There's a light-heartedness about that girl does one good," said Davis,
as he puffed his cigar. "And she's no fool, either."
"I should think she's not," muttered Beecher, half indignantly.
"It could n't be supposed she should know life like you or me, for
instance; she hasn't seen the thing,--never mixed with it; but let
the time come that she shall take her part in the comedy, you 'll see
whether she 'll not act it cleverly."
"She has head for anything!" chimed in Beecher.
"Ay, and what they call tact too. I don't care what company you place
her in; take her among your duchesses to-morrow, and see if she'll not
keep her own place,--and that a good one."
Beecher sighed, but it was not in any despondency.
And now a long silence ensued; not a sound heard save the light noise of
the bottle as it passed between them, and the long-drawn puffs of smoke
that issued from their lips.
"What did you do with Stein? Did he give you the money?" asked Davis, at
last.
"Oh yes, he gave it--he gave it freely enough; in fact, he bled so
easily that, as the doctors say, I took a good dash from him. You
mentioned two thousand florins, but I thought, as I was about it, a
little more would do us no harm, and so I said, 'Lazarus, old fellow,
what if we make this for ten thousand--"
"Ten thousand!" said Davis, removing his cigar from his lips and staring
earnestly, but yet not angrily, at the other.
"Don't you see that as I have the money with me," began Beecher, in a
tone of apology and terror, "and as the old fellow didn't put 'the screw
on' as to discount--"
"No, he's fair enough about that; indeed, so far as my own experience
goes, all Jews are. It's your high-class Christian I'm afraid of; but
you took the cash?"
"Yes!" said Beecher, timidly, for he was n't sure he was yet out of
danger.
"It was well done,--well thought of," said Grog, blandly. "We 'll want
a good round sum to try this new martingale of mine. Opening with five
naps, we must be able to bear a run of four hundred and eighty, which,
according to the rule of chances, might occur once in seventeen thousand
three hundred and forty times."
"Oh, as to that," broke in Beecher, "I have hedged famously. I bought
old Stein's conjuring-book; what he calls his 'Kleinod,' showing how
every game is to be played, when to lay on, when to draw off. Here it
is," said he, producing the volume from his breast-pocket. "I have been
over it all day. I tried three problems with the cards myself, but I
couldn't make them come up right."
"How did you get him to part with this?" asked Davis, as he examined the
volume carefully.
"Well, I gave him a fancy price,--that is, I am to give it, which makes
all the difference," said Beecher, laughing. "In short, I gave him a bit
of stiff, at three months, for one thousand--"
"Florins?"
"No, pounds,--pounds sterling," said Beecher, with a half-choking
effort.
"It was a fancy price," said Grog, slowly, not the slightest sign of
displeasure manifesting itself on his face as he spoke.
"You don't think, then, that it was too much?" faltered out Beecher.
"Perhaps not, under the circumstances," said Davis, keenly.
"What do you mean by 'under the circumstances'?"
Davis threw his cigar into the stream, pushed bottle and glasses
away from him,--far enough to permit him to rest both his arms on the
table,--and then, steadfastly fixing his eyes on the other, with a look
of intense but not angry significance, said, "How often have I told you,
Beecher, that it was no use to try a 'double' with me? Why, man, I know
every card in your hand."
"I give you my sacred word of honor, Grog--"
"To be renewed at three months, I suppose?" said Davis, sneeringly. "No,
no, my boy, it takes an earlier rise to get to the blind side of Kit
Davis. I 'm not angry with you for trying it,--not a bit, lad; there 's
nothing wrong in it but the waste of time."
"May I be hanged, drawn, and quartered, if I know what you are at,
Grog!" exclaimed the other, piteously.
"Well, all I can say is I read you easier than you read me.
You gave old Lazarus a thousand pounds for that book after reading
that paragraph in the 'Times.'"
"What paragraph?"
"I mean that about your brother's title not being legal."
"I never saw it,--never heard of it," cried Beecher, in undisguised
terror.
"Well, I suppose I 'm to believe you," said Davis, half reluctantly.
"It was in a letter from the Crimea, stating that so confident are the
friends of a certain claimant to the title and estates now enjoyed by
Lord Lackington, that they have offered the young soldier who represents
the claim any amount of money he pleases to purchase promotion in the
service."
"I repeat to you my word of honor, I never saw nor heard of it"
"Of course, then, I believe you," said Grog.
Again and again did Beecher reiterate assurances of his good faith;
he declared that during all his stay at Aix he had never looked into
a newspaper, nor had he received one single letter, except from Davis
himself; and Davis believed him, from the simple fact that such a
paragraph as he quoted had no existence,--never was in print, never
uttered till Grog's own lips had fashioned it.
"But, surely, Grog, it is not a flying rumor--the invention of some
penny-a-liner--would find any credence with you?"
"I don't know," said Davis, slowly; "I won't say I 'd swear to it all,
but just as little would I reject it as a fable. At all events, I gave
you credit for having trimmed your sails by the tidings; and if you did
n't, why, there's no harm done, only you 're not so shrewd a fellow as I
thought you."
Beecher's face grew scarlet; how near, how very near, he was of being
"gazetted" the sharp fellow he had been striving for years to become,
and now, by his own stupid admission, had he invalidated his claim to
that high degree.
"And this is old Stein's celebrated book? I 've heard of it these
five-and-thirty years, though I never saw it till now. Well, I won't say
you made a bad bargain--"
"Indeed, Grog,--indeed, by George! I 'm as glad as if I won five hundred
to hear you say so. To tell you the truth, I was half afraid to own
myself the purchaser. I said to myself, 'Davis will chaff me so about
this book, he 'll call me all the blockheads in Europe--'"
"No, no, Beecher, you ain't a blockhead, nor will I suffer any one to
call you such. There are things--there are people, too, Just as there
are games--that you don't know, but before long you 'll be the match of
any fellow going. I can put you up to them, and I will. There's my hand
on it."
Beecher grasped the proffered hand, and squeezed it with a warmth there
was no denying. What wonderful change had come over Grog he could not
guess. Whence this marvellous alteration in his manner towards him? No
longer scoffing at his mistaken notions of people, or disparaging his
abilities, Davis condescended now to talk and take counsel with him as
an equal.
"That 's the king of wines," said Davis, as he pushed a fresh bottle
across the table. "When you can get Marcobrunner like that, where's the
Burgundy ever equalled it? Fill up your glass, and drink a bumper to our
next venture, whatever it be!"
"'Our next venture, whatever it be!'" echoed Beecher, as he laid the
empty glass on the table.
"Another toast," said Davis, replenishing the glasses. "'May all of our
successes be in company.'"
"I drink it with all my heart, old fellow. You 've always stood like a
man to me, and I 'll never desert you," cried Beecher, whose head was
never proof against the united force of wine and excitement.
"There never were two fellows on this earth so made to run in double
harness," said Davis, "as you and myself. Let us only lay our heads
together, and there's nothing can resist us."
Grog now launched forth into one of those descriptions which he
could throw off with a master's hand, sketching life as a great
hunting-ground, and themselves as the hunters. What zest and vigor could
he impart to such a picture!--how artfully, too, could he make Beecher
the foreground figure, he himself only shadowed forth as an accessory!
Listening with eagerness to all he said, Beecher continued to drink
deeply; the starry night, the perfumed air, the rippling sounds of
the river, all combining with the wine and the converse to make up a
dreamland of fascination. Nor was the enchantment less perfect that the
objects described passed before him like a series of dissolving views.
They represented, all of them, a life of pleasure and enjoyment,--means
inexhaustible, means for every extravagance, and, what he relished fully
as much, the undisputed recognition by the world to the claim of being
a "sharp fellow,"--a character to which Grog's aid was so dexterously
contributed as to escape all detection.
Perhaps our reader might not have patience with us were we to follow
Davis through all the devious turns and windings of this tortuous
discourse. Perhaps, too, we should fail signally were we to attempt
to convey in our cold narrative what came from his lips with all the
marvellous power of a good story-teller, whose voice could command many
an inflection, and whose crafty nature appreciated the temper of the
metal beneath his beat If we could master all these, another and a
greater difficulty would still remain; for how could we convey, as
Davis contrived to do, that through all these gorgeous scenes of worldly
success, in the splendor of a life of magnificence, amidst triumphs
and conquests, one figure should ever pass before the mind's eye, now
participating in the success, now urging its completion, now, as it
were, shedding a calm and chastened light over all,--a kind of angelic
influence that heightened every enjoyment of the good, and averted every
approach of evil?
Do not fancy, I beseech you, that this was a stroke of high art far
above the pencil of Grog Davis. Amongst the accidents of his early
life the "stage" had figured, and Grog had displayed very considerable
talents for the career. It was only at the call of what he considered
a higher ambition he had given up "the boards" for "the ring." Besides
this, he was inspired by the Marcobrunner, which had in an equal degree
affected the brain of him who listened. If Grog were eloquent, Beecher
was ductile. Indeed, so eagerly did he devour all that the other
said, that when a moment of pause occurred, he called out, "Go on, old
fellow,--go on! I could listen to you forever!"
Nor was it altogether surprising that he should like to hear words of
praise and commendation from lips that once only opened in sarcasm and
ridicule of him. How pleasant to know, at last, that he was really and
truly a great partner in the house of Davis and Co., and not a mere
commission agent, and that this partnership--how that idea came to
strike him we cannot determine--was to be binding forever. How exalting,
too, the sentiment that it was just at the moment when all his future
looked gloomiest this friendship was ratified. The Lackington peerage
might go, but there was Grog Davis, stanch and true,--the ancient
estates be torn from his house, but there was the precious volume of
old Lazarus, with wealth untold within its pages. Thus threading his
way through these tortuous passages of thought, stumbling, falling, and
blundering at every step, that poor brain lost all power of coherency
and all guidance, and he wavered between a reckless defiance of the
world and a sort of slavish fear of its censure.
"And Lackington, Grog,--Lackington," cried he, at length,--"he's as
proud as Lucifer; what will he say?"
"Not so much as you think!" remarked Grog, dryly. "Lackington will take
it easier than you suspect."
"No, no, you don't know him,--don't know him at all. I wouldn't stand
face to face with him this minute for a round sum!"
"I 'd not like it over-much myself!" muttered Davis, with a grim smile.
"It's all from pride of birth and blood, and he 'd say, 'Debts, if you
like; go ahead with Jews and the fifty per centers, but, hang it, don't
tie a stone round your throat, don't put a double ditch between you and
your own rank! Look where I am,' he 'd say,--'look where I am!'"
"Well, I hope he finds it comfortable!" muttered Grog, with a dry
malice.
"Look where I am!" resumed Beecher, trying to imitate the pretentious
tones of his brother's voice. "And where is it, after all?"
"Where we 'll all be, one day or other," growled out Grog, who could not
help answering his own reflections.
"'And are you sure of where you are?'--that's what I 'd ask him, eh,
Grog?--'are you sure of where you are?'"
"That would be a poser, I suspect," said Davis, who laughed heartily;
and the contagion catching Beecher, he laughed till the tears came.
"I might ask him, besides, 'Are you quite sure how long you are to
remain where you are?' eh, Grog? What would he say to that?"
"The chances are, he 'd not answer at all," said Davis, dryly.
"No, no! you mistake him, he's always ready with a reason; and then he
sets out by reminding you that he's the head of the house,--a fact that
a younger brother does n't need to have recalled to his memory. Oh,
Grog, old fellow, if I were the Viscount,--not that I wish any ill
to Lack-ington,--not that I 'd really enjoy the thing at any cost to
him,--but if I were--"
"Well, let's hear. What then?" cried Davis, as he filled the other's
glass to the top,--"what then?"
"Would n't I trot the coach along at a very different pace. It's not
poking about Italy, dining with smoke-dried cardinals and snuffy old
'marchesas,' I 'd be; but I 'd have such a stable, old fellow, with Jem
Bates to ride and Tom Ward to train them, and yourself, too, to counsel
me. Would n't we give Binsleigh and Hawksworth and the rest of them a
cold bath, eh?"
"That ain't the style of thing at all, Beecher," said Grog,
deprecatingly; "you ought to go in for the 'grand British nobleman
dodge,'--county interests, influence with a party, and a vote in the
Lords. If you were to try it, you 'd make a right good speech. It
wouldn't be one of those flowery things the Irish fellows do, but a
manly, straightforward, genuine English discourse."
"Do you really think so, Grog?" asked he, eagerly.
"I 'm sure of it I never mistook pace in my life; and I know what's in
you as well as if I saw it. The real fact is, you have a turn of speed
that you yourself have no notion of, but it will come out one of these
days if you 're attacked,--if they say anything about your life on the
turf, your former companions, or a word about the betting-ring."
The charm of this flattery was far more intoxicating than even the
copious goblets of Marcobrunner, and Beecher's flushed cheeks and
flashing eyes betrayed how it overpowered him. Davis went on:--
"You are one of those fellows that never show 'the stuff they 're made
of' till some injustice is done them,--eh?"
"True as a book!" chimed in Beecher.
"Take you fairly, and a child might lead you; but try it on to deny you
what you justly have a right to,--let them attempt to dictate to you,
and say, 'Do this, and don't do the other,'--little they know on what
back they 've put the saddle. You 'll give them such a hoist in the air
as they never expected!"
"How you read every line of me!" exclaimed Beecher, in ecstasy.
"And I 'll tell you more; there's not another man breathing knows
you but myself. They 've always seen you in petty scrapes and little
difficulties, pulling the devil by the last joint of his tail, as Jack
Bush says; but let them wait till you come out for a cup race,--the Two
Thousand Guinea Stakes,--then I'm not Kit Davis if you won't be one of
the first men in England."
"I hope you 're right, Davis. I almost feel as if you were," said
Beecher, earnestly.
"When did you find me in the wrong, so far as judgment went? Show me one
single mistake I ever made in a matter of opinion? Who was it foretold
that Bramston would bolt after the Cotteswold if Rugby didn't win?
Who told the whole yard at Tattersall's that Grimsby would sell
Holt's stable? Who saw that Rickman Turner was a coward, and would n't
fight?--and I said it, the very day they gave him 'the Bath' for his
services in China! I don't know much about books, nor do I pretend to;
but as to men and women--men best--I 'll back myself against all England
and the Channel Islands."
"And I 'll take as much as you 'll spare me out of your book, Grog,"
said Beecher, enthusiastically, while he filled his glass and drained
it.
"You see," said Davis, in a low, confidential tone, as if imparting a
great secret, "I've always remarked that the way they smash a fellow
in Parliament--I don't care in which House--is always by raking up
something or other he did years before. If he wrote a play, or a novel,
or a book of poems, they 're down on him at once, about his imagination
and his fancy,--that means, he never told a word of truth in his life.
If he was unfortunate in business, they 're sure to refer to him about
some change in the Law of Bankruptcy, and say, 'There's my honorable
friend yonder ought to be able to help us by his experiences!' Then,
if a fellow has only his wits about him, how he floors them! You see
there's a great deal of capital to be made out of one of these attacks.
You rise to reply, without any anger or passion; only dignity,--nothing
but dignity! You appeal to the House if the assault of the right
honorable baronet opposite was strictly in good taste,--whatever
that means. You ask why you are signalled out to be the mark of his
eloquence, or his wit, or whatever it be; and then you come out with a
fine account of yourself, and all the honorable motives that nobody ever
suspected you of. That's the moment to praise everything you ever did,
or meant to do, or couldn't do; that's the time to show them what a man
they have amongst them."
"Capital, glorious, excellent!" cried Beecher, in delight "Well, suppose
now," said Davis, "there 's a bill about marriages,--they 're always
changing the law about them; it's evidently a contract does n't work
quite smoothly for all parties,--well, there's sure to be many a spicy
remark and impertinent allusion in the debate; it's a sore subject, and
every one has a 'raw' on it; and, at last, somebody says something about
unequal matches, alliances with an inferior class, 'noble lords that
have not scrupled to mingle the ancient blood of their race with
the--the thin and washy current that flows in plebeian veins.' I 'm the
Lord Chancellor, now," said Grog, boldly, "and I immediately turn round
and fix my eyes upon you. Up you get at once, and say, 'I accept, my
Lords,--I accept for myself, and my own case, every word the noble Duke
or Marquis has just uttered. It never would have occurred to me to make
my personal history the subject of your Lordships' attention; but
when thus rudely brought before you,--rudely and gratuitously
introduced--'Here you 'd frown at the last speaker, as much as to say,
'You 'll hear more about this outside--'"
"Go on,--go on!" cried Beecher, with impatience.
"'I rise in this place,'--that has always a great impression, to say
'this place,'--'I rise in this place to say that I am prouder in the
choice that shares with me the honors of my coronet, than in all the
dignity and privilege that same coronet confers.' What a cheer, what
a regular hurrah follows that, for they have seen her,--ay, that have
they! They have beheld her sweeping down the gilded drawing-room,--the
handsomest woman in England! Where's the Duchess with her eyes, her
skin, her dignity, and her grace? Does n't she look 'thoroughbred in
every vein of her neck'? Where did she get that graceful sweep, that
easy-swimming gait, if she had n't it in her very nature'?"
"By Heaven, it's true, every syllable of it!" cried out Beecher, in all
the wild ecstasy of delight.
"Where is the man--I don't care what his rank might be--who would n't
envy you after you 'd made that speech? You 'd walk down Westminster the
proudest man in England after it."
Beecher's features glowed with a delight that showed he had already
anticipated the sense of his popularity.
"And then how the newspapers will praise you! It will be as if you built
a bridge over the gulf that separates two distinct classes of people.
You 'll be a sort of noble reformer. What was the wisest thing Louis
Napoleon ever did? His marriage. Do you mark that he was always
following his uncle's footsteps in all his other policy; he saw that the
only great mistake he ever made was looking out for a high match, and,
like a shrewd fellow, he said, 'I have station, rank, power, and money
enough for two. It 's not to win the good favor of a wrinkled old
Archduchess or a deaf old Princess, I 'm going to marry. I 'll go in for
the whole field. I 'll take the girl that, if I was n't an Emperor, I 'd
be proud to call my own.' And signs on 't, they all cried out, 'See if
he has n't his heart in the right place; there's an honest drop there!
Let him be as ambitious as you like, he married just as you or I would.'
Ain't it a fine thing," exclaimed Grog, enthusiastically, "when one
has all the middle classes in one's favor,--the respectable ruck that's
always running, but seldom showing a winner? Get these fellows with you,
and it's like Baring's name on the back of your bill. And now, Beecher,"
said Davis, grasping the other's hand, and speaking with a deep
earnestness,--"and now that I 've said what you might have done, I 'll
tell you what I will do. I have just been sketching out this line of
country to see how you 'd take your fences, nothing more. You 've shown
me that you 're the right sort, and I 'm not the man to forget it. If
I had seen the shadow of a shade of a dodge about you,--if I 'd have
detected one line in your face, or one shake in your voice, like
treachery,--so help me! I 'd have thrown you over like winking! You
fancied yourself a great man, and was stanch and true to your old
friends; and now it's my turn to tell you that I would n't give that
empty flask yonder for all your brother Lackington's lease of his
peerage! Hear me out I have it from his own lawyers,--from the fellows
in Furnival's Inn,--it's up with him; the others are perfectly sure of
their verdict There's how it is! And now, Annesley Beecher, you were
willing to marry Kit Davis's daughter when you thought you could make
her a peeress; now I say, that when you 've nothing, nor haven't a
sixpence to bless yourself with, it's Kit himself will give her to
you, and say, there's not the other man breathing he'd as soon see the
husband of this same Lizzy Davis!"
The burst of emotion with which Beecher met this speech was, indeed, the
result of very conflicting feelings. Shock at the terrible tidings of
his brother's downfall, and the insult to his house and name, mingled
with a burst of gratitude to Davis for his fidelity; but stronger and
deeper than these was another sentiment,--for, smile if you will, most
sceptical reader, the man was in love, after his fashion. I do not ask
of you to believe that he felt as you or I might or ought to feel the
tender passion. I do not seek to persuade you that the object of his
affection, mingled with all his thoughts, swayed them and etherealized
them; that she was the theme of many a heart-woven story, the heroine
of many an ecstatic dream: still she was one who could elicit from
that nature, in all its selfishness, little traits of generous feeling,
little bursts of honest sentiment, that made him appear better to his
own heart. And so far has the adage truth with it, virtue is its own
reward, in the conscious sense of well doing, in the peaceful calm of an
unrepining spirit, and, not least of all, in that sympathy which good
men so readily bestow upon even faint efforts to win their suffrage.
And so he sobbed out something that meant grief and gratitude; hope,
fear, and uncertainty--worse than fear--all agitating and distracting
him by turns.
Very little time did Grog give himself for calmer reflection; away he
went at full speed to sketch out their future life. They were to make
the tour of Europe, winning all before them. All the joyous part,
all the splendor of equipage, retinue, mode of life, and outlay being
dictated by Beecher; all the more business detail, the play and the
money-getting, devolving upon Davis. Baden, Ems, Wiesbaden, Hamburg, and
Aix,--all glowed in the descriptions like fields of foretold glory. How
they were to outshine Princes in magnificence and Royal Highnesses in
display; the envy of Beecher, of his unvarying luck; the splendor of all
his belongings; Lizzy's beauty, tool What a page would he fill in the
great gossip calendar of Europe!
Well Davis knew how to feed the craving vanity of that weak nature,
whose most ardent desire was to be deemed cunning and sharp, the
cautious reserve of prudent men in his company being a tribute to
his acuteness, the dearest his heart could covet Oh, if he longed for
anything as success, it was for a time when his coming would spread a
degree of terror at a play-table, and men would rise rather than risk
their fortune against his! Should such a moment ever be his? Was that
great triumph ever to befall him? And all this as the husband of Lizzy
Davis!
"Ay!" said Grog, as he read and traced each succeeding emotion in that
transparent nature,--"ay! that's what may be called life; and when we
've done Europe, smashed every bank on the Continent, we 'll cross the
Atlantic, and give Jonathan a 'touch of our quality.' I know all their
games well, and I 've had my 'three bullets and a poker' before now on
a Mississippi steamer! Your Yankee likes faro, and I've a new cabal to
teach him; in short, my boy, there's a roving commission of fun before
us, and if it don't pay, my name ain't Davis!"
"Was this your scheme, then, Grog," asked Beecher, "when you told me at
Brussels that you could make a man of me?"
"It was, my boy," cried Davis, eagerly. "You 've guessed it. There was
only one obstacle to the success of the plan at that time, and this
exists no longer."
"What was the obstacle you speak of?"
"Simply, that so long as you fancied yourself next in succession to a
peerage, you 'd never lay yourself down regularly to your work; you'd
say, 'Lackington can't live forever; he's almost twenty years my senior.
I must be the Viscount yet. Why should I, therefore, cumber myself with
cares that I have no need of, and involve myself amongst people I'll
have to cut one of these days? No, I'll just make a waiting race of
it, and be patient.' Now, however, that you can't count upon this
prospect,--now that to-morrow or next day will declare to the world that
Henry Hastings Beecher is just Henry Hastings Beecher, and not Viscount
Lackington, and that the Honorable Annesley is just Annesley, and no
more,--now, I say, that you see this clearly with your own eyes, you 'll
buckle to, and do your work manfully. And there was another thing--"
And here Davis paused, and seemed to meditate.
"What was that, Grog? Be candid, old fellow, and tell me all."
"So I will, then," resumed Davis. "That other thing was this. So long
as you were the great man in prospective, and might some fine day be
a Lord, you could always persuade yourself--or some one else could
persuade you--that Kit Davis was hanging on you just for your rank; that
he wanted the intimacy of a man in your station, and so on. Now, if
you ever came to believe this, there would have been an end of all
confidence between us; and without confidence, what can a fellow do for
his pal? This was, therefore, the obstacle; and even if you could have
got over it, I couldn't. No, hang me if I could! I was always saying
to myself, 'It's all very nice and smooth now, Kit, between you and
Beecher,--you eat, drink, and sleep together,--but wait till he turns
the corner, old fellow, and see if he won't give you the cold shoulder."
"You could n't believe--"
"Yes, but I could, and did too; and many's the time I said to myself,
'If Beecher was n't a top-sawyer, what a trump he 'd be! He has head
for anything, and address for anything.' And do you know,"--here
Grog dropped his-voice to a whisper, and spoke as if under great
emotion,--"and do you know that I could n't be the same man to you
myself just because of your rank? That was the reason I used to be so
sulky, so suspicious, and so--ay, actually cruel with you, telling you,
as I did, what could n't I do with certain acceptances? Now, look here,
Beecher--Light that taper beside you; there's a match in that box at
your elbow."
Unsteady enough was Beecher's hand; indeed, it was not wine alone now
made him tremble. An intense agitation shook his frame, and he shivered
like one in an ague fit. He couldn't tell what was coming; the theme
alone was enough to arrest all process of reasoning on his part. It was
like the force of a blow that stunned and stupefied at once.
"There, that will do," said Grog, as he drew a long pocket-book from
his breast-pocket, and searched for some time amongst its contents. "Ay,
here they are; two--three--four of them,--insignificant-looking scraps
of paper they look; and yet there's a terrible exposure in open court,
a dreary sea-voyage over the ocean, and a whole life of a felon's
suffering in those few lines."
"For the love of mercy, Davis, if you have a spark of pity in your
heart,--if you have a heart at all,--don't speak in this way to me!"
cried Beecher, in a voice almost choked with sobs.
"It is for the last time in my life you'll ever hear such words," said
Grog, calmly. "Read them over carefully; examine them well. Yes, I wish
and require it."
"Oh, I know them well!" said Beecher, with a heavy sigh. "Many's the
sleepless night the thought of them has cost me."
"Go over every line of them; satisfy yourself that they 're the
same,--that the words 'Johnstone Howard' are in your own hand."
Beecher bent over the papers; but, with his dimmed eyes and trembling
fingers, it was some time ere he could decipher them. A sigh from the
very bottom of his heart was all the reply he could make.
"They'll never cost you another sleepless night, old fellow!" said
Davis, as he held them over the flame of the taper. "There's the end of
'em now!"
CHAPTER XII. REFLECTIONS OF ANNESLEY BEECHER
A wiser head than that of Annesley Beecher might have felt some
confusion on awaking the morning after the events we have just related.
Indeed, his first sensations were those of actual bewilderment as he
opened his eyes, and beheld the pine-clad mountains rising in endless
succession; the deep glens; the gushing streams, crossed by rude bridges
of a single tree; the rustic saw-mills all dripping with spray. And
trembling with the force of their own machinery. Where was he? What
strange land was this? How came he there? Was this in reality the "new
world beyond the seas" Davis had so often described to him? By a slow,
laborious process, like filtering, stray memories dropped, one by one,
through his clouded faculties; and, at length, he remembered the scene
of the preceding night, and all that had passed between Davis and
himself. Yet, withal, there was much of doubt and uncertainty mixed up,
nor could he, by any effort, satisfy himself how much was fact, how much
mere speculation. Was it true that Lackington was to lose his peerage?
Was it possible such a dreadful blow was to fall on their house? If
so, what portion of the estates would follow the title? Would a great
part--would all the property be transferred to the new claimant? What
length of time, too, might the suit occupy?--such things often lasted
for years upon years. Was it too late for a compromise? Could not some
arrangement be come to "some way"? Grog was surely the man to decree
a plan for this; at all events, he could protract and spin out
proceedings. "It's not p.p.; the match may never come off," muttered
Beecher, "and I 'll back old Grog to 'square it' somehow."
And then the bills, the forged acceptances,--they were actually burned
before his face! It was well-nigh incredible; but he had seen them, held
them in his own hand, and watched them as the night wind wafted
away their blackened embers never more to rise in judgment against
him,--never to cost him another night of sleepless terror! Who would
have believed Davis capable of such magnanimity? Of all men living, he
had deemed him the last to forego any hold over another; and then
the act was his own spontaneous doing, without reservation, without
condition.
Beecher's heart swelled proudly as he thought over this trait of his
friend. Was it that he felt a sense of joy in believing better of
mankind? Was it that it awoke within his breast more hopeful thoughts of
his fellow-men? Did it appeal to him like a voice, saying, "Despair of
no man; there are touches of kindliness in natures the very roughest,
that redeem whole lives of harshness"? No, my good reader, it would be
unfair and unjust to you were I to say that such sentiments as these
swayed him. Annesley Beecher's thoughts flowed in another and very
different channel. The words he whispered to his heart were somewhat
in this wise: "What a wonderful fellow must you be, Beecher, to acquire
such influence over a man like Davis; what marvellous gifts must you not
be endowed with! Is it any wonder that Grog predicts a brilliant future
to him who can curb to his will the most stubborn of natures, and elicit
traits of sacrifice out of the most selfish of men? Who but yourself
could work this miracle?" Mean and ignoble as such a mode of arguing may
seem, take my word for it, most patient reader, it is not unfrequent
in this world of ours, nor is Annesley Beecher the only one who has
ascribed all his good fortune to his own deservings.
"Shrewd fellow, that Davis! He always saw what stuff was in me; he
recognized the real metal, while others were only sneering at the
dross,--just as he knows this moment, that if I start fresh without
name, fortune, or title, that I 'm sure to be at the top of the tree
at last. Give me his daughter! I should think he would! It's not all up
with Lackington yet, dark as it looks; we 're in possession, and there
is a 'good line of country' between the Honorable Annesley Beecher, next
Viscount in succession, and Kit Davis, commonly called Grog of that
ilk! Not that the girl isn't equal to any station,--there's no denying
that! Call her a Greville, a Stanley, or a Seymour, and she's a match
for the finest man in England! Make her a Countess to-morrow, and she
'll look it!"
It is but fair to acknowledge that Beecher was not bewildered without
some due cause; for if Davis had at one time spoken to him as one who
no longer possessed claim to rank and station, but was a mere adventurer
like himself, at another moment he had addressed him as the future
Viscount, and pictured him as hurling a proud defiance to the world in
the choice he had made of his wife. This was no blunder on Grog's part.
That acute individual had, in the course of his legal experiences,
remarked that learned counsel are wont to insert pleas which are
occasionally even contradictory, alleging at times that "there was no
debt," and then, that "if there had been, it was already paid." In the
same spirit did Davis embrace each contingency of fortune, showing that,
whether Peer or Commoner, Annesley Beecher "stood to win" in making
Lizzy his wife. "Scratch the pedigree, and she 'll be a stunning
peeress; and if the suit goes against us, show me the girl like her to
meet the world!" This was the sum of the reflections that cost him a
whole morning's intellectual labor, and more of actual mental fatigue
than befalls a great parliamentary leader after a stormy debate.
That Davis had no intention to intimidate him was clearly shown by his
destroying the acceptances: had he wished to lean on coercion, here was
the means. Take your choice between matrimony and a felony, was a short
and easy piece of argumentation, such as would well have suited Grog's
summary notions; and yet he had, of his own accord, freely and forever
relinquished this vantage ground. Beecher was now free. For the first
time for many a long year of life he arose from his bed without a fear
of the law and its emissaries. The horrible nightmare that had scared
him so often, dashing the wildest moments of dissipation with sudden
fear, deepening the depths of despondency with greater gloom, had all
fled, and he awoke to feel that there was no terror in a "Beak's" eye,
nothing to daunt him in the shrewd glances of a detective. They who have
lived years long of insecurity, tortured by the incessant sense of an
impending peril, to befall them to-day, tomorrow, or next day, become
at length so imbued with fear that when the hour of their emancipation
arrives, they are not able for a considerable time to assure themselves
of their safety. The captive dreams of his chains through many a night
after he has gained his liberty; the shipwrecked sailor can never forget
the raft and the lone ocean on which he tossed; nor was it altogether
easy for Beecher to convince himself that he could walk the world with
his head high, and bid defiance to Crown prosecutors and juries!
"I 'm out of your debt, Master Grog," said he, with a pleasant laugh
to himself; "catch me if you can running up another score in your
books. Wait till you see me slipping my neck into a noose held by your
fingers. You made me feel the curb pretty sharp for many a long day, and
might still, if you had n't taken off the bridle with your own hands;
but I 'm free now, and won't I show you a fair pair of heels! Who could
blame me, I 'd like to know? When a fellow gets out of jail, does he
take lodgings next door to the prison? I never asked him to burn those
bills. It was all his own doing. I conclude that a fellow as shrewd as
he knew what he was about. Mayhap he said to himself, 'Beecher's the
downiest cove going. It will be a deuced sight better to have him as
my friend and pal than to send him to break stones in Australia. I can
stand to win a good thing on him, and why should I send him over
seas just out of spite? I'll come the grand magnanimous dodge over
him,--destroy the papers before his face, and say, "Now, old fellow,
what do you say to that for a touch of generosity?"'
"'Well, I'll tell you what I say, Master Davis,'" said he, drawing
himself up, and speaking boldly out. "'I say that you're a regular
trump, and no mistake; but you 're not the sharp fellow I took you
for. No, no, old gent, you 're no match for A. B.! He's been running in
bandages all this time past; and now that his back sinews are all right,
you'll see if he hasn't a turn of speed in him.' And what is more, I
'd say to him, 'Look here, Grog, we've jogged along these ten or twelve
years or so without much profit to either of us,--what say you if we
dissolve the partnership and let each do a little business on his own
account? If I should turn out anything very brilliant, you 'll be proud
of me, just as England says she is when a young colony takes a great
spring of success, and say, "Ay, he was one of my rearing!"' Of course
all dictation, all that bullying intolerance is at an end now, and time
it was! Wasn't I well weary of it! wasn't I actually sick of life with
it! I couldn't turn to anything, could n't think of anything, with that
eternal fear before me, always asking myself, 'Is he going to do it
now?' It is very hard to believe it's all over." And he heaved a deep
sigh as though disburdening his heart of its last load of sorrow.
"Davis is very wide awake," continued he; "he 'll soon see how to trim
his sails to this new wind; he 'll know that he can't bully, can't
terrorize."
A sharp quick report of a pistol, with a clanging crash, and then a
faint tinkle of a bell, cut short his musings, and Beecher hastened to
the window and looked out. It was Davis in the vine alley practising
with the pistol; he had just sent a ball through the target, the bell
giving warning that the shot had pierced the very centre. Beecher
watched him as he levelled again; he thought he saw a faint tremor of
the hand, a slight unsteadiness of the wrist; vain illusion,--bang went
the weapon, and again the little bell gave forth the token of success.
"Give me the word--one--two," cried out Davis to the man who loaded and
handed him the pistols. "One--two," called out the other; and the same
instant rang out the bell, and the ball was true to its mark.
"What a shot,--what a deadly shot!" muttered Beecher, as a cold
shudder came over him.
As quickly as he could take the weapons, Davis now fired;
four--five--six balls went in succession through the tiny circle, the
bell tinkling on and never ceasing, so rapidly did shot follow upon
shot, till, as if sated with success, he turned away, saying, "I' ll try
to-morrow blindfold!"
"I'm certain," muttered Beecher, "no man is bound to go out with a
fellow like that. A duel is meant to be a hazard, not a dead certainty!
To stand before him at twenty--ay, forty paces, is a suicide, neither
more nor less; he must kill you. I'd insist on his fighting across a
handkerchief. I 'd say, 'Let us stand foot to foot!'" No, Beecher, not
a bit of it; you 'd say nothing of the kind, nor, if you did, would it
avail you! Your craven heart could not beat were those stern gray eyes
fixed upon you, looking death into you from a yard off. He 'd shoot you
down as pitilessly, too, at one distance as at the other.
Was it in the fulness of a conviction that his faltering lips tried
to deny, that he threw himself back upon a chair, while a cold, clammy
sweat covered his face and forehead, a sickness like death crept over
him, objects grew dim to his eyes, and the room seemed to turn and swim
before him? Where was his high daring now? Where the boastful spirit in
which he had declared himself free, no more the slave of Grog's insolent
domination, nor basely cowering before his frown? Oh, the ineffable
bitterness. Of that thought, coming, too, in revulsion to all his late
self-gratulations! Where was the glorious emancipation he had dreamed
of, now? He could not throw him into prison, it is true, but he could
lay him in a grave.
"But I 'd not meet him," whispered he to himself. "One is not bound to
meet a man of this sort."
There is something marvellously accommodating and elastic in the phrase,
"One is not bound" to do this, that, and t' other. As the said bond is
a contract between oneself and an imaginary world, its provisions are
rarely onerous or exacting. Life is full of things "one is not bound
to do." You are "not bound," for instance, to pay your father's debts,
though, it might be, they were contracted in your behalf and for your
benefit. You are not bound to marry the girl whose affections have been
your own for years if you can do better in another quarter, and she
has nothing in your handwriting to establish a contract. You are not
bound,--good swimmer though you be,--to rescue a man from drowning, lest
he should clutch too eagerly and peril your safety. You are not bound to
risk the chance of a typhus by visiting a poor friend on his sick-bed.
You are not bound to aid charities you but half approve,--to assist
people who have been improvident,--to associate with many who are
uninteresting to you. But why go on with this expurgatorial catalogue?
It is quite clear the only things "one is bound" to do are those the
world will enforce at his hands; and let our selfishness be ever so
inveterate, and ever so crafty, the majority will beat us, and the Ayes
have it at last!
Now, few men had a longer list of the things they were "not bound to
do" than Annesley Beecher; in reality, if the balance were to be struck
between them and those he acknowledged to be obligatory, it would have
been like Falstaff's sack to the miserable morsel of bread. Men of
his stamp fancy themselves very wise in their generation. They are not
easy-natured, open, trustful, and free-handed, like that Pharisee! Take
my word for it, the system works not so well as it looks, and they
pass their existence in a narrow prison-ward of their own selfish
instincts,--their fears their fetters, their cowardly natures heavy as
any chains!
Beecher reasoned somewhat in this wise. Grog was "not bound" to destroy
the acceptances. He might have held them in terrorism over him for a
long life, and used them, at last, if occasion served. At all events,
they were valuable securities, which it was pure and wanton waste to
burn. Still, the act being done, Beecher was "bound" in the heaviest
recognizances to his own heart to profit by the motion; and the great
question with him was, what was the best and shortest road to that
desirable object? Supposing Lackington all right,--no disputed claim
to the title, no litigation of the estate,--Beecher's best course had
possibly been to slip his cable, make all sail, and part company with
Davis forever. One grave difficulty, however, opposed itself to this
scheme. How was it possible for any man walking the earth to get out of
reach of Grog Davis? Had there been a planet allotted for the special
use of peers,--were there some bright star above to which they could
betake themselves and demand admission by showing their patent, and from
which all of inferior birth were excluded, Beecher would assuredly
have availed himself of his privilege; but, alas! whatever inequalities
pervade life, there is but one earth to bear us living, and cover
us when dead! Now, the portion of that earth which constitutes the
continent of Europe Davis knew like a detective. A more hopeless
undertaking could not be imagined than to try to escape him. Great as
was his craft, it was nothing to his courage,--a courage that gave him a
sort of affinity to a wild animal, so headlong, reckless, and desperate
did it seem. Provoke him, he was ever ready for the conflict; outrage
him, and only your life's blood could be the expiation. And what an
outrage had it been if Beecher had taken this moment,--the first,
perhaps the only one in all his life, in which Davis had accomplished a
noble and generous action,--to desert him! How he could picture to
his mind Grog, when the tidings were told him!--not overwhelmed by
astonishment, not stunned by surprise, not irresolute even for a second,
but starting up like a wounded tiger, and eager for pursuit, his fierce
eyeballs glaring, and his sinewy hands closed with a convulsive grip.
It was clear, therefore, that escape was impossible. What, then, was the
alternative that remained? To abide,--sign a lifelong partnership with
Grog, and marry Lizzy. "A stiff line of country,--a very stiff line
of country, Annesley, my boy," said he, addressing himself: "many a
dangerous rasper, many a smashing fence there,--have you nerve for it?"
Now Beecher knew life well enough to see that such an existence was,
in reality, little else than a steeple-chase, and he questioned himself
gravely whether he possessed head or hand for the effort. Grog, to be
sure, was a marvellous trainer, and Lizzy,--what might not Lizzy achieve
of success, with her beauty, her gracefulness, and her genius! It was
not till after a long course of reflection that her image came up before
him; but when once it did come, it was master of the scene. How he
recalled all her winning ways, her siren voice, her ready wit, her easy,
graceful motion, her playful manner, that gave to her beauty so many new
phases of attraction! What a fascination was it that in her company he
never remembered a sorrow,--nay, to think of her was the best solace he
had ever found against the pain of gloomy reveries. She was never out
of humour, never out of spirits,--always brilliant, sparkling, and
happy-minded.
What a glorious thing to obtain a share of such a nature,--the very next
best thing to having it oneself! "But all this was not Love," breaks in
my impatient reader. Very true; I admit it in all humility. It was not
what you, nor perhaps I, would call by that name; but yet it was all
that Annesley Beecher had to offer in that regard.
Have you never remarked the strange and curious efforts made by men who
have long lived on narrow fortunes to acquit themselves respectably on
succeeding to larger means? They know well enough that they need not
pinch and screw and squeeze any longer,--that fortune has enlarged her
boundaries, and that they can enter into wider, richer, and pleasanter
pasturage,--and yet, for the life of them, they cannot make the venture!
or if they do, it is with a sort of convulsive, spasmodic effort far
more painful than pleasurable. Their old instincts press heavily upon
them, and bear down all the promptings of their present prosperity; they
really do not want all these bounties of fate,--they are half crashed
by the shower of blessings. So is it precisely with your selfish man in
his endeavors to expand into affection, and so was it with Beecher when
he tried to be a lover.
Some moralists tell us that, even in the best natures, love is
essentially a selfish passion. What amount of egotism, then, does it not
include in those who are far--very far--from being "the best"? With all
this, let us be just to poor Beecher. Whatever there was of heart
about him, she had touched; whatever of good or kind or gentle in his
neglected being existed, she had found the way to it. If he were capable
of being anything better, she alone could have aided the reformation.
If he were not to sink still lower and lower, it was to her helping hand
his rescue would be owing. And somehow--though I cannot explain how--he
felt and knew this to be the case. He could hear generous sentiments
from her, and not deem them hypocrisy. He could listen to words of
trust and hopefulness, and yet not smile at her credulity. She had
gained that amount of ascendancy over his mind which subjugated all
his own prejudices to her influence, and, like all weak natures, he was
never so happy as in slavery. Last of all, what a prize it would be
to be the husband of the most beautiful woman in Europe! There was a
notoriety in that, far above the fame of winning "Derbys" or breaking
Roulette Banks; and he pictured to himself how they would journey
through the Continent, admired, worshipped, and envied,--for already he
had invested himself with the qualities of his future wife, and gloried
in the triumphs she was so sure to win.
"By Jove! I'll do it," cried he, at last, as he slapped his hand on the
table. "I don't care what they'll say, I will do it; and if there's
any fellow dares to scoff or sneer at it, Grog shall shoot him. I'll
make that bargain with him; and he 'll like it, for he loves fighting."
He summed up his resolution by imagining that the judgment of the world
would run somehow in this fashion: "Wonderful fellow, that Annesley
Beecher! It's not above a year since his brother lost the title, and
there he is now, married to the most splendid woman in all Europe,
living like a prince,--denying himself nothing, no matter what it
cost,--and all by his own wits! Show me his equal anywhere! Lackington
used to call him a 'flat.' I wonder what he 'd say now!"
CHAPTER XIII. A DARK CONFIDENCE
What a wound would it inflict upon our self-love were we occasionally to
know that the concessions we have extorted from our own hearts by
long effort and persuasion would be deemed matters of very doubtful
acceptance by those in whose favor they were made. With what
astonishment should we learn that there was nothing so very noble in our
forgiveness, nothing so very splendid in our generosity! I have been led
to this reflection by thinking over Annesley Beecher's late resolve, and
wondering what effect it might have had on him could he have overheard
what passed in the very chamber next his own.
Though Lizzy Davis was dressed and ready to come down to breakfast, she
felt so ill and depressed that she lay down again on her bed, telling
the maid to close the shutters and leave her to herself.
"What's this, Lizzy? What's the matter, girl?" said Davis, entering, and
taking a seat at her bedside. "Your hand is on fire."
"I slept badly,--scarcely at all," said she, faintly, "and my head feels
as if it would split with pain."
"Poor child!" said he, as he kissed her burning forehead; "I was the
cause of all this. Yes, Lizzy, I know it, but I had been staving off
this hour for many and many a year. I felt in my heart that you were the
only one in all the world who could console or cheer me, and yet I was
satisfied to forego it all--to deny myself what I yearned after--just to
spare you."
The words came with a slow and faltering utterance from him, and his
lips quivered when he had done speaking.
"I 'm not quite sure the plan was a good one," said she, in a low voice.
"Nor am I now," said he, sternly; "but I did it for the best."
She heaved a heavy sigh, and was silent.
"Mayhap I thought, too," said he, after a pause, "that when you
looked back at all the sacrifices I had made for you, how I toiled
and labored,--not as other men toil and labor, for my handicraft was
always exercised with a convict ship in the offing--There, you needn't
shudder now; I 'm here beside you safe. Well, I thought you 'd say,
'After all, he gave me every advantage in his power. If he could n't
bestow on me station and riches, he made me equal to their enjoyment if
they ever befell me. He didn't bring me down to his own level, nor to
feel the heartburnings of his own daily life, but he made me, in thought
and feeling, as good as any lady in the land.'"
"And for what--to what end?" said she, wildly.
"That you might be such, one day, girl," said he, passionately. "Do you
think I have not known every hour, for the last thirty-odd years, what I
might have been, had I been trained, and schooled, and taught the things
that others know? Have I not felt that I had pluck, daring, energy, and
persistence that only wanted knowledge to beat them all, and leave them
nowhere? Have I not said to myself, 'She has every one of these, and she
has good looks to boot; and why shouldn't she go in and carry away the
cup?' And do you think, when I said that, that I was n't striking a
docket of bankruptcy against my own heart forever? for to make you
great was to make me childless!"
Lizzy covered her face with her hands, but never uttered a word.
"I did n't need any one to tell me," resumed he, fiercely, "that
training you up in luxury and refinement was n't the way to make you
satisfied with poverty, or proud of such a father as myself. I knew
deuced well what I was preparing for myself there. 'But no matter,' I
said, 'come what will, she shall have a fair start of it. Show me the
fellow will try a balk,--show me the man will cross the course while
she's running.'"
Startled by the thick and guttural utterance of his words, Lizzy removed
her hands from her face, and stared eagerly at him. Strongly shaken by
passion as he was, every line and lineament tense with emotion, there
was a marvellous resemblance between her beautiful features and the
almost demoniac savagery of his. Had he not been at her side, the
expression was only that of intense pain on a face of surpassing beauty,
but, seen through the baneful interpretation of his look, she seemed the
type of a haughty nature spirited by the very wildest ambition.
"Ay, girl," said he, with a sigh, "you 've cost me more than money or
money's worth; and if I ever come to have what they call a 'conscience,'
I 'll have an ugly score to settle on your account."
"Oh, dearest father!" cried she, bitterly, "do not wring my heart by
such words as these."
"There, you shall hear no more of it," said he, withdrawing his hand
from her grasp and crossing his arm on his breast.
"Nay," said she, fondly, "you shall tell me all and everything. It has
cost you heavily to make this confidence to me. Let us try if it cannot
requite us both. I know the worst. No?" cried she, in terror, as he
shook his head; "why, what is there remains behind?"
"How shall I tell you what remains behind?" broke he in, sternly; "how
shall I teach you to know the world as I know it,--to feel that
every look bent on me is insult,--every word uttered as I pass a
sarcasm,--that fellows rise from the table when I sit down at it? and
though, now and then, I 'm lucky enough to catch one who goes too far,
and make him a warning to others, they can do enough to spite me,
and yet never come within twelve paces of me. I went over to Neuwied
yesterday to fetch my letters from the post. You 'd fancy that in a
little village on this untravelled bank of the Rhine I might have rested
an hour to bait my horse and eat my breakfast unmolested and without
insult. You 'd say that in a secluded spot like that I would be safe.
Not a bit of it. Scandal has its hue and cry, and every man that walks
the earth is its agent. Two young fellows fresh from England--by their
dress, their manner, and their bad French, I judged them to be young
students from Oxford or Cambridge--breakfasted in the same room with
me, and deeming me a foreigner, and therefore--for it is a right English
conclusion--unable to understand them, talked most freely of events and
people before me. I paid little attention to their vapid talk till my
ear caught the name of Beecher. They were discussing him and a lady who
had been seen in his company at Aix-la-Chapelle. Yes, they had seen her
repeatedly in her rides and drives, followed her to the Cursaal, and
stared at her at the opera. They were quite enthusiastic about her
beauty, and only puzzled to know who this mysterious creature might be
that looked like a queen and dressed like a queen. One averred she was
not Beecher's sister,--the peerage told them that; as little was she his
wife. Then came the other and last alternative. And I had to sit still
and listen to every pro and con of this stupid converse,--their
miserable efforts to reason, or their still more contemptible attempts
to jest, and dare not stand up before them and say, 'Hold your
slanderous tongues, for she is my daughter,' because, to the
first question they would put to me, I must say, 'My name is
Davis--Christopher Davis'--ay, 'Grog Davis,' if they would have it so.
No, no, girl, all your beauty, all your grace, all your fascinations
would not support such a name,--the best horse that ever won the
Derby will break down if you overweight him; and so I had to leave my
breakfast uneaten and come away how I could. For one brief moment I was
irresolute. I felt that if I let them off so easily I 'd pine and fret
over it after, and maybe give way to passion some other time with less
excuse; but my thoughts came back to you, Lizzy, and I said, 'What
signifies about me? I have no object, no goal in life, but her. She must
not be talked of, nor made matter for newspaper gossip. She will one
day or other hold a place at which slander and malevolence only talk in
whispers, and even these must be uttered with secrecy!' I could n't help
laughing as I left the room. One of them declined to eat salad because
it was unwholesome. Little he knew on what a tiny chance it depended
whether that was to be his last breakfast. The devilish pleasure of
turning back and telling him so almost overcame my resolution."
"There was, then, an impropriety in my living at Aix as I did?" asked
Lizzy, calmly.
"The impropriety, as you call it, need not have been notorious,"
said he, in angry confusion. "If people will attract notice by an
ostentatious display,--horses, equipage, costly dressing, and so
on,--the world will talk of them. You could n't know this, but Beecher
did. It was his unthinking folly drew these bad tongues on you. It is a
score he 'll have to settle with me yet."
"But, dearest papa, let me bear the blame that is my due. It was I--I
myself--who encouraged, suggested these extravagances. I fancied myself
possessed of boundless wealth; he never undeceived me; nay, he would not
even answer my importunate questions as to my family, my connections,
whence we came, and of what county."
"If he had," muttered Grog, "I 'd be curious to have heard his
narrative."
"I saw, at last, that there was a secret, and then I pressed him no
more."
"And you did well. Had you importuned, and had he yielded, it had been
worse for him."
"Just as little did I suspect," continued she, rapidly, "that any
reproach could attach to my living in his society; he was your friend;
it was at your desire he accepted this brief guardianship; he never, by
a word, a look, transgressed the bounds of respectful courtesy; and
I felt all the unconstrained freedom of old friendship in our
intercourse."
"All his reserve and all your delicacy won't silence evil tongues, girl.
I intended you to have stayed a day or two, at most, at Aix. You passed
weeks there. Whose fault that, you say? Mine,--of course, mine, and no
one else's. But what but my fault every step in your whole life? Why
was n't I satisfied to bring you up in my own station, with rogues and
swindlers for daily associates? Then I might have had a daughter who
would not be ashamed to own me."
"Oh, that I am not; that I will never be," cried she, throwing her arm
around his neck. "What has your whole life been but a sacrifice to me?
It may be that you rate too highly these great prizes of life; that
you attach to the station you covet for me a value I cannot concur in.
Still, I feel that it was your love for me prompted this hope, and that
while you trod the world darkly and painfully, you purchased a path of
light and pleasantness for me."
"You have paid me for it all by these words," said he, drawing his hand
across his eyes. "I 'd work as a daily laborer on the road, I'd be a
sailor before the mast, I'd take my turn with the chain-gang and eat
Norfolk Island biscuit, if it could help to place you where I seek to
see you."
"And what is this rank to which you aspire so eagerly?"
"I want you to be a peeress, girl. I want you to be one of the
proudest guild the world ever yet saw or heard of; to have a station so
accredited that every word you speak, every act you do, goes forth with
its own authority."
"But stay!" broke she in, "men's memories will surely carry them back to
who I was."
"Let them, girl. Are you the stuff to be chilled by that? Have I made
you what you are, that you cannot play their equal? There are not many
of them better looking; are there any cleverer or better informed? Even
those Oxford boys said you looked like an empress. If insult will crush
you, girl, you 've got little of my blood in you."
Lizzy's face flushed scarlet, and her eyes glittered wildly, as they
seemed to say, "Have no fears on that score." Then, suddenly changing to
an ashy pallor, and in a voice trembling with intense feeling, she said:
"But why seek out an existence of struggle and conflict? It is for me
and my welfare that all your anxieties are exercised. Is it not possible
that these can be promoted without the dangerous risk of this ambition?
You know life well; tell me, then, are there not some paths a woman may
tread for independence, and yet cause no blush to those who love her
best? Of the acquirements you have bestowed upon me, are there not some
which could be turned to this account? I could be a governess."
"Do you know what a governess is, girl?--a servant in the garb of a
lady; one whose mind has been cultivated, not to form resources for
herself, but to be drained and drawn on by others. They used to kill a
serf, in the middle ages, that a noble might warm his feet in the hot
entrails; our modern civilization is satisfied by driving many a poor
girl crazy, to cram some stupid numbskull with a semblance of knowledge.
You shall not be a governess."
"There is the stage, then," cried she. "I'm vain enough to imagine I
should succeed there."
"I'll not hear of it," broke in Davis, passionately. "If I was certain
you could act like Siddons herself, you should not walk the boards. I
know what a theatre is. I know the life of coarse familiarity it leads
to. The corps is a family gathered together like what jockeys call 'a
scratch team,'--a wheeler here, and a leader there, with just smartness
enough to soar above the level of a dull audience, crammed with the
light jest of low comedy, and steered by no higher ambition than a
crowded benefit, or a junketing at Greenwich. How would you consort
with these people?"
"Still, if I achieved success--"
"I won't have it,--that's enough. I tell you, girl, that there is but
one course for you. You must be declared winner at the stand-house
before you have been seen on the ground. If you have to run the gauntlet
through all the slanders and stories they will rake up of me,--if,
before you reach the goal, you have to fight all the lost battles of
my life over again,--you 'll never see the winning-post."
"And is it not better to confront the storm, and risk one's chances with
the elements, than suffer shipwreck at once? I tell you, father," cried
she, eagerly, "I 'll face all the perils you speak of, boldly; I'll
brave insolence, neglect, sarcasm,--what they will,--only let me feel
one honest spot in my heart, and be able to say to myself, 'You have
toiled lowly, and fared ill; you have dared a conflict and been worsted;
but you have not made traffic of your affections, nor bought success by
that which makes it valueless.'"
"These are the wild romances of a girl's fancy," said Davis. "Before a
twelvemonth was over, you could n't say, on your oath, whether you had
married for love or interest, except that poverty might remind you of
the one, and affluence suggest the other. Do you imagine that the
years stop short with spring, and that one is always in the season of
expectancy? No, no; months roll along, and after summer comes autumn,
and then winter, and the light dress you fancied that you never need
change would make but scanty clothing."
"But if I am not able to bring myself to this?"
"Are you certain you will be able to bring me to worse?" said he,
solemnly. "Do you feel, Lizzy, as if you could repay my long life of
sacrifice and struggle by what would undo them all? Do you feel strong
enough to say, 'My old father was a fool to want to make me better
than himself; I can descend to the set he is ashamed of; and, more
still, I can summon courage to meet taunts and insults on him, which,
had I station to repel them from, had never been uttered'?"
"Oh, do not tempt me this way!" cried she, bitterly.
"But I will, girl; I will leave nothing unsaid that may induce you to
save yourself from misery, and me from disgrace. I tell you, girl, if
I face the world again, it must be with such security as only you can
give me,--you, a lady high in rank and position, can then save me. My
enemies will know that their best game will not be to ruin me."
"And are you sure it would save you?" said she, sternly and coldly.
"I am," said he, in a voice like her own.
"Will you take a solemn oath to me that you see no other road out of
these difficulties, whatever they are, than by my doing this?"
"I will swear it as solemnly as ever words were sworn. I believe--before
Heaven I say it--that there's not another chance in life by which your
future lot can be secured."
"Do not speak of mine; think solely of your fortunes, and say if this
alone can save them."
"Just as firmly do I say, then, that once in the position I mean, you
can rescue me out of every peril. You will be rich enough to pay some,
powerful enough to promote others, great enough to sway and influence
all."
"Good God! what have you done, then, that it is only by sacrificing all
my hopes of happiness that you can be ransomed?" cried she, with a burst
of irrepressible passion.
"You want a confession, then," said Davis, in a tone of most savage
energy; "you 'd like to hear my own indictment of myself. Well, there
are plenty of counts in it."
"Stand forward, Kit Davis. You are charged with various acts of swindling
and cheating,--light offences, all of them,--committed in the best of
company, and in concert with honorable and even noble colleagues. By the
virtue of your oath, Captain Davis, how many horses have you poisoned,
how many jockeys have you drugged, what number of men have you hocussed
at play, what sums have you won from others in a state of utter
insensibility? Can you state any case where you enforced a false
demand by intimidation? Can you charge your memory with any instance of
shooting a man who accused you of foul play? What names besides your own
have you been in the habit of signing to bills? Have you any revelations
to make about stock transferred under forgery? Will you kiss the
book, and say that nineteen out of twenty at the hulks have not done a
fiftieth part of what you have done? Will you solemnly take oath that
there are not ten, fifteen, twenty charges, which might be prosecuted
against you, to transportation for life? and are there not two--or,
certainly, is there not one--with a heavier forfeiture on it? Are there
not descriptions of you in almost every police bureau in Europe, and
photographic likenesses, too, on frontier passport-offices of little
German States, that Hesse and Cassel and Coburgh should not be ravaged
by the wolf called Grog Davis?"
"And if this be so, to what end do I sacrifice myself?" cried she, in
bitter anguish. "Were it not better to seek out some far-away land where
we cannot be traced? Let us go to America, to Australia,--I don't care
how remote it be,--the country that will shelter us--"
"Not a step. I'll not budge out of Europe; win or lose, here I stay! Do
as I tell you, girl, and the game is our own. It has been my safety this
many a year that I could compromise so many in my own fall. Well, time
has thinned the number marvellously. Many have died. The Cholera, the
Crimea, the Marshalsea, broken hearts, and what not, have done their
work; and of the few remaining, some have grown indifferent to exposure,
others have dropped out of view, and now it would be as much as I could
do to place four or five men of good names in the dock beside me. That
ain't enough. I must have connections.
"I want those relations that can't afford disgrace. Let me only have
them, they 'll take care of their own reputations. You don't know, but
I know, what great folk can do in England. There 's not a line in the
Ten Commandments they could n't legalize with an Act of Parliament. They
can marry and unmarry, bind and loosen, legitimize or illegitimize, by a
vote 'of the House;' and by a vote of society they can do just as much:
make a swindling railroad contractor the first man in London, and, if
they liked it, and saw it suited their book, they could make Kit Davis
a member of White's, or the Carlton; and once they did it, girl, they 'd
think twice before they 'd try to undo it again. All I say is, give me a
Viscount for a son-in-law, and see if I don't 'work the oracle.' Let me
have just so much backing as secures a fair fight, and my head be
on't if they don't give in before I do! They 're very plucky with one
another, girl, because they keep within the law; but mark how they
tremble before the fellow that does n't mind the law,--that goes through
it, at one side of it, or clean over it. That's the pull I have over
them. The man that don't mind a wetting can always drag another into the
water; do you see that?"
Davis had now so worked upon himself that he walked the room with
hasty steps, his cheeks burning, and his eyes wildly, fiercely glaring.
Amongst the traits which characterize men of lawless and depraved lives,
none is more remarkable than the boastful hardihood with which they will
at times deploy all the resources of their iniquity, even exaggerating
the amount of the wrongs they have inflicted on society. There is
something actually satanic in their exultation over a world they have
cheated, bullied, injured, and insulted, so that, in their infernal
code, honesty and trustfulness seem only worthy of contempt, and he
alone possessed of true courage who dares and defies the laws that bind
his fellow-men.
Davis was not prone to impulsiveness; very few men were less the slaves
of rash or intemperate humors. He had been reared in too stern a school
to let mere temper master him; but his long practised self-restraint
deserted him here. In his eagerness to carry his point, he was borne
away beyond all his prudence, and once launched into the sea of his
confessions, he wandered without chart or compass. Besides this, there
was that strange, morbid sense of vanity which is experienced in giving
a shock to the fears and sensibilities of another. The deeper the tints
of his own criminality, the more terrible the course he had run in life,
so much the more was he to be feared and dreaded. If he should fail to
work upon her affections, he might still hope to extract something from
her terror; for who could say of what a man like him was not capable?
And last of all, he had thrown off the mask, and he did not care to
retain a single rag of the disguise he so long had worn; thus was
it, then, that he stood before her in all the strong light of his
iniquities,--a criminal, whose forfeitures would have furnished Guilt
for fifty.
"Shall I go on?" said he, in a voice of thick and labored utterance, "or
is this enough?"
"Oh, is it not enough?" cried she, bitterly.
"You asked me to tell you all,--everything,--and now that you 've
only caught a passing glimpse of what I could reveal, you start back
affrighted. Be it so; there are, at least, no concealments between us
now; and harsh as my lesson has been, it is not a whit harsher than if
the world had given it I 've only one word more to say, girl," said he,
as he drew nigh the door and held his hand on the lock; "if it be your
firm resolve to reject this fortune, the sooner you let me know it the
better. I have said all that I need say; the rest is within your own
hands; only remember that if such be your determination, give me the
earliest notice, for I, too, must take my measures for the future."
If there was nothing of violence in the manner he uttered these
words, there was a stern, impassive serenity that made them still more
impressive; and Lizzy, without a word of reply, buried her face between
her hands and wept.
Davis stood irresolute; for a moment it seemed as if his affection had
triumphed, for he made a gesture as though he would approach her; then,
suddenly correcting himself with a start, he muttered, below his breath,
"It is done now," and left the room.
CHAPTER XIV. SOME DAYS AT GLENGARIFF
The little Hermitage of Glengariff, with its wooded park, its winding
river, its deep solitudes fragrant with wild-rose and honeysuckle, is
familiar to my reader. He has lingered there with me, strolling through
leafy glades, over smooth turf, catching glimpses of blue sea through
the dark foliage, and feeling all the intense ecstasy of a spot that
seemed especially created for peaceful enjoyment. What a charm was in
those tangled pathways, overhung with jessamine and arbutus, or now
flanked by moss-clad rock, through whose fissures small crystal rivulets
trickled slowly down into little basins beneath. How loaded the air
with delicious perfume; what a voluptuous sense of estrangement from
all passing care crept over one as he stole noiselessly along over the
smooth sward, and drank in the mellow blackbird's note, blended with the
distant murmur of the rippling river! And where is it all now? The park
is now traversed in every direction with wide, unfinished roads; great
open spaces appear at intervals, covered with building materials;
yawning sand-quarries swarming with men; great brick-fields smoking
in all the reeking oppression of that filthy manufacture; lime-kilns
spreading their hateful breath on every side; vast cliffs of slate and
granite-rock, making the air resound with their discordant crash, with
all the vulgar tumult of a busy herd. If you turn seaward, the same
ungraceful change is there: ugly and misshapen wharfs have replaced the
picturesque huts of the fishermen; casks and hogsheads and bales and
hampers litter the little beach where once the festooned net was wont to
hang, and groups of half-drunken sailors riot and dispute where once the
merry laugh of sportive childhood was all that woke the echoes. If the
lover of the picturesque could weep tears of bitter sorrow over these
changes, to the man of speculation and progress they were but signs of
a glorious prosperity. The Grand Glengariff Villa Allotment and Marine
Residence Company was a splendid scheme, whose shares were eagerly
sought after at a high premium. Mr. Dunn must assuredly have lent all
his energies to the enterprise, for descriptions of the spot were to be
found throughout every corner of the three kingdoms. Colored lithographs
and stereoscopes depicted its most seductive scenes through the pages
of popular "weeklies," and a dropping fire of interesting paragraphs
continued to keep up the project before the public through the columns
of the daily press. An "Illustrated News" of one week presented its
subscribers with an extra engraving of the "Yachts entering Glengariff
harbor after the regatta;" the next, it was a finished print of the
"Lady Augusta Arden laying the foundation-stone of the Davenport
Obelisk." At one moment the conflict between wild nature and ingenious
art would be shown by a view of a clearing in Glengariff forest, where
the solid foundations of some proud edifice were seen rising amidst
prostrate pines and fallen oak-trees, prosaic announcements in
advertising columns giving to these pictorial devices all the solemn
stability of fact, so that such localities as "Arden Terrace,"
"Lackington Avenue," "Glengariff Crescent," and "Davenport Heights"
became common and familiar to the public ear.
The imaginative literature of speculation--industrial fiction it might
be called--has reached a very high development in our day. Not content
with enlisting all the graces of fancy in the cause of enterprise,
heightening the charms of scenery and aiding the interests of romance
by historic association, it actually allies itself with the slighter
infirmities of our social creed, and exalts the merits of certain
favored spots by the blessed assurance that they are patronized by our
betters. Amongst the many advantages fortune bestowed upon the grand
Glengariff scheme was conspicuously one,--Dukes had approved, and Earls
admired it "We are happy to learn," said the "Post," "that the Marquis
of Duckington has intrusted the construction of his marine villa at
Glengariff to the exquisite skill and taste of Sir Jeffrey Blocksley,
who is, at present, engaged in preparing Noodleton Hall for his Grace
the Duke of Rowood, at the same charming locality." In the "Herald"
we find: "The Earl of Hanaper is said to have paid no less than twelve
thousand guineas for the small plot of land in which his bathing-lodge
at Glengariff is to stand. It is only right to mention that the view
from his windows will include the entire bay, from the Davenport Obelisk
to Dunn Lighthouse,--a prospect unequalled, we venture to assert,
in Europe." And, greater than these, the "Chronicle" assures us, the
arrival of a Treasury Lord, accompanied by the Chairman of the Board of
Works, on Monday last, at Glengariff, proclaimed the gracious intention
of her Majesty to honor this favored spot by selecting it for a future
residence. "'Queen's Cot,' as it will be styled, will stand exactly on
the site formerly occupied by the late residence of Lord Glengariff,
well known as the Hermitage, and be framed and galleried in wood in the
style so frequently seen in the Tyrol."
Where is the born Briton would not feel the air balmier and the breeze
more zephyr-like if he could see that it waved a royal standard? Where
the Anglo-Saxon who would not think the sea more salubrious that helped
to salt a duke? Where the alley that was not cooler if a marquis walked
beneath its shadow? It is not that honest John Bull seeks the intimacy
or acquaintance of these great folk; he has no such weakness or
ambition,--he neither aspires to know or be known of them; the limit of
his desire is to breathe the same mountain air, to walk the same chain
pier, to be fed by their poulterer and butcher, and, maybe, buried by
their undertaker. Were it the acquaintanceship he coveted, were it some
participation in the habits of refined and elegant intercourse, far be
it from us to say one word in disparagement of such ambition, satisfied,
as we are, that in all that concerns the enjoyment of society, for the
charms of a conversation where fewest prejudices prevail, where least
exaggerations are found, where good feeling is rarely, good taste never,
violated, the highest in rank are invariably the most conspicuous. But,
unhappily, these are not the prizes sought after; the grand object being
attained if the Joneses and Simpkinses can spend their autumn in the
same locality with titled visitors, bathe in the same tides, and take
their airings at the same hours. What an unspeakable happiness might
it yield them to know they had been "bored" by the same monotony, and
exhausted by the same ennuis!
They who were curious in such literature fancied they could detect the
fine round hand of Mr. Hankes in the glowing descriptions of Glengariff.
Brought up at the feet of that Gamaliel of appraisers, George Robins,
he really did credit to his teachings. Nor was it alone the present
delights of the spot he dwelled upon, but expatiated on the admirable
features of an investment certain to realize, eventually, two or three
hundred per cent It was, in fact, like buying uncleared land in the
Bush, upon which, within a few years, streets and squares were to
be found, purchasing for a mere nominal sum whole territories that
to-morrow or next day were to be sold as building lots and valued by the
foot.
As in a storm the tiniest creeks and most secluded coves feel in their
little bays the wild influence that prevails without, and see their
quiet waters ruffled and wave-tossed, so, too, prosperity follows the
same law, and spreads its genial sunshine in a wide circle around
the spot it brightens. For miles and miles along the shore the grand
Glengariff scheme diffused the golden glory of its success. Little
fishing-villages, solitary cottages in sequestered glens, lonely creeks,
whose yellow strands had seldom seen a foot-track,--all felt it. The
patient habits of humble industry seemed contemptible to those who
came back to their quiet homesteads after seeing the wondrous doings
at Glengariff; and marvellous, indeed, were the narratives of sudden
fortunes. One had sold his little "shebeen" for more gold than he knew
how to count; another had become rich by the price of the garden before
his door; the shingly beach seemed paved with precious stones, the rocks
appeared to have grown into bullion. How mean and despicable seemed
daily toil; the weary labor of the field, the precarious life of the
fisherman, in presence of such easy prosperity, were ignoble drudgery.
It savored of superior intelligence to exchange the toil of the hands
for the exercise of speculative talents, and each began to compute what
some affluent purchaser might not pay for this barren plot, what that
bleak promontory might not bring in this market of fanciful bidders.
Let us note the fact that the peasant was not a little amused by the
absurd value which the rich man attached to objects long familiar and
unprized by himself. The picturesque and the beautiful were elements so
totally removed from all his estimate of worth, that he readily ascribed
to something very like insanity the great man's fondness for them. That
a group of stone pines on a jutting cliff, a lone and rocky island, a
ruined wall, an ancient well canopied by a bower of honeysuckle, should
be deemed objects of price, appeared to be the most capricious of all
tastes; and, in his ignorance as to what imparted this value, he glutted
the market with everything that occurred to him. Spots of ground the
least attractive, tenements occupying the most ill-chosen sites, ugly
and misshapen remains of cottages long deserted, were all vaunted as
fully as good or better than their neighbors had sold for thousands.
It must be owned, the market price of any article seemed the veriest
lottery imaginable. One man could actually find no purchaser for four
acres of the finest potato-garden in the county; another got a hundred
guineas for his good-will of a bit of stony land that wouldn't feed
a goat; here was a slated house no one would look at, there was a mud
hovel a Lord and two Members of Parliament were outbidding each other
over these three weeks. Could anything be more arbitrary or inexplicable
than this? In fact, it almost seemed as if the old, the ruinous, the
neglected, and the unprofitable had now usurped the place of all that
was neat, orderly, or beneficial.
If we have suffered ourselves to be led into these remarks, they are
not altogether digressionary. The Hermitage, we have said, was doomed.
Common report alleged that the Queen had selected the spot for her
future residence, and of a truth it was even worthy of such a destiny.
Whether in reality royalty had made the choice, or that merely it
was yet a speculation in hope of such an event, we cannot say, but an
accomplished architect had already begun the work of reconstruction,
and more than two-thirds of the former building were now demolished. The
fragment that still remained was about the oldest part of the cottage,
and not the least picturesque. It was a little wing with three gables to
the front, the ancient framework, of black oak, quaintly ornamented
with many a tasteful device and grim decoration. A little portico, whose
columns were entirely concealed by the rich foliage of a rhododendron,
stood before the windows, whose diamond panes told of an era when glass
bore a very different value; a gorgeous flower-plat, one rich expanse
of rare tulips and ranunculi, sloped from the portico to the river, over
which a single plank formed a bridge. The stream, which was here
deep and rock-bottomed, could be barely seen between the deep hanging
branches of the weeping-ash; but its presence might be recognized by
the occasional plash of a leaping trout, or the still louder stroke of
a swan's wing as he sailed in solemn majesty over his silent domain.
So straggling and wide-spreading had been the ancient building, that,
although a part of the condemned structure, the clank of the mason's
trowel and the turmoil of the falling materials could scarcely be heard
in this quiet, sequestered spot. Here Sybella Kellett still lived,--left
behind by her great protectors,--half in forgetfulness. Soon after the
triumph of the Ossory Bank they had removed to Dublin, thence to
London, where they now awaited the passage of a special bill to make
the Glen-gariff allotment scheme a chartered company. Although the great
turn in the fortunes of Glengariff had transmitted to other hands the
direction and guidance of events there, her zeal, energy, and, above
all, her knowledge of the people, especially marked her out as one whose
services were most valuable. English officials, new to Ireland and its
ways, quickly discovered the vast superiority she possessed over them
in all dealings with the peasantry, whose prejudices she understood, and
whose modes of thought were familiar to her. By none were her qualities
more appreciated than by Mr. Hankes. There was a promptitude and
decision in all she did, a ready-witted intelligence to encounter
whatever difficulty arose, and a bold, purpose-like activity of
character about her that amazed and delighted that astute gentleman.
"She 's worth us all, sir," he would say to Sir Elkanah Paston, the
great English engineer,--"worth us all. Her suggestions are priceless;
see how she detected the cause of those shifting sands in the harbor,
and supplied the remedy at once; mark how she struck out that line
of road from the quarries; think of her transplanting those pinasters
five-and-thirty feet high, and not a failure,--not one failure amongst
them; and there's the promontory, now the most picturesque feature of
the bay: and as to those terraced gardens that she laid out last week,
I vow and declare Sir Joseph himself couldn't have done it better. And
then, after a day of labor--riding, perhaps, five-and-twenty or thirty
miles--she 'll sit down to her desk and write away half the night."
If it had not been for one trait, Mr. Hankes would have pronounced her
perfection; there was, however, a flaw, which the more he thought over
the more did it puzzle him. She was eminently quick-sighted, keen
to read motives and appreciate character, and yet with all this she
invariably spoiled every bargain made with the people. Instead of taking
advantage of their ignorance and inexperience, she was continually on
the watch over their interests; instead of endeavoring to overreach
them, she was mindful of their advantage, cautiously abstaining from
everything that might affect their rights.
"We might have bought up half the county for a song, sir, if it were not
for that girl," Mr. Hankes would say; "she has risen the market on us
everywhere. 'Let us be just,' she says. I want to be just, Miss Kellett,
but just to ourselves."
A pleasant phrase is that same one "just to ourselves;" but Mr. Hankes
employed it like many other people, and never saw its absurdity.
Now, Sybella Kellett fancied that justice had a twofold obligation,
and found herself very often the advocate of the poor man, patiently
sustaining his rights, and demanding their recognition. Confidence, we
are told by a great authority, is a plant of slow growth, and yet she
acquired it in the end. The peasantry submitted to her claims the most
complex and involved; they brought their quaint old contracts, half
illegible by time and neglect; they recited, and confirmed by oral
testimony, the strangest possible of tenures; they recounted long
narratives of how they succeeded to this holding, and what claims they
could prefer to that; histories that would have worn out almost any
human patience to hear, and especially trying to one whose apprehension
was of the quickest. And yet she would listen to the very end, make
herself master of the case, and give it a deep and full consideration.
This done, she decided; and to that decision none ever objected.
Whatever her decree, it was accepted as just and fair, and even if a
single disappointed or discontented suitor could have been found, he
would have shrunk from avowing himself the opponent of public opinion.
It was, however, by the magic of her sympathy, by the secret charm of
understanding their natures, and participating in every joy and sorrow
of their hearts, that she gained her true ascendancy over them. There
was nothing feigned or factitious in her feeling for them; it was not
begotten of that courtly tact which knows names by heart, remembers
little family traits, and treasures up an anecdote; it was true,
heart-felt, honest interest in their welfare. She had watched them long
and closely; she knew that the least amiable trait in their natures was
also that which oftenest marred their fortunes,--distrust; and she set
herself vigorously to work to uproot this vile, pernicious weed, the
most noxious that ever poisoned the soil of a human heart. By her own
truthful dealings with them she inspired truth, by her fairness she
exacted fairness, and by the straightforward honesty of her words and
actions they grew to learn how far easier and pleasanter could be the
business of life where none sought to overreach his neighbor.
[Illustration: 175]
To such an extent had her influence spread that it became at last
well-nigh impossible to conclude any bargain for land without her
co-operation. Unless her award had decided, the peasant could not
bring himself to believe that his claim had met a just or equitable
consideration; but whatever Miss Bella decreed was final and
irrevocable. From an early hour each morning the suitors to her court
began to arrive. Under a large damson-tree was placed a table, at which
she sat, busily writing away, and listening all the while to their
long-drawn-out narratives. It was her rule never to engage in any
purchase when she had not herself made a visit to the spot in question,
ascertained in person all its advantages and disadvantages, and
speculated how far its future value should influence its present price.
In this way she had travelled far and near over the surrounding country,
visiting localities the wildest and least known, and venturing into
districts where a timid traveller had not dared to set foot. It required
all her especial acuteness, often-times, to find out--from garbled and
incoherent descriptions--the strange and out-of-the-way places no
map had ever indicated. In fact, the wild and untravelled country was
pathless as a sea, and nothing short of her ready-witted tact had been
able to navigate it.
She was, as usual, busied one morning with her peasant levee when Mr.
Hankes arrived. He brought a number of letters from the post, and
was full of the importance so natural to him who has the earliest
intelligence.
"Great news, Miss Bella," said he, gayly,--"very great news. One of
the French Princes announces his intention to build a villa here. He
requires a small park of some forty or fifty acres, access to the
sea, and a good anchorage for his yacht. This note here will give all
particulars. Here is an application from Sir Craven Tollemache; he wants
us to build him a house on any picturesque site near the shore, and
contracts to take it on lease. Here is a demand for one hundred shares,
fifty to be exchanged for shares in the Boquantilla Cobalt and Zinc
Mines, now at a premium. Kelsal and Waterline wish to know what
facilities we would afford them to establish yacht-building in Crooke's
Harbor. If liberally dealt with, they propose to expend fifty thousand
on permanent improvements. Lord Drellington is anxious for a house in
Lackington Crescent. I believe he is too late. There are also seven
applications for 'Arden House,' which, I fancy, has been promised to Sir
Peter Parkeswith. Founde's Cliff, too, is eagerly run after; that sketch
you made of it has been a great success. We must extend our territories,
Miss Bella,--we must widen our frontier; never was there such a hit.
It is the grandest operation of Mr. Dunn's life. Seven hundred and
twenty-three thousand pounds,--one-fourth already paid, the remainder
available at short calls. Those Welsh people, Plimnon and Price,
are eager about our lead-mine, and we can run up the shares there to
sixty-five or seventy whenever we please. Here, too, are the plans
for the new Casino and Baths. This is the sketch of a Hydropathic
Establishment,--a pet scheme of Lord Glengariffs; we must let him
have it. And here is Truevane's report about the marble. It will serve
admirably for every purpose but statuary. Our slate slabs are pronounced
the finest ever imported. We mean to flag the entire terrace along
the sea with them. This is from Dunn himself; it is very short, and
hurriedly written: 'Chevass will move the second reading of our bill on
Tuesday. I have spoken to the Chancellor, and it is all right. Before it
goes to the Lords we must have a new issue of shares. I want, at least,
two hundred and fifty thousand by the end of the year.' He says nothing
about politics; indeed, he is so occupied with gayeties and fine
company, he has little time for business. He only mentions that 'till we
have done with this stupid war we cannot hope for any real extension to
our great enterprise.'"
"And does he put our miserable plottings here in competition with the
noble struggle of our glorious soldiers in the Crimea?" cried she, now
breaking silence for the first time.
Mr. Hankes actually started with the energy of her manner, and for a
moment could scarcely collect himself to reply.
"Well, you know, Miss Bella," said he, faltering at every word, "we are
men of peace,--we are people engaged in the quiet arts of trade,--we
cannot be supposed indifferent to the interests our lives are passed in
forwarding."
"But you are Englishmen, besides, sir; not to say you are brothers and
kinsmen of the gallant men who are fighting our enemies."
"Very true, Miss Bella,--very true; they have their profession and we
have ours. We rejoice in their success as we participate in all the
enthusiasm of their gallantry. I give you my word of honor, I could n't
help filling out an extra glass of sherry yesterday to the health of
that fine fellow who dashed at the Russian staff and carried off a
colonel prisoner. You saw it, I suppose, in the papers?"
"No. Pray let me hear it," said she, eagerly.
"Well, it was an observation--a 'reconnaissance' I think they called
it--the Russians were making of the Sardinian lines, and they came so
near that a young soldier--an orderly of General La Marmora's--heard one
of them say, 'Yes, I have the whole position in my head.' Determining
that so dangerous a fellow should not get back to head-quarters, he
watched him closely, till he knew he could not be mistaken in him,
and then setting off at speed,--for he was mounted,--he crossed the
Tchernaya a mile or so further up, and, waiting for them, he lay
concealed in a small copse. His plan was to sell his own life for this
officer's; but whether he relinquished that notion, or that chance
decided the event, there's no knowing. In he dashed, into the midst of
them, cut this colonel's bridle-arm across at the wrist, and, taking his
horse's reins, rode for it with all speed towards his own lines. He got
a start of thirty or forty strides before they could rally in pursuit,
which they did actually up to the very range of the rifle-pits, and only
retired at last when three fell dead or wounded."
[Illustration: 178]
"But he escaped?" cried she.
"That he did, and carried his prisoner safe into the lines, and
presented him to the General, modestly remarking, 'He is safer here than
over yonder,'--pointing to Sebastopol; and, strangest part of the whole
thing, he turns out to be an Englishman."
"An Englishman?"
"Yes. He was serving, by some strange accident, on General La Marmora's
staff, as a simple orderly, though evidently a man of some education and
position,--one of those wild young bloods, doubtless, that had gone
too fast at home, but who really do us no discredit when it comes to a
question of pluck and daring."
"Do us no discredit!" cried she; "and have you nothing more generous to
say of one who has asserted the honor of England so nobly in the face of
an entire army? Do us no discredit! Why, one such feat as this adds more
glory to the nation than all the schemes of all the jobbers who deal in
things like these." And she threw contemptuously from her the colored
plans and pictures that littered the table.
"Dear me, Miss Kellett, here's a whole ink-bottle spilled over the
Davenport Obelisk."
"Do us no discredit!" burst out she again. "Are we really the nation of
shopkeepers that France calls us? Have we no pride save in successful
bargaining, no glory save in growing rich? Is money-getting so close at
the nation's heart that whatever retards or delays its hoardings savors
of misfortune? When you were telling me that anecdote, how I envied
the land that owned such a hero; and when you said he was our own,--our
countryman; my heart felt bursting with gratitude. Tell me his name."
"His name,--his name,--how strange that I should have forgotten it; for,
as I told you, I toasted his health only yesterday."
"Yes, you remember the sherry!" said she, bitterly.
Mr. Hankes's cheek tingled and grew crimson. It was a mood of passionate
excitement he had never witnessed in her before, and he was astounded at
the change in one usually so calm and self-possessed. It was then in
no small confusion that he turned over the letter before him to find
something which might change the topic in discussion.
"Ah, here is a matter," said he, referring once more to Dunn's
letter. "He says: 'Beg of Miss Kellett to see a small holding called
"Kilmaganagh;" I cannot exactly say where, but it lies to the north
of Bantry Bay. I suspect that it possesses few recommendations such
as would entitle it to a place in the "scheme;" but, if to be had on
reasonable terms, I would be well pleased to obtain it. Driscoll had
effected a part purchase, but, having failed to pay up the instalment
due last March, his claim lapses. By the way, can you ascertain for me
where this same Driscoll has gone to? It is now above four months since
I have heard of him. Trace him, if possible. As to Kilmaganagh, tell
Miss K. that she may indulge that generosity she is not indisposed to
gratify, and be on this occasion a liberal purchaser.' He fancies you
lean a little to the country-people, Miss Bella," said Hankes, as
he stole a cautious glance at her now heightened color. "I will even
consent to what is called a fancy price for the tenement, and certainly
not lose it for a hundred or two above its actual value. Look to this,
and look to Driscoll. There's a riddle here, Miss Bella, if we knew how
to read it," said Hankes, as he looked over the few lines once more.
"I have but scant wits to read riddles, Mr. Hankes. Let us see where
this place lies." And she turned to a large map on the table, the paths
and cross-paths of which had been marked in different colored inks by
her own hand. "I remember the name. There was an old tower called
Kilmaganagh Fort, which used to be visible from the bay. Yes, here it
is,--a strange, wild spot, too, and, as Mr. Dunn opines, scarcely
available for his great scheme."
"But he has so many great schemes," said Hankes, with a sly and sidelong
glance towards her.
Sybella, however, paid no attention to the remark, but, leaning over the
map, continued to trace out the line of route to the spot in question.
"By crossing Bantry Bay at Gortalassy, one might save above thirty miles
of way. I have been over the road before, and remember it well."
"And you really mean to undertake the journey?" asked Hankes, in some
astonishment.
"Of course I do. I ask nothing better than to be fully occupied, and am
well pleased when in so doing I can exchange the desk for the saddle,
or, almost better, the stern-sheets of a Bantry Hooker. You are not a
woman, and you cannot feel, therefore, the sense of pride inspired by
mere utility."
"I wish I might ask you a favor, Miss Kellett," said he, after a
moment's thought.
"A favor of me!" said she, laughing, as though the idea amused her.
"Yes," said he, resuming. "I would beg to be permitted to accompany you
on this same journey. I have never been any of these wild, untravelled
tracts, and it would be a great additional charm to visit them in your
company."
"So far as I am concerned, I grant you the permission freely; but it
were well for you to remember that you must not only be well mounted,
but prepared to ride over some rough country. I go, usually, as the crow
flies, and, as nearly as I can, the same pace too. Now, between this and
Loughbeg, there are, at least, three trying fences: one a wall with a
deep drop beyond it, and another a steep bank, where I remember that
somebody narrowly escaped having an ugly fall; there's a small estuary,
too, to cross, near Gortalassy. But I am ashamed to enumerate these
petty obstacles; such as they are, they are the only ones,--there are
none on my part."
"When do you mean to set out?" asked Hankes, in a tone far less eager
than his former question.
"There's a full moon to-morrow night, so that, leaving this about
midnight, we might reach the bay by six or seven o'clock, and then, if
we should be fortunate with the wind, arrive at Kilmaganagh by about
four o'clock. Taking there three or four hours to see the place, we
could start again about eight, or even nine--"
"Good heavens! that gives nothing for repose,--no time to recruit."
"You forget there are fully five hours on board the boat. I 'll not be
the least offended if you sleep the entire time. If there 's not wind
enough to take in a reef, I 'll give the tiller to old Mark Spillane,
and take a sleep myself."
"It is really like a Tartar journey," said the terrified Hankes.
"I have told you the worst of it, I must own," said she, laughing, "for
I feel I have no right to obtain your escort on false pretences."
"And you would go alone over this long distance,--land and sea?"
"Land and sea are very grand words, Mr. Hankes, for some five-and-twenty
miles of heather and a few hours in an open boat; but such as they are,
I would go them alone."
Mr. Hankes would like to have said something complimentary, something
flattering, but it did not exactly occur to him how he was to do it.
To have exalted her heroism would be like a confession of his own
poltroonery; to have seen any surprising evidence of boldness in her
daring might possibly reflect upon her delicacy. He felt--none could
have felt more thoroughly--that she was very courageous and very full of
energy; but, somehow, these were humble aid to propagate that notion,--I
had almost said that fallacy. "Only hear me out," said she, as he tried
to interrupt "I began my duties in the most sanguine of all moods.
Heaven knows not what dreams I had of a land of abundance and content.
Well, I have seen the abundance,--the wealth has really poured in; every
one is richer, better fed, clothed, housed, and cared for, and almost
in an equal ratio are they grown more covetous, grasping, envious,
and malevolent--You won't let me finish," cried she, as he showed an
increasing impatience. "Well, perhaps, as we stroll along the cliffs
to-morrow, you will be more disposed to listen; that is, if I have not
already terrified you from accepting the companionship."
"Oh, no! by no means; but how are we to go,--do we drive?"
"Drive! why, my dear Mr. Hankes, it is only a Kerry pony has either
legs or head for the path we must follow. Cast your eye along this
coast-line; Jagged and fanciful as it looks, it conveys no notion of its
rugged surface of rock, and its wild and darksome precipices. Take
my word for it, you have as much to learn of the scenery as of the
temperament of the land."
"But I'd like to go," repeated he, his accent being marvellously little
in accordance with the sentiment.
"Nothing easier, sir. I'll give orders to have a pony--a most reliable
pony--ready for you here to-morrow evening, when I shall expect you at
tea."
Mr. Hankes bowed his grateful acknowledgments.
"I suspect, sir," said she, playfully, "that I have guessed your reason
for this journey."
"My reason, my dear Miss Kellett," said he, in confusion,--"my reason is
simply the pleasure and honor of your company, and the opportunity of
visiting an interesting scene with--with--with--"
"No matter for the compliment; but I began really to imagine that you
wished to learn my secret of bargaining with the people; that you wanted
to witness one of these contracts you have heard so much of. Well, sir,
you shall have it: our sole secret is, we trust each other."
CHAPTER XV. A BRIDLE-PATH
Sybella Kellett was less than just when she said that the country
which lay between the Hermitage and Bantry Bay had few claims to the
picturesque. It may possibly have been that she spoke with reference to
what she fancied might have been Mr. Hankes's judgment of such a scene.
There was, indeed, little to please an English eye,--no rich and waving
woods, no smiling corn-fields, no expanse of swelling lawn or upland of
deep meadow; but there was a wild and grand desolation, a waving surface
fissured with deep clefts opening on the sea, which boomed in many a
cavern far beneath. There were cliffs upright as a wall, hundreds of
feet in height, on whose bare summits some rude remains were still
traceable,--the fragment of a church, or shrine, or some lone cross,
symbol of a faith that dated from centuries back. Heaths of many a
gorgeous hue--purple, golden, and azure--clad a surface ever changing,
and ferns that would have overtopped a tall horseman mingled their
sprayey leaves with the wild myrtle and the arbutus. The moon was at her
full as Sybella, accompanied by Mr. Hankes, and followed by an old and
faithful groom,--a servant of her father's in times past,--took her way
across this solitary tract.
If my reader is astonished that Mr. Hankes should have offered himself
for such an expedition, it is but fair to state that the surprise was
honestly shared in by that same gentleman. Was it that he made the offer
in some moment of rash enthusiasm; had any impulse of wild chivalry
mastered his calmer reason; was it that curious tendency which
occasionally seems to sway Cockney natures to ascend mountains, cross
dangerous ledges, or peep into volcanic craters? I really cannot aver
that any of these was his actual motive, while I have my suspicion that
a softer, a gentler, though a deeper sentiment influenced him on this
occasion. Mr. Hankes--to use a favorite phrase of his own--"had frequent
occasion to remark" Miss Kellett's various qualities of mind and
intelligence; he had noticed in her the most remarkable aptitude
for "business." She wrote and answered letters with a facility quite
marvellous; details, however complicated, became by her treatment simple
and easy; no difficulties seemed to deter her; and she possessed a
gift--one of the rarest and most valuable of all--never to waste a
moment on the impracticable, but to address herself, with a sort of
intuition, at once, to only such means as could be rendered available.
Now, whether it was that Mr. Hankes anticipated a time when Mr. Dunn,
in his greatness, might soar above the meaner cares of a business
life,--when, lifted into the Elysian atmosphere of the nobility, he
would look down with contemptuous apathy at the straggles and cares of
enterprise,--or whether Mr. Hankes, from sources of knowledge available
peculiarly to himself, knew that the fortunes of that great man were
not built upon an eternal foundation, but shared in that sad lot which
threatens all things human with vicissitude; whether stern facts and
sterner figures taught him that all that splendid reputation, all that
boundless influence, all that immense riches, might chance, one day or
other, to be less real, less actual, and less positive than the world
now believed them to be; whether, in a word, Mr. Hankes felt that
Fortune, having smiled so long and so blandly on her favorite, might
not, with that capriciousness so generally ascribed to her, assume
another and very different aspect,--whatever the reason, in short, he
deemed the dawn of his own day was approaching, and that, if only true
to himself, Mr. Hankes was sure to be the man of the "situation,"--the
next great star in the wide hemisphere that stretches from the Stock
Exchange to--the Marshalsea, and includes all from Belgravia to
Boulogne-sur-Mer.
Miss Kellett's abilities, her knowledge, her readiness, her tact, a
certain lightness of hand in the management of affairs that none but a
woman ever possesses, and scarcely one woman in ten thousand combines
with the more male attributes of hard common-sense, pointed her out to
Mr. Hankes as one eminently suited to aid his ambition. Now, men married
for money every day in the week; and why not marry for what secured not
alone money, but fame, station, and influence? Mr. Hankes was a widower;
his own experience of married life had not been fortunate. The late Mrs.
Hankes was a genius, and had the infirmities of that unsocial class; she
despised her husband, quarrelled with him, lampooned him in a book,
and ran off with the editor of a small weekly review that eulogized her
novel. It was supposed she died in Australia,--at least, she never
came back again; and as the first lieutenant gravely confirms the sun's
altitude when he mutters, "Make it noon," so Mr. Hankes, by as simple
a fiat, said, "Make her dead," and none disputed him. At all events, he
was a widower by brevet, and eligible to be gazetted a husband at any
moment.
Miss Kellett possessed many personal attractions, nor was he altogether
insensible to them; but he regarded them, after all, pretty much as
the intended purchaser of an estate might have regarded an ornamental
fish-pond or a flower-garden on the property,--something, in short,
which increased the attraction, but never augmented the value. He was
glad they were there, though they by no means would have decided him to
the purchase. He knew, besides, that the world set a high price on these
things, and he was not sorry to possess what represented value of any
kind. It was always scrip, shares, securities, even, although one could
not well say how, when, or where the dividend was to be paid.
There was another consideration, too, weighed materially with him. The
next best thing, in Mr. Hankes's estimation, to marrying into a good
connection, was to have none at all,--no brothers, no sisters-in-law,
no cousins-german or otherwise, no uncles, aunts, or any good friends of
parental degree. Now, except a brother in the Crimea,--with an excellent
chance of being killed,--Sybella had none belonging to her. In the happy
phrase of advertisements, she had no encumbrances. There was no one to
insist upon this or that settlement; none to stipulate for anything
in her favor; and these were, to his thinking, vast advantages. Out of
these various considerations our reader is now to fashion some of the
reasons which induced Mr. Hankes to undertake an excursion alike foreign
to his taste and uncongenial to his habits; but as a placeman would not
decline the disagreeables of a sea-voyage as the preliminary to reaching
the colony he was to govern, so this gentleman consoled himself by
thinking that it was the sole penalty attached to a very remunerative
ambition.
If Sybella was not without some astonishment at his proposal to
accompany her, she never gave herself the slightest trouble to explain
the motive. She acceded to his wish from natural courtesy and the desire
to oblige, and that was all. He had been uniformly polite and civil
in all their intercourse; beyond that, he was not a person whose
companionship she would have sought or cared for, and so they rode
along, chatting indifferently of whatever came uppermost,--the scene,
the road, the season, the condition of the few people who formed the
inhabitants of this wild region, and how their condition might possibly
be affected by the great changes then in progress near them.
Guarded and cautious as he was in all he said, Mr. Hankes could not
entirely conceal how completely he separated, in his own mind, the
success of the great scheme and the advantage that might accrue to the
people; nor was she slow to detect this reservation. She took too true
and just a view of her companion's temper and tone to approach this
theme with the scruples that agitated herself, but at once said,--
"Let us suppose this scheme to be as prosperous as its best friends
can wish it, Mr. Hankes; that you all--I mean you great folk, who are
directors, chairmen, secretaries, and so forth--become as rich and
powerful as you desire, see your shares daily increasing in value, your
speculations more and more lucrative, what becomes of the people--the
poor man--all this while?"
"Why, of course he participates in all these successes; he grows rich
too; he sells what he has to sell at a better market, obtains higher
wages for his labor, and shares all our prosperity."
"Granted. But who is to teach him the best use of this newly acquired
prosperity? You, and others like you, have your tastes already formed;
the channels are already made in which your affluence is to run: not so
with him; abundance may--nay, it will--suggest waste, which will beget
worse. Who are to be his guides,--who his examples?"
"Oh, as to that, his increase of fortune will suggest its own
appropriate increase of wants. He will be elevated by the requirements
of his own advancing condition, and even if he were not, it is not
exactly any affair of ours; we do our part when we afford him the means
of a higher civilization."
"I don't think so. I suspect that not alone do you neglect a duty, but
that you inflict a wrong. But come, I will take another alternative; I
will suggest--what some are already predicting--that the project will
not prove a success."
"Who says that?" cried Hankes, hastily, and in his haste forgetting his
habitual caution of manner.
"Many have said it. Some of those whose opinions I am accustomed
to place trust in, have told myself that the speculation is too
vast,--disproportioned to the country, undertaken on a scale which
nothing short of imperial resources could warrant--"
"But surely you do not credit such forebodings?" broke he in.
"It is of little consequence how far I credit them. I am as nothing
in the event. I only would ask, What if all were to fail?--what if ruin
were to fall upon the whole undertaking, what is to become of all those
who have invested their entire fortunes in the scheme? The great and
affluent have many ventures,--they trust not their wealth to one
argosy; but how will it be with those who have embarked their all in one
vessel?"
Mr. Hankes paused, as if to reflect over his reply, and she continued:
"It is a question I have already dared to address to Mr. Dunn himself. I
wrote to him twice on the subject. The first time I asked what guarantee
could be given to small shareholders,--those, for instance, who had
involved their whole wealth in the enterprise. He gave me no answer.
To my second application came the dry rejoinder that I had possibly
forgotten in whose service I was retained; that I drew my resources from
the Earl of Glengariff, and not from the peasantry, whose advocate I had
constituted myself."
"Well?" cried Hankes, curious to hear what turn the correspondence took.
"Well," said she, smiling gently, "I wrote again. I said it was true I
had forgotten the fact of which he reminded me, but I pleaded in excuse
that neither the Earl nor her Ladyship had refreshed my memory on the
circumstance by any replies to eight, or, I believe, nine letters I sent
them. I mentioned, too, that though I could endure the slight of this
neglect for myself, I could not put up with it for the sake of those
whose interest I watched over. Hear me out," said she, perceiving that
he was about to interrupt. "It had become known in Glengariff that all
the little fortune I was possessed of--the few hundred pounds Mr. Dunn
had rescued for me out of the wreck of our property--was invested in
this scheme. Mr. Dunn counselled this employment of the money, and I
consented to it. Now, this trustfulness on my part induced many others
to imitate what they deemed my example."
"And you really did make this investment?" said Hankes, whose eagerness
could not brook longer delay.
"Yes," said she, with a quiet smile, "though, evidently, had I consulted
Mr. Hankes, he would never have counselled the step." After a moment,
she resumed, "I have half a mind to tell you how it happened."
"I pray you let me hear it."
"Well, it was in this way: Shortly after that affair of the Ossory
Bank,--the run for gold, I mean,--I received a few hurried lines from
Mr. Dunn, urging me to greater exertion on the score of the Glengariff
scheme, and calling upon me to answer certain newspaper insinuations
against its solvency, and so forth. Before replying to these attacks,
I was, of course, bound to read them; and, shall I confess it, such was
the singular force of the arguments they employed, so reasonable did
their inferences appear, and so terrible the consequences should the
plan prove a failure, that I for the first time perceived that it was
by no means impossible the vast superstructure we were raising might be
actually on the brink of a volcano. I did not like exactly to tell Mr.
Dunn these misgivings; in fact, though I attempted two or three letters
to that effect, I could not, without great risk of offending, convey my
meaning, and so I reflected and pondered over the matter several days,
working my brain to find some extrication from the difficulty. At last,
I bethought me of this: Mr. Dunn was my guardian; by his efforts was the
small fragment of property that fell to me rescued and saved. What if I
were to request him to invest the whole of it in this scheme? Were its
solvency but certain, where could the employment of the money be safer
or more profitable? If he consented, I might fairly suppose my fears
were vain, and my misgivings unfounded. If, however, he showed any
reluctance, even backwardness, to the project, the very phrase he might
employ to dissuade me would have its especial significance, and I could
at once have something to reason upon. Well, I wrote to him, and he
answered by the next post: 'I fully coincide with your suggestion, and,
acting on it, you are now the possessor of fifty-four shares in the
allotment. As the moment for buying in is favorable, it is a thousand
pities you could not make an equally profitable investment for your
brother, whose twelve hundred pounds is yielding the very inglorious
interest of the bank.'"
"And so you took the shares?" said Hankes, sighing; then added, "But let
me see,--at what rate did you buy?"
"I am ashamed to confess, I forget; but I know the shares were high?"
"After the Ossory run," muttered he,--"that was about September. Shares
were then something like one hundred and twenty-seven and a quarter;
higher afterwards; higher the whole month of November; shaky towards
the end of the year; very shaky, indeed, in January. No, no," said he to
himself, "Dunn ought not to have done it."
"I perceive," said she, half smiling, "Mr. Hankes opines that the money
had been better in the bank."
"After all," continued he, not heeding her remark, "Dunn could n't do
anything else. You own, yourself, that if he had attempted to dissuade
you, you would immediately have taken alarm; you 'd have said, 'This
is all a sham. All these people will find themselves "let in" some fine
morning;' and as Dunn could very readily make good your few hundred
pounds, why, he was perfectly justified in the advice he gave."
"Not when his counsel had the effect of influencing mine," said she,
quickly; "not when it served to make me a perfidious example to others.
No, no, Mr. Hankes; if this scheme be not an honest and an upright one,
I accept no partnership in its details."
"I am only putting a case, remember," said Hankes, hurriedly,--"a
possible, but most improbable case. I am supposing that a scheme with
the finest prospectus, the best list of directors, the most respectable
referees in the empire, to be--what shall I say?--to be sickly,--yes,
sickly,--in want of a little tonic treatment, generous diet, and so
forth."
"You 'll have to follow me here, Mr. Hankes," broke in Sybella; "the
pathway round this cliff only admits one at a time. Keep close to the
rock, and if your head be not steady, don't look down."
"Good heavens! we are not going round that precipice!" cried Hankes, in
a voice of the wildest terror.
"My servant will lead your horse, if you prefer it," said she, without
answering his question; "and mind your footing, for the moss is often
slippery with the spray."
Sybella made a signal with her whip to the groom, who was now close
behind, and then, without awaiting for more, moved on. Hankes watched
her as she descended the little slope to the base of a large rock,
around which the path wound itself on the very verge of an immense
precipice. Even from where he now stood the sea could be seen surging
and booming hundreds of feet below; and although the night was calm and
still, the ever-restless waves beat heavily against the rocks, and sent
masses of froth and foam high into the air. He saw her till she turned
the angle of the path, and then she was lost to his view.
"I don't think I have head for it. I 'm not used to this kind of thing,"
said Hankes, in a voice of helpless despondency to the old groom, who
now stood awaiting him to dismount "Is there much danger? Is it as bad
as it looks?"
"'Tis worse when you get round the rock there," said the groom, "for
it's always going down you are, steeper than the roof of a house, with a
shingle footing, and sloping outwards."
"I'll not go a step; I 'll not venture," broke in Hankes.
"Indeed, I wouldn't advise your honor," said the man, in a tone too
sincere to be deemed sarcastic.
"I know my head could n't bear it," said he, with the imploring accents
of one who entreated a contradiction. But the old groom, too fully
convinced of the sentiment to utter a word against it, was now only
thinking of following his mistress.
[Illustration: 191]
"Wait a moment," cried Hankes, with an immense effort. "If I were
once across this"--he was going to add an epithet, but restrained
himself--"this place, is there nothing more of the same kind
afterwards?"
"Is n't there, faith!" cried the man. "Isn't there the Clunk, where the
beast has to step over gullies five-and-thirty or forty feet deep? Isn't
there Tim's Island, a little spot where you must turn your horse round
with the sea four hundred feet under you? Is n't there the Devil's
Nose--"
"There, there, you need n't go on, my good fellow; I 'll turn back."
"Look where she is now," said the man, pointing with his whip to a rocky
ledge hundreds of feet down, along which a figure on horseback might be
seen creeping slowly along. "'Tis there, where she's stealing along now,
you need the good head and the quick hand. May I never!" exclaimed he,
in terror, "if them isn't goats that's coming up to meet her! Merciful
Joseph! what'll she do? There, they are under the horse's legs, forcing
their way through! Look how the devils are rushing all round and about
her! If the beast moves an inch--" A wild cry broke from the old man
here, for a fragment of rock, displaced by the rushing herd, had just
come thundering down the cliff, and splashed into the sea beneath. "The
heavens be praised! she's safe," muttered he, piously crossing himself;
and then, without a word more, and as if angry at his own delay, he
pressed his horse forward to follow her.
It was in vain Hankes cried to him to wait,--to stop for only an
instant,--that he, too, was ready to go,--not to leave him and desert
him there,--that he knew not where to turn him, nor could ever retrace
his way,--already the man was lost to view and hearing, and all the
vain entreaties were uttered to the winds. As for Sybella, her perilous
pathway gave her quite enough to do not to bestow a thought upon her
companion; nor, indeed, had she much recollection of him till the old
groom overtook her on the sandy beach, and recounted to her, not without
a certain touch of humor, Mr. Hankes's terror and despair.
"It was cruel to leave him, Ned," said she, trying to repress a smile
at the old man's narrative. "I think you must go back, and leave me to
pursue my way alone."
"Sorra one o' me will go back to the likes of him. 'T is for your own
self, and ne'er another, I'd be riskin' my neck in the same spot," said
he, resolutely.
"But what's to become of him, Ned? He knows nothing of the country; he
'll not find his way back to Glengariff."
"Let him alone; devil a harm he 'll come to. 'T is chaps like that never
comes to mischief. He 'll wander about there till day breaks, and
maybe find his way to Duffs Mill, or, at all events, the boy with the
letter-bag from Caherclough is sure to see him."
Even had this last assurance failed to satisfy Sybella, it was so
utterly hopeless a task to overrule old Ned's resolve that she said
no more, but rode on in silence. Not so Ned; the theme afforded him an
opportunity for reflecting on English character and habits which was not
to be lost.
"I 'd like to see your brother John turn back and leave a young lady
that way," said he, recurring to the youth whose earliest years he had
watched over.
No matter how impatiently, even angrily, Bella replied to the old man's
bigoted preference of his countrymen, Ned persisted in deploring the
unhappy accident by which fate had subjected the finer and more gifted
race to the control and dominion of an inferior people. To withdraw
him effectually from a subject which to an Irish peasant has special
attraction, she began to tell him of the war in the East and of
her brother Jack, the old man listening with eager delight to the
achievements of one he had carried about in his arms as a child. Her
mind filled with the wondrous stories of private letters,--the intrepid
daring of this one, the noble chivalry of that,--she soon succeeded in
winning all his attention. It was singular, however, that of all the
traits she recorded, none made such a powerful appeal to the old man's
heart as the generous self-devotion of those women who, leaving home,
friends, country, and all, gave themselves up to the care of the sick
and wounded. He never wearied of hearing how they braved death in its
most appalling shape amidst the pestilential airs of the hospital, in
the midst of such horrors as no pen can picture, taking on them the most
painful duties, accepting fatigue, exhaustion, and peril as the common
incidents of life, braving scenes of agony such as in very recital
sickened the heart, descending to all that was menial in their
solicitude for some poor sufferer, and all this with a benevolence and
a kindness that made them seem less human beings than ministering angels
from heaven.
"Oh, Holy Joseph! is n't it yourself ought to be there?" cried the old
man, enthusiastically. "Was there ever your like to give hope to a sick
heart? Who ever could equal you to cheer up the sinking spirit, and even
make misery bearable? Miss Bella, darling, did you never think of going
out?"
"Ay, Ned, a hundred times," said she, sighing drearily. "I often, too,
said to myself, There's not one of these ladies--for they are ladies
born and bred--who has n't a mother, father, sisters, and brothers dear
to her, and to whom she is herself dear. She leaves a home where she is
loved, and where her vacant place is daily looked at with sorrow; and
yet here am I, who have none to care for, none to miss me, who would
carry over the sea with me no sorrows from those I was leaving, for I am
friendless,--surely I am well fitted for such a task--"
"Well," said he, eagerly, as she seemed to hesitate, "well, and why--"
"It was not fear held me back," resumed she. "It was not that I shrank
from the sights and sounds of agony that must have been more terrible
than any death; it was simply a hope--a wish, perhaps, more than a
hope--that I might be doing service to those at home here, who, if
I were to leave them, would not have one on their side. Perhaps I
overrated what I did, or could do; perhaps I deemed my help of more
value than it really was; but every day seemed to show me that the
people needed some one to counsel and to guide them,--to show them
where their true interests lay, and by what little sacrifices they could
oftentimes secure a future benefit."
"That's thrue, every word of it. Your name is in every cabin, with a
blessing tacked to it. There's not a child does n't say a prayer for you
before he goes to sleep; and there's many a grown man never thought of
praying at all till he axed a blessing for yourself!"
"With that, too," resumed she, "was coupled power, for my Lord left much
to my management. I was able to help the deserving, to assist the
honest and industrious; now I aided this one to emigrate, now I could
contribute a little assistance of capital. In fact, Ned, I felt they
wanted me, and I knew I liked them. There was one good reason for not
going away. Then there were other reasons," said she, falteringly. "It
is not a good example to give to others to leave, no matter how humble,
the spot where we have a duty, to seek out a higher destiny. I speak as
a woman."
"And is it thrue, Miss Bella, that it's Mister Dunn has it all here
under his own hand,--that the Lord owns nothing only what Dunn allows
him, and that the whole place down to Kenmare River is Dunn's?"
"It is quite true, Ned, that the control and direction of all the great
works here are with Mr. Dunn. All the quarries and mines, the roads,
harbors, quays, 'bridges, docks, houses, are all in his hands."
"Blessed hour! and where does he get the money to do it all?" cried he,
in amazement.
Now, natural as was the question, and easy of reply as it seemed,
Sybella heard it with something almost like a shock. Had the thought not
occurred to her hundreds of times? And, if so, how had she answered
it? Of course there could be no difficulty in the reply; of course such
immense speculations, such gigantic projects as Mr. Dunn engaged in,
supplied wealth to any amount. But equally true was it, that they
demanded great means; they were costly achievements,--these great lines
of railroad, these vast harbors. Nor were they always successful; Mr.
Hankes himself had dropped hints about certain "mistakes" that were very
significant. The splendid word "Credit" would explain it all, doubtless,
but how interpret credit to the mind of the poor peasant? She tried to
illustrate it by the lock of a canal, in which the water is momentarily
utilized for a particular purpose, and then restored, unimpaired, to the
general circulation; but Ned unhappily damaged the imagery by remarking,
"But what's to be done if there's no water?" Fortunately for her logic,
the road became once more only wide enough for one to proceed at a time,
and Sybella was again left to her own musings.
Scarcely conscious of the perilous path by which she advanced, she
continued to meditate over the old man's words, and wonder within
herself how it was that he, the poor, unlettered peasant, should have
conceived that high notion of what her mission ought to be,--when and
how her energies should be employed. She had been schooling herself for
years to feel that true heroism consisted in devoting oneself to some
humble, unobtrusive career, whose best rewards were the good done to
others, where self-denial was a daily lesson, and humility a daily
creed; but, do what she could, there was within her heart the embers of
the fire that burned there in childhood. The first article of that
faith taught her that without danger there is no greatness,--that in
the hazardous conflicts where life is ventured, high qualities only are
developed. What but such noble excitement could make heroes of those
men, many of whom, without such stimulus, had dropped down the stream of
life unnoticed and undistinguished? "And shall I," cried she, aloud,
"go on forever thus, living the small life of petty cares and interests,
confronting no dangers beyond a dark December day, encountering no other
hazards than the flippant rebuke of my employer?" "There's the yawl,
Miss Bella; she's tacking about, waiting for us," said Ned, as he
pointed to a small sailboat like a speck in the blue sea beneath; and at
the same instant a little rag of scarlet bunting was run up to the peak,
to show that the travellers had been seen from the water.
CHAPTER XVI. THE DISCOVERY
It is possible that my reader might not unwillingly accompany Sybella
as she stepped into the little boat, and, tripping lightly over the
"thwarts," seated herself in the stern-sheets. The day was bright and
breezy, the sea scarcely ruffled, for the wind was off the land; the
craft, although but a fishing-boat, was sharp and clean built, the
canvas sat well on her, and, last of all, she who held the tiller was a
very pretty girl, whose cheek, flushed with exercise, and loosely
waving hair, gave to her beauty the heightened expression of which care
occasionally robbed it. The broad bay, with its mountain background
and its wide sea-reach, studded with tall three-masters, was a fine and
glorious object; and as the light boat heeled over to the breeze, and
the white foam came rustling over the prow, Sybella swept her fair
hand through the water, and bathed her brow with the action of one who
dismissed all painful thought, and gave herself to the full enjoyment of
the hour. Yes, my dear reader, the companionship of such a girl on
such a day, in such a scene, was worth having; and so even those rude
fishermen thought it, as, stretched at full length on the shingle
ballast, they gazed half bashfully at her, and then exchanged more
meaning looks with each other as she talked with them.
[Illustration: 198]
Just possible it is, too, that some curiosity may exist as to what
became of Mr. Hankes. Did that great projector of industrial enterprise
succeed in retracing his steps with safety? Did he fall in with some one
able to guide him back to Glengariff? Did he regain the Hermitage after
fatigue and peril, and much self-reproach for an undertaking so foreign
to his ways and habits; and did he vow to his own heart that this was to
be the last of such excursions on his part? Had he his misgivings, too,
that his conduct had not been perfectly heroic; and did he experience a
sense of shame in retiring before a peril braved by a young and delicate
girl? Admitted to a certain share of that gentleman's confidence, we are
obliged to declare that his chief sorrows were occasioned by the loss
of time, the amount of inconvenience, and the degree of fatigue the
expedition had caused him. It was not till late in the afternoon of the
day that he chanced upon a fisherman on his way to Bantry to sell his
fish. The poor peasant could not speak nor understand English, and after
a vain attempt at explanation on either side, the colloquy ended by
Hankes joining company with the man, and proceeding along with him,
whither he knew not.
If we have not traced the steps of Sybella's wanderings, we are little
disposed to linger along with those of Mr. Hankes, though, if his own
account were to be accepted, his journey was a succession of adventures
and escapes. Enough if we say that he at last abandoned his horse amid
the fissured cliffs of the coast, and, as best he might, clambered over
rock and precipice, through tall mazes of wet fern and deep moss, along
shingly shores and sandy beaches, till he reached the little inn at
Bantry, the weariest and most worn-out of men, his clothes in rags,
his shoes in tatters, and he himself scarcely conscious, and utterly
indifferent as to what became of him.
A night's sound sleep and a good breakfast were already contributing
much to efface the memory of past sufferings, when Sybella Kellett
entered his room. She had been over to the cottage, had visited the
whole locality, transacted all the business she had come for, and only
diverged from her homeward route on hearing that Mr. Hankes had just
arrived at Bantry. Rather apologizing for having left him than
accusing him of deserting her, she rapidly proceeded to sketch out her
own journey. She did not dwell upon any incidents of the way,--had they
been really new or strange she would not have recalled them,--she only
adverted to what had constituted the object of her coming,--the purchase
of the small townland which she had completed.
"It is a dear old place," said she, "of a fashion one so rarely sees in
Ireland, the house being built after that taste known as Elizabethan,
and by tradition said to have once been inhabited by the poet Spenser.
It is very small, and so hidden by a dense beech-wood, that you might
pass within fifty yards of the door and never see it. This rude drawing
may give you some idea of it."
"And does the sea come up so close as this?" asked Hankes, eagerly.
"The little fishing-boat ran into the cove you see there; her mainsail
dropped over the new-mown hay."
"Why, it 's the very thing Lord Lockewood is looking for, He is
positively wild about a spot in some remote out-of-the-way region; and
then, what you tell me of its being a poet's house will complete the
charm. You said Shakspeare--"
"No, Spenser, the poet of the 'Farie Queene,'" broke she in, with a
smile.
"It's all the same; he 'll give it a fanciful name, and the association
with its once owner will afford him unceasing amusement."
"I hope he is not destined to enjoy the pleasure you describe."
"No?--why not, pray?"
"I hope and trust that the place may not pass into his hands; in a word,
I intend to ask Mr. Dunn to allow me to be the purchaser. I find that
the sum is almost exactly the amount I have invested in the Allotment
scheme,--these same shares we spoke of,--and I mean to beg as a great
favor,--a very great favor,--to be permitted to make this exchange. I
want no land,--nothing but the little plot around the cottage."
"The cottage formerly inhabited by the poet Spenser, built in the purest
Elizabethan style, and situated in a glen,--you said a glen, I think,
Miss Kellett?" said Hankes,--"in a glen, whose wild enclosure, bosomed
amongst deep woods, and washed by the Atlantic--"
"Are you devising an advertisement, sir?"
"The very thing I was doing, Miss Kellett. I was just sketching out a
rough outline of a short paragraph for the 'Post.'"
"But remember, sir, I want to possess this spot. I wish to be its
owner--"
"To dispose of, of course, hereafter,--to make a clear three, four, or
five thousand by the bargain, eh?"
"Nothing of the kind, Mr. Hankes. I mean to acquire enough--some one
day or other--to go back and dwell there. I desire to have what I shall
always, to myself at least, call mine--my home. It will be as a goal to
win, the time I can come back and live there. It will be a resting-place
for poor Jack when he returns to England."
Mr. Hankes paused. It was the first time Miss Kellett had referred to
her own fortunes in such a way as permitted him to take advantage of the
circumstance, and he deliberated with himself whether he ought not to
profit by the accident. How would she receive a word of advice from him?
Would it be well taken? Might it possibly lead to something more? Would
she be disposed to lean on his counsels; and, if so, what then? Ay, Mr.
Hankes, it was the "what then?" was the puzzle. It was true his late
conduct presented but a sorry emblem of that life-long fidelity he
thought of pledging; but if she were the clear-sighted, calm-reasoning
intelligence he believed, she would lay little stress upon what, after
all, was a mere trait of a man's temperament. Very rapidly, indeed, did
these reflections pass through his mind; and then he stole a glance at
her as she sat quietly sipping her tea, looking a very ideal of calm
tranquillity. "This cottage," thought he, "has evidently taken a hold
of her fancy. Let me see if I cannot turn the theme to my purpose."
And with this intention he again brought her back to speak of the spot,
which she did with all the eagerness of true interest.
"As to the association with the gifted spirit of song," said Mr. Hankes,
soaring proudly into the style he loved, "I conclude that to be somewhat
doubtful of proof, eh?"
"Not at all, sir. Spenser lived at a place called Kilcoleman, from
which he removed for two or three years, and returned. It was in this
interval he inhabited the cottage. Curiously enough, some manuscript
in his writing--part of a correspondence with the Lord-Deputy--was
discovered yesterday when I was there. It was contained in a small oak
casket with a variety of other papers, some in quaint French, some
in Latin. The box was built in so as to form a portion of a curiously
carved chimney-piece, and chance alone led to its discovery."
"I hope you secured the documents?" cried Hankes, eagerly.
"Yes, sir; here they are, box and all. The Rector advised me to carry
them away for security' sake." And so saying, she laid upon the table a
massively bound and strong-built box, of about a foot in length.
It was with no inexperienced hand that Mr. Hankes proceeded to
investigate the contents. His well-practised eye rapidly caught the
meaning of each paper as he lifted it up, and he continued to mutter to
himself his comments upon them. "This document is an ancient grant of
the lands of Cloughrennin to the monks of the Abbey of Castlerosse, and
bears date 1104. It speaks of certain rights reserved to the Baron Hugh
Pritchard Conway. Conway--Conway," mumbled he, twice or thrice; "that's
the very name I tried and could not remember yesterday, Miss Kellett.
You asked me about a certain soldier whose daring capture of a Russian
officer was going the round of the papers. The young fellow had but one
arm too; now I remember, his name was Conway."
"Charles Conway! Was it Charles Conway?" cried she, eagerly; "but it
could be no other,--he had lost his right arm."
"I 'm not sure which, but he had only one, and he was called an orderly
on the staff of the Piedmontese General."
"Oh, the noble fellow! I could have sworn he would distinguish himself.
Tell me it all again, sir; where did it happen, and how, and when?"
Mr. Hankes's memory was now to be submitted to a very searching test,
and he was called on to furnish details which might have puzzled "Our
own Correspondent." Had Charles Conway been rewarded for his gallantry?
What notice had his bravery elicited? Was he promoted, and to what
rank? Had he been decorated, and with what order? Were his wounds, as
reported, only trifling? Where was he now?--was he in hospital or on
service? She grew impatient at how little he knew,--how little the
incident seemed to have impressed him. "Was it possible," she asked,
"that heroism like this was so rife that a meagre paragraph was deemed
enough to record it,--a paragraph, too, that forgot to state what had
become of its hero?"
"Why, my dear Miss Kellett," interposed he, at length, "one reads a
dozen such achievements every week."
"I deny it, sir," cried she, angrily. "Our soldiers are the bravest in
the world; they possess a courage that asks no aid from the promptings
of self-interest, nor the urgings of vanity; they are very lions in
combat; but it needs the chivalrous ardor of the gentleman, the man
of blood and lineage to conceive a feat like this. It was only a noble
patriotism could suggest the thought of such an achievement."
"I must say," said Hankes, in confusion, "the young fellow acquitted
himself admirably; but I would also beg to observe that there is nothing
in the newspaper to lead to the conclusion you are disposed to draw.
There's not a word of his being a gentleman."
"But I know it, sir,--the fact is known to me. Charles Conway is a man
of family; he was once a man of fortune: he had served as an officer
in a Lancer regiment; he had been extravagant, wild, wasteful, if you
will."
"Why, it can't be the Smasher you're talking of?--the great swell that
used to drive the four chestnuts in the Park, and made the wager he 'd
go in at one window of Stagg and Mantle's and out at t'other?"
"I don't care to hear of such follies, sir, when there are better things
to be remembered. Besides, he is my brother's dearest friend, and I will
not hear him spoken of but with respect. Take my word for it, sir, I
am but asking what you had done, without a hint, were he only present."
"I believe you,--by Jove, I believe you!" cried Hankes, with an honesty
in the tone of his voice that actually made her smile. "And so this is
Conway the Smasher!"
"Pray, Mr. Hankes, recall him by some other association. It is only fair
to remember that he has given us the fitting occasion."
"Ay, very true,--what you say is perfectly just; and, as you say, he
is your brother's friend. Who would have thought it!--who would have
thought it!".
Without puzzling ourselves to inquire what it was that thus excited Mr.
Hankes's astonishment, let us observe that gentleman, as he turns over,
one by one, the papers in the box, muttering his comments meanwhile to
himself: "Old title-deeds,--very old indeed,--all the ancient contracts
are recited. Sir Gwellem Conway must have been a man of mark and note in
those days. Here we find him holding 'in capite' from the king, twelve
thousand acres, with the condition that he builds a strong castle and
a 'bawn.' And these are, apparently, Sir Gwellem's own letters. Ah!
and here we have him or his descendant called Baron of Ackroyd and
Bedgellert, and claimant to the title of Lackington, in which he seems
successful. This is the writ of summons calling him to the Lords as
Viscount Lackington. Very curious and important these papers are,--more
curious, perhaps, than important,--for in all likelihood there have been
at least half a dozen confiscations of these lands since this time."
Mr. Hankes's observations were not well attended to, for Sybella was
already deep in the perusal of a curious old letter from a certain Dame
Marian Conway to her brother, then Sheriff of Cardigan, in which some
very strange traits of Irish chieftain life were detailed.
"I have an antiquarian friend who'd set great store by these old
documents, Miss Kellett," said Hankes, with a sort of easy indifference.
"They have no value save for such collectors; they serve to throw a
passing light over a dark period of history, and perhaps explain a
bygone custom or an obsolete usage. What do you mean to do with them?"
"Keep them. If I succeed in my plans about the cottage, these letters of
Spenser to Sir Lawrence Esmond are in themselves a title. Of course, if
I fail in my request, I mean to give them to Mr. Dunn."
"These were Welsh settlers, it would seem," cried Hankes, still bending
over the papers. "They came originally from Abergedley."
"Abergedley!" repeated Sybella, three or four times over. "How strange!"
"What is strange, Miss Kellett?" asked Hankes, whose curiosity was
eagerly excited by the expression of her features.
Instead of reply, however, she had taken a small notebook from her
pocket, and sat with her eyes fixed upon a few words written in her own
hand: "The Conways of Abergedley--of what family--if settled at any time
in Ireland, and where?" These few words, and the day of the year when
they were written, recalled to her mind a conversation she had once held
with Terry Driscoll.
"What is puzzling you, Miss Kellett?" broke in Hankes; "I wish I could
be of any assistance to its unravelment."
"I am thinking of 'long ago;' something that occurred years back. Didn't
you mention," asked she, suddenly, "that Mr. Driscoll had been the
former proprietor of thia cottage?"
"Yes, in so far as having paid part of the purchase-money. Does his name
recall anything to interest you, Miss Kellett?"
If she heard she did not heed his question, but sat deep sunk in her own
musings.
If there was any mood of the human mind that had an especial fascination
for Mr. Hankes, it was that frame of thought which indicated the
possession of some mysterious subject,--some deep and secret theme which
the possessor retained for himself alone,--a measure of which none were
to know the amount, to which none were to have the key. It would be
ignoble to call this passion curiosity, for, in reality, it was less
exercised by any desire to fathom the mystery than it was prompted by an
intense jealousy of him who thus held in his own hands the solution of
some portentous difficulty. To know on what schemes other men were bent,
what hopes and fears filled them, by what subtle trains of reasoning
they came to this conclusion or to that, were the daily exercises of
his intelligence. He was eternally, as the phrase is, putting things
together, comparing events, confronting this circumstance with that, and
drawing inferences from every chance and accident of life. Now, it was
clear to him Miss Kellett had a secret; or, at least, had the clew
to one. Driscoll was "in it," and this cottage was "in it," and, not
impossibly too, some of these Conway s were "in it." There was something
in that note-book; how was he to obtain sight of it? The vaguest
line---a word--would be enough for him. Mr. Hankes remembered how he
had once committed himself and his health to the care of an unskilful
physician simply because the man knew a fact which he wanted, and
did worm out of him during his attendance. He had, at another time,
undertaken a short voyage in a most unsafe craft, with a drunken
captain, because the stewardess was possessed of a secret of which, even
in his sea-sickness, he obtained the key. Over and over again had he
assumed modes of life he detested, dissipation the most distasteful to
him, to gain the confidence of men that were only assailable in these
modes; and now he bethought him that if he only had a glimmering of his
present suspicion, the precipice and the narrow path and the booming sea
below had all been braved, and he would have followed her unflinchingly
through every peril with this goal before him. Was it too late to
reinstate himself in her esteem? He thought not; indeed, she did not
seem to retain any memory of his defection. At all events, there was
little semblance of it having influenced her in her manner towards him.
"We shall meet at Glengariff, Mr. Hankes," said Sybella, rising, and
replacing the papers in the box. "I mean to return by the coast road,
and will not ask you to accompany me."
"It is precisely what I was about to beg as a favor. I was poorly
yesterday,--a nervous headache, an affection I am subject to; in short,
I felt unequal to any exertion, or even excitement."
"Pray let me counsel you to spare yourself a journey of much fatigue
with little to reward it. Frequency and long habit have deprived the
mountain tract of all terror for me, but I own that to a stranger it
is not without peril. The spot where we parted yesterday is the least
dangerous of the difficulties, and so I would say be advised, and keep
to the high-road."
Now, there was not the slightest trace of sarcasm in what she said; it
was uttered in all sincerity and good faith, and yet Mr. Hankes could
not help suspecting a covert mockery throughout.
"I 'm determined she shall see I am a man of courage," muttered he to
himself; and then added, aloud, "You must permit me to disobey you, Miss
Kellett. I am resolved to bear you company."
There was a dash of decision in his tone that made Sybella turn to
look at him, and, to her astonishment, she saw a degree of purpose and
determination in his face very unlike its former expression. If she did
not possess the craft and subtlety which long years had polished to a
high perfection in him, she had that far finer and more delicate tact by
which a woman's nature reads man's coarser temperament. She watched
his eye, too, and saw how it rested on the oaken box, and, even while
awaiting her answer, never turned from that object.
"Yes," said she to herself, "there is a game to be played out between
us, and yonder is the stake."
Did Mr. Hankes divine what was passing in her mind? I know not. All he
said was,--
"May I order the horses, Miss Kellett?"
"Yes, I am ready."
"And this box, what is to be done with it? Best to leave it here in the
possession of the innkeeper. I suppose it will be safe?" asked he, half
timidly.
"Perfectly safe; it would be inconvenient to carry with us. Will you
kindly tell the landlord to come here?"
No sooner had Mr. Hankes left the room on his errand, than Sybella
unlocked the box, and taking out the three papers in which the name of
Conway appeared, relocked it. The papers she as quickly consigned to
a small bag, which, as a sort of sabretasche, formed part of her
riding-costume.
Mr. Hankes was somewhat longer on his mission than appeared necessary,
and when he did return there was an air of some bustle and confusion
about him, while between him and the landlord an amount of intimacy had
grown up--a sort of confidence was established--that Bella's keen glance
rapidly read.
"An old-fashioned lock, and doubtless worth nothing, Miss Kellett,"
said Hankes, as with a contemptuous smile he regarded the curiously
carved ornament of the keyhole. "You have the key, I think?"
"Yes; it required some ingenuity to withdraw it from where, I suppose,
it has been rusting many a year."
"It strikes me I might as well put a band over the lock and affix my
seal. It will convey the notion of something very precious inside,"
added he, laughing, "and our friend here, Mr. Rorke, will feel an
increased importance in the guardianship of such a treasure."
"I 'll guard it like goold, sir; that you may depend on," chimed in the
landlord.
Why was it that, as Bella's quick glance was bent upon him, he turned so
hastily away, as if to avoid the scrutiny?
Do not imagine, valued reader, that while this young girl scanned the
two faces before her, and tried to discover what secret understanding
subsisted between these two men,--strangers but an hour ago,--that she
herself was calm and self-possessed. Far from it; as little was she
self-acquitted. It was under the influence of a sudden suspicion
flashing across her mind--whence or how she knew not--that some
treachery was being planned, that she withdrew these documents from the
box. The expression of Hankes's look, as it rested on the casket, was
full of significance. It meant much, but of what nature she could not
read. The sudden way he had questioned her about Driscoll imparted a
link of connection between that man and the contents of the box, or part
of them; and what part could that be except what concerned the name of
Conway? If these were her impulses, they were more easily carried
out than forgiven, and in her secret heart she was ashamed of her own
distrust, and of what it led her to do.
"It would be a curious question at law," said Hankes, as he affixed the
third and last seal,--"a very curious question, who owns that box.
Not that its contents would pay for the litigation," added he, with
a mocking laugh; "but the property being sold this morning, with an
unsettled claim of Driscoll's over it, and the purchaser being still
undeclared,--for I suppose you bought it in for the Earl, or for Mr.
Dunn, perhaps--"
"No, sir, in my own name, and for myself, waiting Mr. Dunn's good
pleasure to confirm the sale in the way I have told you."
"Indeed!" exclaimed he, looking with an unfeigned admiration at a young
girl capable of such rapid and decisive action, "so that you really may
consider yourself its owner."
"I do consider myself its owner," was her calm reply.
"Then pray excuse my officiousness in this sealing up. I hope you will
pardon my indiscreet zeal."
She smiled without answering, and the blood mounted to Mr. Hankes's face
and forehead till they were crimson. He, too, felt that there was a game
between them, and was beginning to distrust his "hand."
"Are we to be travelling-companions, Mr. Hankes?" asked she. And though
nothing was said in actual words, there was that in the voice and manner
of the speaker that made the question run thus: "Are we, after what we
have just seen of each other, to journey together?"
"Well, if you really wish me to confess the truth, Miss Kellett, I must
own I am rather afraid of my head along these mountain paths,--a sort of
faintness, a rushing of blood to the brain, and a confusion; in short,
Nature never meant me for a chamois-hunter, and I should bring no credit
on your training of me."
"Your resolve is all the wiser, sir, and so to our next meeting." She
waved him a half-familiar, half-cold farewell, and left the room.
Mr. Hankes saw her leave the town, and he loitered about the street
till he could mark two mounted figures ascending the mountain. He then
ordered a chaise to the door with all speed.
"Will you take it now, sir, or send for it, as you said at first?" asked
the innkeeper, as he stood with the oak box in his hands.
"Keep it till I write,--keep it till you hear from me; or, no, put it in
the chaise,--that's better."
CHAPTER XVII. THE DOUBLE BLUNDER
Short as had been Sybella's absence from the Hermitage, a vast number of
letters had arrived for her in the mean while. The prospect of a peace,
so confidently entertained at one moment, was now rudely destroyed by
the abrupt termination of the Vienna conferences, and the result was a
panic in the money-market.
The panic of an army rushing madly on to victory; the panic on shipboard
when the great vessel has struck, and after three or four convulsive
throes the mighty masts have snapped, and the blue water, surging and
bounding, has riven the hatchways and flooded the deck; the panic of
a mob as the charge of cavalry is sounded, and the flash of a thousand
sabres is seen through the long vista of a street; the panic of a city
stricken by plague or cholera,--are all dreadful and appalling things,
and have their scenes of horror full of the most picturesque terror;
still are there incidents of an almost equal power when that dread
moment has arrived which is called a "Panic on 'Change."
It was but yesterday, and the world went well and flourishingly, mills
were at work, foundries thundered with their thousand hammers, vessels
sailed forth from every port, and white-sailed argosies were freighted
with wealth from distant colonies. None had to ask twice for means to
carry out his speculations, for every enterprise there was capital;
and now scarcely twenty-four hours have passed, and all is changed.
A despatch has been received in the night; a messenger has arrived at
Downing Street; the Minister has been aroused from his sleep to hear
that we have met some great reverse; a terrible disaster has befallen
us; two line-of-battle ships, whose draught of water was too great,
have grounded under an enemy's fire; in despite of the most heroic
resistance, they have been captured; the union-jacks are on their way to
Moscow. Mayhap the discomfiture, less afflicting to national pride, is
the blunder of a cavalry officer or the obstinacy of an envoy. Little
matter for the cause, we have met a check. Down goes credit, and up
go the discounts; the mighty men of millions have drawn their
purse-strings, and not a guinea is to be had; the city is full of
sad-visaged men in black, presaging every manner of misfortune. More
troops are wanted; more ships; we are going to have an increase of the
income-tax,--a loan,--a renewal of war burdens in fifty shapes! Each
fancies some luxury of which he must deprive himself, some expense to be
curtailed; and all are taking the dreariest view of a future whose chief
feature is to be privation.
So was it now. Amidst a mass of letters was one from Davenport Dunn,
written with brevity and in haste. By a mistake, easily made In the
hurry and confusion of such correspondence, it was, though intended for
Mr. Hankes, addressed to Miss Kellett; the words "Strictly private and
confidential" occupying a conspicuous place across the envelope, while
lower down was written "Immediate."
It was a very rare event, latterly, for Mr. Dunn to write to Miss
Kellett, nor had she, in all their intercourse, once received from him a
letter announced thus "confidential."
It was, then, in some surprise, and not without a certain anxiety, that
she broke the seal. It was dated "Wednesday, Irish Office," and began
thus: "Dear S."--she started,--he had never called her Sybella in his
life; he had been most punctiliously careful ever to address her as Miss
Kellett. She turned at once to the envelope, and read the address, "Miss
Kellett, the Hermitage, Glengariff." And yet there could be no mistake.
It opened, "Dear S." "He has forgotten a word," thought she; "he meant
in his mood of confidence to call me Miss Sybella, and has omitted
the title." The letter ran thus: "We have failed at Vienna, as we do
everywhere and in everything. The war is to continue; consequently, we
are in a terrible mess. Glumthal telegraphs this morning that he will
not go on; the Frankfort people will, of course, follow his lead,
so that Mount Cenis will be 'nowhere' by the end of the week. I am,
however, more anxious about Glengariff, which must be upheld, for the
moment, at any cost To-day I can manage to keep up the shares; perhaps,
also, to-morrow.. The old Earl is more infatuated about the scheme than
ever, though the accounts he receives from that girl"--"That girl,"
muttered she; "who can he mean?"--"from that girl occasionally alarm
him. She evidently has her own suspicions, though I don't clearly see
by what they have been suggested. The sooner, therefore, you can possess
yourself of the correspondence, the better. I have written to her by
this post with a proposition she will most probably accept; advise it,
by all means."--"This is scarcely intelligible," said she, once more
reverting to the direction of the letter.--"Should the Ministry be
beaten on Monday, they mean to dissolve Parliament. Now, they cannot
go to the country, in Ireland, without me, and my terms I have already
fixed. They must give us aid,--material, substantial aid; I will not
be put off with office or honors,--it is no time for either. Meanwhile,
I want all the dividend warrants, and a brief sketch of our next
statement; for we meet on Saturday. Come what will, the Allotment must
be sustained till the new election be announced. I hope Lackington's
check was duly presented, for I find that his death was known here on
the 4th. Where the new Viscount is, no one seems even to guess. Get rid
of the girl, and believe me, yours ever,--D. D."
"Surely, there is some strange mystification here," said she, as she
sat pondering over this letter. "There are allusions which, had they
not been addressed to me, I might have fancied were intended for myself.
This girl, whose accounts have terrified Lord Glengariff, and who
herself suspects that all is not right, may mean me; but yet it is to
me he writes, confidentially and secretly. I cannot complain that the
letter lacks candor; it is frank enough; every word forebodes coming
disaster, the great scheme is threatened with ruin, nothing can save it
but Government assistance,--an infamous compact, if I read it aright.
And if all this be so, in what a game have I played a part! This
great venture is a swindling enterprise! All these poor people whose
hard-earned gains have been invested in it will be ruined; my own small
pittance, too, is gone. Good heavens! to what a terrible network of
intrigue and deception have I lent myself! How have I come to betray
those whose confidence I strove so hard to gain! This girl,--this
girl,--who is she, and of whom does he speak?" exclaimed she, as, in an
outburst of emotion, she walked the room, her whole frame trembling, and
her eyes glaring in all the wildness of high excitement.
"May I come in?" whispered a soft voice, as a low tap was heard at the
door; and without waiting for leave, Mr. Hankes entered. Nothing could
be silkier nor softer than his courteous approach; his smile was the
blandest, his step the smoothest, his bow the nicest blending of homage
and regard; and, as he took Miss Kellett's hand, it was with the air
of a courtier dashed with the devotion of an admirer. Cruel is the
confession that she noticed none--not one--of these traits. Her mind
was so engrossed by the letter, that, had Mr. Hankes made his entry in
a suit of chain armor, and with a mace in his hand, she would not have
minded it.
"I am come to entreat forgiveness,--to sue your pardon, Miss Kellett,
for a very great offence, of which, however, I am the guiltless
offender. The letter which I hold here, and which, as you see, is
addressed S. Hankes, Esq.,' was certainty intended for you, and not me."
"What--how--misdirected--a mistake in the address?" cried she, eagerly.
"Just so; placed in a wrong enclosure," resumed he, in a tone of
well-graduated calm. "A blunder which occurs over and over in life, but
I am fain to hope has never happened with less serious results."
"In short," said she, hastily, "my letter, or the letter meant for me,
came directed to you?"
"Precisely. I have only to plead, as regards myself, that immediately
on discovery--and I very soon discovered that it could not have been
destined for my perusal--I refolded the epistle and hastened to deliver
it to your own hands."
"More discreet and more fortunate than I," said she, with a very
peculiar smile, "since this letter which I hold here, and which bore
my address, I now perceive was for you, and this I have not read merely
once or twice, but fully a dozen times; in truth, I believe I could
repeat it, word for word, if the task were required of me."
What has become of Mr. Hankes's soft and gentle manner? Where are his
bland looks, his air of courtesy and kindness, his voice so full of
sweetness and deference? Why, the man seems transfixed, his eyeballs are
staring wildly, and he actually clutches, not takes, the letter from her
hands.
"Why, the first words might have undeceived you," cried he, rudely.
"Your name is not Simpson Hankes."
"No, sir; but it is Sybella, and the writer begins 'Dear S.,'--a
liberty, I own, I felt it, but one which I fancied my position was
supposed to permit. Pray read on, sir, and you will see that there was
matter enough to puzzle finer faculties than mine."
Perhaps the tone in which she spoke these words was intentionally
triumphant; perhaps Mr. Hankes attributed this significance to them
causelessly; at all events, he started and stared at her for above a
minute steadfastly, he then addressed himself suddenly to the letter.
"Gracious heavens! what a terrible blunder!" exclaimed he, when he had
finished the reading.
"A great mistake, certainly, sir," said she, calmly.
"But still one of which you are incapable to take advantage, Miss
Kellett," said he, with eagerness.
"Is it to the girl who is to be got rid of, sir, you address this
speech? Is it to her whose trustfulness has been made the instrument
to deceive others and lure them to their ruin? Nay, Mr. Hankes, your
estimate of my forbearance is, indeed, too high."
"But what would you do, young lady?"
"Do, sir! I scarcely know what I would not do," burst she in,
passionately. "This letter was addressed to me. I know nothing of the
mistake of its direction; here is the envelope with my name upon it. It
is, consequently, mine,--mine, therefore, to publish, to declare to the
world, through its words, that the whole of this grand enterprise is
a cheat; that its great designer is a man of nothing, living the
precarious life of a gambling speculator, trading on the rich man's
horde and the poor man's pittance, making market of all, even to his
patriotism. I would print this worthy document with no other comment
than the words, 'Received by me, Sybella Kellett, this day of September,
and sworn to as the handwriting of him whose initials it bears,
Davenport Dunn.' I would publish it in such type that men might read
it as they went, that all should take warning and put no faith in these
unprincipled tricksters. Ay, sir, and I would cling, as my hope of
safety from the world's scorn, to that insulting mention of myself,
and claim as my vindication that I am the girl to be 'got rid of.' None
shall dare to call me complice, since the little I once called my own
is lost. But I would do more, sir. The world I have unwittingly aided
to deceive has a full right to an expiation at my hands. I would make
public the entire correspondence I have for months back been engaged in.
You seem to say 'No' to this. Is it my right you dispute, or my courage
to assert the right?"
"You must be aware, Miss Kellett," said he, deprecatingly, "that you
became possessed of this letter by a mistake; that you had no right
to the intelligence it contains, and, consequently, have none to avail
yourself of that knowledge. It may be perfectly true that you can employ
it to our detriment. It would, I have little doubt, serve to shake our
credit for a day or two; but do you know what misery, what utter ruin,
your rashness will have caused meanwhile? By the fall of our securities
you will beggar hundreds. All whose necessities may require them to sell
out on the day of your disclosures will be irretrievably ruined. You
meditate a vengeance upon Mr. Dunn, and your blow falls on some poor
struggling creatures that you never so much as heard of. I do not
speak," continued he, more boldly, as he saw the deep effect his words
produced,--"I do not speak of the destitution and misery you will spread
here,--all works stopped, all enterprise suspended, thousands thrown out
of employment. These are the certain, the inevitable evils of what you
propose to do. And now, let me ask, What are to be the benefits? You
would depose from his station of power and influence the only man in
the kingdom who has a brain to conceive, or a courage to carry out these
gigantic enterprises,--the only man of influence sufficient to treat
with the Government, and make his own terms. You would dethrone him, to
install in his place some inferior intelligence,--some mere creature of
profit and loss, without genius or patriotism; and all for what?--for
a mere phrase, and that, too, in a letter which was never intended for
your eyes."
Mr. Hankes saw that he was listened to, and he continued. Artfully
contriving to take the case out of its real issue, he made it appear to
Miss Kellett that she was solely impelled by personal motives, and had
no other object in view than a vengeance on the man who had insulted
her. "And now just throw your eyes over the letter intended for
yourself. I only glanced at it, but it seemed to me written in a tone of
sincerest well-wishing."
It was so. It contained the offer of a most advantageous position. A
new Governor-General of India desired a suitable companion for his
daughters, who had lost their mother. He was a nobleman of highest rank
and influence. The station was one which secured great advantages,
and Dunn had obtained the promise of it in her behalf by considerable
exertion on his part Nay, more. Knowing that her fortune was engaged in
the "Allotment scheme," he volunteered to take her shares at the highest
rate they had ever borne, as she would, probably, require immediate
means to procure an Indian outfit. The whole wound up with a deeply
expressed regret at the loss Glengariff would sustain by her departure;
"but all my selfishness," added he, "could not blind me to the injustice
of detaining in obscurity one whose destiny so certainly points her out
for a station lofty and distinguished."
She smiled at the words, and, showing them to Hankes, said, "It is most
unfortunate, sir, that I should have seen the other letter. I could so
readily have yielded myself up to all this flattery, which, even in its
hollowness, has a certain charm."
"I am certain Miss Kellett has too much good sense--too much knowledge
of life--too much generosity, besides--"
"Pray, sir, let me stop you, or the catalogue of my perfections may
become puzzling, not to say that I need all the good gifts with which
you would endow me to aid me to a right judgment here. I wish I knew
what to do."
"Can you doubt it?"
"If the road be so clear, will you not point it out?"
"Write to Mr. Dunn. Well, let me write to him. I will inform him how
this mischance occurred. I will tell him that you had read and re-read
his letter before discovering the mistake of the address; that,
consequently, you are now--so far as this great enterprise is
concerned--one of ourselves; that, although you scorn to take advantage
of a circumstance thus accidentally revealed, yet that, as chance has
put you in possession of certain facts, that---that, in short--"
"That, in short, I ought to profit by my good fortune," said she,
calmly, finishing the phrase for him.
"Unquestionably," chimed in Hankes, quickly; "and, what's more, demand
very high terms too. Dunn is a practical man," added he, in a lower and
more confidential tone; "nobody knows better when liberality is the best
policy."
"So that this is a case for a high price?" asked she, in the same calm
tone.
"I 'd make it so if I were in your place. I 'd certainly say a 'high
figure,' Miss Keliett."
"Shall I confess, sir, that, in so far as knowing how to profit by it,
I am really unworthy of this piece of fortune? Is Mr. Hankes enough my
friend to enlighten me?"
There was a smile that accompanied this speech which went far--very
far--to influence Mr. Hankes. Once again did his personal fortunes rise
before him; once again did he bethink him that this was an alliance that
might lead to much.
"I can give you a case in point, Miss Keliett,--I mean as to the value
of a secret. It was when Sir Robert Peel meditated his change in
the Corn-laws. One of the council--it does not matter to say his
name--accidentally divulged the secret intention, and a great journal
gave no less than ten thousand pounds for the intelligence,--ten
thousand pounds sterling!"
She seemed to pause over this story, and reflect upon it.
"Now," resumed Hankes, "it is just as likely he 'd say, 'Money is scarce
just now; your demand comes at an inconvenient moment' This would be
true,--there's no gainsaying it; and I'd reply, 'Let me have it in
shares,--some of the new preference scrip just issued.'"
"How it does allay difficulties to deal with persons of great practical
intelligence,--men of purpose-like mind!" said Sybella, gravely.
"Ah, Miss Kellett, if I could only believe that this was a favorable
moment to appeal to you in their behalf,--at least, in so far as regards
one of their number,--one who has long admired your great qualities in
silence, and said to himself, 'What might she not be if allied to one
well versed in life, trained to all its chances and changes--'"
"It never occurred to me to fancy I had inspired all this interest,
sir," said she, calmly.
"Probably because your thoughts never dwelt on me," said Hankes,
with a most entreating look; "but I assure you," added he, warmly, "the
indifference was not reciprocal. I have been long--very long attracted
by those shining abilities you display. Another might dwell upon your
personal attractions, and say the impression your beauty had made upon
him; but beauty is a flower,--a perishable hot-house flower. Not," added
he, hastily, "that I pretend to be insensible to its fascinations; no,
Miss Kellett, I have my weaknesses like the rest."
Sybella scarcely heard his words. It was but a day before, and a poor
unlettered peasant, an humble creature unread in life and human nature,
told her that he deemed her one fit for high and devoted enterprise,
and that her rightful place was amidst the wounded and the dying in
the Crimea. Had he construed her, then, more truly? At all events, the
career was a noble one. She did not dare to contrast it any longer with
her late life, so odious now did it seem to her, with all its schemes
for wealth, its wily plot-tings and intrigues.
"I am afraid, sir, I have been inattentive,--I fear that my thoughts
were away from what you have been saying," said she, hastily.
"Shall I just throw my ideas on paper, Miss Kellett, and wait your
answer--say to-morrow?"
"My answer to what, sir?"
"I have been presumptuous enough to make you an offer of my hand, Miss
Kellett," said he, with a half-offended dignity. "There are, of course,
a number of minor considerations--I call them minor, as they relate to
money matters--to be discussed after; for instance, with regard to these
shares--"
"It will save us both a world of trouble, sir, when I thank you deeply
for the honor you would destine me, and decline to accept it."
"I know there is a discrepancy in point of years--"
"Pray, sir, let us not continue the theme. I have given my answer, and
my only one."
"Or if it be that any meddling individual should have mentioned the
late Mrs. H.," said he, bristling up,-- "for she is the late, that I
can satisfy you upon,--I have abundant evidence to show how that woman
behaved--"
"You are confiding to me more than I have the right or wish to hear,
sir."
"Only in vindication,--only in vindication. I am aware how her atrocious
book has libelled me. It made me a perfect martyr for the season after
it came out; but it is out of print,--not a copy to be had for fifty
pounds, if it were offered."
"But really, sir--"
"And then, Miss Kellett," added he, in a sort of thrilling whisper,
"she drank; at first sherry,--brown sherry--but afterwards brandy,--ay,
ma'am, brandy neat and a matter of a bottle daily. If you only knew what
I went through with her,--the scenes in the streets, in the playhouses,
in coffee-rooms,--ay, and police-offices,--I give you my sacred word of
honor Simpson Hankes was rapidly becoming as great a public scandal as
the Rev. Paul Classon himself!"
"Cannot you perceive, sir, that these details are less than
uninteresting to me?"
"Don't say that, Miss Kellett,--don't, I beg you, or else you 'll make
me fear that you 'll not read the little pamphlet I published, entitled
'A Brief Statement by Simpson Hankes,'--a brochure that I am proud to
believe decided the world in my favor."
"Once for all, Mr. Hankes, I decline to hear more of these matters. If I
have not more plainly told you how little they claim to interest me, it
is because my own selfish cares fill up my thoughts. I will try to
hand you the correspondence Mr. Dunn desires to see in your keeping by
to-morrow morning. There are many circumstances will require special
explanation in it. However I will do my best to be ready."
"And my offer, Miss Kellett?"
"I have declined it, sir."
"But really, young lady, are you well aware of what it is you refuse?"
asked he, angrily.
"I will not discuss the question, sir," said she, haughtily. "Give me
that letter I showed you."
"The letter, I opine, is mine, Miss Kellett. The address alone pertains
to you."
"Do you mean, then, to retain possession of the letter?" asked she,
hurriedly.
"I protest, I think it is better--better for all of us--that I should do
so. You will pardon me if I observe that you are now under the influence
of excited feelings,--you are irritated. Any line of action, under
such circumstances, will necessarily be deficient in that calm, matured
judgment which is mainly your characteristic."
"It needed but this, sir, to fill up the measure!" ex-claimed she,
passionately.
"I don't perfectly apprehend you, Miss Kellett."
"I mean, sir, that this last trait of yours was alone wanting to
complete the utter contempt I now feel for my late life and
its associates. Mr. Dunn's letter, with all its disgraceful
disclosures,--your own crafty counsels how best to profit by the
accidental knowledge,--and now this refusal to restore the letter,--this
mean distrust based on a breach of confidence--"
"By no means, madam. In withholding this letter, I maintain it to be my
own. I have already explained to you that the address is all you can
lay claim to; a recent legal decision is in my favor. It was tried last
Hilary term before Justice Whitecroff. The case was Barnes versus
Barnes."
"If my anger prompt me to rasher acts than my calmer reason might have
counselled," broke in Sybella, "remember, sir, it is to yourself you
owe it. At least upon one point you may rely. Whatever I decide to do
in this affair, it will not be swayed by any--the slightest--regard for
your friends or their interests. I will think of others alone,--never
once of them. Your smile seems to pay, 'The war between us is an
unequal one.' I know it. I am a woman, poor, friendless, unprotected;
you and yours are rich, and well thought of; and yet, with all this
odds, if I accept the conflict I do not despair of victory."
As she left the room and the door closed after her, Mr. Hankes wiped
the perspiration from his forehead, and sat down, the perfect picture of
dismay.
"What is she up to?" cried he, three or four times to himself. "If
she resolves to make a public scandal of it, there's an end of us! The
shares would be down--down to nothing--in four-and-twenty hours! I'll
telegraph to Dunn at once!" said he, rising, and taking his hat. "The
mischance was his own doing; let him find the remedy himself."
With all that perfection of laconic style which practice confers, Mr.
Hankes communicated to Davenport Dunn the unhappy mistake which had
just befallen. Under the safeguard of a cipher used between them, he
expressed his deepest fears for the result, and asked for immediate
counsel and guidance.
This despatch, forwarded by telegraph, he followed by a long letter,
entering fully into all the details of the mischance, and reporting
with--it must be acknowledged--a most scrupulous accuracy an account of
the stormy scene between Miss Kellett and himself. He impressed upon his
chief that no terms which should secure her silence would be too high,
and gently insinuated that a prompt and generous offer on Dunn's part
might not impossibly decide the writer to seal his devotion to the
cause, by making the lady Mrs. Hankes. "Only remember," added he, "it
must be in cash or approved bills."
Partly to illustrate the difficulty of the negotiation he was engaged
in, partly to magnify the amount of the sacrifice he proposed to make,
he depicted Sybella in colors somewhat less flattering than ardent
love usually employs. "It is clear to me now," wrote he, "from what
I witnessed to-day, that neither you nor I ever understood this
girl aright. She has a temper of her own, and an obstinacy perfectly
invincible. Acting on the dictate of what she fancies to be her
conscience, she is quite capable of going to any extreme, and I have the
strongest doubt that she is one to be moved by affection or deterred
by fear." After a little more of this eulogistic strain, he wound up by
repeating his former generous proposal He adroitly pointed out that
it was in the interest of only such a patron he could ever dream of so
great a sacrifice; and then in that half-jocular way in which he often
attained to all the real and businesslike elements of a project,
he added, "Say ten thousand, and the 'match' will come off,--a very
moderate stake, if you only remember the 'forfeit.'"
In a brief postscript he mentioned the discovery of the ancient document
found at the cottage, with, as he said, "some curious papers about the
Conway family. These I have duly sealed up in the box, and retain in my
possession, although Miss K. has evidently an eye upon them.
"Write fully and explicitly whatever you mean to do; should you,
however, fully agree to what I propose, telegraph back to
"Yours, ever faithfully,
"Simpson Hankes.
"They have come to tell me she is packing up her things and has sent a
twenty-pound note to be changed."
CHAPTER XVIII. DOWNING STREET.
If our story had a hero--which it has not--that hero would be Mr.
Davenport Dunn himself, and we might, consequently, feel certain
compunctious scruples as to the length of time that has elapsed since we
last saw him. When we parted, however, we took care to remind our reader
that we left him in good company, and surely such a fact ought to allay
all apprehensions on his behalf.
Months have rolled over; the London season has passed; Parliament has
but a few days to run; the wearied speakers are longing to loiter along
green lanes, or be touring or water-curing it in Germany; cities are all
but deserted, and town-houses have that dusty, ill-cared-for air that
reminds one of an estate in Chancery, or a half-pay lieutenant. Why is
it, then, that Mr. Dunn's residence in Merrion Square wears a look of
unusual trimness? Fresh paint--that hypocrisy of architecture--has done
its utmost; the hall door is a marvel of mock oak, as are the columns
of spurious marble; the Venetian blinds are of an emerald green, and the
plate-glass windows mirror the parched trees in the square, and reflect
back the almost equally picturesque jaunting-cars as they drive past;
the balcony, too, throughout its whole length, is covered with rich
flowers and flowery shrubs. In a word, there is a look of preparation
that bespeaks a coming event. What can it be?
Various rumors are afloat as to the reason of these changes, some
averring that Mr. Dunn is about to take a high official position, and be
raised to a distinguished rank; others opine that he is about to retire
from the cares of a business life, and marry. What may he not be? Whom
may he not aspire to? Surely the world has gone well with this roan.
What a great general is to an army in the field,--what a great leader to
a party in the "House," was he to every industrial enterprise. His name
was a guarantee for all that was accurate in discipline and perfect in
organization. The Board over which he presided as Chairman was sure to
meet with regularity and act with energy. The officials who served under
him, even to the very humblest, seemed to typify the wise principles by
which he had himself been guided in life. They appeared as though imbued
with the same patient industry; the same untiring application, the same
grave demeanor marked them. "I served under Mr. Davenport Dunn," "Mr.
Dunn knows me," "Mr. Dunn will speak for me," were characters that had
the force of a diploma, since they vouched not alone for capacity, but
for conduct.
It is a very high eminence to attain when a man's integrity and ability
throw such a light about him that they illumine not alone the path he
treads in life, but shine brightly on those who follow his track, making
an atmosphere in which all around participate. To this height had Dunn
arrived, and he stood the confessed representative of those virtues
Englishmen like to honor, and that character they boast to believe
national,--the man of successful industry. The fewer the adventitious
advantages he derived from fortune, the greater and more worthy did he
appear. He was no aristocrat, propped and bolstered by grand relatives.
He had no Most Noble or Right Honorable connections to push him. He was
not even gifted with those qualities that win popular favor,--he had
none of those graces of easy cordiality that others possess,--he was
not insinuating in address, nor ready of speech. They who described him
called him an awkward, bashful man, always struggling against his own
ignorance of society, and only sustained by a proud consciousness that
whispered the "sterling stuff that was inside,"--qualities which appeal
to large audiences, and are intelligible to the many. Ay, there was
indeed his grand secret. Genius wounds deeply, talent and ability offend
widely, but the man of mere commonplace faculties, using common gifts
with common opportunities, trading rather upon negative than positive
properties, succeeding because he is not this, that, and t' other,
plodding along the causeway of life steadily and unobtrusively, seen
by all, patched and noticed in every successive stage of his upward
progress, so that each may say, "I remember him a barefooted boy,
running errands in the street,--a poor clerk at forty pounds a year,--I
knew him when he lived in such an alley, up so many pair of stairs!"
Strange enough, the world likes all this; there is a smack of
self-gratulation in it that seems to say, "If I liked it, I could have
done as well as he." Success in life won, these men rise into another
atmosphere, and acquire another appreciation. They are then used to
point the moral of that pleasant fallacy we are all so fond of repeating
to each other, when we assert, amongst the blessings of our glorious
Constitution, that there is no dignity too great, no station too high,
for the Englishman who combines industry and integrity with zeal and
perseverance. Shame on us, that we dare to call fallacy that which
great Lord Chancellors and Chief Justices have verified from their own
confessions; nay, we have even heard a Lord Mayor declare that he was,
once upon a time, like that "poor" publican! The moral of it all is that
with regard to the Davenport Dunns of this world, we pity them in their
first struggles, we are proud of them in their last successes, and we
are about as much right in the one sentiment as in the other.
The world--the great wide world of man--is marvellously identical with
the small ingredient of humanity of whose aggregate it consists. It has
its moods of generosity, distrust, liberality, narrowness, candor, and
suspicion,--its fevers of noble impulse, and its cold fits of petty
meanness,--its high moments of self-devotion, and its dark hours of
persecution and hate. Men are judged differently in different ages,
just as in every-day life we hear a different opinion from the same
individual, when crossed by the cares of the morning and seated in all
the voluptuous repose of an after-dinner abandonnement.
Now it chanced that Mr. Dunn's lot in life had thrown him into a
fortunate conjuncture of the world's temper. The prosperity of a long
peace had impressed us with an exaggerated estimate of all the arts that
amass wealth; riches became less the reward than the test of ability;
success and merit had grown to be convertible terms; clever speakers
and eloquent writers assured us that wars pertained only to ages of
barbarism,--that a higher civilization would repudiate them,--that
men, now bent upon a high and noble philanthropy, would alone strive to
diffuse the benefits of abundance and refinement amongst their fellows,
and that we were about to witness an elysian age of plenty, order,
and happiness. The same men who stigmatized the glory of war as the
hypocrisy of carnage, invented another hypocrisy infinitely meaner and
more ignoble, and placed upon the high altars of our worship the golden
image of Gain.
As the incarnation of this passion Davenport Dunn stood out before the
world; nor was there a tribute of its flattery that was not laid at his
feet. Even they who had neither wish nor necessity to benefit by his
peculiar influence did not withhold their homage, but joined in the
general acclamation that pronounced him the great man of our time; and
at his Sunday dinners were met the most distinguished in rank,--all
that the country boasted of great in station, illustrious by services or
capacity. His splendid house in Piccadilly--rented for the season for a
fabulous sum--was beset all the morning by visitors, somewhat unlike,
it must be owned, the class who frequented his Dublin levees. Here they
were not deputations or bank directors, railway chairmen or drainage
commissioners; they were all that fashion claims as her own,--proud
duchesses of princely fortune, great countesses high in courtly favor,
noble ladies whose smile of recognition was a firman to the highest
places. They met there, by one of those curious compacts the grand
world occasionally makes with itself, to do something, in a sort of half
imitation of that inferior race of mortals who live and marry and die
in the spheres beneath them. In fact, Dunn's house was a sort of bourse,
where shares were trafficked in, and securities bought and sold, with
an eagerness none the less that the fingers that held them wore gloves
fastened with rubies and emeralds.
In those gorgeous drawing-rooms, filled with objects of high art,
statues stolen from the Vatican, gems obtained by Heaven knows what
stratagems from Italian or Spanish convents, none deigned to notice
by even a passing look the treasures that surrounded them. In vain the
heavenly beauty of Raphael beamed from the walls,--in vain the seductive
glances of Greuze in all their languishing voluptuousness,--in vain the
haughty nobility of Van Dyck claimed the homage of a passing look. All
were eagerly bent upon lists of stocks and shares, and no words were
heard save such as told of rise or fall,--the alternations of that
chance which makes or mars humanity.
It was while in the midst of that distinguished company Mr. Dunn
received the telegram we have mentioned in our last chapter as
despatched by Mr. Hankes. His was a nature long inured to the ups and
downs of fortune; his great self-teaching had been principally directed
to the very point of how best to meet emergencies; and yet, as he read
over these brief lines, for a moment his courage seemed to have deserted
him.
"Chimbarago Artesian Well and Water Company," lisped out a very pale,
sickly-looking Countess. "Shares are rising, Mr. Dunn; may I venture
upon them?"
"Here's the Marquesas Harbor of Refuge scheme going to smash, Dunn!"
whispered an old gentleman, with a double eye-glass, his hand trembling
as it held the share-list. "Eh, what do you say to that?"
"Glengariff 's going steadily up,--steadily up," muttered Lord
Glengariff, in Dunn's ear. Then, struck by the sudden pallor of his
face, he added, "Are you ill?--are you faint?"
"A mere nothing," said Dunn, carelessly. "By the way, what hour is
it? Near one, and I have an appointment with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Yes, Lady Massingberd, perfectly safe; not a splendid
investment, but quite sure. Cagliari Cobalts are first-rate, Sir George;
take all you can get of them. The Dalmatian line is guaranteed 'by
the Austrian Government, my Lord. I saw the Ambassador yesterday. Pray
excuse a hasty leave-taking."
His carriage was quickly ordered, but before he set out he despatched a
short telegraphic message to Hankes. It ran thus: "Detain her; suffer no
letters from her to reach the post." This being duly sent off, he drove
to Downing Street. That dingy old temple of intrigue was well known to
him. His familiar steps had mounted that gloomy old stair some scores of
times; but now, for the first--the very first time in his life, instead
of being at once ushered into the presence of the Minister, he was asked
to "wait for a few moments." What a shock did the intimation give him!
Was the news already abroad,--had the fell tidings escaped? A second's
consideration showed this was impossible; and yet what meant this
reserve?
"Is the Council sitting, Mr. Bagwell?" asked he, of a very well-dressed
young gentleman, with a glass fixed in his eye, who acted as Private
Secretary to the Minister.
"No; they're chatting, I fancy," lisped out the other. "The Council was
up half an hour ago."
"Have you mentioned my name, sir?" asked Dunn, with a formidable
emphasis on the pronoun.
"Yes," said he, arranging his hair before the glass; "I sent in your
card."
"Well, and the answer?"
"There was no answer, which, I take it, means 'wait,'" replied he, in
the same light and graceful tone of voice.
Dunn took his hat hastily from the table; and with a stern stare,
intended to mean "I shall remember your face again," said,--
"You may inform Lord Jedburg that I came by appointment; that I was here
punctually at one o'clock; that I waited full fifteen minutes; that--"
What more Mr. Dunn was about to say was cut short by the opening
of a-door, and the issuing forth of some five or six gentlemen, all
laughing and talking together.
"How d'ye do, Mr. Dunn?" "How d'ye do, Dunn?" "How are you, Dunn?" said
some three or four, familiarly, as they passed through the room. And ere
he could acknowledge the salutations, Lord Jedburg himself appeared at
the door, and made a sign for him to enter. Never before had Davenport
Dunn crossed those precincts with so nervous a heart. If his reason
assured him that there was no cause of fear, his instincts and his
conscience spoke a different language. He bent one quick penetrating
glance on the Minister ere he sat down, as though to read there what he
might of the future; but there was nothing to awaken anxiety or distrust
in that face. His Lordship was far advanced in life, his hair more white
than gray, his brow wrinkled and deep-furrowed; and yet, if, instead of
the cares of a mighty empire, his concern had been the passing events of
a life of society and country habits, nothing could have more suited the
easy expression, the graceful smile, and the pleasant bonhomie of that
countenance. Resuming the cigar he had been smoking as Dunn came in, he
lounged back indolently in his deep chair, and said,--
"What can I do for you at the Isle of Wight, Dunn? I fancy we shall have
a trip to Osborne to-morrow morning."
"Indeed, my Lord?" asked he, anxiously; "are you going out?"
"So they say," replied the other, carelessly. "Do you smoke? You 'll
find those Cubans very mild. So they say, Dunn. Monksley assures us that
we shall be in a minority to-night of fifteen or sixteen. Drake thinks
five-and-twenty."
"From your Lordship's easy mode of taking it, I conclude that there is
either a remedy for the disaster, or that--"
"It is no disaster at all," chimed in his Lordship, gayly. "Well, the
Carlton Club are evidently of that mind, and some of the evening papers
too."
"I perceive, my Lord," said Dunn, with a peculiar smile, "the misfortune
is not irremediable."
"You are right, Dunn," said the other, promptly. "We have decided to
accept a defeat, which, as our adversaries have never anticipated, will
find them perfectly unprepared how to profit by it They will beat us,
but, when called upon to form a Government, will be utterly unable.
The rest is easy enough: a new Parliament, and ourselves stronger than
ever."
"A very clever countryman of mine once told me, my Lord, that he made
a ruinous coach-line turn out a most lucrative speculation by simply
running an opposition and breaking it; so true are the world in their
attachment to success."
A hearty laugh from the Minister acknowledged the parallel, and he added
carelessly,--
"Sir George Bosely has a story of a fellow who once established a run
on his own bank just to get up his credit. A hit above even you, Master
Dunn,--eh?"
If Dunn laughed, it was with a face of deepest crimson, though he saw,
the while, his secret was safe. Indeed, the honest frankness of his
Lordship's laugh guaranteed that all was well.
"The fellow ought to have been a Cabinet Minister, Dunn. He had the true
governing element in him, which is a strong sense of human gullibility."
"A little more is needed, my Lord,--how to turn that flame tendency to
profit."
"Of course,--of course. By the way, Dunn, though not apropos," said
he, laughingly, "what of the great Glengariff scheme? Is it prospering?"
"The shares stand at one hundred and seventy-seven and an eighth, my
Lord," said Dunn, calmly. "I can only wish your Lordship's party as
favorable a fortune."
"Well, we are rather below par just now," said the Minister, laughing,
while he busied himself to select another cigar from the heap before
him.
"It was just about that very enterprise I came to speak to your Lordship
this morning," said Dunn, drawing his chair closer. "I need not tell you
how far the assurance of Government support has aided our success. The
report of the Parliamentary Committee as to the Harbor of Refuge, the
almost certain promise of her Majesty's marine residence, the flattering
reception your Lordship gave to the deputation in the matter of the
American packet-station, have all done us good and efficient service.
But we want more, my Lord,--we want more!"
"The deuce you do! Why, my good friend, these marks of our preference
for your scheme have cost us some hundred angry addresses and
recriminations from all parts of the kingdom, where, we are told, there
is more picturesque scenery, more salubrious air, deeper water, and
better anchorage. If you built a villa for every member of the Cabinet,
and settled it on us in freehold there, it would not repay us for all we
have suffered in your cause."
"We should be both proud and happy to accommodate your Lordship's
colleagues on Jedburg Crescent," said Dunn, bowing with a well-assumed
seriousness.
"But what do you want us to do?" said his Lordship, peevishly; for he
had the dislike great men generally feel to have their joke capped. It
is for them to be smart, if they please, but not for the Mr. Davenport
Dunns of this world to take up the clew of the facetiousness.
Mr. Dunn seemed somewhat posed by the abrupt directness of this
question. Lord Jedburg went on:--
"You surely never supposed that we could send you material assistance.
You are far too conversant with the working of our institutions to
expect such. These things are possible in France, but they won't do
here. No, Dunn; perfectly impossible here."
"And yet, my Lord, it is precisely in France that they ought to be
impossible. Ministers in that country have no responsibility except
towards their sovereign. If they become suddenly enriched, one sees at
once how they have abused the confidence of their master."
"I'll not enter upon that question," said his Lordship, smartly. "Tell
me, rather, something about Ireland; how shall we fare there in a
general election?"
"With proper exertions you may be able to hold your own," was the dry
rejoinder.
"Not more? Not any more than this?"
"Certainly not, my Lord, nor do I see how you could expect it. What you
are in the habit of calling concessions to Irish interests have been
little other than apologies for the blunders of your colleagues. You
remove some burden imposed by yourselves, or express sorrow for some
piece of legislation your own hands have inflicted--"
"Come, come, Mr. Dunn, the only course of lectures I attend are
delivered in the House of Commons; besides, I have no time for these
things." There was a tone of prompt decision in the way he uttered this
that satisfied Dunn he had gone fully as far as was safe. "Now as to
Ireland, we shall look for at least sixty, or perhaps seventy, sure
votes. Come, where's your list, Dunn? Out with it, man! We are rather
rich in patronage just now. We can make a Bishop, a Puisne Judge, three
Assistant Barristers, a Poor Law Commissioner, not to say that there are
some fifty smaller things in the Revenue. Which will you have?"
"All, my Lord," said Dunn, coolly,--"all, and some colonial appointments
besides, for such of our friends as find living at home inexpedient."
His Lordship lay back in his chair, and laughed pleasantly. "There's
Jamaica just vacant; would that suit you?"
"The Governorship? The very thing I want, and for a very old supporter
of your Lordship's party."
"Who is he?"
"The Earl of Glengariff, my Lord, a nobleman who has never received the
slightest acknowledgment for a political adherence of fifty-odd years."
"Why, the man must be in second childhood. If I remember aright, he
was--"
"He is exactly four years your Lordship's senior; he says you fagged for
him his last half at Eton."
"Pooh, pooh! he mistakes; it was of my father he was thinking. But to
the point: what can he do for us?"
"I was alluding to what he had done, my Lord," said Dunn, pointedly.
"Ah, Dunn, we are not rich enough for gratitude. That is the last luxury
of a 'millionnaire;' besides, you are aware how many claimants there
will be for so good a thing as this."
"Which of them all, my Lord, can promise you ten votes in the Houses?"
"Well, is the bargain finished? Is all paid?"
"Not yet, my Lord; not yet You are averse to affording us any support to
the Glengariff scheme, and, for the present, I will not hamper you with
the consideration; you can, however, serve us in another way. Glumthal
is very anxious about the Jew Bill; he wishes, Heaven knows why, to see
his brother in the House. May I promise him that the next session will
see it law? Let me just have your Lordship's word to that effect, so
that I may telegraph to him when I leave this."
His Lordship shook his head dubiously, and said, "You forget that I have
colleagues, Dunn."
"I remember it well, my Lord, and I only asked for your own individual
pledge. The fact is, my Lord, the Jews throughout the world
have attached an immense importance to this question; and if
Glumthal--confidentially, of course--be made the depositary of
the secret, it will raise him vastly in the estimation of his
co-religionists."
"Let us see if the thing can be done. Is it practicable, and how?" "Oh,
as to that, my Lord, modern legislation is carried on pretty much like a
mercantile concern; you advertise your want, and it is supplied at once.
Ask the newspapers. 'How are we to admit the Jews?' and you 'll get your
answer as regularly as though it were a question of sport addressed to
'Bell's Life.'"
"Candor being the order of the day, what does Mr. Davenport Dunn want
for himself?"
"I am coming to him, my Lord, but not just yet."
"Why, really, Dunn, except that we turn Colonel Blood in your behalf,
and steal the crown for you, I don't see what more we can do."
"It is a mere trifle in point of patronage, my Lord, though, in my
ignorance of such matters, it may be, possibly, not without difficulty,"
said Dunn; and, for the first time, his manner betrayed a sign of
embarrassment "The Earl of Glengariff has an only unmarried daughter,
a lady of great personal attractions, and remarkably gifted in point
of ability; one of those persons, in short, on whom Nature has set the
stamp of high birth, and fitted to be the ornament of a Court."
"But we are all married in the Cabinet. Even the Treasury Lords have got
wives," said Lord Jedburg, laughing, and enjoying the discomfiture of
Dunn's face even more than his own jest.
"I am aware of it, my Lord," replied Dunn, with inflexible gravity; "my
ambitious hopes did not aspire so highly. What I was about to entreat
was your Lordship's assistance to have the lady I have mentioned
appointed to a situation in the household,--one of her Majesty's
ladies--"
"Impossible! perfectly impossible, Dunn!" said the Minister, flinging
away his cigar in impatient anger; "really, you seem to have neither
measure nor moderation in your demands. Such an interference on my part,
if I were mad enough to attempt it, would meet a prompt rebuke."
"If your Lordship's patience had permitted me to finish, you would have
heard that what I proposed was nothing beyond the barren honor of a
'Gazette.' On the day week that her Ladyship's name had so appeared she
would be married."
"It does not alter the matter in the least. It is not in my province to
make such a recommendation, and I refuse it flatly."
"I am sorry for it, my Lord. Your Lordship's refusal may inflict
great evils upon the country,--the rule of an incompetent and ungenial
Government,--the accession to power of men the most unscrupulous and
reckless.". "Cannot you see, sir," said the Minister, sharply, "that I
am in a position to comprehend what my office admits of, and where its
limits are laid? I have told you that these appointments are not in our
hands."
"Sir Robert Peel did not say so, my Lord; he insisted--actually
insisted--on his right to surround the throne with political partisans."
"The Cabinet is not an Equity Court, to be ruled by precedents; and I
tell you once more, Dunn, I should fail if I attempted it."
"The Viscountess might obtain this favor," said Dunn, with an obdurate
persistence that was not to be resisted; "and even if unsuccessful, it
would inflict no rebuff on your Lordship. Indeed, it would come more
gracefully as a proposition from her Ladyship, who could also mention
Lady Augusta's approaching marriage."
"I almost think I might leave you to finish the discussion with my
wife," said his Lordship, laughing; "I half suspect it would be the best
penalty on your temerity. Are you engaged for Sunday?--well, then, dine
with us. And now, that bill being adjourned," said he, with a weary
sigh, "what next?"
"I am now coming to myself,--to my own case, my Lord," said Dunn, with
the very slightest tremor in his voice. "Need I say that I wish it were
in the hands of any other advocacy? I am so far fortunate, however,
that I address one fully conversant with my claims on his party.
For five-and-twenty years I have been the careful guardian of their
interests in a country where, except in mere name, they never possessed
any real popularity. Your Lordship smiles a dissent; may I enter upon
the question?"
"Heaven forbid!" broke in the Minister, smiling good-humoredly.
"Well, my Lord, were I to reduce my services to a mere monetary
estimate, and furnish you with a bill of costs, for what a goodly sum
should I stand in the estimates. I have mainly sustained the charge of
seven county elections, hardly contested. I have paid the entire charges
on twenty-two borough contests. I have subsidized the provincial press
in your favor at a cost of several thousand pounds out of my own pocket
I have compromised three grave actions about to be brought against the
Government. Of the vast sums I have contributed to local charities,
schools, nunneries, societies of various denominations, all in the
interest of your party, I take no account I have spent in these and
like objects a princely fortune, and yet these hundreds of thousands of
pounds are as nothing--mere nothing to the actual personal services I
have rendered to your party. In the great revolution effected by the
sale of encumbered estates, I have so watchfully guarded your interests
that I have replaced the old rampant Toryism of the land by a gentry
at once manageable and practicable,--men intent less upon party than
personal objects, consequently available to the Minister, always
accessible by an offer of direct advantage. I have, with all this, so
thrown a Whig light over the rising prosperity of the country, that
it might seem the result of your wise rule that stimulated men to the
higher civilization they have attained to, and that a more forbearing
charity and a more liberal spirit went hand in hand with improved
agriculture and higher farming. To identify a party with the great
march of this prosperity, to make of your policy a cause of these noble
results, was the grand conception which, for a quarter of a century, I
have carried out. When Mr. O'Connell kept your predecessors in power,
his price was the bit-by-bit surrender of what in your hearts you
believed to be bulwarks of the constitution. In return for my support
what have I got? Some patronage--be it so--for my own dependants
and followers, no doubt! Show me one man of my name, one man of my
convictions, holding place under the Crown. No, my Lord, my power to
serve your party was based on this sure foundation, that I was open to
no imputation; I was the distributor of your patronage to the men best
worthy to receive it,--no more."
"Four o'clock, Dunn; time's up," said his Lordship. "I must go down to
the House."
"I am sorry to have detained your Lordship with so ungracious a theme."
"Well, I do think you might have spared me some of it I know well my
colleagues all know your invaluable services,--an admirable member
of the party, active and able, but not quite neglected, either, eh,
Dunn?--not entirely left in oblivion?"
While he spoke, he busied himself in the search for a paper amidst
the heap of those before him, and could not, therefore, notice the
mortification so palpably expressed on Dunn's face.
"I can't find it," muttered he; "I should like, however, to show you the
memorandum itself, in which your name stands recommended to her Majesty
for a baronetcy."
Dunn's sudden start made the speaker look up; and as he turned his
eyes on him, there was no mistaking the look of determined anger on his
features.
"A baronetcy, my Lord," said he, with a slow, thick utterance, "has
become the recognized reward of a popular writer, or a fashionable
physician, whose wives acquire a sort of Brummagem rank in calling
themselves 'My Lady;' but men like myself,--men who have sustained a
party,--men who, wielding many arms of strength, have devoted them all
to the one task of maintaining in power a certain administration,
which, whatever their gifts, assuredly did not possess the art of
conciliating--"
"Come, it is a peerage you want?" broke in his Lordship, whose manner
betrayed a temper pushed to its last limits.
"If I am to trust your Lordship's tone, the pretension would seem
scarcely credible," said Dunn, calmly.
"I believe I can understand how it would appear to others. I can,
without great difficulty, imagine the light in which it would be
viewed."
"As to that, my Lord, any advancement to a man like me will evoke plenty
of animadversion. I have done too-much for your party not to have made
many enemies. The same objection would apply were I to accept the paltry
acknowledgment you so graciously contemplated for me, and which I warn
you not to offer me."
Was it the naked insolence of this speech, or was it that in uttering
it the proud pretension of the man summoned a degree of dignity to his
manner; but certainly the Minister now looked at him with a sort of
respect, he had not deigned hitherto to bestow.
"You know well, Dunn," he began, in a tone of conciliation, "that
fitness for the elevation is only one of the requirements in such a
case. There are a mass of other considerations,--the ostensible claims;
I mean such as can be-avowed and declared openly,--of the pretending
party,--the services he has rendered to the country at large,--the
merits he can show for some great public recognition. The press,
whatever be its faults nowadays, has no defects on the score of
frankness, and we shall have the question put in twenty different
quarters, 'What brilliant campaign has Mr. Dunn concluded?' 'What
difficult negotiation carried to successful issue?' 'Where have been his
great achievements in the law courts?' To be sure, it might be said that
we honor the industrial spirit of our country in ennobling one who has
acquired a colossal fortune by his own unaided abilities; but Manchester
and Birmingham have also their 'millionnaires.'"
"Your Lordship's time is far too valuable to be passed in such
discussion; even mine might be more profitably spent than in listening
to it, My demand is now before you; in some three weeks hence it is not
impossible it may await the consideration of your Lordship's successors.
In one word, if I leave this room without your distinct pledge on the
subject, you will no longer reckon me amongst the followers of your
party."
"Half-past four, I protest," said Lord Jedburg, taking up his gloves. "I
shall be too late at the House. Let us conclude this to-morrow morning.
Come down here at eleven."
"Excuse me, my Lord. I leave town to-night I am going over to Ireland."
"Yes, you ought to be there; I forgot. Well, you must leave this affair
in my hands. I 'll speak to Croydon and Locksley about it,--both stanch
friends of yours. I can make no pledge, you know,--no actual promise--"
"Nor I either, my Lord," said Dunn, rising. "Let me, however, ask you to
accept of my excuses for Sunday at dinner."
"I regret much that we are not to have the pleasure of your company,"
said his Lordship, with a formal courtesy.
"These appointments," said Dunn, laying down a list he had made on the
table, "are, of course, in your Lordship's hands."
"I conclude so," was the dry reply, as the Minister but-toned his coat.
"I wish your Lordship a very good morning. Good-bye, my Lord." And the
words had their peculiar utterance.
"Good-bye, Mr. Dunn," said the Minister, shortly, and rang for his
carriage.
Dunn had but reached the foot of the stairs, when he heard a rapid
tread behind him. "I beg pardon, Mr. Dunn," cried Bagwell, the private
secretary; "his Lordship sent me to overtake you, and say that the
matter you are desirous about shall be done. His Lordship also hopes you
can dine with him on Sunday."
"Oh, very well; say 'Yes, with much pleasure.' Has his Lordship gone?"
"Yes, by the private door. He was in a great hurry, and will, I fear, be
late, after all."
"There's a good thing to be done just now in potash, Bagwell, at Pesaro.
If you have a spare hundred or two, give me a call to-morrow morning."
And with a gesture to imply secrecy, Dunn moved away, leaving Bagwell in
a dream of gold-getting.
CHAPTER XIX. THE COTTAGE NEAR SNOWDON
At an early portion of this true story, our reader was incidentally told
that Charles Conway had a mother, and that she lived in Wales. Her home
was a little cottage near the village of Bedgellert, a neighborhood
wherein her ancestors had once possessed large estates, but of which not
an acre now acknowledged her as owner. Here, on a mere pittance, she had
lived for years a life of unbroken solitude. The few charities to
the poor her humble means permitted had served to make her loved and
respected; while her gentle manners and kind address gave her that sort
of eminence which such qualities are sure to attain in remote and simple
circles.
All her thoughts in life, all her wishes and ambitions, were centred in
her son; and although it was to the wild and reckless extravagance of
his early life that she owed the penury which now pressed her, although
but for his wasteful excesses she had still been in affluence and
comfort, she never attached to him the slightest blame, nor did her lips
ever utter one syllable of reproach. Strong in the conviction that so
long as the wild excesses of youth stamp nothing of dishonor on the
character, the true nature within has sustained no permanent injury, she
waited patiently for the time when, this season of self-indulgence over,
the higher dictates of manly reason would assert their influence,
and that Charley, having sown his wild oats, would come forth rather
chastened and sobered than stained by his intercourse with the world.
If this theory of hers has its advocates, there are many--and wise
people, too--who condemn it, and who deem those alone safe who have
been carefully guarded from the way of temptation, and have been kept
estranged from the seductions of pleasure. To ourselves the whole
question resolves itself into the nature of the individual, at the same
time that we had far rather repose our confidence in one who had borne
his share in life's passages, gaining his experience, mayhap, with cost,
but coming honorably through the trial, than on him who, standing apart,
had but looked out over the troubled ocean of human passion, nor risked
himself on the sea of man's temptations.
The former was Conway's case: he had led a life of boundless
extravagance; without any thought of the cost, he had launched out
into every expensive pursuit. What we often hear applied to others
figuratively, was strictly applicable to him; he never knew the value
of money; he never knew that anything one desired could be overpaid for.
The end came at last. With a yacht ready stored and fitted out for a
Mediterranean cruise, with three horses heavily engaged at Doncaster,
with a shooting-lodge filled with distinguished company in the
Highlands, with negotiations all but completed for the Hooksley hounds,
with speculations rife as to whether the Duchess of This or the
Countess of That had secured him for a daughter or a niece, there came,
one morning, the startling information from his solicitor that a
large loan he had contemplated raising was rendered impossible by some
casualty of the money-market Recourse must be had to the Jews; heavy
liabilities incurred at Newmarket must be met at once and at any cost.
A week of disaster fell exactly at this conjuncture; he lost largely at
the Portland, largely on the turf; a brother officer, for whom he had
given surety, levanted immensely in debt; while a local bank, in which
a considerable sum of his was vested, failed. The men of sixty per cent
saved him from shipwreck; but they took the craft for the salvage, and
Conway was ruined.
Amidst the papers which Conway had sent to his solicitor as securities
for the loan, a number of family documents had got mingled, old deeds
and titles to estates of which the young man had not so much as heard,
claims against property of whose existence he knew nothing. When
questioned about them by the man of law, he referred him coolly to his
mother, saying, frankly, "it was a matter on which he had never troubled
his head.'" Mrs. Conway herself scarcely knew more. She had heard that
there was a claim in the family to a peerage; her husband used to allude
to it in his own dreamy, indolent fashion, and say that it ought to be
looked after, and that was all.
Had the information come to the mind of an active or enterprising man of
business, it might have fared differently. The solicitor to the family
was, however, himself a lethargic, lazy sort of person, and he sent back
the papers to Mrs. Conway, stating that he was not sure "something might
not be made of them;" that is, added he, "if he had five or six thousand
pounds to expend upon searches, and knew where to prosecute them."
This was but sorry comfort, but it did not fall upon a heart high in
hope or strong in expectation. Mrs. Conway had never lent herself to the
impression that the claim had much foundation, and she heard the tidings
with calm; and all that was remembered of the whole transaction was
when some jocular allusion would be made by Charles to the time when he
should succeed to his peerage, or some as light-hearted jest of the
old lady as to whether she herself was to enjoy a title or not The
more stirring incidents of a great campaign had latterly, however, so
absorbed all the young soldier's interest that he seemed totally to have
forgotten the oft-recurring subject of joke between them. Strange enough
was it, yet, that in the very letter which conveyed to his mother
an account of his Tchernaya achievement, a brief postscript had the
following words:--
"Since I have been confined to hospital, a person connected
with the newspapers, I believe, has been here to learn the
exact story of my adventure, and, curiously enough, has been
pumping me about our family history. Can it be that 'our
peerage' is looking up again? This last sabre-cut on my
skull makes me rather anxious to exchange a chako for a
coronet. Can you send me anything hopeful in this
direction?"
It was on an answer to this letter the old lady was occupied, seated at
an open window, as the sun was just setting on a calm and mellow evening
in late autumn. Well understanding the temperament of him she addressed,
she adverted little to the danger of his late achievement, and simply
seemed to concur in his own remark when recounting it, that he who has
made his name notorious from folly has, more than others, the obligation
to achieve a higher and better reputation; and added, at the same time:
"Charley, what I liked best in your feat was its patriotism. The sense
of rendering a good and efficient service to the cause of your country
was a nobler prompting than any desire for personal distinction." From
this she turned to tell him about what she well knew he loved best
to hear of,--her home and her daily life, with its little round of
uneventful cares, the little Welsh pony "Crw," and his old spaniel
"Belle," and the tulips he had taken such pains about, and the well
he had sunk in the native rock. She had good tidings, too, that the
railroad--the dreadful railroad--was not to take the line of their happy
valley, but to go off in some more "favored" direction. Of the cottage
itself she had succeeded in obtaining a renewed lease,--a piece of news
well calculated to delight him, "if," as she said, "grand dreams of the
peerage might not have impaired his relish for the small hut at the foot
of Snowdon." She had just reached so far when a little chaise, drawn
by a mountain pony, drew up before the door, and a lady in a sort of
half-mourning dress got out and rang the bell. As the old lady rose to
admit her visitor,--for her only servant was at work in the garden,--she
felt no small astonishment. She was known to none but the peasant
neighborhood about her; she had not a single acquaintance in the country
with its gentry; and although the present arrival came with little
display, in her one glance at the figure of the stranger she saw her to
be distinctly of a certain condition in life.
It will conduce equally to brevity and to the interests of our story if
we give what followed in the words wherein Mrs. Conway conveyed it to
her son:--
"Little, I thought, my dear Charley, that I should have to
cross this already long letter,--little suspected that its
real and only interest was to have been suggested as I drew
to its close; and here, if I had the heart for it, were the
place to scold you for a pretty piece of mystification you
once practised upon me, when you induced me to offer the
hospitality of this poor cottage to an humble gentlewoman,
whose poverty would not deem even my life an existence of
privation,--the sister of a fellow-soldier you called her,
and made me to believe--whose the fault I am not sure--that
she was some not very young or very attractive person, but
one whose claim lay in her friendless lot and forlorn
condition. Say what you will, such was my impression, and it
could have no other source than your description.
[Illustration: 244]
"Yes, Charley, my mind-picture was of a thin-faced, somewhat
sandy-haired lady, of some six or eight and thirty years,
bony, angular, and awkward, greatly depressed, and naturally
averse to intercourse with those who had not known her or
her better fortunes; shall I add that I assisted my
portrait by adding coarse hands, and filled up my
anticipation by suspecting a very decided Irish brogue? Of
course this flattering outline could not have been revealed
in a vision, and must have come from your hands, deny it
whenever and however you may! And now for the reality,--the
very prettiest girl I ever saw, since I left off seeing
pretty people, when I was young and had pretensions myself:
even then I do not remember any one handsomer, and with a
winning grace of manner equal, if not superior, to her
beauty. You know me as a very difficult critic on the
subject of breeding and maintien. I feel that I am so,
even to injustice, because I look for the reserved courtesy
of one era as well as the easy frankness of another. She
has both; and she is a court lady who could adorn a
cottage. Of my own atrocious sketch there was nothing about
her.    Stay, there was.    She had the Irish accent, but by
some witchery of her own I got to like it,--fancied it was
musical and breathed of the sweet south; but if I go on
with her perfections, I shall never come to the important
question, for which you care more to hear besides, as to how
I know all these things. And now, to my horror, I find how
little space is left me to tell you. Well, in three words
you shall have it. She has been here to see me on her way
somewhere, her visit being prompted by the wish to place in
my hands some very curious and very old family records,
found by a singular accident in an Irish country-house. They
relate to the claim of some ancestor of yours to certain
lands in Ireland, and the right is asserted in the name of
Baron Conway, and afterwards the Lord Viscount Lackington. I
saw no further; indeed, except that they all relate to our
dear peerage, they seem to possess no very peculiar
interest. If it were not that she would introduce your name,
push me with interminable questions as to what it was you
had really done, what rewards you had or were about to reap,
where you were, and, above all, how, I should have called
her visit the most disinterested piece of kindness I ever
heard of. Still she showed a sincere and ardent desire to
serve us, and said that she would be ready to make any delay
in London to communicate with our lawyer, and acquaint him
fully with the circumstances of this discovery.
"I unceasingly entreated her to be my guest, were it only
for a few days. I even affected to believe that I would send
for our lawyer to come down and learn the curious details of
the finding of the papers; but she pleaded the absolute
necessity of her presence in London so strongly--she
betrayed, besides, something like a deep anxiety for some
coming event--that I was obliged to abandon my attempt, and
limit our acquaintance by the short two hours we had passed
together.
"It will take some time, and another long letter, to tell
you of the many topics we talked over; for, our first
greeting over, we felt towards each other like old friends.
At last she arose to leave me, and never since the evening
you bade me good-bye did the same loneliness steal over my
heart as when I saw her little carriage drive away from the
door.
"One distressing recollection alone clouds the memory of our
meeting: I suffered her to leave me without a promise to
return. I could not, without infringing delicacy, have
pressed her more to tell me of herself and her plans for the
future, and yet even now I regret that, at any hazard, I did
not risk the issue. The only pledge I could obtain was that
she would write to me. I am now at the end of my paper, but
not of my theme, of which you shall hear more in my next.
Meanwhile, if you are not in love with her, I am.
"Your affectionate mother,
"Marian Conway."
We have ourselves nothing to add to the narrative of this letter save
the remark that Mrs. Conway felt far more deeply than she expressed the
disappointment of not being admitted to Sybella's full confidence. The
graceful captivation of the young girl's manner, heightened in interest
by her friendless and lone condition,--the perilous path in life that
must be trodden by one so beautiful and unprotected,--had made a deep
impression on the old lady's heart, and she was sincere in self-reproach
that she had suffered her to leave her.
She tried again and again, by recalling all that passed between them, to
catch some clew to what Sybella's future pointed; but so guardedly had
the young girl shrouded every detail of her own destiny, that the effort
was in vain. Sybella had given an address in town, where Mrs. Conway's
lawyer might meet her if necessary, and with a last hope the old lady
had written a note to that place, entreating, as the greatest favor,
that she would come down and pass some days with her at the cottage; but
her letter came back to her own hands. Miss Kellett was gone.
CHAPTER XX. A SUPPER.
In long-measured sweep the waves flowed smoothly in upon the low shore
at Baldoyle of a rich evening in autumn, as a very old man tottered
feebly down to the strand and seated himself on a rock. Leaning his
crossed arms on his stout stick, he gazed steadily and calmly on the
broad expanse before him. Was it that they mirrored to him the wider
expanse of that world to which he was so rapidly tending; was it in that
measured beat he recognized the march of time, the long flow of years he
could count, and which still swept on, smooth but relentless; or was
it that the unbroken surface soothed by its very sameness a brain long
wearied by its world conflict? Whatever the cause, old Matthew Dunn came
here every evening of his life, and, seated on the self-same spot, gazed
wistfully over the sea before him.
Although his hair was snow-white and the wrinkles that furrowed his
cheeks betrayed great age, his eyes yet preserved a singular brightness,
and in their vivid glances showed that the strong spirit that reigned
within was still unquenched. The look of defiance they wore was the very
essence of the man,--one who accepted any challenge that fortune
flung him, and, whether victor or vanquished, only prepared for fresh
conflict.
There was none of the weariness so often observable in advanced age
about his features, nothing of that expression that seems to crave rest
and peace, still as little was there anything of that irritable activity
which seems at times to' counterfeit past energy of temperament; no,
he was calm, stern, and self-possessed, the man who had fought this way
from boyhood, and who asked neither grace nor favor of fortune as he
drew nigh the end of the journey!
"I knew I'd find you here," said a deep voice close to his ear. "How are
you?"
The old man looked up, and the next moment his son was in his arms.
"Davy, my own boy--Davy, I was just thinking of you; was it Friday or
Saturday you said you 'd come."
"I thought I could have been here Saturday, father, but Lord Jedburg
made a point of my dining with him yesterday; and it was a great
occasion,--three Cabinet Ministers present, a new Governor-General of
India too,--I felt it was better to remain."
"Right, Davy,--always right,--them's the men to keep company with!"
"And how are you, sir? Are you hale and stout and hearty as ever?" said
Dunn, as he threw his head back, the better to look at the old man.
"As you see me, boy: a little shaky about the knees, somewhat tardy
about getting up of a morning; but once launched, the old craft can keep
her timbers together. But tell me the news, lad,--tell me the news, and
never mind me."
"Well, sir, last week was a very threatening one for us. No money to be
had on any terms, discounts all suspended, shares failing everywhere,
good houses crashing on all sides, nothing but disasters with every
post; but we 've worked through it, sir. Glumthal behaved well, though
at the very last minute; and Lord Glengariff, too, deposited all his
title-deeds at Hanbridge's for a loan of thirty-six thousand; and then,
as Downing Street also stood to us, we weathered the gale; but it was
close work, father,--so close at one moment I telegraphed to Liverpool
to secure a berth in the 'Arctic.'"
A sudden start from the old man stopped him, but he quickly resumed:
"Don't be alarmed, sir; my message excited no suspicion, for I sent a
fellow to New York by the packet, and now all is clear again, and we
have good weather before us."
"The shares fell mighty low in the allotment, Davy; how was that?"
"Partly from the cause I have mentioned, father, the tightness in the
money market; partly that I suspect we had an enemy in the camp, that
daughter of Kellett's--"
"Did n't I say so? Did n't I warn you about her? Did n't I tell you that
it was the brood of the serpent that stung us first?" cried out the old
man, with a wild energy; "and with all that you would put her there with
the Lord and his family, where she 'd know all that was doing, see the
letters, and maybe write the answers to them! Where was the sense and
prudence of that, Davy?"
"She was an enthusiast, father, and I hoped that she'd have been content
to revel in that realm, but I was mistaken."
There was a tone of dejection in the way he spoke the last words that
made the old man fix his eyes steadfastly on him. "Well, Davy, go on,"
said he.
"I have no more to say, sir," said he, in the same sad voice. "The Earl
has dismissed her, and she has gone away."
"That's right, that's right,--better late than never. Neither luck nor
grace could come of Paul Kellett's stock. I hope that's the last we 'll
hear of them; and now, Davy, how is the great world doing? How is the
Queen?"
Dunn could scarcely suppress a smile as he answered this question, asked
as it was in real and earnest anxiety; and for some time the old man
continued to press him with eager inquiries as to the truth of various
newspaper reports about royal marriages and illustrious visitors, of
which it was strange how he preserved the recollection.
"You have not asked me about myself, father," said Dunn at last, "and I
think my fortunes might have had the first place in your interest."
"Sure you told me this minute that you didn't see the Queen," said the
old man, peevishly.
"Very true, sir, I did not, but I saw her Minister. I placed before him
the services I had done his party, my long sacrifices of time, labor,
and money in their cause; I showed him that I was a man who had
established the strongest claim upon the Government."
"And wouldn't be refused,--wouldn't be denied, eh, Davy?"
"Just so, sir. I intimated that also, so far as it was prudent to do
so."
"The stronger the better, Davy; weak words show a faint heart. 'Tis
knowing the cost of your enmity will make men your friends."
"I believe, sir, that in such dealings my own tact is my safest guide.
It is not to-day or yesterday that I have made acquaintance with men of
this order. For upwards of two-and-twenty years I have treated Ministers
as my equals."
The old man heard this proud speech with an expression of almost ecstasy
on his features, and grasped his son's hand in a delight too great for
words.
"Ay, father, I have made our name a cognate number in this kingdom's
arithmetic. Men talk of Davenport Dunn as one recognized in the land."
"'Tis true; 'tis true as the Bible!" muttered the old man.
"And what is more," continued the other, warming with his theme, "what
I have done I have done for all time. I have laid the foundations deep,
that the edifice might endure. A man of inferior ambition would have
been satisfied with wealth, and the enjoyments it secures; he might
have held a seat in Parliament, sat on the benches beside the Minister,
mayhap have held some Lordship of This or Under-Secretaryship of that,
selling his influence ere it matured, as poor farmers sell their crops
standing,--but I preferred the' patient path. I made a waiting race of
it, father, and see what the prize is to be. Your son is to be a peer of
Great Britain!"
The old man's mouth opened wide, and his eyes glared with an almost
unnatural brightness, as, catching his son with both arms, he tried to
embrace him.
"There, dear father,--there!" said Dunn, calmly; "you must not
over-excite yourself."
"It's too much, Davy,--it's too much; I'll never live to see it."
"That you will, sir,--for a time, indeed, I was half disposed to
stipulate that the title should be conferred upon yourself. It would
have thus acquired another generation in date, but I remembered how
indisposed you might feel to all the worry and care the mere forms of
assuming it might cost you. You would not like to leave this old spot,
besides--"
"No, on no account," said the old man, pensively.
"And then I thought that your great pride, after all, would be to hear
of me, your own Davy, as Lord Castle-dunn."
"I thought it would be plain Dunn,--Lord Dunn," said the old man,
quickly.
"If the name admitted of it, I 'd have preferred it so."
"And what is there against the name?" asked he angrily.
"Nothing, father; none have ever presumed to say a word against it. In
talking the matter over, however, with some members of the Cabinet, one
or two suggested Dunnscourt, but the majority inclined to Castledunn."
"And what did your Lordship say?" asked the old man, with a gleeful
cackle. "Oh, Davy! I never thought the day would come that I 'd call you
by any name I 'd love so well as that you bore when a child; but see,
now, it makes my old eyes run over to speak to you as 'my Lord.'"
"It is a fair and honest pride, father," said Dunn, caressingly. "We
stormed the breach ourselves, with none to help, none to cheer us on."
"Oh, Davy, but it does me good to call you 'my Lord.'"
"Well, sir, you are only anticipating a week or two. Parliament will
assemble after the elections, and then be prorogued; immediately
afterwards there will be four elevations to the peerage,--mine one of
them."
"Yes, my Lord," mumbled the old man, submissively.
"But this is not all, father; the same week that sees me gazetted a peer
will announce my marriage with an Earl's daughter."
"Davy, Davy, this luck is coming too quick! Take care, my son, that
there's no pit before you."
"I know what I am doing, sir, and so does the Lady Augusta Arden. You
remember the Earl of Glengariffs name?"
"Where you were once a tutor, is it?"
"The same, sir."
"It was they that used to be so cruel to you, Davy, wasn't it?"
"I was a foolish boy, ignorant of the world and its ways at the time. I
fancied fifty things to mean offence which never were intended to wound
me."
"Ay, they made you eat in the servants' hall, I think."
"Never, sir,--never; they placed me at a side table once or twice when
pressed for room."
"Well, it was the room you had somewhere in a hayloft, eh?"
"Nothing of the kind, sir. Your memory is all astray. My chamber was
small,--for the cottage had not much accommodation,--but I was well and
suitably lodged."
"Well, what was it they did?" muttered he to himself. "I know it was
something that made you cry the whole night after you came home."
"Father, father! these are unprofitable memories," said Dunn, sternly.
"Were one to treasure up the score of all the petty slights he may have
received in life, so that in some day of power he might acquit the debt,
success would be anything but desirable."
"I'm not so sure of that, Davy. I never forgot an injury."
"I am more charitable, sir," said Dunn, calmly.
"No, you 're not, Davy,--no, you 're not," replied the old man, eagerly,
"but you think it's wiser to be never-minding; and so it would, boy, if
the man that injured you was to forget it too. Ay, Davy, that's the rub.
But he won't; he 'll remember to his dying day that there's a score
between you."
"I tell you, father, that these maxims do not apply to persons of
condition, all whose instincts and modes of thought are unlike those of
the inferior classes."
"They are men and women, Davy,--they are men and women."
Dunn arose impatiently, observing that the night was growing chilly, and
it were better to return to the house.
"I mean to sup with you," said he, gayly, "if you have anything to give
me."
"A rasher and eggs, and a bladebone of cold mutton is all I have,"
muttered the old man, gloomily. "I would not let them buy a chicken
this week, when I saw the shares falling. Give me your arm, Davy, I've
a slight weakness in the knees; it always took me at this season since
I was a boy." And mumbling how strange it was that one did not throw off
childish ailments as one grew older, he crept slowly along towards the
house.
As they entered the kitchen, Dunn remarked with astonishment how little
there remained of the abundance and plenty which had so characterized it
of old. No hams, no flitches hung from the rafters; no sturdy barrels of
butter stood against the walls; the chicken-coop was empty; and even
to the good fire that graced the hearth there was a change, for a few
half-sodden turf-sods were all that lingered in the place. Several
baskets and hampers, carefully corded and sealed, were ranged beside the
dresser, in which Dunn recognized presents of wine, choice cordials and
liqueurs, that he had himself addressed to the old man.
"Why, father, how is this?" asked he, half angrily. "I had hoped for
better treatment at your hands. You have apparently not so much as
tasted any of the things I sent you."
"There they are, indeed, Davy, Just as they came for 'Matthew Dunn,
Esq., with care,' written on them, and not a string cut!"
"And why should this be so, sir, may I ask?"
"Well, the truth is, Davy," said he, with a sigh, "I often longed to
open them, and uncork a bottle of ale, or brandy, or, maybe, sherry,
and sore tempted I felt to do it when I was drinking my buttermilk of
a night; but then I 'd say to myself, 'Ain't you well and hearty? keep
cordials for the time when you are old, and feeble, and need support;
don't be giving yourself bad habits, that maybe some fifteen or twenty
years hence you'll be sorry for.' There's the reason, now, and I see by
your face you don't agree with me."
Dunn made no answer, but taking up a knife he speedily cut the cordage
of a large hamper, and as speedily covered a table with a variety of
bottles.
"We 'll drink this to the Queen's health, father," said he, holding up
a flask of rare hock; "and this to the 'House of Lords,' for which
estimable body I mean to return thanks; and then, father, I 'll give
'Prosperity to the landed interest and the gentry of Ireland,' for which
you shall speak."
Dunn went gayly along in this jesting fashion while he emptied the
hamper of its contents, displaying along the dresser a goodly line of
bottles, whose shape and corkage guaranteed their excellence. Meanwhile
an old servant-woman had prepared the table, and was busily engaged with
the materials of the meal.
"If I only thought we were going to have a feast, Davy, I 'd have made
her light a fire in the parlor," said the old man, apologetically.
"We're better here, sir; it's cosier and homelier, and I know you think
so. Keep your own corner, father, and I 'll sit here."
With appetites sharpened by the sea air and a long fast, they seated
themselves at table and eat heartily. If their eyes met, a smile of
pleasant recognition was exchanged; for while the old man gazed almost
rapturously on his illustrious son, Dunn bent a look of scarcely
inferior admiration on that patriarchal face, whereon time seemed but to
mellow the traits that marked its wisdom.
"And what name do they give this, Davy?" said he, as he held up his
glass to the light.
"Burgundy, father,--the king of wines. The wine-merchant names this
Chambertin, which was the favorite drinking of the great Napoleon."
"I wonder at that, now," said the old man, sententiously.
"Wonder at it! And why so, father?--is it not admirable wine?"
"It's just for that reason, Davy; every sup I swallow sets me
a-dreaming of wonderful notions,--things I know the next minute is quite
impossible,--but I feel when the wine is on my lips as if they were all
easy and practicable."
"After all, father, just remember that you cannot imagine anything one
half so strange as the change in our own actual condition. There you
sit, with your own clear head, to remind you of when and how you began
life, and here am I!--for I am, as sure as if I held my patent in my
hand, the Right Honorable Lord Castledunn."
"To your Lordship's good health and long life," said the old man,
fervently.
"And now to a worthier toast, father,--Lady Castledunn that is to be."
[Illustration: 255]
"With all my heart. Lady Castledunn, whoever she is."
"I said, 'that is to be,' father; and I have given you her name,--the
Lady Augusta Arden."
"I never heard of her," muttered the old man, dreamily.
"An Earl's daughter, sir; the ninth Earl of Glengariff," said Dunn,
pompously.
"What 's her fortune, Davy? She ought to bring you a good fortune."
"Say rather, sir, it is I that should make a splendid settlement,--so
proud a connection should meet its suitable acknowledgment."
"I understand little about them things, Davy; but there's one thing I do
know, there never was the woman born I 'd make independent of me if she
was my wife. It is n't in nature, and it isn't in reason."
"I can only say, sir, that with your principles you would not marry
into the peerage."
"Maybe I 'd find one would suit me as well elsewhere."
"That is very possible, sir," was the dry reply.
"And if she cost less, maybe she'd wear as well," said the old man,
peevishly; "but I suppose your Lordship knows best what suits your
Lordship's station."
"That also is possible, sir," said Dunn, coldly.
The old man's brow darkened, he pushed his glass from him, and looked
offended and displeased.
Dunn quickly saw the change that had passed over him, and cutting
the wire of a champagne flask, he filled out a foaming tumbler of the
generous wine, saying, "Drink this to your own good health, father,--to
the man whose wise teachings and prudent maxims have made his son a
foremost figure in the age, and who has no higher pride than to own
where he got his earliest lessons."
"Is it true, Davy,--are them words true?" asked the old man, trembling
with eagerness.
"As true as that I sit here." And Dunn drained his glass as he spoke.
The old man, partly wearied by the late sitting, partly confused by all
the strange tidings he had heard, drooped his head upon his chest and
breathed heavily, muttering indistinctly a few broken and incoherent
words. Lost in his own reveries, Dunn had not noticed this drowsy
stupor, when suddenly the old man said,--
"Davy,--are you here, Davy?"
"Yes, father, here beside you."
"What a wonderful dream I had, Davy!" he continued; "I dreamed you
were made a lord, and that the Queen sent for you, and I was looking
everywhere, up and down, for the fine cloak with the ermine all over it
that you had to wear before her Majesty; sorra a one of me could find
it at all; at last I put my hand on it, and was going to put it on your
shoulders, when what should it turn out but a shroud!--ay, a shroud!"
"You are tired, father; these late hours are bad for you. Finish that
glass of wine, and I'll say good-night."
"I wonder what sign a shroud is, Davy?" mumbled the old man,
pertinaciously adhering to the dream. "A coffin, they say, is a
wedding."
"It is not a vigorous mind like yours, father, that lends faith to such
miserable superstitions."
"That is just what they are not. Dreams is dreams, Davy."
"Just so, sir; and, being dreams, have neither meaning nor consistency."
"How do you know that more than me? Who told you they were miserable
superstitions? I call them warnings,--warnings that come out of our own
hearts; and they come to us in our sleep just because that's the time
our minds is not full of cares and troubles, but is just taking
up whatever chances to cross them. What made Luke Davis dream of a
paycock's feather the night his son was lost at sea? Answer me that if
you can."
"These are unprofitable themes, father; we only puzzle ourselves when we
discuss them. Difficult as they are to believe, they are still harder to
explain."
"I don't want to explain them," said the old man, sternly, for he deemed
that the very thought of such inquiry had in it something presumptuous.
"Well, father," said Dunn, rising, "I sincerely trust you will sleep
soundly now, and be disturbed by none of these fancies. I must hasten
away. I leave for Belfast by the early train, and have a mass of letters
to answer before that."
"When am I to see you again, Davy?" asked the old man, eagerly.
"Very soon, I hope, sir; as soon as I can, of that you may be certain,"
said he, cordially.
"Let it be soon, then, Davy, for the meeting does me good. I feel
to-night ten years younger than before you came, and it isn't the
wine either; 'tis the sight of your face and the touch of your hand.
Good-night, and my blessing be with you!" And a tear coursed down his
seared cheek as he spoke.
CHAPTER XXI. A SHOCK.
It was past midnight when Davenport Donn reached his own house. His
return was unexpected, and it was some time before he gained admission.
The delay, however, did not excite his impatience; his head was so
deeply occupied with cares and thoughts for the future that he was
scarcely conscious of the time he had been kept waiting.
Mr. Clowes, hurriedly summoned from his bed, came up full of apologies
and excuses.
"We did not expect you till to-morrow, sir, by the late packet," said
he, in some confusion. Dunn made no answer, and the other went on: "Mr.
Hankes, too, thought it not improbable you would not be here before
Wednesday."
"When was he here?"
"To-day sir; he left that oak box here this morning, and those letters,
sir."
While Dunn carelessly turned over the superscriptions, among which he
found none to interest him, Clowes repeatedly pressed his master to take
some supper, or at least a biscuit and a glass of dry sherry.
"Send for Mr. Hankes," said Dunn, at last, not condescending to notice
the entreaties of his butler. "Let him wait for me here when he comes."
And so saying, he took a candle and passed upstairs.
Mr. Clowes was too well acquainted with his master's temper to obtrude
unseasonably upon him, so that he glided noiselessly away till such time
as he might be wanted.
When Dunn entered the drawing-room, he lighted the candles of the
candelabra over the chimney and some of those which occupied the
branches along the walls, and then, turning the key in the door, sat
down to contemplate the new and splendid decorations of the apartment.
The task had been confided to skilful hands, and no more attempted than
rooms of moderate size and recent architecture permitted. The walls,
of a very pale green, displayed to advantage a few choice
pictures,--Italian scenes by Turner, a Cuyp or two, and a Mieris,--all
of them of a kind to interest those who had no connoisseurship to
be gratified. A clever statuette of the French Emperor, a present
graciously bestowed by himself, stood on a console of malachite, and
two busts of Whig statesmen occupied brackets at either side of a vast
mirror. Except these, there was little ornament, and the furniture
seemed rather selected for the indulgence of ease and comfort than
for show or display. A few bronzes, some curious carvings in ivory, an
enamelled miniature, and some illuminated missals were scattered about
amongst illustrated books and aquarelles, but in no great profusion; nor
was there that indiscriminate litter which too frequently imparts to
the salon the character of a curiosity-shop. The rooms, in short, were
eminently habitable.
Over the chimney in the back drawing-room was a clever sketch, by
Thorburn, of Lady Augusta Arden. She was in a riding-habit, and standing
with one hand on the mane of an Arab pony,--a beautiful creature
presented to her by Dunn. While he stood admiring the admirable
likeness, and revolving in his mind the strange traits of that
thoughtfulness which had supplied the picture,--for it was all Sybella
Kellett's doing, every detail of the decorations, the color of the
walls, the paintings, even to the places they occupied, had all been
supplied by her,--Dunn started, and a sudden sickness crept over him. On
a little table beside the fireplace stood a small gold salver, carved by
Cellini, and which served to hold a few objects, such as coins and
rings and antique gems. What could it be, then, amidst these century-old
relics, which now overcame and so unmanned him that he actually
grew pale as death, and sank at last, trembling, into a seat, cold
perspiration on his face, and his very lips livid?
Mixed up amid the articles of virt on that salver was an
old-fashioned penknife with a massive handle of bloodstone, to which
a slip of paper was attached, containing two or three words in Miss
Kellett's hand. Now, the sight of this article in that place so overcame
Dunn that it was some minutes ere he could reach out his hand to take
the knife. When giving to Miss Kellett the charge of several rare and
valuable objects, he had intrusted her with keys to certain drawers,
leaving to her own judgment the task of selection. He had totally
forgotten that this knife was amongst these; but even had he remembered
the circumstance, it would not have caused alarm, naturally supposing
how little worthy of notice such an object would seem amidst others
of price and rarity. And yet there it was, and, by the slip of paper
fastened to it, attesting a special notice.
With an effort almost convulsive he at last seized the knife, and reads
the words. They were simply these: "A penknife, of which Mr. Dunn can
probably supply the history." He dropped it as he read, and lay back,
with a sense of fainting sickness.
The men of action and energy can face the positive present perils
of life with a far bolder heart than they can summon to confront the
terrors of conscience-stricken imagination. In the one case danger
assumes a shape and a limit; in the other it looms out of distance,
vast, boundless, and full of mystery. She knew, then, the story of his
boyish shame; she had held the tale secretly in her heart through all
their intercourse, reading his nature, mayhap, through the clew of that
incident, and tracing out his path in life by the light it afforded;
doubtless, too, she knew of his last scene with her father,--that
terrible interview, wherein the dying man uttered a prediction that was
almost a curse: she had treasured up these memories, and accepted his
aid with seeming frankness, and yet, all the while that she played the
grateful, trusting dependant, she had been slowly pursuing a vengeance.
If Paul Kellett had confided to her the story of this childish
transgression, he had doubtless revealed to her how heavily it had been
avenged--how, with a persistent, persecuting hate, Dunn had tracked him,
through difficulty and debt, to utter ruin. She had therefore read him
in his real character, and had devoted herself to a revenge deeper than
his own. Ay, he was countermined!
Such was the turn of his thoughts, as he sat there wiping the cold sweat
that broke from his forehead, and cursing the blindness that had so
long deceived him; and he, whose deep craft had carried him triumphant
through all the hardest trials of the world, the man who had encountered
the most subtle intellects, the great adventurer in a whole ocean of
schemes, was to be the dupe and sport of a girl!
And now, amid his self-accusings, there rose up that strange attempt at
compromise the baffled heart so often clings to, that he had, at times,
half suspected this deep and secret treachery,--that she had not been
either so secret or so crafty as she fancied herself. "If my mind," so
reasoned he, "had not been charged with far weightier themes, I should
have detected her at once; all her pretended gratitude, all her assumed
thankfulness, had never deceived me; her insignificance was her
safeguard. And yet withal, I sometimes felt, she is too deeply in our
confidence,--she sees too much of the secret machinery of our plans.
While I exulted over the ignoble dependence she was doomed to,--while
I saw, with a savage joy, how our lots in life were reversed,--was I
self-deceived?"
So impressed was he with the idea of a game in which he had been
defeated, that he went over in his mind every circumstance he could
recall of his intercourse with her. Passages the simplest, words of
little significance, incidents the most trivial, he now charged with
deepest meaning. Amidst these, there was one for which he could find no
solution,--why had she so desired to be the owner of the cottage near
Bantry? It was there that Driscoll had discovered the Conway papers. Was
it possible--the thought flashed like lightning on him--that there was
any concert between the girl and this man? This suspicion no sooner
occurred to him than it took firm hold of his mind. None knew better
than Dunn the stuff Driscoll was made of, and knowing, besides, how he
had, by his own seeming luke-warmness, affronted that crafty schemer, it
was by no means improbable that such an alliance as this existed. And
this last discovery of documents,--how fortunate was it that Hankes had
secured them! The papers might or might not be important; at all events,
the new Lord Lackington might be brought to terms by their means; he
would have come to his peerage so unexpectedly that all the
circumstances of the contested claim would be strange to him. This was a
point to be looked at; and as he reasoned thus, again did he go back to
Sybella Kellett, and what the nature of her game might be, and how it
should first display itself.
A tap at the door startled him. "Mr. Hankes is below, sir," said Clowes.
"I will be with him in a moment," replied Dunn; and again relapsed into
his musings.
CHAPTER XXII. A MASTER AND MAN
"Is she gone?--where to?" cried Dunn, without answering Mr. Hankes's
profuse salutations and welcomes.
"Yes, sir; she sailed yesterday."
"Sailed, and for where?"
"For Malta, sir, in the Euxine steamer. Gone to her brother in the
Crimea. One of the people saw her go on board at Southampton."
"Was she alone?"
"Quite alone, sir. My man was present when she paid the boatman. She had
very little luggage, but they demanded half a guinea--"
"What of Driscoll? Have you traced him?" asked Dunn, impatient at the
minuteness of this detail.
"He left London for Havre on the 12th of last month, sir, with a
passport for Italy. He carried one of Hart-well's circulars for three
hundred pounds, and was to have taken a courier at Paris, but did not."
"And where is he now?" asked Dunn, abruptly.
"I am unable to say, sir," said Hankes, almost abjectly, for he felt
self-rebuked in the acknowledgment. "My last tidings of him came from
Como,--a new Hydropathic Institution there."
"Expecting to find the Viscount Lackington," said Dunn, with a sardonic
laugh. "Death was before you, Master Driscoll; you did not arrive in
time for even the funeral. I say, Hankes," added he, quickly, "what of
the new Viscount? Has he answered our letters?"
"Not directly, sir; but there came a short note signed 'C. Christopher,'
stating that his Lordship had been very ill, and was detained at Ems,
and desiring to have a bank post-bill for two hundred forwarded to him
by return."
"You sent it?"
"Of course, sir; the letter had some details which proved it to be
authentic."
"And the sum a trifle," broke in Dunn. "She is scarcely at Malta by
this, Hankes. What am I thinking of? She 'll not reach it before next
Friday or Saturday. Do you remember young Kellett's regiment?"
"No, sir."
"Well, find it out. I'll write to the Horse Guards tomorrow to have him
promoted,--to give him an Ensigncy in some regiment serving in India.
Whom do you know at Malta, Hankes?"
"I know several, sir; Edmond Grant, in the Storekeeper's Department;
James Hocksley, Second Harbor-Master; Paul Wesley, in the
Under-Secretary's Office."
"Any of them will do. Telegraph to detain her; that her brother is
coming home; she must not go to the Crimea." There was a stern fixity of
purpose declared in the way these last words were spoken, which at the
same time warned Hankes from asking any explanation of them. "And now
for business. What news from Arigua,--any ore?"
"Plenty, sir; the new shaft has turned out admirably. It is yielding
upwards of twenty-eight per cent, and Holmes offers thirty pounds a ton
for the raw cobalt."
"I don't care for that, sir. I asked how were shares," said Dunn,
peevishly.
"Not so well as might be expected, sir. The shake at Glengariff was felt
widely."
"What do you mean? The shares fell, but they rose again; they suffered
one of those fluctuations that attend on all commercial or industrial
enterprises; but they rallied even more quickly than they went down.
When I left town yesterday, they were at one hundred and forty-three."
"I know it, sir. I received your telegram, and I showed it to Bayle and
Childers, but they only smiled, and said, 'So much the better for the
holders.'"
"I defy any man--I don't care what may be his abilities or what his
zeal--to benefit this country!" exclaimed Dunn, passionately. "There
is amongst Irishmen, towards each other, such an amount of narrow
jealousy--mean, miserable, envious rivalry--as would swamp the best
intentions, and destroy the wisest plans that ever were conceived. May
my fate prove a warning to whoever is fool enough to follow me!"
Was it that when Dunn thus spoke he hoped to persuade Mr. Hankes that he
was a noble-hearted patriot, sorrowing over the errors of an ungrateful
country? Did he fancy that his subtle lieutenant, the associate of all
his deep intrigues, the confidant of his darkest schemes, was suddenly
to see in him nothing but magnanimity of soul and single-hearted
devotedness? No, I cannot presume to say that he indulged in any such
delusion. He uttered the words just to please himself,--to flatter
himself! as some men drink off a cordial to give them Dutch courage.
There are others that enunciate grand sentiments, high sounding and
magniloquent, the very music and resonance of their words imparting a
warm glow within them.
It is a common error to imagine that such "stage thunder" is confined to
that after-dinner eloquence in whose benefit the canons of truth-telling
are all repealed. Far from it. The practice enters into every hour of
every-day life, and the greatest knave that ever rogued never cheated
the world half as often as he cheated himself!
As though it had been a glass of brown sherry that he swallowed, Mr.
Dunn felt "better" after he had uttered these fine words. He experienced
a proud satisfaction in thinking what a generous heart beat within
his own waistcoat; and thus reassured, he thought well of the world at
large.
"And Ossory, Mr. Hankes,--how is Ossory?"
"A hundred and fourteen, with a look upwards," responded Mr. Hankes.
"Since the day of 'the run' deposits have largely increased. Indeed,
I may say we are now the great country gentry bank of the midland. We
discount freely, too, and we lend generously."
"I shall want some ready money soon, Hankes," said Dunn, as he paced the
room with his hands behind his back, and his head bent forward. "You 'll
have to sell out some of those Harbor shares."
"Bantry's, sir? Glumthal's have them as securities!"
"So they have; I forgot. Well, St Columbs, or the Patent Fuel, or that
humbug discovery of Patterson's,--the Irish Asphalt There's an American
fellow, by the way, wants that."
"They're very low,--very low, all these, sir," said Hankes,
lugubriously. "They sank so obstinately that I just withdrew our name
quietly, so that we can say any day we have long ceased any connection
with these enterprises."
"She 'll scarcely make any delay in Malta, Hankes. Your message ought to
be there by Thursday at latest" And then, as if ashamed of showing where
his thoughts were straying, he said, "All kinds of things--odds and ends
of every sort--are jostling each other in my brain to-night."
"You want rest, sir; you want nine or ten hours of sound sleep."
"Do I look fatigued or harassed?" asked Dunn, with an eagerness that
almost startled the other.
"A little tired, sir; not more than that," cautiously answered Hankes.
"But I don't feel tired. I am not conscious of any weariness," said
he, pettishly. "I suspect that you are not a very acute physiognomist,
Hankes. I have told you," added he, hastily, "I shall want some twelve
or fifteen thousand pounds soon. Look out, too, for any handsome
country-seat--in the South, I should prefer it--that may be in the
market I 'll not carry out my intentions about Kellett's Court. It is
a tumble-down old concern, and would cost us more in repairs than a
handsome house fit to inhabit."
"Am I to have the honor of offering my felicitations, sir?" said Hankes,
obsequiously; "are the reports of the newspapers as to a certain happy
event to be relied on?"
"You mean as to my marriage? Yes, perfectly true. I might, in a mere
worldly point of view, have looked higher,--not higher, certainly
not,--but I might have contracted what many would have called a more
advantageous connection; in fact, I might have had any amount of money I
could care for, but I determined for what I deemed the wiser course. You
are probably not aware that this is a very long attachment. Lady Augusta
and myself have been as good as engaged to each other for--for a number
of years. She was very young when we met first,--just emerging from
early girlhood; but the sentiment of her youthful choice has never
varied, and, on my part, the attachment has been as constant."
"Indeed, sir!" said Hankes, sorely puzzled what to make of this
declaration.
"I know," said Dunn, returning rapidly to the theme, "that nothing
will seem less credible to the world at large than a man of my stamp
marrying for love! The habit is to represent us as a sort of human
monster, a creature of wily, money-getting faculties, shrewd,
over-reaching, and successful. They won't give us feelings, Hankes. They
won't let us understand the ties of affection and the charms of a home.
Well," said he, after a long pause, "there probably never lived a man
more mistaken, more misconceived by the world than myself."
Hankes heaved a heavy sigh; it was, he felt, the safest thing he could
do, for he did not dare to trust himself with a single word. The sigh,
however, was a most profound one, and, plainly as words, declared the
compassionate contempt he entertained for a world so short-sighted and
so meanly minded.
"After all," resumed Dunn, "it is the penalty every man must pay for
eminence. The poor little nibblers at the rind of fortune satisfy their
unsuccess when they say, 'Look at him with all his money!'"
Another and deeper sigh here broke from Hankes, who was really losing
all clew to the speaker's reflections.
"I'm certain, Hankes, you have heard observations of this kind five
hundred times."
"Ay, have I, sir," answered he, in hurried confusion,--"five thousand!"
"Well, and what was your reply, sir? How did you meet such remarks?"
said Dunn, sternly.
"Put them down, sir,--put them down at once; that is, I acknowledged
that there was a sort of fair ground; I agreed in thinking that,
everything considered, and looking to what we saw every day around us in
life--and Heaven knows it is a strange world, and the more one sees of
it the less he knows--"
"I 'm curious to hear," said Dunn, with a stern fixedness of manner, "in
what quarter you heard these comments on my character."
Hankes trembled from head to foot. He was in the witness-box, and felt
that one syllable might place him in the dock.
"You never heard one word of the kind in your life, sir, and you know
it," said Dunn, with a savage energy of tone that made the other sick
with fear. "If ever there was a man whose daily life refuted such a
calumny, it was myself."
Dunn's emotions were powerful, and he walked the room from end to end
with long and determined strides. Suddenly halting at last, he looked
Hankes steadily in the face, and said,--
"It was the Kellett girl dared thus to speak of me, was it not? The
truth, sir,--the truth; I will have it out of you!"
"Well, I must own you are right. It was Miss Kellett."
Heaven forgive you, Mr. Hankes, for the lie, inasmuch as you never
intended to tell it till it was suggested to you.
"Can you recall the circumstance which elicited this remark? I mean,"
said he, with an affected carelessness of manner, "how did it occur? You
were chatting together,--discussing people and events, eh?"
"Yes, sir; just so."
"And she observed--Do you chance to remember the phrase she used?"
"I give you my word of honor I do not, sir," said Hankes, with a sincere
earnestness.
"People who fancy themselves clever--and Miss Kellett is one of that
number--have a trick of eliminating every trait of a man's character
from some little bias,--some accidental bend given to his youthful mind.
I am almost certain--nay, I feel persuaded--it was by some such light
that young lady read me. She had heard I was remarkable as a schoolboy
for this, that, or t' other,--I saved my pocket-money, or lent it out at
interest. Come, was it not with the aid of an ingenious explanation of
this kind she interpreted me?"
Mr. Hankes shook his head, and looked blankly disconsolate.
"Not that I value such people's estimate of me," said Dunn, angrily.
"Calumniate, vilify, depreciate as they will, here I stand, with my foot
on the first step of the peerage. Ay, Hankes, I have made my own terms;
the first 'Gazette' after the new elections will announce Mr. Davenport
Dunn as Lord Castledunn."
Hankes actually bounded on his chair. Had he been the faithful servant
of some learned alchemist, watching patiently for years the wondrous
manipulations and subtle combinations of his master, following him from
crucible to crucible and from alembic to alembic, till the glorious
moment when, out of smoke and vapor, the yellow glow of the long-sought
metal gleamed before his eyes, he could not have regarded his chief with
a more devoted homage.
Dunn read "worship" in every lineament of the other's face. It was as
honest veneration as his nature could compass, and, sooth to say,
the great man liked it, and sniffed his incense with the-air of Jove
himself.
"I mean to take care of you, Hankes," said he, with a bland
protectiveness. "I do not readily forget the men who have served me
faithfully. Of course we must draw out of all our enterprises here. I
intend at once to realize--yes, Hankes--to realize a certain comfortable
sum and withdraw."
These were not very explicit nor very determinate expressions, but they
were amply intelligible to him who heard them.
"To wind up, sir, in short," said Hankes, significantly.
"Yes, Hankes, 'to wind up.'"
"A difficult matter,--a very difficult matter, sir."
"Difficulties have never deterred me from anything, Mr. Hankes. The only
real difficulty I acknowledge in life is to choose which of them I
will adopt; that done, the rest is matter of mere detail." Mr. Dunn now
seated himself at a table, and in the calm and quiet tone with which
he treated every business question, he explained to Hankes his views
on each of the great interests he was concerned in. Shares in home
speculations were to be first exchanged for foreign scrip, and these
afterwards sold. Of the vast securities of private individuals pledged
for loans, or given as guarantees, only such were to be redeemed as
belonged to persons over whom Dunn had no control. Depositary as he was
of family secrets, charged with the mysterious knowledge of facts whose
publication would bring ruin and disgrace on many, this knowledge was to
have its price and its reward; and as he ran his finger down the list
of names so compromised, Hankes could mark the savage exultation of his
look while he muttered unintelligibly to himself.
Dunn stopped at the name of the Viscount Lackington, and, leaning his
head on his hand, said, "Don't let us forget that message to Malta."
"A heavy charge that, sir," said Hankes. "The Ossory has got all his
Lordship's titles; and we have set them down, too, for twenty-one
thousand seven hundred above their value."
"Do you know who is the Viscount Lackington?" asked Dunn, with a strange
significance.
"No, sir."
"Neither do I," said Dunn, hurriedly following him. "Mayhap it may cost
some thousands of pounds and some tiresome talk to decide that question;
at all events, it will cost you or me nothing."
"The Earl of Glengariff's claim must, I suppose, be satisfied, sir?"
"Of course, it must, and the very first of all! But I am not going to
enter minutely into these things now, Hankes. I need a little of that
rest you were just recommending me to take. Be here to-morrow at twelve;
do not mention my arrival to any one, but come over with the Ossory
statement and the two or three other most important returns."
Mr. Hankes rose to withdraw; and as he moved towards the door, his eye
caught the oaken box, with three large seals placed by his own hand.
"You have scarcely had time to think about these papers, sir; but they
will have their importance when that peerage case comes to be discussed.
The Lackingtons were Conways--"
"Let me have a look at them," said Dunn, rapidly.
Hankes broke open the paper bands, and unlocked the box. For some time
he searched through the documents as they lay, and then emptying them
all upon the table, he went over them more carefully, one by one. "Good
heavens!" cried he, "how can this be?"
"What do you mean?" exclaimed Dunn; "you do not pretend that they are
missing?"
"They are gone,--they are not here!" said the other, almost fainting
from agitation.
"But these are the seals you yourself fastened on the box."
"I know it,--I see it; and I can make nothing of it."
"Mr. Hankes, Mr. Hankes, this is serious," said Dunn, as he bent upon
the affrighted man a look of heart-searching significance.
"I swear before Heaven--I take my most solemn oath--"
"Never mind swearing; how could they have been extricated? That is the
question to be solved."
Hankes examined the seals minutely; they were his own. He scrutinized
the box on every side to see if any other mode of opening it existed;
but there was none. He again went through the papers,--opening, shaking,
sifting them, one by one; and then, with a low, faint sigh, he sank down
upon a chair, the very image of misery and dismay. "Except it was the
devil himself--"
"The devil has plenty of far more profitable work on hand, sir," said
Dunn, sternly; and then, in a calmer tone, added, "Is it perfectly
certain that you ever saw the documents you allude to? and when?"
"Saw them? Why, I held them in my hands for several minutes. It was I
myself replaced them in the box before sealing it."
"And what interval of time occurred between your reading them and
sealing them up?"
"A minute,--half a minute, perhaps; stay," cried he, suddenly, "I
remember now that I left the room to call the landlord. Miss Kellett
remained behind."
With a dreadful imprecation Dunn struck his forehead with his hand, and
sank into his seat. "What cursed folly," cried he, bitterly, "and what
misfortune and ruin may it beget!"
"It was then that she took them,--that was the very moment," muttered
Hankes, as he followed on his own dreary thoughts.
"My father was right," said Dunn, below his breath; "that girl will
bring sorrow on us yet."
"But, after all, what value could they have in her eyes? She knows
nothing about the questions they refer to; she could not decipher the
very titles of the documents."
"I ought to have known,--I ought to have foreseen it," cried Dunn,
passionately. "What has my whole life been but a struggle against the
blunders, the follies, and the faults of those who should have served
me! Other men are fortunate in their agents. It was reserved for me to
have nothing but incapables, or worse."
"If you mean to include me in either of these categories, sir, will
you please to say which?" said Hankes, reddening with anger.
"Take your choice,--either, or both!" said Dunn, savagely.
"A man must be very strong in honesty that can afford to speak in this
fashion of others," said Hankes, his voice tremulous with rage. "At all
events, the world shall declare whether he be right or not."
"How do you mean, 'the world shall declare'? Is it that what has passed
between us here can be made matter for public notoriety? Would you
dare--"
"Oh, I would dare a great deal, sir, if I was pushed to it," said
Hankes, scoffingly. "I would dare, for instance, to let the world we are
speaking of into some of the mysteries of modern banking. I have a vast
amount of information to give as to the formation of new companies,--how
shares are issued, cancelled, and reissued. I could tell some amusing
anecdotes about title-deeds of estates that never were transferred--"
Why is it that Mr. Hankes, now in the full flood of his sarcasm, stops
so suddenly? What has arrested his progress; and why does he move so
hurriedly towards the door, which Dunn has, however, already reached
before him and locked? Was it something in the expression of Dunn's
features that alarmed him?--truly, there was in his look what might
have appalled a stouter heart,--or was it that Dunn had suddenly taken
something, he could not discern what, from a drawer, and hastily hidden
it in his pocket?
"Merciful heavens!" cried Hankes, trembling all over, "you would not
dare--"
"Like yourself, sir, I would dare much if pushed to it," said Dunn, in
a voice that now had recovered all its wonted composure. "But come,
Hankes, it is not a hasty word or an ungenerous speech is to break up
the ties of a long friendship. I was wrong; I was unjust; I ask your
pardon for it. You have served me too faithfully and too well to be
requited thus. Give me your hand, and say you forgive me."
"Indeed, sir, I must own I scarcely expected--that is, I never
imagined--"
"Come, come, do not do it grudgingly; tell me, frankly, all is
forgiven."
Hankes took the outstretched hand, and muttered some broken,
unintelligible words.
"There, now, sit down and think no more of this folly." He opened a
large pocket-book as he spoke, and searching for some time amongst its
contents, at last took forth a small slip of paper. "Ay, here it is,"
said he: "'Sale of West Indian estates; resident commissionership; two
thousand per annum, with allowance for house,' &c. Sir Hepton Wallis was
to have it. Would this suit you, Hankes? The climate agrees with many
constitutions."
"Oh, as to the climate," said Hankes, trembling with eagerness and
delight, "I 'd not fear it."
"And then with ample leave of absence from time to time, and a retiring
allowance, after six years' service, of--if I remember aright--twelve
hundred a year. What say you? It must be filled up soon. Shall I write
your name instead of Sir Hepton's?"
"Oh, sir, this is, indeed, generosity!"
"No, Hankes, mere justice; nothing more. The only merit I can lay claim
to in the matter is the sacrifice I make in separating myself from a
well-tried and trusted adherent."
"These reports shall be ready immediately, sir," said Hankes. "I 'll not
go to bed to-night--"
"We have ample time for everything, Hankes; don't fatigue yourself, and
be here at twelve to-morrow."
CHAPTER XXIII. ANNESLEY BEECHER IN A NEW PART.
About five weeks have elapsed since we last sojourned with Grog Davis
and his party at the little village of Holbach. Five weeks are a short
period in human life, but often enough has it sufficed to include great
events, and to make marvellous changes in a man's fortunes! Now,
the life they all led here might seem well suited to exclude such
calculations. Nothing seemed less likely to elicit vicissitudes. It was
a calm, tame monotony; each day so precisely like its predecessor that
it was often hard to remember how the week stole on. The same landscape,
with almost the same effects of sun and shadow, stretched daily before
their eyes; the same gushing water foamed and fretted; the same weeds
bent their heads to the flood; the self-same throbbing sounds of busy
mills mingled with the rushing streams; the very clouds, as they dragged
themselves lazily up the mountain side, and then broke into fragments
on the summit, seemed the same; and yet in that little world of three
people there was the endless conflict of hope and fear, and all the
warring interests which distract great masses of men filled their hearts
and engaged their minds.
At first Beecher chafed and fretted at the delay; Lizzy appeared but
rarely; and when she did it was with a strange reserve, almost amounting
to constraint, that he could not comprehend. She did not seem angry
or offended with him, simply more distant. Her high spirits, too,
were gone; no more the light-hearted, gay, and playful creature he
remembered, she was calm even to seriousness. A look of thoughtful
preoccupation marked her as she sat silently gazing on the landscape,
or watching the eddies of the circling river. There was nothing--save
a slight increase of paleness--to denote sorrow in her appearance; her
features were placid, and her expression tranquil. If her voice had lost
its ringing music, it had acquired a tone of deep and melting softness
that seemed to leave an echo in the heart that heard it. To this change,
which at first chilled and repelled Beecher, he grew day by day to
accustom himself. If her mood was one less calculated to enliven and to
cheer him, it was yet better adapted to make his confidence. He could
talk to her more freely of himself than heretofore. No longer did he
stand in dread of the sharp and witty epigrams with which she used to
quiz his opinions and ridicule his notions of life. She would listen to
him now with patience, if not with interest, and she would hear him
with attention as he talked for hours on the one sole theme he
loved,--himself. And, oh, young ladies,--not that you need any counsels
of mine in such matters; but if, perchance, my words of advice should
have any weight with you,--let me impress this lesson on your hearts:
that for the man who is not actually in love with you, but only
"spooney," there is no such birdlime as the indulgence of his
selfishness. Let him talk away about his dogs and his horses, his
exploits in China or the Crimea, his fishings in Norway, his yachtings
in the Levant; let him discourse about his own affairs, of business as
well as pleasure; how briefs are pouring in or patients multiply; hear
him as he tells you of his sermon before the bishop, or his examination
at Burlington House,--trust me, no theme will make him so eloquent
nor you so interesting. Of all "serials,"--as the phrase is,--there is
none can be carried out to so many "numbers" as Egotism; and though the
snowball grows daily bigger, it rolls along even more easily.
I am not going to say that Lizzy Davis did this of "prepense;" I am
even candid enough to acknowledge to you that I am not quite sure I can
understand her. She had ways of acting and thinking peculiarly her
own. She was not always what the French call consquente, but she was
marvellously quick to discover she was astray, and "try back." She was
one of those people who have more difficulty in dealing with themselves
than with others. She had an instinctive appreciation of those whose
natures she came in contact with, joined to a strong desire to please;
and, lastly, there was scarcely a human temperament with which she could
not sympathize somewhere. She let Beecher talk on, because it pleased
him, and pleasing him became, at last, a pleasure to herself. When
he recalled little traits of generosity, the kind things he had done
here, the good-natured acts he had done there, she led him on to feel
a more manly pride in himself than when recounting tales of his sharp
practices on the turf and his keen exploits in the ring.
Beecher saw this leaning on her part, and ascribed it all to her
"ignorance of the world," and firmly believed that when she saw more
of life she would think more highly of his intellect than even of his
heart. Poor fellow! they were beautifully balanced, and phrenology
for once would have its triumph in showing the mental and the moral
qualities in equilibrium. After the first week they were always
together, for Davis was continually on the road,--now to Neuwied, now
to Hchst. The letters and telegrams that he despatched and received
were incredible in number; and when jested with on the amount of
his correspondence by Beecher, his only answer was, "It's all your
business, my boy,--the whole concerns you." Now, Annesley Beecher was
far too much of a philosopher to trouble his head about anything which
could be avoided, and to find somebody who devoted himself to his
interests, opened and read the dunning appeals of creditors, answered
their demands by "renewals," or cajoled them by promises, was one of the
highest luxuries he could imagine. Indeed, if Grog would only fight for
him and go to jail for him, he 'd have deemed his happiness complete.
"And who knows," thought he, "but it may come to that yet? I seem to
have thrown a sort of fascination over the old fellow that may lead him
any lengths."
Meanwhile there was extending over himself another web of fascination
not the less complete that he never perceived it His first waking
thought was of Lizzy. As he came down to breakfast, his dress showed how
studiously he cultivated appearance. The breakfast over, he sat down
to his German lesson beside her with a patient perseverance that amazed
him. There he was, with addled head and delighted heart, conjugating
"Ich liebe," and longing for the day when he should reach the imperative
mood; and then they walked long country walks into the dark beech woods,
along grassy alleys where no footfall sounded, or they strayed beside
some river's bank, half fancying that none had ever strolled over the
same sward before. And how odd it was to see the Honorable Annesley
Beecher, the great lion of the Guards' Club, the once celebrity of the
Coventry, carrying a little basket on his arm, like a stage peasant in
a comic opera, with the luncheon, or, mayhap, bearing a massive stone
in his arms to bridge a stream for Lizzy to cross. Poor fellow! he did
these things with a good will, and even in his awkwardness there was
that air of "gentleman" which never left him; and then he would laugh
so heartily at his own inaptitude, and join in' Lizzy's mirth at the
mischances that befell him. And was it not delightful, through all these
charming scenes, on the high mountain-aide, in the deep heather, or deep
in some tangled glen, with dog-roses and honeysuckle around them, he
could still talk of himself, and she could listen?
For the life of him he could not explain how it was that the time
slipped over so pleasantly. As he himself said, "there was not much to
see, and nothing to do," and yet, somehow, the day was always too short
for either. He wanted to write to his brother, to his sister-in-law,
to Dunn, to his man of business,--meaning the Jew who raised money for
him,--but never could find time. He was so puzzled by the problem that
he actually asked Lizzy to explain it; but she only laughed.
Now and then, when he chanced to be all alone, a sudden thought would
strike him that he was leading a life of inglorious idleness. He would
count up how many weeks it was since he had seen a "Bell's Life," and
try to calculate what races were coming off that very same day; then he
would draw a mind-picture of Tattersall's on a settling day, and
wonder who were the defaulters, and who were getting passports for the
Continent; and he would wind up his astonishment by thinking that Grog
was exactly leading the game indolent existence, "although we have that
'grand book with the martingale,' and might be smashing the bank at
Baden every night."
That a man should have the cap of Fortunatus, and yet never try it on,
even just for the experiment's sake, was downright incredible. You might
not want money,--not that he had ever met the man in that predicament
yet,--you might, perhaps, have no very strong desire for this, that,
or t' other; yet, somehow, "the power was such a jolly thing!" The fact
that you could go in and win whenever you pleased was a marvellously
fine consideration. As for himself,--so he reasoned,--he did not exactly
know why, but he thought his present life a very happy one. He never was
less beset with cares: he had no duns; there was not a tailor in Bond
Street knew his address; the very Jews had not traced him; he was as
free as air. Like most men accustomed to eat and drink of the best, the
simple fare of an humble inn pleased him. Grog, whenever he saw him, was
good-humored and gay; and as for Lizzy, "of all the girls he had ever
met, she was the only one ever understood him."
As Annesley Beecher comprehended his own phrase, being "understood" was
no such bad thing. It meant, in the first place, a generous appreciation
of all motives for good, even though they never went beyond motives; a
hopeful trust in some unseen, unmanifested excellence of character; a
broadcast belief that, making a due allowance for temptations, human
frailties, and the doctrine of chances,--this latter most of all,--the
balance would always be found in favor of good versus evil; and,
secondly, that all the imputed faults and vices of such natures as his
were little else than the ordinary weaknesses of "the best of us." Such
is being "understood," good reader; and, however it may chance with
others, I hope that "you and I may."
But Lizzy Davis understood him even better and deeper than all this.
She knew him, if not better than I do myself, at least, better than I
am able to depict to you. Apart, then, from the little "distractions"
I have mentioned, Beecher was very happy. It had been many a long day
since he felt himself so light-hearted and so kindly-minded to the world
at large. He neither wished any misfortune to befall Holt's "stable"
or Shipman's "three-year old;" he did not drop off to sleep hoping
that Beverley might break down or "Nightcap" spring a back sinew; and,
stranger than all, he actually could awake of a morning and not wish
himself the Viscount Lackington. Accustomed as he was to tell Lizzy
everything, to ask her advice about all that arose, and her explanation
for all that puzzled him, he could not help communicating this new
phenomenon of his temperament, frankly acknowledging that it was a
mystery he could not fathom.
"Nothing seems ever to puzzle you, Lizzy,"--he had learned to call her
Lizzy some time back,--"so just tell me what can you make of it? Ain't
it strange?"
"It is strange," said she, with a faint smile, in which a sort of sad
meaning mingled.
"So strange," resumed he, "that had any one said to me, 'Beecher, you
'll spend a couple of months in a little German inn, with nothing to
do, nothing to see, and, what's more, it will not bore you,' I 'd
have answered, 'Take you fifty to one in hundreds on the double
event,--thousands if you like it better,'--and see, hang me if I should
n't have lost!"
"Perhaps not. If you had a heavy wager on the matter, it is likely you
would not have come."
"Who knows! Everything is Fate in this world. Ah, you may laugh; but it
is, though. What else, I ask you--what brings you here just now?--why am
I walking along the river with you beside me?"
"Partly, because, I hope, you find it pleasant," said she, with a droll
gravity, while something in her eyes seemed to betoken that her own
thoughts amused her.
"There must be more than that," said he, thoughtfully, for he felt the
question a knotty one, and rather liked to show that he did not skulk
the encounter with such difficulties.
"Partly, perhaps, because it pleases me," said she, in the same quiet
tone.
He shook his head doubtingly; he had asked for an explanation, and
neither of these supplied that want. "At all events, Lizzy, there is one
thing you will admit,--if it is Fate, one can't help it,--eh?"
"If you mean by that that you must walk along here at my side, whether
you will or not, just try, for experiment's sake, if you could not cross
over the stream and leave me to go back alone."
"Leave you to go back alone!" cried he, upon whom the last words were
ever the most emphatic. "But why so, Lizzy; are you angry with me?--are
you weary of me?"
"No, I 'm not angry with you," said she, gently.
"Wearied, then--tired of me--bored?"
"Must I pay you compliments on your agreeability, Mr. Beecher?"
"There it is again," broke he in, pettishly. "It was only yesterday
you consented to call me Annesley, and you have gone back from it
already,--forgotten it all!"
"No, I forget very seldom--unfortunately." This last word was uttered to
herself and for herself.
"You will call me Annesley, then?" asked he, eagerly.
"Yes, if you wish it,--Annesley." There was a pause before she spoke the
last word; and when she did utter it, her accent faltered slightly, and
a faint blush tinged her cheek.
As for Beecher, his heart swelled high and proudly; he felt at that
moment a strange warm glow within him that counterfeited courage; for
an instant he thought he would have liked something perilous to
confront,--something in encountering which he might stand forth before
Lizzy as a Paladin. Was it that some mysterious voice within him
whispered, "She loves you; her heart is yours"? and, oh, if so, what
a glorious sentiment must there be in that passion, if love can move a
nature like this, and mould it to one great or generous ambition!
"Lizzy, I want to talk to you seriously," said he, drawing her arm
within his own. "I have long wanted to tell you something; and if you
can hear it without displeasure, I swear to you I 'd not change with
Lackington to-morrow! Not that it's such good fun being a younger
son,--few men know that better than myself; still, I repeat, that if you
only say 'yes' to me, I pledge you my oath I 'd rather hear it than be
sure I was to win the Oaks,--ay, by Heaven! Oaks and Derby, too! You
know now what I mean, dearest Lizzy, and do not, I beseech you, keep me
longer in suspense."
She made no answer; her cheek became very pale, and a convulsive shudder
passed over her; but she was calm and unmoved the next instant.
"If you love another, Lizzy," said he, and his lips trembled violently,
"say so frankly. It's only like all my other luck in life, though
nothing was ever as heavy as this."
There was an honesty, a sincerity in the tone, of these words that
seemed to touch her; for she stole a side look at his face, and the
expression of her glance was of kindly pity.
"Is it true, then, that you do love another, Lizzy?" repeated he, with
even deeper emotion.
"No!" said she, with a slow utterance.
"Will you not tell me, dearest Lizzy, if--if--I am to have any hope? I
know well enough that you need n't take a poor beggar of a younger son.
I know where a girl of your beauty may choose. Far better than you do I
know that you might have title, rank, fortune; and as for me, all I
have is a miserable annuity Lackington allows me, just enough to starve
on,--not that I mean to go on, however, as I have been doing; no, no, by
Jove! I 'm round the corner now, and I intend to make play, and 'take up
my running.' Your father and I understand what we're about."
What a look was that Lizzy gave him! What a piercing significance must
the glance have had that sent the blood so suddenly to his face and
forehead, and made him falter, and then stop.
"One thing I 'll swear to you, Lizzy,--swear it by all that is most
solemn," cried he, at last: "if you consent to share fortunes with me,
I 'll never engage in anything--no matter how sure or how safe--without
your full concurrence. I have been buying experience this many a
year, and pretty sharply has it cost me. They make a gentleman pay his
footing, I promise you; but I do know a thing or two at last; I have
had my eyes opened!"
Oh, Annesley Beecher, can you not see how you are damaging your own
cause? You have but to look at that averted head, or, bending round, to
catch a glimpse of those fair features, and mark the haughty scorn upon
them, to feel that you are pleading against yourself.
"And what may be this knowledge of which you are so proud?" said she,
coldly.
"Oh, as to that," said he, in some confusion at the tone she had
assumed, "it concerns many a thing you never heard of. The turf, and the
men that live by it, make a little world of their own; they don't bother
their heads about parties or politics,--don't care a farthing who 's
'in' or who 's 'out.' They keep their wits--and pretty sharp wits they
are--for what goes on in Scott's stable, and how Holt stands for the St.
Lger. They 'd rather hear how Velocipede eat his corn, than hear all
the Cabinet secrets of Europe; and for that matter, so would I."
"I do not blame you for not caring for State secrets,--it is very
possible they would interest you little; but surely you might imagine
some more fitting career than what, after all, is a mere trading on the
weakness of others. To make of an amusement a matter of profit is, in my
eyes, mean; it is contemptible."
"That's not the way to look on it at all. The first men in England have
race-horses."
"And precisely in the fact of their great wealth do they soar above all
the ignoble associations the turf obliges to those who live by it."
"Well, I 'll give it up; there's my word on't I 'll never put my foot in
Tattersall's yard again. I 'll take my name off the Turf Club,--is that
enough?"
She could not help smiling at the honest zeal of this sacrifice; but the
smile had none of the scorn her features displayed before.
"Oh, Lizzy!" cried he, enthusiastically, "if I was sure we could just
live on here as we are doing,--never leave this little valley, nor see
more of the world than we do daily,--I'd not exchange the life for a
duke's fortune--"
"And Holt's stable," added she, laughing. "Come, you must not omit the
real bribe."
He laughed heartily at this sally, and owned it was the grand
temptation.
"You are certainly very good-tempered, Annesley," said she, after a
pause.
"I don't think I am," said he, half piqued, for he thought the remark
contained a sort of disparagement of that sharpness on which he chiefly
prided himself. "I am very hot at times."
"I meant that you bore with great good-humor from me what you might, if
so disposed, have fairly enough resented as an impertinence. What do I,
what could I, know of that play-world of which you spoke? How gentlemen
and men of fashion regard these things must needs be mysteries to me;
I only wished to imply that you might make some better use of your
faculties, and that knowledge of life you possess, than in conning over
a betting-book or the 'Racing Calendar.'"
"So I mean to do. That's exactly what I 'm planning."
"Here's the soup cooling and the sherry getting hot," cried Grog, as
he shouted from the window of the little inn, and waved his napkin to
attract their notice.
"There's papa making a signal to us," said Lizzy; "did you suspect it
was so late?"
"Seven o'clock, by Jove!" cried Beecher, as he gave her his hand to
cross the stepping-stones. "What a fuss he 'll make about our keeping
the dinner back!"
[Illustration: 284]
"I have eaten all the caviare and the pickles, and nearly finished a
bottle of Madeira, waiting for you," said Grog; "so, no dressing, but
come in at once."
"Oh, dearest Lizzy!" cried Beecher, as they gained the porch, "just one
word,--only one word,--to make me the happiest fellow in the world or
the most miserable." But Lizzy sprang up the stairs, and was in her room
almost ere his words were uttered.
"If I had bad but another moment," muttered Beecher to himself, "just
one moment more, I'd have shown her that I meant to turn over a new
leaf,--that I was n't going to lead the life I have done. I 'd have told
her--though, I suppose, old Grog would murder me if he knew it--of
our grand martingale, and how we mean to smash the bank at Baden. No
deception about that,--no 'cross' there. She can't bring up grooms and
jockeys and stable-helpers against me now. It will all be done amongst
ourselves,--a family party, and no mistake!"
All things considered, Annesley Beecher, it was just as well for you
that you had not that "one moment" you wished for.
CHAPTER XXIV. A DEAD HEAT
Some eight or ten days have elapsed since the scene we have Just
recorded,--not one of whose incidents are we about to relate,--and
we are still at Holbach. As happens so frequently in the working of
a mathematical question, proofs are assumed without going over the
demonstrations; so, in real life,--certain postulates being granted,--we
arrive at conclusions which we regard as inevitable.
We are at Holbach, but no longer strolling along its leaf-strewn alleys,
or watching the laughing eddies of its circling river,--we are within
doors. The scene is a small, most comfortably furnished chamber of
the little inn, where an ample supper is laid out on a sideboard, a
card-table occupying the centre of the room, at which two players
are seated, their somewhat "charged" expressions and disordered dress
indicating a prolonged combat,--a fact in part corroborated by the
streak of pinkish dawn that has pierced between the shutters, and now
blends with the sickly glare of the candles. Several packs of cards
litter the floor around them, thrown there in that superstitious passion
only gamblers understand, and a decanter and some glasses stand on the
table beside the players, who are no others than our acquaintances Grog
Davis and Paul Classon.
There is a vulgar but not unwise adage that tells us "dogs do not eat
dogs," and the maxim has a peculiar application to gamblers. All
sorts and manners of men love to measure their strength with each
other,--swordsmen, swimmers, pedestrians, even hard drinking used to
have its duels of rivalry,--gamblers never. Such an employment of their
skill would seem to their eyes about as absurd as that of a sportsman
who would turn his barrel against his companion instead of the
cock-pheasant before him. Their "game" is of another order. How, then,
explain the curious fact we have mentioned? There are rivalries
that last life-long; there are duels that go on from year to year
of existence, and even to the last leave the question of superiority
undetermined. The game of piquet formed such between these two men. At
every chance meeting in life,--no matter how long the interval or how
brief the passage might be,--they recurred to the old-vexed question,
which fortune seemed to find a pleasure in never deciding definitively.
The fact that each had his own separate theory of the game, would have
given an interest to the encounter; but besides there was now another
circumstance whose import neither were likely to undervalue. Davis had
just paid over to Paul Classon the sum of two hundred napoleons,--the
price of a secret service he was about to perform,--and the sight of
that glowing heap of fresh gold--for there it lay on the corner of the
table--had so stimulated the acquisitiveness of Grog's nature that he
could not resist the temptation to try and regain them. The certainty
that when he should have won them it would only be to restore them to
the loser, for whose expenses on a long Journey they were destined,
detracted nothing from this desire on his part A more unprofitable
debtor than Holy Paul could not be imagined. His very name in a schedule
would reflect discredit on the bankruptcy! But there lay the shining
pieces, fresh from the mint and glittering, and the appeal they made was
to an instinct, not to reason. Was it with the knowledge of this fact
that Paul had left them there instead of putting them up in his pocket?
Had he calculated in his own subtle brain that temptations are
least resistible when they are most tangible? There was that in his
reverence's look which seemed to say as much, and the thoughtless
wantonness of his action as his fingers fiddled with the gold may not
have been entirely without a purpose. They had talked together, and
discussed some knotty matters of business, having concluded which, Davis
proposed cards.
[Illustration:  290]
"Our old combat, I suppose?" said Paul, laughing. "Well, I 'm always
ready."
And down they sat, hour after hour finding them still in the same hard
straggle, fortune swinging with its pendulous stroke from side to side,
as though to elicit the workings of hope and fear in each alternately.
Meanwhile they drank freely, and from time to time arose to eat at the
side-table in that hurried and greedy way that only gamblers eat, as
though vexed at the hanger that called them from their game. They
were both too great proficients in play to require that absorption
of faculties inferior gamblers need. They could, and did, talk of
everything that came uppermost, the terms of the game dropping through
the conversation like the measured booming of great guns amid the
clattering crash of musketry. Luck for some time had favored Holy Paul;
and while he became blander, softer, and more benign of look, Grog
grew fierce, his eyes fiery, and his words sharp and abrupt. Classon's
polished courtesy chafed and irritated him, but he seemed determined
to control his anger as far as he might, and not give his adversary
the transient advantage of temper. Had spectators been admitted to the
lists, the backers would have most probably taken the Churchman. His
calm countenance, his mild, unexcited eye, his voice so composed and
gentle, must have made Paul the favorite.
"We shall scarcely have time for another game, Kit,"--he'd have called
him Grog, but that he was losing,--"I perceive the day is beginning to
break."
"So am I, for the matter of that," said Davis, with a bitter laugh. "You
have won--let me see--forty-six, and twenty-seven, and a hundred and
twelve,--that was a 'thumper,'--and thirty-four, besides that loose cash
there,--about two hundred and forty or fifty naps, Master Paul. A very
pretty-night's work, and more profitable than preaching, I take it."
"Regarding the matter as a mere monetary question--"
"No gammon,--cut the cards," broke in Davis; "one game must finish us.
Now, shall we say double or quits?"
"If you really wish me to speak my candid mind, I 'd rather not."
"I thought as much," muttered Grog to himself; and then, in a louder
voice, "What shall it be then.--one-hundred and fifty? Come, even if you
should lose, you'll get up winner of a clean hundred."
"Would that it were at the expense of some one I love less!"
"Answer my question," said Davis, angrily. "Will you have a hundred and
fifty on the last game,--yes or no?"
"Yes, of course, Kit, if you desire it."
"Cut again; there is a faced card," said Davis. And now he dealt with
a slow deliberation that showed what an effort his forced composure was
costing him.
Classon sat back in his chair watching the cards as they fell from the
dealer's hand, but affecting in his half-closed eyes and folded arms the
air of one deep in his own musings.
"I will say this, Davis," said he, at last, with the slow utterance that
announces a well-matured thought, "you have managed the whole of this
business with consummate skill; you have done it admirably."
"I believe I have," said Davis, with a sort of stern decision in his
tone; "and there was more difficulty in the case than you are aware of."
"There must have been very considerable difficulty," rejoined Paul,
slowly. "Even in the very little I have seen of him I can detect a man
whose temperament must have presented the greatest embarrassments. He
is proud, very proud, suspectful to any extent. I have five
cards--forty-seven."
"Not good."
"Three queens."
"Four tens."
"So, then, my tierce in spades is not good, of course. I play one."
"Fifteen and five, twenty, and the tens ninety-four. The first honor I
have scored this hour. The difficulty I allude to was with my daughter;
she would n't have him."
"Not have him?--not accept a peer of the realm?"
"Who told her he was a peer? She only knows him as the Honorable
Annesley Beecher."
"Even so. As the Honorable Annesley Beecher, he is a man of high
connections,--related to some of the first people. A dub--play a club. I
take it that such a man is a very high mark indeed."
"She wasn't of your mind, that's clear," said Davis, abruptly; "nor do
I believe it would have signified in the least to have told her that he
was a Lord."
"Romantic!" muttered Paul.
"No, not a bit."
"Loved another, perhaps."
"How should she? She never saw any other except a one-eyed Pole, that
taught her music at that Belgian school, and a sort of hairy dwarf, that
gave lessons in drawing! A hundred and seventeen. It's your deal."
"And he himself has no suspicion of his brother's death?" said Classon,
as he gave out the cards.
"Not the slightest. He was trying to write a letter to him, to break the
news of his marriage, only yesterday."
"Cleverly done,--most cleverly done," said Paul, in ecstasy. "If he had
come to the knowledge, he might very possibly have refused her."
"I rather--suspect--not," said Grog, dwelling slowly on each word,
while his countenance assumed an expression of fierce and terrible
determination. "A lucky take in, that,--the queen of diamonds: it gives
me seven cards. Refuse her! by Heaven, he'd have had a short experience
of his peerage! Kings and knaves--six, and seven I play--twenty-three.
Piqued again, Holy Paul! No, no; he'd never have dared that."
Classon shook his head doubtingly.
"You might just as well tell me, Paul Classon, that you 'd refuse to
marry them," said Davis, as he struck the table with his clenched fist,
"and that I would bear it! I have a way of not being denied what I have
determined on; that has done me good service in life. That blear-eyed
boy--the Attach at the Legation in Frankfort--wanted to refuse me a
passport for the Honorable Annesley Beecher and Mrs. Beecher, saying
that, until the marriage, there was no such person. But I whispered a
word to him across the table, and he gave it, and there it is now."
"Going to Italy!" said Classon, as he read from the document which
Grog had thrown down before him; "wonderful fellow,--wonderful
fellow,--forgets nothing!" muttered he to himself.
"Yes, but he does, though; he has just forgotten four kings and suffered
you to count four queens, Master Paul,--a tribute to your agreeability
somewhat too costly."
"Even to the travelling-carriage, Kit," resumed Classon, not heeding the
sarcasm; "and a more complete thing I never saw in my life. You picked
it up at Frankfort."
"Yes, at the Htel de Russie; got it for two thousand two hundred
francs,--it cost ten, six months ago. A quint in spades, and the cards
divided; I score thirty-one."
"And when is he to learn that he has succeeded to the title?"
"When he's across the Alps,--when he is out of the land of rouge et noir
and roulette; he may know it then, as soon as he pleases. I 'm to join
them at Como, or Milan, as I can't well 'show' at Baden, even at
this late time of year. Before I come up he 'll have heard all about
Lacking-ton's death."
"Will it ever occur to him, Kit, to suspect that you were aware of it?"
"I don't know; perhaps it may," said Grog, doggedly.
"If so, will the impression not lead to a very precarious state of
relations between you?"
"Maybe so,--seven hearts and five spades, you are 'capoted.' There,
Paul, that doesn't leave so much between us, after all. What if he does
suspect it? The world suspects fifty things about me that no man has
ever yet dared to lay to my charge. If you and I, Master Paul, were to
fret ourselves about the suspicions that are entertained of us, we'd
have a pleasant life of it. Your good health."
"To yours, my dear Kit; and may I never drink it in worse tipple would
be the only additional pleasure I could suggest to the toast. It is
wonderful Madeira!"
"I have had it in the London Docks since the year '81; every bottle of
it now, seeing that the vines are ruined in the island, is worth from
thirty shillings to five-and-thirty. I won it from Tom Hardiman; he took
the invoice out of his pocket-book and flung it across the table to
me. 'Grog,' says he, 'when you take it out of bond, mind you ask me to
dinner, and give me a bottle of it?' But he's gone, 'toes up,' and so
here's to his memory."
"'Drunk in solemn silence,' as the newspapers say," broke in Paul, as he
drained his glass.
"Yes," said Davis, eying the wine by the light, "that's a tipple this
little inn here is not much accustomed to see under its roof; but if I
were to stay a little longer, I 'd make something of this place. They
never heard of Harvey's sauce, Chili vinegar, Caviare, Stilton; even
Bass and British gin were novelties when I came. There, as well as I can
make it up, you are a winner of fifteen naps; there they are."
"Dear me, I fancied I stood safe to come off with a hundred!" said Paul,
lugubriously.
"So you did, without counting the points; but you 've lost five hundred
and sixty-four,--ay, and a right good thing you 've made of it, Master
Paul. I 'd like to know how long it is since you earned such a sum
honestly."
Classon sighed heavily as he swept the cash into his pocket, and said,
"I'm unable to tell you; my memory grows worse every day."
"When you go back to England, you can always brush it up by the Police
sheet,--that's a comfort," said Davis, with a savage laugh.
"And what will the noble Viscount have to spend yearly?" asked Classon,
to change the theme.
"Something between eight and ten thousand."
"A snug thing, Kit,--a very snug thing indeed; and I take it that by
this time o' day he knows the world pretty well."
"No; nothing of the kind!" said Grog, bluntly; "he's a fool, and must
stay a fool!"
"The more luck his, then, to have Christopher Davis for his
father-in-law."
"I 'll tell you what's better still, Holy Paul,--to have Lizzy Davis for
his wife. You think she's going to make a great match of it because
he's the Lord Viscount and she is my daughter; but I tell you, and I
'm ready to maintain it too, I never met the man yet was worthy of her.
There may be girls as handsome, though I never saw them,--there may be
others as clever, that I'm no judge of; but this I do know,--that for
pluck, real pluck, you 'll not find her equal in Europe. She'd never
have married him for his rank; no, if it was a dukedom he had to offer
her. She 'd never have taken him for his fortune, if it had been ten
times the amount. No, she would n't consent to it, even to take me out
of my difficulties and set me all straight with the world, because she
fancied that by going on the stage, or some such trumpery, she could
have done that just as well. She'd not have had him for himself, for
she knows he's a fool, just as well as I do. There was only one thing
I found she could n't get over: it was the thought she dare not marry
him; that to thrust herself into the station and rank he occupied
would be to expose herself to insults that must crush her. It was by a
mere chance I discovered that this was a challenge she 'd have rather
died than decline. It was for all the world like saying to myself,
'Don't you go into the ring there, Kit Davis; my Lords and the gentlemen
don't like it.' 'Don't they? Well, let's see how they'll take it, for I
am a-going!' It was that stung her, Paul Classon. She did n't want
all those fine people; she did n't care a brass farthing about their
ways and their doings! She 'd not have thought it a hard lot in life
just to jog on as she is. She did n't want to be called a countess, nor
live like one; but when it was hinted to her, that if she did venture
amongst them, it would be to be driven back with shame and insult, then
her mind was made up at once. Not that she ever confessed as much to me;
no, I found out her secret by watching her closely. The day I told her I
forget what anecdote about some outrageous piece of insolence played off
on some new intruder into the titled class, she suddenly started as
if something had stung her, and her eyes glared like a tiger's; then,
catching me by the hand, she said, 'Don't tell me these things; they
pain me more to hear than real, downright calamities!' That was enough
for me. I saw her cards, Paul, and I played through them!"
Classon heaved a deep sigh, and was silent.
"What are you sighing over, Paul?" asked Davis, half morosely.
"I was just sorrowing to myself to think how little all her pluck will
avail her."
"Stuff and nonsense, sir! It is the very thing to depend on in the
struggle."
"Ay, if there were a struggle, Kit, but that is exactly what there will
not be. You, for instance, go into Brookes's to-morrow, you have been
duly elected. It was a wet day, only a few at the ballot, and somehow
you got in. Well, you are, to all intents, as much a member as his Grace
there, or the noble Marquis. There's no commotion, no stir when you
enter the room. The men at their newspapers look up, perhaps, but they
read away immediately with only increased attention; the group at the
window talks on too; the only thing noticeable is that nobody talks to
you. If you ask for the 'Globe' or the 'Chronicle,' when the reader
shall have finished, he politely hands it at once, and goes away."
"If he did, I'd follow him--"
"What for?--to ask an explanation where there had been no offence?
To make yourself at once notorious in the worst of all possible ways?
There's nothing so universally detested as the man that makes a 'row;'
witness the horror all well-bred people feel at associating with
Americans, they're never sure how it's to end. Now, if all these
considerations have their weight with men, imagine how they mast be
regarded by women, fifty times more exacting as they are in all the
exigencies of station, and whose freemasonry is a hundred times more
exclusive."
"That's all rot!" broke in Davis, his passion the more violent as the
arguments of the other seemed so difficult to answer. "You think to
puzzle me by talking of all these grand people and their ways as if
they weren't all men and women. That they are, and a rum lot, too, some
of them! Come," cried Davis, suddenly, as though a happy thought had
just flashed across his mind, "it was the turn of a straw one day, by
your own account, that you were not a bishop. Now, I 'd like to know, if
that lucky event had really taken place, wouldn't you have been the same
Holy Paul Classon that sits there?"
"Perhaps not, entirely," said Classon, in his oiliest of voices. "I
trust that I should, in ascending to that exalted station, have cast off
the slough of an inferior existence, and carried up little of my former
self except the friendships of my early years."
"Do you fancy, Master Paul, that gammon like this can impose upon a man
of my sort?"
"My dear and worthy friend," rejoined Classon, "the tone in which I
appeal to you is my tribute to your high ability. To an inferior man
I had spoken very different language. Sentiments are not the less
real that they are expressed with a certain embroidery, just as a Bank
post-bill would be very good value though a Choctaw Indian might deem it
a piece of waste-paper."
"I 'd like to see you try it on with Lizzy in this fashion," said Davis.
"I don't think even your friend the Choctaw Indian would save you."
"I should be proud of even defeat at such hands!" exclaimed Paul,
rapturously.
"You 'd have little to be proud of when she 'd have done with you,"
cried Grog, all his good-humor restored by the mere thought of his
daughter.
"Have you spoken to his Lordship about what I mentioned?" said Paul,
half diffidently.
"No," said Grog; "on reflection, I thought it better not. I 'm sure,
besides, that there's no Church preferment in his gift; and then,
Classon, he knows you, as who does not?"
"'Qu regio terr non plena est?' Ay, Grog, you and I have arrived at
what the world calls Fame."
"Speak for yourself, sir; I acknowledge no partnership in the case. When
I have written letters, they have not been begging ones; and when I have
stretched out my hand, there was no pistol in the palm of it!"
"Very true, Kit; I never had a soul above petty larceny, and you had
a spirit that aspired to transportation for life."
Davis bounded on his chair, and glowered with a fearful stare at the
speaker, who meanwhile drained the decanter into his glass with an
unmoved serenity.
"Don't be angry, my ancient friend," said he, blandly. "The cares
of friendship, like the skill of a surgeon, must often pain to be
serviceable. Happy let us call ourselves when no ruder hand wields the
probe or the bistoury!"
"Make an end of canting, I want to speak to you about matters of moment.
You will set out to-day, I hope."
"Immediately after the marriage."
"What road do you take?"
"Strasburg, Paris, Marseilles, whence direct to Constantinople by the
first steamer."
"After that?"
"Across the Black Sea to Balaklava."
"But when do you reach the Crimea?"
"Balaklava is in the Crimea."
Davis flushed scarlet. The reflection on his geography wounded him, and
he winced under it.
"Are you quite clear that you understand my instructions?" said he,
testily.
"I wish I was as sure of a deanery," said Paul, smacking his lips over
the last glass.
"You can scarcely wish over-well to the Church, when you desire to be
one of its dignitaries," said Davis, with a sarcastic grin.
"Why so, my worthy friend? There is a wise Scotch adage says, 'It taks
a' kind of folk to mak a warld;' and so, various orders of men, with
gifts widely differing, if not discrepant, are advantageously assembled
into what we call corporations."
"Nonsense,--bosh!" said Grog, impatiently. "If you have no better
command of common-sense where you are going, I have made a precious bad
choice of an agent."
"See how men misconstrue their own natures!" exclaimed Classon, with a
sort of fervor. "If any one had asked me what gift I laid especial claim
to possess, I protest I should have said 'common-sense;' a little more
common-sense than any one else I ever met."
"You are modest too."
"Becomingly so, I hope and believe."
"Have you any other remarkable traits that you might desire to record?"
"A few, and a very few," said Paul, with a well-assumed air of humility.
"Nature has blessed me with the very best of tempers. I am never rash,
hasty, or impetuous; I accept the rubs of life with submission; I think
well of every one."
"Do you, faith!" exclaimed Davis, with a scornful laugh.
"Knowing well that we are all slaves of circumstances, I take motives
where others demand actions, just as I would take a bill at three months
from him who has no cash. It may be paid, or it may not."
"You'd have passed it ere it became due, eh, Master Paul?"
"Such is possible; I make no claims above human frailty."
"Is sobriety amongst your other virtues?"
"I rarely transgress its limits, save when alone. It is in the solitary
retirement where I seek reflection that I occasionally indulge. There I
am, so to say, 'Classo cum Classone.' I offer no example to others,--I
shock no outward decorum. If the instinctive appreciation of my
character--which I highly possess--passes that of most men, I owe it to
those undisguised moments when I stand revealed to myself. Wine keeps no
secrets; and Paul Classon drunk appeals to Paul Classon sober. Believe
me, Kit, when I tell you no man knows half the excellent things in his
own heart till he has got tipsy by himself!"
"I wish I had never thought of you for this affair," said Davis,
angrily.
"Pitt made the same speech to Wolfe, and yet that young general
afterwards took Quebec."
"What do I care about Wolfe or Quebec? I want a particular service that
a man of moderate brains and a firm purpose can accomplish."
"And for which Paul Classon pledges himself with his head? Ay, Grog
Davis, that is my bond."
"The day you come back to me with proof of success, I hand you five
hundred pounds."
"Cash?"
"Cash,--and more, if all be done to our entire satisfaction. He--"
here he jerked up his thumb towards Beecher's room--"he sha'n't forget
you."
Paul closed his eyes, and muttered something to himself, ending with,
"And 'five pounds for the Cruelty to Animals,--from the Reverend Paul
Classon.' I shall be in funds for them all."
"Ah, Kit!" said he at last, with a deep-drawn sigh, "what slaves are
we all, and to the meanest accidents too,--the veriest trifles of our
existence. Ask yourself, I beseech you, what is it that continually
opposes your progress in life,--what is your rock ahead? Your name!
nothing but your name!--call yourself Jones, Wilkins, Simpson, Watkins,
and see what an expansion it will give your naturally fine faculties.
Nobody will dare to assert that you or I are the same men we were
five-and-twenty or thirty years ago, and yet you must be Davis and I
must be Classon, whether we will or not. I call this hard,--very hard
indeed!"
"Would it be any benefit to me if I could call myself Paul Classon?"
said Grog, with an insolent grin.
"It is not for the saintly man who bears that name to speak boastfully
of its responsibilities--"
"In bills of exchange, I O U's, promissory notes, and so forth," laughed
in Grog.
"I have, I own, done a little in these ways; but what gifted man ever
lived who has not at some time or other committed his sorrows to paper.
The misfortune in my case was that it was stamped."
"Do you know, Holy Paul, I think you are the greatest 'hemp' I ever
met."
"No, Kit, don't say so,--don't, my dear and valued friend; these words
give me deep pain."
"I do say it, and I maintain it!"
"What good Company you must have kept through life, then!"
"The worst of any man in England. And yet," resumed he, after a pause,
"I 'm positively ashamed to think that my daughter should be married by
the Reverend Paul Classon."
"A prejudice, my dear and respected friend,--a prejudice quite beneath
your enlarged and gifted understanding! Will it much signify to you
if he, who one of these days shall say, 'The sentence of this court,
Christopher Davis, is transportation beyond the seas,' be a Justice of
the Common Pleas or a Baron of the Exchequer? No, no, Kit; it is only
your vain, conceited people who fancy that they are not hanged if it was
n't Calcraft tied the noose!"
More than once did Davis change color at this speech, whose
illustrations were selected with special intention and malice.
"Here 's daybreak already!" cried Grog, throwing open the window, and
admitting the pinkish light of an early dawn, and the fresh sharp air of
morning.
"It's chilly enough too," said Classon, shivering, as he emptied the gin
into his glass.
"I think you 've had enough already," said Grog, rudely, as he flung
both tumbler and its contents out of the window. "Go, have a wash, and
make yourself a little decent-looking; one would imagine, to see you,
you had passed your night in the 'lock-up'!"
"When you see me next, you 'll fancy I 'm an archdeacon." So saying, and
guiding himself by the chairs, Paul Classon left the room.
With a quiet step, and firm, neither "overtaken" by liquor nor fatigued
by the night's debauch, Davis hastened to his chamber. So long as he was
occupied with the cares of dressing, his features betrayed no unusual
anxiety; he did, indeed, endeavor to attire himself with more than
ordinary care; and one cravat after another did he fling on the floor,
where a number of embroidered vests were already lying. At length the
toilet was completed, and Grog surveyed himself in the large glass, and
was satisfied. He knew he didn't look like Annesley Beecher and that
"lot," still less did he resemble the old "swells" of Brookes's and
the Carlton; but he thought there was something military, something
sporting,--a dash of the "nag," with "Newmarket,"--about him, that might
pass muster anywhere! "At all events, Lizzy won't be ashamed of me,"
muttered he to himself. "Poor, poor Lizzy!" added he, in a broken tone;
and he sank down into a chair, and leaned his head on the table.
A gentle tap came to the door. "Come in," said he, without raising his
head; and she entered.
As the rich robe of silk rustled across the floor, he never raised his
head; nor even when, bending over, she threw an arm around his neck and
kissed his forehead, did he stir or move.
"I want you to look at me, dearest papa," said she, softly.
"My poor Lizzy,--my own dear Lizzy!" murmured he, half indistinctly;
then, starting suddenly up, he cried aloud, "Good heavens! is it worth
all this--"
"No, indeed, papa," burst she in; "it is not--it is not worth it!"
"What do you mean?" asked he, abruptly. "What were you thinking of?"
"It was your thoughts I was following out," said she, drearily.
"How handsome,--how beautiful you are, girl!" exclaimed he, as, holding
both her hands, he surveyed her at full length. "Is this Brussels lace?"
She nodded assent
"And what do you call these buttons?"
"They are opals."
"How it all becomes you, girl! I'd never like to see you less smartly
dressed! And now.--and now I am to lose you!" And he fell upon her neck,
and clasped her fondly to his heart.
"Oh, my dear father, if you knew--" She could not continue.
"And don't I know!" broke he in. "Do you think that all my hard, bad
experience of life has left me so bereft of feeling! But I 'll tell you
another thing I know, Lizzy," said he, in a deep, calm voice; "that what
we fancy must break our hearts to do we can bear, and bear patiently,
and, what's more, so learn to conform to, that after a few years of life
we wonder that we ever thought them hardships!"
"We do not change so much without heavy suffering!" said she,
sorrowfully.
"That is possible too," said he, sighing. Then, suddenly rallying, he
said, "You'll write to me often, very often, Lizzy; I 'll want to hear
how you get on with these great folk; not that I fear anything, only
this, girl, that their jealousy will stimulate their rancor. You are so
handsome, girl! so handsome!"
"I 'm glad of it," said she, with an air of proud exultation.
"Who's there?" cried Davis, impatiently, as a sharp knock came to the
door. It was the Reverend Paul come to borrow a white neckcloth, none of
his own being sufficiently imposing for such an occasion.
"I am scarcely presentable, Miss Davis. I am sure I address Miss Davis,"
said he, pushing into the room, and bowing ceremoniously at each step.
"There can be but only one so eminently beautiful!"
"There, take what you want, and be off!" cried Davis, rudely.
"Your father usurps all the privileges of long friendship, and emboldens
me to claim some, too, my dear young lady. Let me kiss the fairest hand
in Christendom." And with a reverential homage all his own, Paul bent
down and touched her hand with his lips.
"This is the Reverend Paul Classon, Lizzy," said Davis,--"a great
dignitary of the Church, and an old schoolfellow of mine."
"I am always happy to know a friend of my father's," said she, smiling
gracefully. "You have only just arrived?"
"This moment!" said he, with a glance towards Grog.
"There, away with you, and finish your dressing," broke in Davis,
angrily; "I see it is nigh seven o'clock."
"Past seven, rather; and the company assembled below stairs, and Mr.
Beecher--for I presume it must be he--pacing the little terrace in all
the impatience of a bride-groom. Miss Davis, your servant." And with a
bow of deep reverence Paul retired.
"There were so many things running in my mind to say to you, Lizzy,"
said Davis, "when that Classon came in." It was very hard for him not to
add an epithet; but he did escape that peril.
"I own, papa, he did not impress me very favorably."
"He's a first-rate man, a great scholar, a regular don amongst the
shovel-hats," said Grog, hastily; "that man was within an ace of being a
bishop. But it was not of him my head was full, girl. I wanted to talk
to you about Beecher and that haughty sister-in-law of his. She 'll
'try-it on' with you, Lizzy; I 'm sure she will!"
"Dearest papa, how often have you told me that in preparing for the
accidents of life we but often exaggerate their importance. I'll not
anticipate evil."
"Here's Beecher!--here he is!" cried Davis, as he clasped her once more
to his heart; and then, opening the door, led her down the stairs.
There was a full assemblage of all the folk of the little inn, and the
room was crowded. The landlord and his wife, and four buxom daughters
and two sons, were there; and a dapper waiter, with very tight-fitting
trousers, and a housemaid, and three farm-servants, all with big
bouquets in their hands and huge bows of white ribbon on their breasts;
and Mademoiselle Annette, Lizzy's maid, in a lilac, silk and a white
crape bonnet; and Peters, Beecher's man, in a most accurate blue frock,
except his master, looking far more like a gentleman than any one there.
As for Annesley Beecher, no man ever more accurately understood how
to "costume" for every circumstance in life; and whether you saw him
lounging over the rail in Rotten Row, strolling through the Park at
Richmond, sunning himself at Cowes, or yawning through a wet day in a
country-house, his "get-up" was sure to be faultless. Hundreds tried in
vain to catch the inimitable curl of his hat, the unattainable sweep of
his waistcoat-collar; and then there were shades and tones of his color
about him that were especially his own. Of course, I am not about to
describe his appearance on this morning; it is enough if I say that he
bestowed every care upon it, and succeeded. And Paul,--Holy Paul,--how
blandly imposing, how unctuously serene he looked! Marriage was truly
a benediction at such hands. He faltered a little, his dulcet accents
trembled with a modest reluctance, as he asked, "'Wilt thou take--this
woman--'" Could he have changed the Liturgy for the occasion, he had
said, "this angel;" as it was, his voice compensated for the syllables,
and the question was breathed out like air from the Garden of Eden.
And so they were married; and there was a grand breakfast, where all the
household were assembled, and where Paul Classon made a most effective
little speech to "the health of the bride," interpolating his English
and German with a tact all his own; and then they drove away with four
posters, with all the noise and whip-cracking, the sighs and smiles and
last good-byes, just as if the scene had been Hanover Square, and the
High Priest a Canon of Westminster!
CHAPTER XXV. STUNNING TIDINGS
A telegram, duly despatched, had prepared the hotel of the Cour de Bade
for the arrival of the Honorable Annesley and Mrs. Beecher; and when
the well-appointed travelling-carriage came clattering into the
porte-cochre at nightfall, there was a dress parade of landlord and
waiters ready to receive them.
It was a very long time since Beecher had felt the self-importance of
being deemed rich. For many a year back life had been but a series of
struggles, and it was a very delightful sensation to him to witness once
more all the ready homage, all the obsequious attention which are only
rendered to affluence. Herr Bauer had got the despatch just in time to
keep his handsomest suite of rooms for him; indeed, he had "sent away
the Margraf of Schweinerhausen, who wanted them." This was gratifying;
and, limited as Beecher's German was, he could catch the muttered
exclamations of "Ach Grott, wie schn!" "Wie leiblich!" as his beautiful
wife passed up the stairs; and this, too, pleased him. In fact, his
was just then the glorious mood that comes once in a lifetime to the
luckiest of us,--to be charmed with everything.
To enjoy the sunshine one must have sojourned in shadow; and, certainly,
prosperity is never so entrancing as after some experience of its
opposite, and Beecher was never wearied of admiring the splendor of the
apartment, the wonderful promptitude of the waiters, and the excellence
of everything. It must be owned the dinner was in Bauer's best
style,--the bisque, the raebraten, the pheasant, all that could be
wished for; and when the imposing host himself uncorked a precious flask
of a "Cabinet Steinberger," Beecher felt it was a very charming world
when one had only got to the sunny side of it. Mr. Bauer--a politeness
rarely accorded, save to the highest rank--directed the service in
person, and vouchsafed to be agreeable during the repast.
"And so your season was a good one, Bauer?" said Beecher.
"Reasonably so, your Excellency. We had the King of Wurtemberg, the
Queen of Greece, a couple of archdukes, and a crown prince of
something far north,--second rate ones all, but good people, and easily
satisfied."
Beecher gave a significant glance towards Lizzy, and went on: "And who
were your English visitors?"
"The old set, your Excellency: the Duke of Middleton, Lord Headlam and
his four daughters, Sir Hipsley Keyling, to break the bank, as usual--"
"And did he?"
"No, Excellency; it broke him."
"Poor devil! it ain't so easy to get to windward of those fellows,
Bauer; they are too many for us, eh?" said Beecher, chuckling with the
consciousness that he had the key to that mysterious secret.
"Well, Excellency, there's nobody ever does it but one, so long as I
have known Baden."
"And who is he, pray?"
"Mr. Twining,--Adderley Twining, sir; that's the man can just win what
and when and how he pleases."
"Don't tell me that, Bauer; he has n't got the secret. If Twining
wins, it 's chance,--mere chance, just as you might win."
"It may be so, your Excellency."
"I tell you, Bauer,--I know it as a fact,--there's just one man in
Europe has the martingale, and here's to his health."
Mr. Bauer was too well skilled in his calling not to guess in whose
honor the glass was drained, and smiled a gracious recognition of the
toast.
"And your pretty people, Herr Bauer," broke in Lizzy,--"who were your
great beauties this season?"
"We had nothing remarkable, Madame," said he, bowing.
"No, Master Bauer," broke in Beecher; "for the luck and the good looks I
suspect you should have gone somewhere else this summer."
Bauer bowed his very deepest acknowledgment. Too conscious of what
became him in his station to hazard a flattery in words, he was yet
courtier enough to convey his admiration by a look of most meaning
deference.
"I conclude that the season is nigh over," said Lizzy, half languidly,
as she looked out on the moonlit promenade, where a few loungers were
lingering.
"Yes, Madame; another week will close the rooms. All are hastening away
to their winter quarters,--Rome, Paris, or Vienna."
"How strange it is, all this life of change!" said Lizzy, thoughtfully.
"It is not what it seems," said Beecher; "for the same people are always
meeting again and again, now in Italy, now in England. Ah! I see the
Cursaal is being lighted up. How jolly it looks through the trees! Look
yonder, Lizzy, where all the lamps are glittering. Many a sad night it
cost me, gay as it appears."
Mr. Bauer withdrew as the dessert was placed on the table, and they were
alone.
"Rich fellow that Bauer," said Beecher; "he lends more money than any
Jew in Frankfort. I wonder whether I could n't tempt him to advance me a
few hundreds?"
"Do you want money, then?" asked she, unsuspectingly.
"Want it? No, not exactly, except that every one wants it; people always
find a way to spend all they can lay their hands on."
"I don't call that wanting it," said she, half coldly.
"Play me something, Lizzy, here's a piano; that Sicilian song,--and sing
it." He held out his hand to lead her to the piano, but she only drew
her shawl more closely around her, and never moved. "Or, if you like
better, that Styrian dance," continued he.
"I am not in the humor," said she, calmly.
"Not in the humor? Well, be in the humor. I was never in better spirits
in my life. I would n't change with Davis when he won the Czarewitch.
Such a dinner as old Bauer gave us, and such wine! and then this coffee,
not to speak of the company,--eh, Lizzy?"
"Yes, Mr. Bauer was most agreeable."
"I was n't talking of Mr. Bauer, ma chre, I was thinking of some one
else."
"I did n't know," said she, with a half-weary sigh.
Beecher's cheek flushed up, and he walked to the window and looked out;
meanwhile she took up a book and began to read. Along the alley beneath
the window troops of people now passed towards the rooms. The hour of
play had sounded, and the swell of the band could be heard from the
space in front of the Cursaal. As his eyes followed the various
groups ascending the steps and disappearing within the building, his
imagination pictured the scene inside.
There was always a kind of rush to the tables on the last few nights of
the season. It was a sort of gamblers' theory that they were "lucky,"
and Beecher began to con over to himself all the fortunate fellows who
had broken the bank in the last week of a season. "I told old Grog I 'd
not go," muttered he; "I pledged myself I'd not enter the rooms; but, of
course, that meant I 'd not play,--it never contemplated mere looking in
and seeing who was there: rather too hard if I were not to amuse myself,
particularly when"--here he turned a glance towards Lizzy--"I don't
perceive any very great desire to make the evening pass pleasantly here.
Ain't you going to sing?" asked he, half angrily.
"If you wish it," said she, coldly.
"Nor play?" continued he, as though not hearing her reply.
"If you desire it," said she, rising, and taking her place at the piano.
He muttered something, and she began. Her fingers at first strayed
in half-careless chords over the instrument; and then, imperceptibly,
struck out into a wild, plaintive melody of singular feeling and
pathos,--one of those Hungarian airs which, more than any other national
music, seem to dispense with words for their expression.
Beecher listened for a few moments, and then, muttering indignantly
below his breath, he left the room, banging the door as he went out.
Lizzy did not seem to have noticed his departure, but played on, air
succeeding air, of the same character and sentiment; but at last she
leaned her head upon the instrument and fell into a deep revery.
The pale moonlight, as it lay upon the polished floor, was not more
motionless. Beecher, meanwhile, had issued forth into the street,
crossed the little rustic bridge, and held his way towards the Cursaal.
His humor was not an enviable nor an amiable one. It was such a mood as
makes a courageous man very dangerous company, but fills an individual
of the Beecher type with all that can be imagined of suspicion and
distrust. Every thought that crossed his mind was a doubt of somebody or
something. He had been duped, cheated, "done," he did n't exactly know
when, how, or by whom, with what object, or to what extent. But the fact
was so. He entered the rooms and walked towards the play-table. There
were many of the old faces he remembered to have seen years ago. He
exchanged bows and recognitions with several foreigners whose names he
had forgotten, and acknowledged suitably the polite obeisance of the
croupiers, as they rose to salute him. It was an interesting moment as
he entered, and the whole table were intently watching the game of one
player, whose single Louis d'or had gone on doubling with each deal,
till it had swelled into a sum that formed the limit of the bank. Even
the croupiers, models as they are of impassive serenity, showed a touch
of human sentiment as the deal began, and seemed to feel that they were
in presence of one who stood higher in Fortune's favor than themselves.
"Won again!" cried out a number of voices; "the thirteenth pass! Who
ever saw the like? It is fabulous, monstrous!" Amid the din of incessant
commentaries, few of them uttered in the tone of felicitation, a very
tall man stretched his arm towards the table, and began to gather in the
gold, saying, in a pleasant but hurried voice: "A thousand pardons. I
hope you 'll excuse me; would n't inconvenience you for worlds. I
think you said"--this was to the banker--"I think you said thirty-eight
thousand francs in all; thank you, extremely obliged; a very great run
of luck, indeed,--never saw the like before. Would you kindly exchange
that note, it is a Frankfort one; quite distressed to give you the
trouble; infinitely grateful;" and, bashfully sweeping the glittering
coins into his hat, as if ashamed to have interrupted the game,
he retired to a side table to count over his winnings. He had just
completed a little avenue of gold columns, muttering to himself little
congratulations, interspersed with "What fun!" when Beecher, stepping
up, accosted him. "The old story, Twining! I never heard nor read of a
fellow with such luck as yours!"
[Illustration: 311]
"Oh, very good luck, capital luck!" cried Twining, rubbing his lean
hands, and then slapping them against his leaner legs. "As your
Lordship observes, I do occasionally win; not always, not always,
but occasionally. Charmed to see you here,--delighted,--what fun!
Late,--somewhat late in the season,--but still lovely weather. Your
Lordship only just arrived, I suppose?"
"I see you don't remember me, Twining," said Beecher, smiling, and
rather amused to mark how completely his good fortune had absorbed his
attention.
"Impossible, my Lord-!--never forget a face,--never!"
"Pardon me if I must correct you this once; but it is quite clear you
have forgotten me. Come, for whom do you take me?"
"Take you, my Lord,--take you? Quite shocked if I could make a blunder;
but really, I feel certain I am speaking with Lord Lackington."
"There, I knew it!" cried Beecher, laughing out "I knew it, though, by
Jove! I was not quite prepared to hear that I looked so old. You know
he's about eighteen years my senior."
"So he was, my Lord,--so he was," said Twining, gathering up his gold.
"And for a moment, I own, I was disposed to distrust my eyes, not seeing
your Lordship in mourning."
"In mourning? and for whom?"
"For the late Viscount, your Lordship's brother!"
"Lackington! Is Lackington dead?"
"Why, it's not possible your Lordship hasn't heard it? It cannot be
that your letters have not brought you the tidings? It happened six--ay,
seven weeks ago; and I know that her Ladyship wrote, urgently entreating
you to come out to Italy." Twining continued to detail, in his own
peculiar and fitful style, various circumstances about Lord Lackington's
last illness. But Beecher never heard a word of it, but stood stunned
and stupefied by the news. It would be too tangled a web were we to
inquire into the complicated and confused emotions which then swayed his
heart. The immense change in his own fortunes, his sudden accession to
rank, wealth, and station, came, accompanied by traits of brotherly love
and affection bestowed on him long, long ago, when he was a Harrow boy,
and "Lack" came down to see him; and then, in after life, the many
kind things he had done for him,--helping him out of this or that
difficulty,--services little estimated at the time, but now remembered
with more than mere gratitude. "Poor Lackington! and that I should not
haver been with you!" muttered he; and then, as if the very words had
set another chord in vibration, he started as he thought that he had
been duped. Davis knew it all; Davis had intercepted the letters. It was
for this he had detained him weeks long in the lonely isolation of that
Rhenish village. It was for this his whole manner had undergone such a
marked change to him. Hence the trustfulness with which he burned the
forged acceptances; the liberality with which he supplied him with
money, and then--the marriage! "How they have done me!" cried he, in
an agony of bitterness,--"how they have done me! The whole thing was
concerted,--a plant from the very beginning; and she was in it!" While
he thus continued to mutter to himself imprecations upon his own folly,
Twining led him away, and imperceptibly induced him to stroll along one
of the unfrequented alleys. At first Beecher's questions were all
about his brother's illness,--how it began, what they called it, how it
progressed. Then he asked after his sister-in-law,--where she then was,
and how. By degrees he adverted to Lackington's affairs; his will,--what
he had left, and to whom. Twining was one of the executors, and
could tell him everything. The Viscount had provided handsomely, not
extravagantly, for his widow, and left everything to his brother! "Poor
Lackington, I knew he loved me always!" Twining entered into a somewhat
complicated narrative of a purchase the late Viscount had made, or
intended to make, in Ireland,--an encumbered estate,--but Beecher paid
no attention to the narrative. All his thoughts were centred upon his
own position, and how Davis had done him.
"Where could you have been, my Lord, all that time, not to have heard of
this?" asked Twining.
"I was in Germany, in Nassau. I was fishing amongst the mountains," said
the other, in confusion.
"Fishing?--great fun, capital fun; like it immensely,--no expense,
rods and hooks,--rods and hooks; not like hunting,--hunting perfectly
ruinous,--I mean for men like myself, not, of course, for your
Lordship."
"Poor Lackington!" muttered Beecher, half unconsciously.
"Ah!" sighed Twining, sympathetically.
"I was actually on my way out to visit him, but one thing or another
occurred to delay me!"
"How unfortunate, my Lord; and, really, his anxieties about you were
unceasing. You have not to be told of the importance he attached to the
title and name of your house! He was always saying, 'If Beecher were
only married! If we could find a wife for Annesley--'"
"A wife!" exclaimed the other, suddenly.
"Yes, my Lord, a wife; excellent thing, marriage,--capital thing,--great
fun."
"But it's done, sir; I 'm booked!" cried Beecher, vehemently. "I was
married on Sunday last."
"Wish your Lordship every imaginable joy. I offer my felicitations on
the happy event Is the Viscountess here?"
"She is here," said Beecher, with a dogged sternness.
"May I ask the name of Lady Lackington's family?" said Twining,
obsequiously.
"Name,--name of her family!" echoed Beecher, with a scornful laugh.
Then, suddenly stopping, he drew his arm within Twining's, and in the
low voice of a secret confidence, said, "You know the world as well
as most men,--a deal better, I should say; now, can you tell me, is a
marriage of this kind binding?"
"What kind of marriage do you mean?"
"Why, a private marriage in an inn, without banns, license, or
publication of any kind, the ceremony performed by a fellow I suspect
is a degraded parson,--at least, I used to hear he was 'scratched' years
ago,--Classon."
"Paul Classon,--Holy Paul?--clever fellow, very ingenious. Tried to walk
into me once for a subscription to convert the Mandans Indians,--did n't
succeed,--what fun!"
"Surely no ministration of his can mean much, eh?"
"Afraid it does, my Lord; as your late brother used to observe, marriage
is one of those bonds in which even a rotten string is enough to
bind us. Otherwise, I half suspect some of us would try to slip our
cables,--slip our cables and get away! What fun, my Lord,--what fun!"
"I don't believe such a marriage is worth a rush," went on Beecher, in
that tone of affirmation by which he often stimulated his craven heart
to feel a mock confidence. "At least, of this I am certain, there are
five hundred fellows in England would find out a way to smash it."
"And do you want to 'cryoff my Lord?" asked Twining, abruptly.
"I might, or I might not; that depends. You see, Twining, there's
rather a wide line of country between Annesley Beecher with nothing, and
Viscount Lackington with a snug little estate; and if I had only known,
last Sunday morning, that I was qualified to run for a cup I'd scarcely
have entered for a hack stakes."
"But then, you are to remember her connections."
"Connections!" laughed out Beecher, scornfully.
"Well, family,--friends; in short, she may have brothers,--a father?"
"She has a father, by Jove!--she has a father!"
"May I be so bold as to ask--"
"Oh, you know him well!--all the world knows him, for the matter of
that. What do you say to Kit Davis,--Grog!"
"Grog Davis, my Lord?--Grog Davis!"
"Just so," said Beecher, lighting a cigar with an affected composure he
intended to pass off for great courage.
"Grog--Grog--Grog!--wonderful fellow! astonishing fellow! up to
everything! and very amusing! I must say, my Lord,--I must say, your
Lordship's father-in-law is a very remarkable man."
"I rather suspect he is, Twining."
"Under the circumstances,--the actual circumstances, I should say, my
Lord, keep your engagement,--keep your engagement."
"I understand you, Twining; you don't fancy Master Grog. Well, I know an
opinion of that kind is abroad. Many people are afraid of him; I never
was,--eh?" The last little interrogative was evoked by a strange smile
that flickered across Twining's face. "You suspect that I am afraid of
him, Twining; now, why should I?"
"Can't possibly conceive, my Lord,--cannot imagine a reason."
"He is what is called a dangerous fellow."
"Very dangerous."
"Vindictive."
"To the last. Never abandons a pursuit, they tell me."
"But we live in an age of civilization, Twining. Men of his stamp can't
take the law in their own hands."
"I 'm afraid that is exactly the very thing they do, my Lord; they
contrive always to be in the wrong, and consequently have everything
their own way;" and so Mr. Twining rubbed his hands, slapped his legs,
and laughed away very pleasantly.
"You are rather a Job's comforter, Twining," said Beecher, tartly.
"Not very like Job, your Lordship; very little resemblance, I must say,
my Lord! Much more occasion for pride than patience,--peerage and a fine
property!"
"I 'm sure I never coveted it; I can frankly say I never desired
prosperity at the price of--the price of--By the way, Twining, why
not compromise this affair? I don't see why a handsome sum--I'm quite
willing it should be handsome--would n't put all straight. A clever
friend might be able to arrange the whole thing. Don't you agree with
me?"
"Perfectly, my Lord; quite convinced you have taken the correct view."
"Should you feel any objection to act for me in the matter,--I mean, to
see Davis?"
Twining winced like a man in pain.
"Why, after all, it is a mere negotiation."
"Very true, my Lord."
"A mere experiment."
"Just so, my Lord; so is proving a new cannon; but I'd just as soon not
sit on the breech for the first fire."
"It's wonderful how every one is afraid of this fellow, and I wind him
round my finger!"
"Tact, my Lord,--tact and cleverness, that's it."
"You see, Twining," said Beecher, confidentially, "I'm not quite clear
that I 'd like to be off. I have n't regularly made up my mind about it.
There's a good deal to be said on either side of the question. I'll tell
you what to do: come and breakfast with us to-morrow morning,--I 'd say
dine, but I mean to get away early and push on towards the South; you
shall see her, and then--and then we 'll have a talk afterwards."
"Charmed, my Lord,--delighted,--too happy. What 's your hour?"
"Let us say eleven. Does that suit you?"
"Perfectly; any hour,--eleven, twelve, one,--whenever your Lordship
pleases."
"Well, good-night, Twining, good-night."
"Good-night, my Lord, good-night. What fun!" muttered he, slapping his
legs as he stepped out to his lodgings.
It was not till he had smoked his fourth cigar, taking counsel from his
tobacco, as was his wont, that the new Viscount returned to his hotel.
It was then nigh morning, and the house was so buried in sleep that he
knocked full half an hour before he gained admittance.
"There's a gentleman arrived, sir, who asked after you. He didn't give
his name."
"What is he like,--old, young, short, or tall?"
"Middle-aged, sir, and short, with red beard and moustaches. He drank
tea with the lady upstairs, sir, and waited to see you till nigh two
o'clock."
"Oh, I know him," muttered Beecher, and passed on. When he reached
his dressing-room, he found the table covered with a mass of letters
addressed to Lord Viscount Lackington, and scrawled over with postmarks;
but a card, with the following few words, more strongly engaged his
attention: "It's all right, you are the Viscount--C. D."
A deep groan burst from Beecher as he dropped the card and sank heavily
into a seat. A long, long time slipped over ere he could open the letters
and examine their contents. They were almost all from lawyers and men of
business, explanation of formalities to be gone through, legal details
to be completed, with here and there respectful entreaties to be
continued in this or that agency. A very bulky one was entirely occupied
with a narrative of the menaced suit on the title, and a list of
the papers which would be hereafter required for the defence. It was
vexatious to be told of a rebellion ere he had yet seated himself on the
throne; and so he tossed the ungracious document to the end of the room,
his mood the very reverse of that he had so long pictured to himself it
might be.
"I suppose it's all great luck!" muttered he to himself; "but up to this
I see no end of difficulty and trouble."
CHAPTER XXVI. UNPLEASANT EXPLANATIONS
Beecher had scarcely dropped off to sleep when he was awoke by a heavy,
firm tread in the room; he started up, and saw it was Davis.
"How is the noble Viscount?" said Grog, drawing a chair and seating
himself. "I came over here post haste when I got the news."
"Have you told her?" asked Beecher, eagerly.
"Told her! I should think I have. Was it not for the pleasure of that
moment that I came here,--here, where they could arrest me this instant
and send me off to the fortress of Rastadt? I shot an Austrian officer
in the garrison there four years ago."
"I heard of it," groaned Beecher, from the utmost depth of his heart "So
that she knows it all?"
"She knows that you are a peer of England, and that she is a peeress."
Beecher looked at the man as he spoke, and never before did he appear
to him so insufferably insolent and vulgar. Traits which he had in part
forgotten or overlooked now came out in full force, and he saw him in
all the breadth of his coarseness. As if he had read what was passing in
Beecher's mind, Davis stared fully at him, resolute and defiant.
"I suppose," resumed Grog, "it was a pleasure you had reserved for
yourself to inform her Ladyship of her step in rank, but I thought she'd
just like to hear the news as well from her father."
Beecher made no answer, but sat buried in thought; at last he said: "Mr.
Twining, whom I met accidentally last night, told me of my brother's
death, and told me, besides, that it had occurred fully eight weeks
ago."
"So long as that!" said Davis, dryly.
"Yes, so long as that," said Beecher, fixing his eyes steadfastly on
the other. "He tells me, too, that Lady Lackington wrote twice, or even
thrice, to urge me to come on to Italy; that my arrival was looked for
hourly. Many other letters were also sent after me, but not one reached
my hand. Strange, very strange!"
"I suppose you have them all there now," said Grog, defiantly, as he
pointed to the mass of letters on the dressing-table.
"No, these are all of recent dates, and refer, besides, to others which
I have never got."
"What has become of the others, then?" asked Grog, resolutely.
"That's the very point I cannot decide, and it is the very question I
was about to ask of you."
"What do you mean?" said Grog, calmly.
"What I mean is this," said Beecher, "that I am curious to learn how
long it is since you knew of my brother's death?"
"If you 'd like to hear when I suspected that fact, perhaps I can tell
you," said Grog.
"Well, let me hear so much."
"It was shortly after your arrival at Holbach."
"Ah! I thought so--I thought as much!" cried Beecher triumphantly.
"Wait a bit,--wait a bit; don't be sure you have won the game, I 've a
card in my hand yet. When you endorsed certain large bills for Lazarus
Stein at Aix, you signed your name 'Lackington.' Oh, there's no denying
it, I have them here in this pocket-book. Now, either your brother was
dead, or you committed a forgery."
"You know well, sir," said Beecher, haughtily, "at whose instance and
persuasion I wrote myself Lackington.'"
"I know it! I know nothing about it. But before we carry this
controversy further, let me give you a hint: drop this haughty tone you
have just taken with me,--it won't do,--I tell you it won't. If you 're
the Lord Viscount to the world, you know deuced well what you are to me,
and what, if you push me to it, I could make you to them."
"Captain Davis, I am inclined to think that we had better come to an
understanding at once," said Beecher, with a degree of firmness he could
rarely assume. "Our relations cannot be what they have hitherto been. I
will no longer submit to dictation nor control at your hands. Our roads
in life lie in opposite directions; we need seldom to meet, never to
cross each other. If Lady Lackington accepts the same view of these
matters as myself, well; if not, it will not be difficult to suggest an
arrangement satisfactory to each of us."
"And so you think to come the noble Lord over me, do you?" said Grog,
with an irony perfectly savage in look and tone. "I always knew you
were a fool, but that you could carry your stupid folly that far I
never imagined. You want to tell me--if you had the pluck you would tell
me--that you are ashamed of having married my daughter, and I tell
you that out of your whole worthless, wretched, unmanly life, it is
the one sole redeeming action. That she stooped to marry you is
another matter,--she that, at this very moment, confers more honor upon
your rank than it can ever bestow upon her! Ay! start if you will, but
don't sneer; for if you do, by the eternal Heaven above us, it will be
the last laugh you 'll ever indulge in!" A sudden movement of his hand
towards the breast of his coat gave such significance to the words that
Beecher sprang from his seat and approached the bell-rope. "Sit down
there,--there, in that chair," cried Grog, in the thickened accents of
passion. "I have n't done with you. If you call a servant into the room,
I' ll fling you out of the window. If you imagined, when I burned your
forged acceptances, that I had n't another evidence against you stronger
than all, you mistook Kit Davis. What! did you think to measure
yourself against me? Nature never meant you for that, my Lord
Viscount,--never!"
If Davis was carried away by the impetuosity of his savage temper in all
this, anger never disabled him from keenly watching Beecher and scanning
every line in his face. To his amazement, therefore, did he remark that
he no longer exhibited the same extent of fear he had hitherto done. No,
he was calmer and more collected than Grog had ever seen him in a moment
of trial.
"When your passion has blown over," said Beecher, quietly, "you will
perhaps tell me what it is you want or require of me."
"Want of you,--want of you!" reiterated Davis, more abashed by the
other's demeanor than he dared to confess, even to himself,--"what can
I want of you? or, if I do want anything, it is that you will remember
who you are, and who am I. It is not to remember that you are a Lord,
and I a leg,--it is not that I mean,--you 're not very like to forget
it; it is to call to mind that I have the same grip of you I have
had any day these ten years, and that I could show up the Viscount
Lackington just as easily as the Honorable Annesley Beecher."
If Beecher's cheek grew paler, it was only for a moment, and, with an
amount of calm dignity of which Grog had not believed him capable, he
said,--
"There's not any use in your employing this language towards
me,--there's not the slightest necessity for me to listen to it. I
conclude, after what has passed between us, we cannot be friends:
there's no need, however, of our being enemies."
"Which means, 'I wish you a very good-morning, Kit Davis,' don't it?"
said Grog, with a grin.
Beecher gave a smile that might imply anything.
"Ah! so that's it?" cried Davis, endeavoring, by any means, to provoke a
reply.
Beecher made no answer, but proceeded in most leisurely style with his
dressing. #
"Well, that's candid, anyhow," said Grog, sternly. "Now, I 'll be as
frank with you: I thought a few days back that I 'd done rather a good
thing of it, but I find that I backed the wrong horse after all. You are
the Viscount, now, but you won't be so this day six months."
Beecher turned his head round, and gave a smile of the most insolent
incredulity.
"Ay, I know you'll not believe it, because it is I that tell you; but
there came out a fellow from Fordyce's with the same story, and when you
open your letters you 'll see it again."
Beecher's courage now deserted him, and the chair on which he leaned
shook under his grasp.
"Here's how it is," said Grog, in a calm, deliberate tone: "Dunn--that
same fellow we called on one day together--has fallen upon a paper--a
title, or a patent, or a writ, or something--that shows you have no
claim to the Viscounty, and that it ought to go, along with the estates,
to some man who represents the elder branch. Now Dunn, it seems, was
some way deep with your brother. He had been buying land for him,
and not paying, or paying the money and not getting the land,--at all
events, he was n't on the square with him; and seeing that you might
probably bring him to book, he just says, 'Don't go into accounts with
me, and here's your title; give me any trouble, and I 'll go over to the
enemy.'"
"But there can be no such document."
"Fordyce's people say there is. Hankes, Dunn's own agent, told them the
substance of it; and it seems it was on the list of proofs, but they
never could lay a hand on it."
Beecher heard no more, but taking up the lawyer's letter, which he had
thrown so indignantly from him the night before, he began patiently to
read it.
"Who can make head or tail of all this?" cried he, in angry impatience.
"The fellow writes as if I was a scrivener's clerk, and knew all their
confounded jargon. Mere schemes to extort money these!"
"Not always. There's now and then a real charge in the gun, and it's too
late to know it when you 're hit," cried Grog, quietly.
"Why do not Fordyce's people send out a proper person to communicate
with myself directly," said Beecher, haughtily. "They did, and I saw
him," said Grog, boldly.
Beecher grew crimson, and his lip trembled with a convulsive movement.
It was very hard indeed to restrain himself, but, with an effort, he
succeeded, and simply said, "And then--"
"And then," resumed Davis, "I packed him off again."
"What authority had you to thrust yourself forward in this manner?"
cried Beecher, passionately. "What authority?--the interest of my
daughter, the Viscountess Lackington," said Grog, with a mingled
insolence and mockery. "You may safely swear it was out of no special
regard for you. What authority?" And with this he burst out into a
laugh of sarcastic defiance.
"It need not offend you," said Beecher, "if I say that a question like
this must be intrusted to very different hands from yours."
"You think so, eh?"
"I'm sure of it."
"Well, I am not; so far from it, that I'm ready to declare if I can't
pull you through, there's not that man living who can. Lawyers can meet
lawyers. If one wins a trick here, the other scores one there. This
fellow has a deed,--that one has a codicil. It is always the same game;
and they 're in no hurry to finish, for they are playing on velvet. What
's really wanting is some one that does n't care a rush for a little
risk,--ready to bribe this man,--square the other,--burn a parish
register, if need be, and come at--at any document that may be
required,--at the peril of passing his days at Norfolk Island."
"You fancy that the whole world is like the ring at Ascot," said
Beecher, sneeringly.
"And ain't it? What's the difference, I'd like to know? Is it noble
lords like yourself would prove the contrary?"
"I will see Fordyce myself," said Beecher, coldly.
"You needn't be at the trouble," said Davis, calmly. "There's two ways
of doing the thing: one is a compromise with the claimant, who turns out
to be that young Conway, the 'Smasher.'"
"Young Conway, the one-armed fellow?"
"Just so. The other is, to get hold of Dunn's papers. Now, I have
despatched a trusty hand to the Crimea to see about the first of these
plans. As for the other, I 'll do it myself."
"How so?"
"Just this way: you shall give me a written authority to demand from
Dunn all your family papers and documents, making me out to be your
agent for the Irish estates." Beecher started, and a slight cast of
derision marked his lip; but there was that in Grog's face that speedily
suppressed every temptation to sneer, and he grew sick with terror.
"Dunn will be for holding out," resumed Davis. "He 'll be for writing to
yourself for explanations, instructions, and so forth; and if I were a
fellow of his own sort, I 'd have to agree; but, being what I am,--Kit
Davis, you see,--I'll Just say: 'No gammon, my old gent. We don't mean
to lose this match, nor don't mean to let you nobble us. Be on
the square, and it will be all the better for yourself.' We 'll soon
understand each other."
A gentle tap at the door here interrupted Davis, and Beecher's servant,
with a most bland voice, said, "Her Ladyship is waiting breakfast, my
Lord," and disappeared.
"Who told him?" asked Beecher, a strange sense of pleasure vibrating
through him as this recognition reminded him of his newly acquired
station.
"I told him last night," said Davis, with a look that seemed to say,
"And of whatever I do, let there be no farther question."
As they entered the breakfast-room, they found Lizzy--I must ask pardon
if I return at times to their former names in speaking of her and
her husband--in conversation with Mr. Twining, that gentleman having
presented himself, and explained how he came to be there.
"Do you know Captain Davis, Twining? Let me present him to you," said
Beecher, blushing deeply as he spoke.
"Charmed, my Lord,--much honored,--fancy we have met before,--met at
York Spring Meet. Rataplan beat by a neck,--great fun!"
"It was n't great fun for me," growled out Grog; "I stood to win on
Bruiser."
"Excellent horse,--capital horse,--wonderful stride!"
"I'll tell you what he was," said Grog, sternly,--"a rare bad 'un!"
"You surprise--amaze me, Captain Davis,--quite astonish me! Always heard
a great character of Braiser!"
"You did, did you?" said Grog, with a jocose leer.
"Well, the information wasn't thrown away, for you laid heavily against
him."
"Most agreeable man, your father-in-law, my Lord," said Twining,
slapping his legs and laughing away in high good humor; then, turning
again to Davis, he engaged him in conversation.
Meanwhile Beecher had drawn Lizzy into a recess of the window, and was
whispering anxiously to her.
"Did this piece of news take you by surprise?" asked he, scanning her
closely as he spoke.
"Yes," said she, calmly.
"It was quite unexpected," said he, half in question,--"at least by me,"
added he, after a pause.
She saw that some suspicion--she knew not of what, and as possibly cared
as little--agitated him, and she turned away to the breakfast-table
without speaking. Beecher, however, led her back again to the window. "I
'd like much to ask you a question," said he, half timidly; "that is, if
I did not fear you might take it ill."
"And there is such a risk, is there?" asked she.
"Well, it is just possible," faltered he.
"In that case, take my advice, and do not hazard it." There was a calm
resolution in her tone that carried more weight with it than anything
like passion, and Beecher felt in his heart that he dared not reject her
counsel.
Lizzy had now taken her place at the breakfast-table, her air, look, and
manner being all that could denote a mind perfectly easy and
contented. So consummate, too, was her tact, that she gradually led the
conversation into that tone of pleasant familiarity when frank opinions
are expressed and people talk without restraint; and thus, without the
semblance of an effort, she succeeded, while developing any agreeability
Beecher possessed, in silencing her father, whose judgments of men
and events were not always the safest. As for Twining, she perfectly
fascinated him. He was no mean critic in all that regards dress and
manners; few men could more unerringly detect a flaw in breeding or a
solecism in address. Mere acting, however good, would never have imposed
upon him, and all the polish of manner and the charm of a finished
courtesy would have failed with him if unaccompanied by that "sentiment"
of good breeding which is its last and highest captivation. How subdued
was all the flippant mockery of his manner! how respectful the tone
in which he accosted her! It was the Viscountess, and not Grog Davis's
daughter, he saw before him. Now Beecher saw all this, and a sense of
pride swelled his heart, and made him almost forget his distrusts and
suspicions. When breakfast was over, Lizzy, passing her arm within her
father's, led him away. She had many things to say to him, and he to
her, so that Beecher and Twining were left alone together.
"Well, Twining," said Annesley, as he lighted a cigar, "tell me
frankly,--don't you think I might have done worse?"
"Impossible to have done better,--impossible!" said Twining. "I don't
speak of her Ladyship's beauty, in which she surpasses all I have ever
seen, but her manner--her courtesy--has a blending of grace and dignity
that would confer honor on the most finished Court in Europe."
"I'm glad you say so, Twining; men quote you as an authority on these
things, and I own frankly I am delighted to have my own judgment so
ratified."
"Her appearance in the world will be such a success as one has not seen
for years!" exclaimed Twining.
"She'll be sharply criticised," said Beecher, puffing his cigar.
"She can well afford it, my Lord."
"What will the women say, Twining? She is so good-looking,--what will
the women say?"
"Where there's no rivalry, there will be no dispraise. She is so
surpassingly beautiful that none will have courage to criticise; and if
they should, where can they detect a fault?"
"I believe you are right, Twining,--I believe you are right," said
Beecher, and his face glowed with pleasure as he spoke. "Where she got
her manners I can't make out," added he, in a whisper.
"Ay, my Lord, these are Nature's own secrets, and she keeps them
closely."
"It is the father--old Grog--is the difficulty," whispered Beecher,
still lower; "what can be done with him?"
"Original, certainly; peculiar,--very peculiar,--what fun!" And Twining
in an instant recovered all his wonted manner, and slapped away at his
legs unmercifully.
"I don't exactly see the fun of it,--especially for me," said Beecher,
peevishly.
"After all, a well-known man, my Lord,--public character,--a celebrity,
so to say."
"Confound it!" cried Beecher, angrily, "don't you perceive there lies
the whole annoyance? The fellow is known from one end of England to the
other. You can't enter a club of a rainy day, when men sit round the
fire, without hearing a story of him; you don't get to the third station
on a railroad till some one says, 'Have you heard old Grog's last?'
There's no end to him?"
"Wonderful resources!--astonishing!--great fun!"
"I'll be hanged if it is great fun, though you are pleased to say so,"
said Beecher, angrily.
Twining was far too good-tempered to feel hurt by this peevishness, and
only rubbed his hands and laughed joyfully.
"And the worst of all," resumed Beecher,--"the worst of all is, he
will be a foreground figure; do what you may, he will be in the
front of the Stand-house."
"Get him a situation abroad, my Lord,--something in the colonies," broke
in Twining.
"Not a bad thought that, Twining; only he is so notorious."
"Doesn't signify in the least, my Lord. Every office under the Crown has
its penal settlements. The Foreign Office makes its culprits consuls;
the Colonial sends their chief justices to the Gold Coast; and the Home
Secretary's Botany Bay is Ireland."
"But would they really give me something,--I mean something he 'd take?"
"I have n't a doubt of it, my Lord; I wanted to get rid of a poor
relation t' other day, and they made him a Boundary Commissioner at
Baffin's Bay. Baffin's Bay!--what fun!" And he laughed immoderately.
"How am I to set about this, Twining? You are aware that up to this I
have had no relations with politics or parties."
"Nothing easier, my Lord; always easy for a peer,--proxy often of great
consequence. Write to the Premier,--hint that you are well disposed to
adopt his views,--due maintenance of all the glorious privileges of our
Constitution, with progressive improvement,--great fun, capital fun!
all the landmarks firm and fixed, and as much of your neighbor's farm as
possible. Or if you don't like to do this, set Davenport Dunn at
them; he is your Lordship's Irish agent,--at least, he was the late
Viscount's,--he 'll do it,--none better, none so well!"
"That might be the best way," said Beecher, musing.
"He'll be charmed--delighted--overjoyed at this proof of your Lordship's
confidence. He 'll go to work at once, and before your Lordship begins
to receive, or go out, your amiable and most highly gifted father-in-law
may be Income-tax Collector in Cochin-China."
"Now, there's only one thing more, Twining, which is, to induce Davis
to agree to this. He likes Europe,--likes the life of England and the
Continent."
"Certain he does,--quite sure of it; no man more calculated to
appreciate society or adorn it. Capital fun!"
"Do you think," resumed Beecher, "that you could just throw out a
hint--a slight suggestion--to see how he'd take it?"
"Come much better from your Lordship."
"Well, I don't know--that is, I half suspect--"
"Far better, infinitely better, my Lord; your own tact, your Lordship's
good taste--Oh dear me, one o'clock already, and I have an appointment!"
And with the most profuse apologies for a hurried departure, and as many
excuses to be conveyed to her Ladyship, Mr. Twining disappeared.
Although Twining's reluctance to carry into execution the tone of policy
he suggested did not escape Beecher's penetration, the policy itself
seemed highly recommendable. Grog out of Europe,--Grog beyond the seas,
collecting taxes, imprisoning skippers, hunting runaway negroes, or
flogging Caffres,--it mattered not, so that he never crossed his sight
again. To be sure, it was not exactly the moment to persuade Davis to
expatriate himself when his prospects at home began to brighten, and he
saw his daughter a peeress. Still, Dunn was a fellow of such marvellous
readiness, such astonishing resources! If any man could "hit off" the
way here, it was he. And then, how fortunate! Grog was eagerly pressing
Beecher to be accredited to this same Davenport Dunn; he asked that he
might be sent to confer and negotiate with him about the pending action
at law. What an admirable opportunity was this, then, for Dunn to sound
Davis and, if occasion served, tempt him with an offer of place! Besides
these reasons, valid and sound so far as they went, there was another
impulse that never ceased to urge Beecher forward, and this was a vague
shadowy sort of impression that if he could only succeed in his plan
he should have outwitted Grog, and "done" him. There was a sense of
triumph associated with this thought that made his heart swell with
pride. In his passion for double-dealing, he began to think how he could
effect his present purpose,--by what zigzag and circuitous road, through
what tangled scheme of duplicity and trick. "I have it,--I have it,"
cried he at length; and he hastened to his dressing-room, and, having
locked the door, he opened his writing-desk and sat down to write. But
it is not at the end of a chapter I can presume to insert his Lordship's
correspondence.
CHAPTER XXVII. OVERREACHINGS
Beecher did not amongst his gifts possess the pen of a ready writer; but
there was a strange symmetry observable between the composition and
the manual part. The lines were irregular, the letters variously sized,
erasures frequent, blots everywhere, while the spelling displayed a
spirit that soared above orthography. A man unused to writing, in
the cares of composition, is pretty much in the predicament of a bad
horseman in a hunting-field. He has a vague, indistinct motion of
"where" he ought to go, without the smallest conception as to the "how."
He is balked or "pounded" at every step, always trying back, but never
by any chance hitting off the right road to his object.
Above a dozen sheets of paper lay half scrawled over before him after
two hours of hard labor, and there he still sat pondering over his
weary task. His scheme was simply this: to write a few lines to Dunn,
introducing his father-in-law, and instructing him to afford him all
information and details as to the circumstances of the Irish property,
it being his intention to establish Captain Davis in the position of
his agent in that country; having done which, and given to Grog to
read over, he meant to substitute another in its place, which other was
confidentially to entreat of Dunn to obtain some foreign and far-away
appointment for Davis, and by every imaginable means to induce him
to accept it. This latter document Dunn was to be instructed to burn
immediately after reading. In fact, the bare thought of what would
ensue if Davis saw it, made him tremble all over, and aggravated all the
difficulties of composition. Even the mode of beginning puzzled him,
and there lay some eight or ten sheets scrawled over with a single
line, thus: "Lord Lackington presents his compliments"--"The
Viscount Lackington requests"--"Lord Lackington takes the present
opportunity"--"Dear Dunn"--"Dear Mr. Dunn"--"My dear Mr. Dunn"--"Dear
D." How nicely and minutely did he weigh over in his mind the value to
be attached to this exordium, and how far the importance of position
counterbalanced the condescension of close intimacy! "Better be
familiar," said he, at last; "he 's a vulgar dog, and he 'll like it;"
and so he decided for "My dear Dunn."
"My dear Dunn,--As I know of your influence with the people in
power--too formal that, perhaps," said he, re-reading it--"as I know
what you can do with the dons in Downing Street--that 's far better--I
want you to book the bearer--no, that is making a flunkey of him--I
want you to secure me a snug thing in the Colonies--or better, a snug
Colonial appointment--for my father-in-law--no, for my friend--no,
for my old and attached follower, Captain Davis--that's devilish
well-rounded, 'old and attached follower, Captain Davis.' When I tell
you that I desire he may get something over the hills and far away, you
'll guess at once--you 'll guess at once why--no, guess the reason--no,
you 'll see with half an eye how the cat jumps." He threw down his pen
at this, and rubbed his hands in an ecstasy of delight. "Climate does
n't signify a rush, for he's strong as a three-year-old, and has
the digestion of an 'ostrage;' the main thing, little to do, and
opportunities for blind hookey. As to outfit, and some money in hand,
I 'll stand it. Once launched, if there's only a billiard-table or
dice-box in the colony, he 'll not starve."
"Eh, Grog, my boy," cried he, with a laugh, "as the parsons say, 'Salary
less an object than a field of profitable labor!' And, by Jove! the
grass will be very short, indeed, where you can't get enough to feed on!
There 's no need to give Dunn a caution about reserve, and so forth with
him,--he knows Grog well."
Having finished this letter, and placed it carefully in his pocket, he
began the other, which, seeing that it was never to be delivered,
and only shown to Davis himself, cost him very little trouble in the
composition. Still it was not devoid of all difficulty, since, by the
expectations it might create in Grog's mind of obtaining the management
of the Irish property, it would be actually throwing obstacles in the
way of his going abroad. He therefore worded the epistle more carefully,
stating it to be his intention that Captain Davis should be his agent at
some future time not exactly defined, and requesting Dunn to confer with
him as one enjoying his own fullest confidence.
He had but finished the document when a sharp knock at the door
announced Davis. "The very man I wanted," said Beecher; "sit down and
read that."
Grog took his double eye-glass from his pocket,--an aid to his sight
only had recourse to when he meant to scrutinize every word and every
letter,--and sat down to read. "Vague enough," said he, as he concluded.
"Small credentials for most men, but quite sufficient for Kit Davis."
"I know that," said Beecher, half timidly; for no sooner in the
redoubted presence than he began to tremble at his own temerity.
"This Mr. Dunn is a practical sort of man, they say, so that we shall
soon understand each other," said Davis.
"Oh, you'll like him greatly."
"I don't want to like him," broke in Grog; "nor do I want him to like
me."
"He's a fellow of immense influence just now; can do what he pleases
with the Ministry."
"So much the better for him," said Grog, bluntly.
"And for his friends, sir," added Beecher. "He has only to send in a
name, and he's sure to get what he asks for, at home or abroad."
"How convenient!" said Grog; and whether it was an accident or not, he
directed his eyes full on Beecher as he spoke, and as suddenly a deep
blush spread over the other's face. "Very convenient, indeed," went on
Grog, while his unrelenting glance never wavered nor turned away. As
he stared, so did Beecher's confusion increase, till at last, unable
to endure more, he turned away, sick at heart "My Lord Viscount,"
said Grog, gravely, "let me give you a word of counsel: never commit a
murder; for if you do, your own fears will hang you."
"I don't understand you," faltered out Beecher.
"Yes, you do; and right well too," broke in Grog, boldly. "What
rubbish have you got into your head now, about 'a place' for me? What
nonsensical scheme about making me an inspector of this or a collector
of that? Do you imagine that for any paltry seven or eight hundred a
year I 'm going to enter into recognizance not to do what's worth six
times the amount? Mayhap you 'd like to send me to India or to China.
Oh, that's the dodge, is it?" exclaimed he, as the crimson flush now
extended over Beecher's forehead to the very roots of his hair. "Well,
where is it to be? There 's a place called Bogota, where they always
have yellow fever; couldn't you get me named consul there? Oh dear, oh
dear!" laughed he out, "how you will go on playing that little game,
though you never score a point!"
"I sometimes imagine that you don't know how offensive your language
is," said Beecher, whose angry indignation had mastered all his fears;
"at least, it is the only explanation I can suggest for your conduct
towards myself!"
"Look at it this way," said Grog; "if you always lost the game whenever
you played against one particular man, wouldn't you give in at last, and
own him for your master? Well, now, that is exactly what you are doing
with me,--losing, losing on, and yet you won't see that you're beaten."
"I'll tell you what I see, sir," said Beecher, haughtily,--"that our
intercourse must cease."
Was it not strange that this coarse man, reckless in action, headstrong
and violent, felt abashed, for the instant, in presence of the dignified
manner which, for a passing moment, the other displayed. It was the one
sole weapon Grog Davis could not match; and before the "gentleman" he
quailed, but only for a second or two, when he rallied, and said, "I
want the intercourse as little as you do. I am here for the pleasure of
being with my daughter."
"As for that," began Beecher, "there is no need--" He stopped abruptly,
something terribly menacing in Grog's face actually arresting his words
in the utterance.
"Take you care what you say," muttered Grog, as he approached him, and
spoke with a low, guttural growl. "I have n't much patience at the best
of times; don't provoke me now."
"Will you take this letter,--yes or no?" said Beecher, resolutely.
"I will: seal and address it," said Grog, searching for a match to light
the taper, while Beecher folded the letter, and wrote the direction.
Davis continued to break match after match in his effort to strike a
light. Already the dusk of declining day filled the room, and objects
were dimly descried. Beecher's heart beat violently. The thought that
even yet, if he could summon courage for it, he might outwit Grog, sent
a wild thrill through him. What ecstasy, could he only succeed!
"Curse these wax contrivances! the common wooden ones never failed,"
muttered Davis. "There goes the fifth."
"If you 'll ring for Fisher--"
An exclamation and an oath proclaimed that he had just burned his
finger; but he still persevered.
"At last!" cried he,--"at last!" And just as the flame rose slowly up,
Beecher had slipped the letter in his pocket, and substituted the other
in its place.
"I'll write 'Private and confidential,'" added Beecher, "to show that
the communication is strictly for himself alone." And now the document
was duly sealed, and the name "Lackington" inscribed in the corner.
"I 'll start to-night," said Davis, as he placed the letter in his
pocket-book; "I may have to delay a day in London, to see Fordyce. Where
shall I write to you?"
"I'll talk that over with my Lady," said the other, still trembling with
the remnant of his fears. "We dine at six," added he, as Davis arose to
leave the room.
"So Lizzy told me," said Davis.
"You don't happen to know if she invited Twining, do you?"
"No! but I hope she didn't," said Grog, sulkily.
"Why so? He's always chatty, pleasant, and agreeable," said Beecher,
whose turn it was now to enjoy the other's irritation.
"He's what I hate most in the world," said Davis, vindictively; "a swell
that can walk into every leg in the Ring,--that's what he is!" And with
this damnatory estimate of the light-hearted, easy-natured Adderley
Twining, Grog banged the door and departed.
That social sacrament, as some one calls dinner, must have a strange,
mysterious power over our affections and our sympathies; for when these
two men next met each other, with napkins on their knees and soup before
them, their manner was bland, and even cordial. You will probably say,
How could they be otherwise? that was neither the time nor place to
display acrimony or bitterness, nor could they carry out in Lizzy's
presence the unseemly discussion of the morning. Very true; and their
bearing might, consequently, exhibit a calm and decent courtesy; but it
did more,--far more; it was familiar and even friendly, and it is to
the especial influence of the dinner-table that I attribute the happy
change. The blended decorum and splendor--that happy union of tangible
pleasure with suggestive enjoyment, so typified by a well-laid and
well-spread table--is a marvellous peacemaker. Discrepant opinions blend
into harmonious compromise as the savory odors unite into an atmosphere
of nutritious incense, and a wider charity to one's fellows comes
in with the champagne. Where does diplomacy unbend? where do its
high-priests condescend to human feelings and sympathies save at dinner?
Where, save at Mansion House banquets, are great Ministers facetious?
Where else are grave Chancellors jocose and Treasury Lords convivial?
The three who now met were each in their several ways in good spirits:
Grog, because he had successfully reasserted his influence over Beecher;
Beecher, because, while appearing to be defeated, he had duped his
adversary; and Lizzy, for the far better reason that she was looking
her very best, and that she knew it. She had, moreover, passed a very
pleasant morning; for Mr. Twining had made it his business--doubtless,
with much hand-rubbing and many exclamations of "What fun!"--to go
amongst all the tradespeople of Baden, proclaiming the arrival of
a "millionnaire Milor," and counselling them to repair with all the
temptations of their shops to the hotel. The consequence was that
Lizzy's drawing-room was like a fair till the hour of dressing for
dinner. Jewelry in its most attractive forms, rich lace, silks,
velvets, furs, costly embroideries, inlaid cabinets, gems, ancient
and modern,--all the knick-knackeries which a voluptuous taste has
conceived, all the extravagant inventions of a fashion bent on ruinous
expenditure,--were there; fans sparkling with rubies, riding-whips
incrusted with turquoises, slippers studded over with pearls. There was
nothing wanting; even richly carved meerschaums and walking-sticks were
paraded, in the hope that as objects of art and elegance they might
attract her favor. Her father had found her dazzled and delighted by
all this splendor, and told her that one of the first duties of her high
station was the encouragement of art. "It is to you, and such as you,
these people look for patronage," said he. "An English peeress is a
princess, and must dispense her wealth generously."
I am bound to acknowledge, her Ladyship did not shrink from this
responsibility of her station. Without caring for the cost,--as often
without even inquiring the price,--she selected what she wished; and
rows of pearls, diamond bracelets, rings, and head ornaments covered her
dressing-table, while sable and Astrakan cloaks, cashmeres, and Genoa
velvets littered every corner of the room. "After all," thought she, as
she fixed a jewelled comb in her hair, "it is very nice to be rich; and
while delighting yourself you can make so many others happy."
Doubtless, too, there was some reason in the reflection; and in
the smiling faces and grateful glances around her she found a ready
confirmation of the sentiment. Happily for her at the moment, she did
not know how soon such pleasures pall, and, as happily for ourselves,
too, is it the law of our being that they should do so, and that no
enjoyment is worth the name which has cost no effort to procure, nor
any happiness a boon which has not demanded an exertion to arrive at.
If Beecher was startled at the sight of all these costly purchases,
his mind was greatly relieved as Grog whispered him that Herr Koch, the
banker, had opened a credit for him, on which he might draw as freely
as he pleased. The word "Lackington" was a talisman which suddenly
converted a sea of storm and peril into a lovely lake only ruffled by a
zephyr.
At last the pleasant dinner drew to a close; and as the coffee was
brought in, the noise of a carriage beneath the windows attracted them.
"That's my trap," said Davis; "I ordered it for half past eight,
exactly."
"But there 's no train at this hour," began Lizzy.
"I know that; but I mean to post all night, and reach Carlsruhe for
the first departure in the morning. I 'm due in London on Monday
morning,--eh, my Lord?"
"Yes, that you are," said Beecher; "Dublin, Tuesday evening."
"Just so," said Davis, as he arose; "and I mean to keep my time like
a pendulum. Can I do any little commission for your Ladyship as I pass
through town,--anything at Howell and James's, anything from Storr's?"
"I never heard of them--"
"Quite time enough, Lizzy," broke in Beecher; "not to say that we might
stock a very smart warehouse with the contents of the next room. Don't
forget the courier,--he can join us at Rome; and remember, we shall want
a cook. The 'Mowbray' have an excellent fellow, and I 'm sure an extra
fifty would seduce him, particularly as he hates England, detests a
club, and can't abide the 'Sundays;' and my Lady will require something
smarter than Annette as a maid."
"Oh, I could n't part with Annette!"
"Nor need you; but you must have some one who can dress hair in a
Christian fashion."
"And what do you call that?" asked Grog, with a stare of insolent
meaning.
"My Lord is quite right in the epithet; for I copied my present coiffure
from a picture of a Jewish girl I bought this morning, and I fancy it
becomes me vastly."
There was in the easy coquetry of this speech what at once relieved the
awkwardness of a very ticklish moment, and Beecher rewarded her address
with a smile of gratitude.
"And the house in Portland Place to be let?" murmured Davis, as he read
from his note-book. "What of that box in the Isle of Wight?"
"I rather think we shall keep it on; my sister-in-law liked it, and
might wish to go there."
"Let her buy it or take a lease of it, then," said Grog. "You 'll see,
when you come to look into it, she has been left right well off."
Beecher turned away impatiently, and made no reply.
"All that Herefordshire rubbish of model farm and farming-stock had
better be sold at once. You are not going into that humbug like the late
Lord, I suppose?"
"I have come to no determination about Lackington Court as yet," said
Beecher, coldly.
"The sooner you do, then, the better. There's not a more rotten piece
of expense in the world than southdowns and shorthorns, except it be
Cochin-China hens and blue tulips."
"Let Fordyce look to my subscriptions at the clubs."
"Pure waste of money when you are not going back there."
"But who says that I am not?" asked Beecher, angrily.
"Not yet a bit, at all events," replied Davis, and with a grin of
malicious meaning so significant that Beecher actually sickened with
terror.
"It will be quite time enough to make further arrangements when I confer
with the members of my family," said Beecher, haughtily.
To this speech Davis only answered by another grin, that spoke as plain
as words could, "Even the high tone will have no effect upon me."
Luckily this penance was not long to endure, for Lizzy had drawn her
father aside, and was whispering a few last words to him. It was in a
voice so low and subdued they spoke that nothing could be heard; but
Beecher imagined or fancied he heard Grog mutter, "'Pluck' will do it;
'pluck' will do anything." A long, affectionate embrace, and a fondly
uttered "Good-bye, girl," followed, and then, shaking hands with
Beecher, Davis lighted his cigar and departed.
Lizzy opened the window, and, leaning over the balcony, watched
the carriage as it sped along the valley, the lights appearing and
disappearing at intervals. What thoughts were hers as she stood there?
Who knows? Did she sorrow after him, the one sole being who had cared
for her through life; did her heart sadden at the sense of desertion;
was the loneliness of her lot in life then uppermost in her mind; or
did she feel a sort of freedom in the thought that now she was to be
self-guided and self-dependent? I know not. I can only say that, though
a slight flush colored her cheek, she shed no tears; and as she closed
the window and returned into the room, her features were calm and
emotionless.
"Why did not papa take the route by Strasburg? It is much the shortest?"
"He couldn't," said Beecher, with a triumphant bitterness,--"he could
n't. He can't go near Paris."
"By Verviers, then, and Belgium?" said she, reddening.
"He'd be arrested in Belgium and tried for his life. He has no road left
but down the Rhine to Rotterdam."
"Poor fellow!" said she, rising, "it must be a real peril that turns
him from his path." There was an accent on the pronoun that almost
made the speech a sarcasm; at all events, ere Beecher could notice it,
she had left the room.
"Now, if Fortune really meant to do me a good turn," said Beecher to
himself, "she 'd just shove my respected father-in-law, writing-desk,
pocket-book, and all, into the 'Rheingau,' never to turn up again." And
with this pious sentiment, half wish, half prayer, he went downstairs
and strolled into the street.
As the bracing night air refreshed him, he walked along briskly towards
Lindenthal, his mind more at ease than before. It was, indeed, no small
boon that the terror of Grog's presence was removed. The man who had
seen him in all his transgressions and his shortcomings was, in reality,
little else than an open volume of conscience, ever wide spread before
him. How could he presume in such a presence to assert one single high
or honorable motive? What honest sentiment dare be enunciate? He felt in
his heart that the Viscount Lackington with ten thousand a year was not
the Honorable Annesley Beecher with three hundred. The noble Lord
could smile at the baits that to the younger son were irresistible
temptations. There was no necessity that he should plot, scheme, and
contrive; or if he did, it should be for a higher prize, or in a higher
sphere and with higher antagonists. And yet Grog would not have it so.
Let him do what he would, there was the inexorable Davis ever ready
to bring down Lackington to the meridian of Beecher! Amidst all
the misfortunes of his life, the ever having known this man was the
worst,--the very worst!
And now he began to go over in his mind some of the most eventful
incidents of this companionship. It was a gloomy catalogue of debauch
and ruin. Young fellows entrapped at the very outset in life, led on to
play, swindled, "hocussed," menaced with exposure, threatened with who
knows what perils of public scandal if they refused to sign this or
that "promise to pay." Then all the intrigues to obtain the money; the
stealthy pursuit of the creditor to the day of his advancement or his
marriage; the menaces measured out to the exigencies of the case,--now
a prosecution, now a pistol. What a dreadful labyrinth of wickedness
was it, and how had he threaded through it undetected! He heaved a heavy
sigh as he muttered a sort of thanksgiving that it was all ended at
last,--all over! "If it were not for Grog, these memories need never
come back to me," said he. "Nobody wants to recall them against me,
and the world will be most happy to dine with the Viscount Lackington
without a thought of the transgressions of Annesley Beecher! If it were
not for Grog,--if it were not for Grog!" and so ran the eternal refrain
at the close of each reflection. "At all events," said he, "I 'll
'put the Alps between us;'" and early on the following morning the
travelling-carriage stood ready at the door, and amidst the bowings
and reverences of the hotel functionaries, the "happy pair" set out for
Italy.
Do not smile in any derision at the phrase, good reader; the words are
classic by newspaper authority; and whatever popular preachers may aver
to the contrary, we live in a most charming world, where singleness is
blessed and marriage is happy, public speaking is always eloquent, and
soldiery ever gallant. Still, even a sterner critic might have admitted
that the epithet was not misapplied; for there are worse things in life
than to be a viscount with a very beautiful wife, rolling pleasantly
along the Via Mala on Collinge's best patent, with six smoking posters,
on a bright day of November. This for his share; as to hers, I shall not
speak of it. And yet, why should I not? Whatever may be the conflict in
the close citadel of the heart, how much of pleasure is derivable from
the mere aspect of a beautiful country as one drives rapidly along,
swift enough to bring the changes of scene agreeably before the eye,
and yet not too fast to admit of many a look at some spot especially
beautiful. And then how charming to lose oneself in that-dreamland,
where, peopling the landscape with figures of long, long ago, we too
have our part, and ride forth at daybreak from some deep-vaulted portal
in jingling mail, or gaze from some lone tower over the wide expanse
that forms our baronial realm,--visions of ambition, fancies of a lowly,
humble life, alternating as the rock-crowned castle or the sheltered cot
succeed each other! And lastly, that strange, proud sentiment we feel
as we sweep past town and village, where human life goes on in its
accustomed track,--the crowd in the market-place, the little group
around the inn, the heavy wagon unloading at the little quay, the
children hastening on to school,--all these signs of a small, small
world of its own, that we, in our greatness, are never again to gaze
on, our higher destiny bearing us ever onward to grander and more
pretentious scenes.
"And this is Italy?" said Lizzy, half aloud, as, emerging from the
mists of the Higher Alps, the carriage wound its zigzag descent from the
Splgen, little glimpses of the vast plain of Lombardy coming into
view at each turn of the way, and then the picturesque outlines of old
ruinous Chiavenna, its tumble-down houses, half hid in trellised vines,
and farther on, again, the head of the Lake of Como, with its shores of
rugged rock.
"Yes, and this miserable dog-hole here is called Campo Dolcino!" said
Beecher, as he turned over the leaves of his "John Murray." "That's the
most remarkable thing about these Italians; they have such high-sounding
names for everything, and we are fools enough to be taken in by the
sound."
"It is a delusion that we are rather disposed to indulge in, generally,"
said Lizzy. "The words, 'your Majesty' or 'your Highness,' have their
own magic in them, even when the representatives respond but little to
the station."
[Illustration: 342]
"It was your father, I fancy, taught you that lesson," said he,
peevishly.
"What lesson do you mean?"
"To hold people of high rank cheaply; to imagine that they must be all
cheats and impositions."
"No," said she, calmly but resolutely. "If he taught me anything on this
subject, it was to attribute to persons of exalted station very lofty
qualities. What I have to fear is that my expectation will be far above
the reality. I can imagine what they might be, but I 'm not so sure it
is what I shall find them."
"You had better not say so to my sister-in-law," said Beecher,
jeeringly.
"It is not my intention," said she, with the same calm voice.
"I make that remark," resumed he, "because she has what some people
would call exaggerated notions about the superiority of the well-born
over all inferior classes; indeed, she is scarcely just in her estimate
of low people."
"Low people are really to be pitied!" said she, with a slight laugh; and
Beecher stole a quick glance at her, and was silent.
He was not able long to maintain this reserve. The truth was, he felt an
invincible desire to recur to the class in life from which Lizzy came,
and to speak disparagingly of all who were humbly born. Not that
this vulgarity was really natural to him,--far from it. With all his
blemishes and defects he was innately too much a gentleman to descend to
this. The secret impulse was to be revenged of Grog Davis; to have the
one only possible vengeance on the man that had "done him;" and even
though that was only to be exacted through Davis's daughter, it
pleased him. And so he went on to tell of the prejudices--absurd, of
course--that persons like Lady Georgina would persist in entertaining
about common people. "You 'll have to be so careful in all your
intercourse with her," said he; "easy, natural, of course, but never
familiar; she would n't stand it."
"I will be careful," said Lizzy, calmly.
"The chances are, she 'll find out some one of the name, and ask you, in
her own half-careless way, 'Are you of the Staffordshire Davises? or do
you belong to the Davises of such a place?'"
"If she should, I can only reply that I don't know," said Lizzy.
"Oh! but you must n't say that," laughed out Beecher, who felt a sort of
triumph over what he regarded as his wife's simplicity.
"You would not, surely, have me say that I was related to these people?"
"No, not exactly that; but, still, to say that you didn't know whether
you were or not, would be a terrible blunder! It would amount to a
confession that you were Davises of nowhere at all."
"Which is about the truth, perhaps," said she, in the same tone.
"Oh! truth is a very nice thing, but not always pleasant to tell."
"But don't you think you could save me from an examination in which I am
so certain to acquit myself ill, by simply stating that you have married
a person without rank, station, or fortune? These facts once
understood, I feel certain that her Ladyship will never allude to them
unpleasantly."
"Then there 's another point," said Beecher, evidently piqued that he
had not succeeded in irritating her,--"there 's another point, and you
must be especially careful about it,--never, by any chance, let out that
you were educated at a school, or a pensionnat, or whatever they call
it. If there 's anything she cannot abide, it is the thought of a girl
brought up at a school; mind, therefore, only say, 'my governess.'"
She smiled and was silent.
"Then she'll ask you if you had been 'out,' and when you were presented,
and who presented you. She 'll do it so quietly and so naturally, you 'd
never guess that she meant any impertinence by it."
"So much the better, for I shall not feel offended."
"As to the drawing-room," rejoined Beecher, "you must say that you
always lived very retiredly,--never came up to town; that your father
saw very little company."
"Is not this Chiavenna we 're coming to?" asked Lizzy, a slight--but
very slight--flush rising to her cheek. And now the loud cracking of
the postilions' whips drowned all other sounds as the horses tore along
through the narrow streets, making the frail old houses rock and shiver
as they passed. A miserable-looking vetturino carriage stood at the inn
door, and was dragged hastily out of the way to make room for the more
pretentious equipage. Scarcely had the courier got down than the whole
retinue of the inn was in motion, eagerly asking if "Milordo" would not
alight, if his "Eccellenza" would not take some refreshment.
But his "Eccellenza" would do neither; sooth to say, he was not in the
best of humors, and curtly said, "No, I want nothing but post-horses to
get out of this wretched place."
"Is n't that like an Englishman?" said a voice from the vetturino
carriage to some one beside him.
"But I know him," cried the other, leaping out. "It's the new Viscount
Lackington." And with this he approached the carriage, and respectfully
removing his hat, said, "How d'ye do, my Lord?"
"Ah, Spicer! you here?" said Beecher, half haughtily. "Off to England, I
suppose?"
"No, my Lord, I 'm bound for Rome."
"So are we, too. Lady Lackington and myself," added be, correcting at
once a familiar sort of a glance that Spicer found time to bestow upon
Lizzy. "Do you happen to know if Lady Georgina is there?"
"Yes, my Lord, at the Palazzo Gondi, on the Pintian;" and here Spicer
threw into his look an expression of respectful homage to her Ladyship.
"Palazzo Gondi; will you try and remember that address?" said Beecher
to his wife. And then, waving his hand to Spicer, he added,
"Good-bye,--meet you at Rome some of these days," and was gone.
CHAPTER XXVIII. AT ROME
In a small and not very comfortably furnished room looking out upon
the Pintian Hill at Rome, two ladies were seated, working,--one in
deep mourning, whose freshness indicated a recent loss; the other in
a strangely fashioned robe of black silk, whose deep cape and rigid
absence of ornament recalled something of the cloister. The first was
the widowed Viscountess Lackington; the second the Lady Grace Twining,
a recent convert to Rome, and now on her way to some ecclesiastical
preferment in the Church, either as "Chanoinesse," or something equally
desirable. Lady Lackington looked ill and harassed; there were not on
her face any traces of deep sorrow or affliction, but the painful marks
of much thought. It was the expression of one who had gone through a
season of trial wherein she had to meet events and personages all
new and strange to her. It was only during the last few days of Lord
Lackington's illness that she learned the fact of a contested claim
to the title, but, brief as was the time, every post brought a mass of
letters bearing on this painful topic. While the lawyers, therefore,
showered their unpleasant and discouraging tidings, there was nothing
to be heard of Beecher; none knew where he was, or how a letter was
to reach him. All her own epistles to him remained unacknowledged.
Fordyce's people could not trace him, neither could Mr. Dunn, and there
was actually the thought of asking the aid of that inquisitorial service
whose detective energies are generally directed in the pursuit of guilt.
If Annesley Beecher might be slow to acknowledge the claims of fraternal
affection, there was no one could accuse him of any lukewarmness to his
own interests, and though it was now two months and upwards since the
Viscount's death, yet he had never come forward to assert his new rank
and station. Whatever suspicions might have weighed down the mind of the
Viscountess regarding this mysterious disappearance, the language of all
the lawyers' letters was assuredly ill calculated to assuage. They more
than hinted that they suspected some deep game of treachery and fraud.
Beecher's long and close intimacy with the worst characters of the
turf--men notorious for their agency in all the blackest intrigues--was
continually brought up. His life of difficulty and strait, his unceasing
struggle to meet his play engagements, driving him to the most ruinous
compacts, all were quoted to show that to a man of such habits and with
such counsellors any compromise would be acceptable that offered present
and palpable advantages in lieu of a possible and remote future.
The very last letter the Viscountess received from Fordyce contained
this startling passage: "It being perfectly clear that Mr. Beecher would
only be too ready to avail himself of his newly acquired privileges if
he could, we must direct our sole attention to those circumstances which
may explain why he could not declare himself the Viscount Lackington.
Now, the very confident tone lately assumed by the Conway party seems
to point to this mysterious clew, and everything I learn more and more
disposes me to apprehend a shameful compromise."
It was with the letter that contained this paragraph before her Lady
Lackington now sat, affecting to be engaged in her work, but in reality
reading over, for the fiftieth time, the same gloomy passage.
"Is it not incredible that, constituted as the world now is, with
its railroads and its telegraphs, you cannot immediately discover the
whereabouts of any missing individual?" said Lady Lackington.
"I really think he must have been murdered," said Lady Grace, with
the gentlest of accents, while she bent her head over the beautiful
altar-cloth she was embroidering.
"Nonsense,--absurdity! such a crime would soon have publicity enough."
Lady Grace gave a smile of compassionate pity at the speech, but said
nothing.
"I can't imagine how you could believe such a thing possible," said the
Viscountess, tartly.
"I can only say, my dear, that no later than last night Monsignore
assured me that, through M. Mazzini and the Bible societies, you can
make away with any one in Europe, and, indeed, in most parts of the
world besides. Don't smile so contemptuously, my dear. Remember who
it is says this. Of course, as he remarks, the foolish newspapers have
their own stupid explanations always ready, at one moment calling it
a political crime, at another the act of insanity, and so on. They
affected this language about Count Rossi, and then about the dear and
sainted Archbishop of Paris; but what true believer ever accepted this?"
"Monsignore would not hold this language to me," said Lady Lackington,
haughtily.
"Very probably not, dearest; he spoke in confidence when he mentioned it
to me."
"I mean, that he would hesitate ere he forfeited any respect I entertain
for his common-sense by the utterance of such wild absurdity. What is
it, Turner?" asked she, suddenly, as her maid entered.
"Four packing-cases have just come, my Lady, with Mr. Spicer's
respectful compliments, and that he will be here immediately,--he has
only gone to change his dress."
"Why don't he come at once? I don't care for his dress."
"No, my Lady, of course not," said Turner, and retired.
"I must say he has made haste," said Lady Lackington, languidly. "It was
only on the eighth or the ninth, I think, he left this, and as he had to
get all my mourning things,--I had actually nothing,--and to go down
to Lackington Court, and then to Wales, and after that to the Isle of
Wight, what with lawyers and other tiresome people to talk to, he has
really not done badly."
"I hope he has brought the chalice," sighed Lady Grace.
"I hope he has brought some tidings of my respectable brother-in-law,"
said the Viscountess, in a tone that seemed to say where the really
important question lay.
"And the caviare,--I trust he has not forgotten the caviare. It is the
only thing Monsignore eats at breakfast in Advent."
An insolent gesture of the head was all the acknowledgment Lady
Lackington vouchsafed to this speech. At last she spoke: "When he can
get horse-racing out of his head, Spicer is a very useful creature."
"Very, indeed," said Lady Grace.
"The absurd notion that he is a sporting character is the parent of so
many other delusions; he fancies himself affluent, and, stranger still,
imagines he's a gentleman." And the idea so amused her Ladyship that she
laughed aloud at it.
"Mr. Spicer, my Lady," said a servant, flinging wide the door; and in a
most accurate morning-dress, every detail of which was faultless, that
gentleman bowed his way across the room with an amount of eagerness that
might possibly exact a shake of the hand, but, if unsuccessful, might
easily subside into a colder acceptance. Lady Lackington vouchsafed
nothing beyond a faint smile, and the words, "How d'ye do?" as with
a slight gesture she motioned to him the precise chair he was to seat
himself on. Before taking his place, Mr. Spicer made a formal bow to
Lady Grace, who, with a vacant smile, acknowledged the courtesy, and
went on with her work.
"You have made very tolerable haste, Spicer," said Lady Lackington. "I
scarcely expected you before Saturday."
"I have not been to bed for six nights, my Lady."
"You 'll sleep all the better for it to-night, perhaps."
"We had an awful gale of wind in crossing to Calais,--the passage took
eight hours."
"You relished land travelling all the more for it afterwards."
"Not so, my Lady; for at Lyons the whole country was flooded, and we
were obliged to march eleven miles afoot on a railway embankment, and
under a tremendous storm of rain; but even that was not the worst, for
in crossing the St. Bernard--"
"I really don't care for such moving accidents; I always skip them in
the newspapers. What of my mourning,--is much crape worn?"
"A great deal of crape, my Lady, and in 'bouffes' down the dress."
"With bugles or without? I see by your hesitation, sir, you have
forgotten about the bugles."
"No, my Lady, I have them," said he, proudly; "small acorns of Jet are
also worn on points of the flounces, and Madame Frontin suggested that,
as your Ladyship dislikes black so much--"
"But who said as much, sir?" broke she in, angrily.
"And the caviare, Mr. Spicer,--have you remembered the caviare?" lisped
out Lady Grace.
"Yes, my Lady; but Fortnum's people are afraid some of it may prove a
failure. There was something, I don't know what, happened to the fish in
the Baltic this year."
"Who ventured to say black was unbecoming to me?" asked Lady Lackington,
changing her question, and speaking more angrily.
"It was Frontin, my Lady, who remarked that you once had said nothing
would ever induce you to wear that odious helmet widows sometimes put
on."
"Oh dear; and I have such a fancy for it," exclaimed Lady Grace.
"You mistake, my dear; you are confounding the occasion with the
costume," said Lady Lackington; and her eyes sparkled with the malice of
her remark.
Mr. Spicer's face exhibited as much enjoyment of the wit as he deemed
decorous to the party satirized.
"And now, sir, for the important part of your mission r have you
obtained any information about my brother-in-law?"
"Yes, my Lady, I saw him at Chiavenna. He drove up to the post-house to
change horses as we were there; he told me, in the few minutes we spoke
together, that they were on their way to Rome."
"Whom do you mean, sir, when you say 'they'?"
"Lord and Lady Lackington, my Lady."
"Is he married? Did you say he was married, sir?'" exclaimed she, in a
voice discordant above all her efforts to restrain.
"Yes, my Lady; I was, in a manner, presented to her Ladyship, who was, I
must say, a very beautiful person--"
"I want no raptures, sir; are you quite certain she was his wife?"
"His Lordship told me so, my Lady; and when they reached the Htel
Royal, at Milan, I took occasion to question the courier! whom I knew
before, and he told me all about it."
"Go on, sir."
"Well, my Lady, they were just married about ten or twelve days when I
met them; the ceremony had been performed in some little out-of-the-way
spot in the Rhine country, where Mr. Beecher had been staying for the
summer, and where, as it happened, he never received any tidings of
the late Lord's death, or the presumption is, he had never made this
unfortunate connection."
"What do you mean by 'unfortunate connection '?"
"Why, one must really call it so, my Lady; the world, at least, will say
as much."
"Who is she, sir?"
"She's the daughter of one of the most notorious men in England, my
Lady,--the celebrated leg, Grog Davis."
Ah, Mr. Spicer, small and insignificant as you are, you have your sting,
and her Ladyship has felt it. These words, slowly uttered in a tone of
assumed sorrow, so overcame her they were addressed to, that she covered
her face with her handkerchief and sat thus, speechless, for several
minutes. To Spicer it was a moment of triumph,--it was a vengeance for
all the insults, all the slights she showered upon him, and he only
grieved to think how soon her proud spirit would rally from the shock.
Lady Lackington's face, as she withdrew her handkerchief, was of ashy
paleness, and her bloodless lips trembled with emotion. "Have you heard
what this man has said, Grace?" whispered she, in a voice so distinct as
to be audible throughout the room.
"Yes, dearest; it is most distressing," said the other, in the softest
of accents.
"Distressing! It is an infamy!" cried she. Then suddenly turning to
Spicer, with flaring eyes and flushed face, she said, "You have rather
a talent for blundering, sir, and it is just as likely this is but a
specimen of your powers. I am certain she is not his wife."
"I can only say, my Lady, that I took pains enough to get the story
accurately; and as Kuffner, the courier, was at the marriage--"
"Marriage!" broke she in, with a sarcastic irony; "why, sir, it is not
thus a peer of England selects the person who is to share his dignity."
"But you forget, my Lady," interposed Spicer, "that he did n't know he
was a peer--he had not the slightest expectation of being one--at the
time. Old Grog knew it--"
"Have a care, sir, and do not you forget yourself. These familiar
epithets are for your associates in the ring, and not for my ears."
"Well, the Captain, my Lady,--he is as well known by that name as the
other,--he had all the information, and kept back the letters, and
managed the whole business so cleverly that the first Mr. Beeeher ever
knew of his. Lordship's death was when hearing it from Mr. Twining at
Baden."
"I thought Mr. Twining was in Algiers, or Australia, I forget which,"
said Lady Grace, gently.
"Such a marriage must be a mockery,--a mere mockery. He shall break
it,--he must break it!" said Lady Lacking-ton, as she walked up and down
with the long strides and the step of a tigress in a cage.
"Oh dear! they are so difficult to break!" sighed Lady-Grace. "Mr.
Twining always promised me a divorce when the law came in and made it so
cheap, and now he says that it's all a mistake, and until another Bill,
or an Act, or something or other, is passed, that it's a luxury far
above persons of moderate fortune."
"Break it he shall," muttered Lady Lackington, as she continued her
march.
"Of course, dearest, expense doesn't signify to you," sighed out Lady
Grace.
"And do you mean to tell me, sir," said Lady Lacking-ton, "that this
is the notorious Captain Davis of whose doings we have been reading in
every newspaper?"
"Yes, my Lady, he is the notorious"--he was going to say "Grog," but
corrected himself, and added--"Captain Davis, and has been for years
back the intimate associate of the present Lord Lackington."
Mr. Spicer was really enjoying himself on this occasion, nor was it
often his fortune to give her Ladyship so much annoyance innocuously.
His self-indulgence, however, carried him too far; for Lady Lackington,
suddenly turning round, caught the expression of gratified malice on his
face.
"Take care, sir,--take care," she cried, with a menacing gesture of her
finger. "There may chance to be a flaw somewhere in your narrative; and
if there should, Mr. Spicer,--if there should,--I don't think Lord
Lackington would forget it,--I am sure I sha'n't." And with this
threatening declaration her Ladyship swept out of the room in most
haughty fashion.
"This is all what comes of being obliging," exclaimed Spicer, unable
to control himself any longer. "It was not I that threw Beecher into
Grog's company,--it was not I that made him marry Grog's daughter. For
all that I cared, he might go and be a monk at La Trappe, or marry as
many wives as Brigham Young himself."
"I hope you brought me Lady Gertrude Oscot's book, Mr. Spicer,--'Rays
through Oriel Windows'?" said Lady Grace, in one of her sweetest voices.
"She is such a charming poetess."
"I'd lay my life on't, she's just as wide-awake as her father," muttered
Spicer to himself.
"As wide-awake? Dear me, what can you mean?"
"That's she's fly--up to trap--oh, is n't she!" went he on, still
communing to himself.
"Lady Gertrude Oscot, sir?"
"No; but Grog Davis's daughter,--the new Viscountess Lackington,--my
Lady. I was thinking of her," said Spicer, suddenly recalled to a
sense of where he stood.
"I protest, sir, I cannot understand how two persons so totally
dissimilar could occur to any mind at the same moment." And with this
Lady Grace gathered up the details of her embroidery, and courtesying a
deep and formal adieu, left the room.
"Haven't I gone and done it with both of them!" said Spicer, as he took
out his cigar-case to choose a cigar; not that he had the slightest
intention of lighting it in such a place,--no profanity of the kind ever
occurred to him,--all he meant was the mock bravado to himself of an
act that seemed to imply so much coolness, such collected courage. As to
striking a light, he 'd as soon have done it in a magazine.
And sticking his cigar in his mouth, he left the house; even in the
street he forgot to light it, and strolled along, turning his weed
between his lips, and revolving no very pleasant thoughts in his mind:
"All the way to England, down to Wales, then the Isle of Wight, seeing
no end of people,--lawyers, milliners, agents, proctors, jewellers, and
dressmakers--eternal explainings and expostulatings, begging for this,
deprecating that; asking this man to be active and the other to be
patient; and then back again over the whole breadth of Europe in
atrocious weather, sea-sick and land-sick, tossed, Jolted, and
shaken,--and all for what,--ay, for what? To be snubbed, outraged,
and insulted, treated like a lackey,--no, but ten times worse than any
lackey would bear. And why should I bear it? That's the question. Why
should I? Does it signify a brass farthing to me whether the noble house
of Lackington quarters its arms with the cogged dice and the marked king
of the Davises? What do I care about their tarnished shield? It's rather
cool of my lady to turn upon me!" Well reasoned and true, Mr. Spicer;
you have but forgotten one small item in the account, which is the
consideration accorded to you by your own set, because you were seen to
mingle with those so much above you.
We are told that when farthings are shaken up a sufficiently long time
with guineas in a bag, they acquire a sort of yellow lustre, which,
though by no means enabling them to pass for guineas, still makes them
wonderfully bright farthings, and doubtless would render them very
intolerant in the company of their equals. Such was, in a measure, what
had happened to Mr. Spicer; and though at first sight the process
would seem a gain, it is in reality the reverse, since, after this mock
gilding, the coin--whether it be man or farthing--has lost its stamp
of truthfulness, and will not "pass" for even the humble value it once
represented.
"At all events," thought Mr. Spicer, as he went along, "her Ladyship
has not come off scot free for all her impertinence. I have given her
materials for a very miserable morning, and irritated the very sorest
spot in all her mind. It was just the very lesson she wanted; there's
nothing will do her so much good in the world."
It is by no means an uncommon delusion for ill-natured people to fancy
that they are great moral physicians, and that the bitters they drop
into your wine-glass and my teacup are admirable tonics, which our
constitutions require. The drug is not always an evil, but the doctor is
detestable.
As Spicer drew nigh one of the great hotels in the Piazza di Spagna,
he recognized Beecher's travelling-carriage just being unloaded at the
door. They had arrived at that moment, and the courier was bustling
about and giving his orders like one whose master was likely to exact
much and pay handsomely.
"The whole of the first floor, Freytag," said the courier,
authoritatively; "every room of it. My Lord cannot bear the disturbance
of people lodged near him."
"He used not to be so particular in the 'Bench,'" muttered Spicer. "I
remember his sleeping one of three in a room."
"Ah, Mr. Spicer, my Lord said, if I should meet you, to mention he
wishes to see you."
"Do you think he'd receive me now, Kuffner?"
"Well, I 'll go and see."
Mr. Kuffner came speedily back, and, beckoning to Spicer to follow, led
the way to Lord Lackington's room. "He is dressing for dinner, but will
see you," added he, as he introduced him.
The noble Viscount did not turn from the mirror at which he was
elaborately arranging his neckcloth as Spicer entered, but satisfied
himself with calling out, "Take a chair, Spicer; you 'll find one
somewhere."
The tone of the salutation was not more significant than the aspect
of this room itself. All the articles of a costly dressing-case of
silver-gilt were ranged on one table Essence-bottles, snuff-boxes,
pipe-heads, with rings, jewelled buttons, and such-like knick-knackeries
covered another; whatever fancy could suggest or superfluity compass of
those thousand-and-one trinkets the effeminacy of our age has introduced
into male costume, all abounded. Quantities, too, of the most
expensive clothes were there,--rich uniforms, fur-lined pelisses, and
gold-embroidered waistcoats. And as Mr. Spicer quickly made the tour of
these with his eye, his gaze rested at last on my Lord himself, whose
dressing-gown of silver brocade would have made a state robe for a
Venetian Doge.
"Everything is in confusion just now; but if you 'll throw down some of
those things, you 'll get a chair," said Beecher, carelessly.
Spicer, however, preferred to take his place at the chimney, on which he
leaned in an attitude that might take either the appearance of respect
or familiarity, as the emergency required.
"When did you arrive?" asked my Lord.
"About two hours ago," was the short reply.
Beecher turned to gaze at the man, who answered without more semblance
of deference, and now, for the first time, their eyes met. It was,
evidently, Spicer's game, by a bold assertion of former intimacy, to
place their future intercourse on its old footing; and just as equally
decided was Beecher that no traditions of the past should rise up and
obtrude themselves on the present, and so he threw into this quiet,
steady stare an amount of haughty resolution, before which Spicer
quailed and struck his flag.
"Perhaps I should say three hours, my Lord," added Spicer, flurriedly;
and Beecher turned away with a slight curl on his lip, as though to say,
"The conflict was not a very long one." Spicer marked the expression,
and vowed vengeance for it.
"I thought you 'd have got here two or three days before," said Beecher,
carelessly.
"Vetturino travelling is not like extra-post, my Lord," said Spicer,
fawningly. "You could cover your hundred miles between breakfast and a
late dinner, while we thought ourselves wonderful to get over forty from
sunrise to midnight."
"That's true," yawned out Beecher; "vetturino work must be detestable."
"No man could give you a better catalogue of its grievances than
your father-in-law, my Lord; he has had a long experience of them. I
remember, one winter, we started from Brussels in the deep snow,--there
was Baring, Hope, Fisk, Grog, and myself."
"I don't care to hear your adventures; and it would be just as agreeable
to me were you to call my relative Captain Davis, as to speak of him by
a vulgar nickname."
"Faith, my Lord, I did n't mean it. It slipped out quite unconsciously,
Just as it did awhile ago,--far more awkwardly, by the bye,--when I was
talking to Lady Lacking-ton. The dowager, I mean."
"And what occasion, sir, had you to refer to Captain Davis in her
company?" asked Beecher, fiercely.
"She asked me plumply, my Lord, what was her Ladyship's name, what
family she came of, who her connections were, and I told her that I
never heard of any of them, except her father, popularly known as Grog
Davis,--a man that every one on the turf was acquainted with."
"You are a malicious scoundrel, Spicer," said Beecher, whose pale cheek
now shook and trembled with passion.
"Well, I don't think so, my Lord," said the other, quietly. "It is
not, certainly, the character the world gives me. And as to what passed
between her Ladyship and myself this afternoon, I did my very best to
escape difficulties. I told her that the Brighton affair was almost
forgotten now,--it was fully eighteen years since it happened; that as
to Charles Herbert's death, there were two stories,--some averring that
poor Charley had actually struck Grog; and then, though the York trial
was a public scandal--Well, my Lord, don't look so angrily at me; it was
by no fault of mine these transactions became notorious."
"And what have you been all your whole life to this Davis but his cad
and errand-boy,--a fellow he has sent with a bad horse,--for he would
not have trusted you with a good one,--to run for a hack stakes in an
obscure county, a lounger about stables and the steps of club-houses,
picking up scraps of news from the jocks and selling them to the
gentlemen? Does it become you to turn out Kit Davis and run full cry
after him?"
It was but rarely that Beecher's indignation could warm up to the
temperature of downright passion; but when it did so, it gave the man
a sort of power that few would have recognized in his weak and yielding
nature; at all events, Spicer was not the man to stem such a torrent,
and so he stared at him with mingled terror and anger.
"I tell you, Mr. Spicer," added Beecher, more passionately still, "if
you hadn't known Davis was a thousand miles away, you 'd never have
trusted yourself to speak of him in this fashion; but, for your comfort
I say it, he 'll be here in a day or two."
"I never said a word of him you 'd not find in the newspapers," said
Spicer, doggedly.
"When you come to settle accounts together, it will surprise me very
much if there won't be matter for another paragraph in them," said
Beecher, with a sneer.
Spicer winced; he tried to arrange his neckcloth, and then to button
his glove, but all his efforts could not conceal a tremor that shook
him from head to foot. Now, when Beecher got his "man down," he never
thought he could trample enough upon him; and as he walked the room in
hasty strides to and fro, he jeeringly pictured to Spicer the pleasures
of his next meeting with Davis: not, indeed, but that all his eloquence
was superfluous; it needed no descriptive powers to convince any who
enjoyed Grog's friendship what his enmity might imply.
"I know him as well as you do, my Lord," said Spicer, as his patience
at last gave way; "and I know, besides, there's more than half the
Continent where he can't set a foot."
"Perhaps you mentioned that, also, to my sister-in-law," said Beecher,
derisively.
"No, I said nothing about it!" muttered the other.
There was now a pause; each only waited for any, the slightest show
of concession to make advances to the other; for although without the
slightest particle of good feeling on either side, they well knew
the force of the adage that enjoins friendship among knaves. My
Lord thoroughly appreciated the utility of a Spicer; well did Spicer
understand all the value of a peer's acquaintance.
Each ruminated long over the situation; and at last Beecher said, "Did
poor Lackington leave you anything in his will?"
"A racing snaffle and two whips, my Lord."
"Poor fellow, he never forgot any one, I 'm sure," sighed Beecher.
"He had a wonderful memory, indeed, my Lord; for I had borrowed twenty
pounds of him at the Canterbury races some ten years ago, and he said
to me, just before he took to bed, 'Never mind the trifle that's between
us, Spicer; I shall not take it.'"
"Good-hearted, generous fellow!" muttered Beecher.
Spicer's mouth twitched a little, but he did not speak.
"There never was a better brother, never!" said Beecher, far more intent
upon the display of his own affectionate sorrow than in commemorating
fraternal virtues. "We never had a word of disagreement in our lives.
Poor Lackington! he used to think he was doing the best by me by keeping
me so tight, and always threatening to cut me down still lower; he meant
it for the best, but you know I could n't live upon it, the thing was
impossible. If I had n't been one of the 'wide-awakes,' I 'd have gone
to the wall at once; and let me tell you, Master Spicer, it wasn't every
fellow would have kept his head over water where I was swimming."
"That I 'm convinced of," said Spicer, gravely.
"Well, it's a long lane has no turning, Spicer," said he, oomplacently
looking at himself in the glass. "Even a runaway pulls up somewhere; not
but I'm sorry from the bottom of my heart for poor Lack, but it will be
our own turn one of these days; that's a match there's no paying forfeit
on, eh, Spicer? it must come off whether we will or not!"
"So it must, my Lord," sighed out Spicer, sympathetically.
"Ay, by Jove! whether a man leaves twelve thousand a year or only two
hundred behind him," sighed out Beecher, who could not help making the
application to himself.
Again did Spicer sigh, and so profoundly, it might have represented
grief for the whole peerage.
"I say, old fellow," said Beecher, clapping him familiarly on the
shoulder, "I wish you had n't told Georgy all that stuff about Davis;
these things do no good."
"I assure you solemnly, my Lord, I said it with the best motives; her
Ladyship would certainly learn the whole history somewhere, and so I
thought I 'd just sketch the thing off in a light, easy way."
"Come, come, Spicer,--no gammon, my lad; you never tried any of your
light, easy ways with my sister-in-law. At all events, it's done,
and can't be undone now," sighed he, drearily. Then, after a moment, he
added, "How did she take the news?"
"Well, at first, my Lord, she wouldn't believe it, but went on, 'She's
not his wife, sir; I tell you they're not married,' and so on."
"Well,--and then?"
"Then, my Lord, I assured her that there could be no doubt of the
matter; that your Lordship had done me the honor of presenting me--"
"Which I never did, Master Spicer," laughed in Beecher,--"you know well
enough that I never did; but a fib won't choke you, old fellow."
"At all events, I made it clear that you were really married, and to the
daughter of a man that would send you home on a shutter if you threw any
doubt on it."
"Wouldn't he, by Jupiter!" exclaimed Beecher, with all the sincerity of
a great fact "Well, after that, how did she take on?"
"She did n't say a word, but rocked from side to side, this way,--like
one going to faint; and, indeed, her color all went, and she was pale as
a corpse; and then she took long breaths, and muttered below her voice,
'This is worst of all!' After that she rallied, and certainly gave it to
your Lordship in round style, but always winding it up with, 'Break
it he shall, and must, if it was the Archbishop of Canterbury married
them.'"
"Very fine talking, Master Spicer, but matrimony is a match where
you can't scratch and pay forfeits. I wish you could," muttered he to
himself. "I wish you had the presence of mind and the pluck to have
told her that it was my affair, and not hers. As to the honor of the
Lackingtons and all that lot, she is n't a Lackington any more than you
are,--she 's a De Tracey; good blood, no better, but she isn't one of
us, and you ought to have told her so."
"I own I 'd not have had courage for that!" said Spicer, candidly.
"That's what I'd have said in your place, Spicer. The present Viscount
Lackington is responsible to himself, and not to the late Lord's widow;
and, what's more, he is no flat, without knowledge of men and the world,
but a fellow with both eyes open, and who has gone through as smart a
course of education as any man in the ring. Take up the Racing Calendar,
and show me any one, since Huckaback beat Crim. Con., that ever got it
so 'hot' as I have. No, no, my Lady, it won't do, preaching to me about
'life.' If I don't know a thing or two, who does? If you 'd have had
your wits about you, Spicer, that's what you 'd have told her."
"I'm not so ready at a pinch as you are, my Lord," muttered Spicer, who
affected sullenness.
"Few are, Master Spicer,--very few are, I can tell you;" and in the
pleasure of commending and complimenting himself and his own great
gifts, Beecher speedily ceased to remember. What so lately had annoyed
him. "Dine here at seven, Spicer," said he, at last, "and I'll present
you to my Lady. She 'll be amused with you." Though the last words
were uttered in a way that made their exact significance somewhat
doubtful, Mr. Spicer never sought to canvass them; he accepted the
invitation in good part, for he was one of those men who, though they
occasionally "quarrel with their bread-and-butter," are wise enough
never to fall out with their truffles.
CHAPTER XXIX. THE TWO VISCOUNTESSES
When the new Viscount had dismissed Mr. Spicer, he set out to visit his
sister-in-law. Any one who has been patient enough to follow the stages
of this history will readily imagine that he did not address himself
to the task before him with remarkable satisfaction. If it had been a
matter to be bought off by money, he would readily have paid down a good
round sum as forfeit. It was no use fortifying himself, as he tried to
do, by all the commonplaces he kept repeating to his own heart, saying,
"She ain't my guardian. I'm no ward to be responsible to her. She can
exercise no control over me or my property. She 's the dowager, and
no more." All the traditions of his younger brother life rose up in
rebellion against these doctrines, and he could think of her as nothing
but the haughty Viscountess, who had so often pronounced the heaviest
censures upon his associates and his mode of living. A favorite theory
of his was it, also, in olden time, to imagine that, but for Georgina,
Lackington would have done this, that, and t'other for him; that she it
was who thwarted all his brother's generous impulses, and brought him
to look with stern disfavor on his life of debt and dissipation.
These memories rushed now fully to his mind, and, assuredly, added no
sentiment of pleasure to his expectation of the meeting. More than once
did he come to a halt, and deliberate whether, seeing how unpleasant
such an interview must prove, he need incur the pain of it. "I could
write to her, or I could send Lizzy to say that I was confined to bed,
and ill. Would n't that be a flare up! By Jove! if I could only see the
match as it came off between them, I 'd do that. Not but I know Georgy
would win; she 'd come out so strong as 'Grande Dame;' the half-bred 'un
would have no chance. Still, there would be a race, and a close one, for
Lizzy has her own turn of speed; and if she had the breeding--" And as
he got thus far in his ruminations, he had reached the Palazzo Gondi,
where his sister-in-law lived. With a sort of sullen courage he rang the
bell, and was shown in; her Ladyship was dressing, but would be down in
a moment.
Beecher had now some minutes alone, and he passed them scrutinizing the
room and its appurtenances. All was commoner and more homely than he
looked for. Not many indications of comfort; scarcely any of luxury.
What might this mean? Was her settlement so small as to exact this
economy, or was it a voluntary saving? If so, it was the very reverse
of all her former tastes, for she was essentially one who cultivated
splendor and expense. This problem was still puzzling him, when the door
opened, and she entered. He advanced rapidly to meet her, and saluted
her on each cheek. There was a strange affectation of cordiality on each
side. Prize-fighters shake hands ere they double them up into catapults
for each other's heads; but the embrace here was rather more like the
kiss the victim on the scaffold bestows upon his executioner.
Seated side by side on the sofa, for a few minutes neither uttered a
word; at last she said, in a calm, low voice, "We had hoped to see you
before this,--he looked anxiously for your coming."
Beecher heaved a heavy sigh; in that unhappy delay was comprised all the
story of his calamities. And how to begin--how to open the narrative?
"I wrote as many as five letters," resumed she; "some addressed to
Fordyce's, others to the care of Mr. Davenport Dunn."
"Not one of them ever reached me."
"Very strange, indeed," said she, with the smile of faintest
incredulity; "letters so seldom miscarry nowadays. Stranger, still,
that none of your other correspondents should have apprised you of your
brother's state; there was ample time to have done it."
"I know nothing of it I vow to Heaven I had not the slightest suspicion
of it!"
"Telegraphs, too, are active agencies in these days, and I wrote to
Fordyce to use every exertion to acquaint you."
"I can only repeat what I have said already, that I was utterly
ignorant of everything till I arrived at Baden; there I accidentally met
Twining--"
"Spicer told me about it," said she abruptly, as though it was not
necessary to discuss any point conceded on both sides. "Your coming,"
continued she, "was all the more eagerly looked for because it was
necessary you should be, so far as possible, prepared for the suit we
are threatened with; actions at law for ejectments on title are already
announced, and great--the very greatest--inconvenience has resulted for
want of formal instructions on your part."
"Is the thing really serious, Georgy?" asked he, with an unfeigned
anxiety of manner.
"If you only will take the trouble of reading Fordyce's two last
letters,--they are very long, I confess, and somewhat difficult to
understand,--you will at least see that his opinion is the reverse of
favorable. In fact, he thinks the English estates are gone."
"Oh, Georgy dearest! but you don't believe that?"
"The Irish barony and certain lands in Cork," resumed she, calmly, "are
not included in the demand they profess to make; nor, of course, have
they any claim as to the estates purchased by Lord Lackington through
Mr. Dunn."
"But the title?"
"The Viscounty goes with the English property."
"Good heavens! a title we have held undisturbed, unquestioned, since
Edward the Third's time. I cannot bring myself to conceive it!"
"Great reverses of condition can be borne with dignity when they are not
of our own incurring," said she, with a stern and pointed significance.
"I'm afraid I cannot boast of possessing all your philosophy," said he,
touchily.
"So much the worse. You would need it, and even more, too, if all that I
have heard be true."
There was no mistaking this inference, and Beecher only hesitated
whether he should accept battle at once, or wait for another broadside.
"Not but," broke she in, "if you could assure me that the rumors were
untrue,--that you have been calumniated, and I misinformed,--if, I
say, you were enabled to do this, the tidings would help greatly to
sustain me through this season of trouble."
"You must speak more plainly, Georgina, if I am to understand you."
"Are you married, Annesley?" said she, abruptly.
"Yes. I hope I am of an age to enter the holy estate without leave from
my relations."
"It is true, then?" said she, with a deep, full voice.
"Perfectly true. And then?" There was an open defiance in this tone of
questioning which seemed actually to sting her.
"And then?" repeated she, after him,--"'and then?' You are right to say,
'and then?'--if that means 'What next?'"
Beecher turned pale and red, as fear and passion swayed him alternately;
but he never spoke.
"Is it really a marriage?" broke she in again, "or is it some mockery
enacted by a degraded priest, and through the collusion of some scheming
sharpers. Oh, Annesley! tell me frankly how you have been tricked into
this ignominious contract!" And her accents, as she spoke this, assumed
a tone of imploring affection that actually moved him. To this a sense
of offended dignity quickly succeeded with him, and he said,--
"I cannot permit you to continue in this strain; I am rightfully,
legally married, and the lady who shares my lot is as much the
Viscountess Lackington as you are."
She covered her face with both her hands, and sat thus for several
minutes.
"Perhaps it is all for the best," muttered she, in a low but audible
accent,--"perhaps it is all for the best. Loss of rank, station, and
name will fall the more lightly on those who so little understood how to
maintain them with dignity."
"And if I am threatened with the loss of my title and fortune," cried
Beecher, passionately, "is it exactly the time to heap these insults on
me?"
Partly from the firmness of his manner as he uttered these words, partly
that they were not devoid of truthful meaning, she accepted the reproof
almost submissively.
"You must go over to England at once, Beecher," said she, calmly. "You
must place yourself immediately in Fordyce's hands, and secure the best
advice the Bar affords. I would go with you myself, but that--" The deep
flush that spread over Beecher's face as she paused here made the moment
one of intense pain to each. "No matter," resumed she; "there is only
one danger I would warn you against. You dropped the word 'compromise;'
now, Annesley, let nothing induce you to descend to this. Such a
suggestion could only have come from those whose habits of life accept
expediency in lieu of principle. Maintain your rights proudly and
defiantly so long as they pertain to you; if law should at last declare
that we are only usurpers--" She tried to finish, but the words seemed
as if they would choke her, and after an effort almost convulsive she
burst into tears. Scarcely less moved, Beecher covered his face with his
hands and turned away.
"I will do whatever you advise me, Georgina," said he at length, as
he seated himself on the sofa at her side. "If you say I ought to go to
England, I 'll set off at once."
"Yes; you must be in London; you must be where you can have daily,
hourly access to your lawyers; but you must also determine that this
contest shall be decided by law, and law alone. I cannot, will not,
believe that your rights are invalid. I feel assured that the House of
Lords will maintain the cause of an acknowledged member of their order
against the claims of an obscure pretender. This sympathy, however,
will only be with you so long as you are true to yourself. Let the
word 'compromise' be but uttered, and the generous sentiment will be
withdrawn; therefore, Annesley,"--here she dropped her voice, and
spoke more impressively,--"therefore, I should say, go over to England
alone; be free to exercise untrammelled your own calm judgment,--keep
your residence a secret from all save your law advisers,--see none
else."
"You mean, then, that I should go without my wife?"
"Yes!" said she, coldly; "if she accompany you, her friends, her father,
with whom she will of course correspond, will know of your whereabouts,
and flock round you with their unsafe counsels; this is most to be
avoided."
"But how is it to be managed, Georgina; she cannot surely stop here, at
an hotel too, while I am away in England?"
"I can see nothing against such an arrangement; not having had the
pleasure of seeing and knowing Lady Lack-ington, I am unable to guess
any valid reasons against this plan. Is she young?"
"Not twenty."
"Handsome, of course?" said she, with a slight but supercilious curl of
the lip.
"Very handsome,--beautiful," answered he, but in a voice that denoted no
rapture.
Lady Lackington mused for a moment or two; it seemed as if she were
discussing within her own mind a problem, stating and answering
objections as they arose, for she muttered such broken words as,
"Dangerous, of course--in Rome especially--but impossible for her to go
to England--all her relations--anything better than that--must make
the best of it;" then turning to Beecher with an air of one whose
determination was taken, she said: "She must stay with me till you
return." Before he had rallied from his surprise at this resolution, she
added, "Come over to tea this evening, and let me see her."
Beecher pressed her hand cordially, as though to imply a gratitude above
words; but in reality he turned away to conceal all the emotions this
new position of difficulty occasioned, merely calling out, "We 'll come
very early," as he departed.
Lizzy heard that Spicer was to be their guest at dinner, and they
themselves to take tea with the Viscountess. Lackington, with
equal indifference. She had scarcely seen Mr. Spicer, and was not
over-pleased with her brief impression; of her Ladyship she had only
heard, but even that much had not inspired her to anticipate a
pleasant meeting.
There was, however, in her husband's manner, a sort of fidgety anxiety
that showed he attached to the coming interview an amount of importance
she could by no means understand. He continued to throw out such hints
as to "Georgina's notions" on this or that point; and, while affecting
a half ridicule, really showed how seriously he regarded them. Even to
Lizzy's dress his cares extended; and he told her to be mindful that
nothing in her costume should attract special criticism or remark.
Beecher was far more uneasy than even his looks betrayed. He dreaded
to dwell upon the haughty demeanor his sister-in-law would so certainly
assume, and the sort of inspection to which his wife was to be
subjected. In his heart he wished that Lizzy had been less beautiful,
less attractive, or, as he ungraciously styled it to himself, "less
showy." He well knew how damaging would all her brilliant qualities
become to the eyes of one herself a belle and a beauty in times past. He
discussed over and over with himself whether it might not be better to
acquaint Lizzy of the kind of dress parade that awaited her, or leave
wholly to chance the events of the interview. For once in his life he
took a wise resolve, and said nothing on the matter.
The dinner passed off somewhat heavily,--Beecher silent and preoccupied,
Lizzy thoughtful and indisposed to converse, and Spicer vexed, in spite
of all his resolutions to the contrary, by what he had insultingly
called to himself "the airs of Grog Davis's daughter;" and yet nothing
could be less just than to stigmatize by such a phrase a manner quiet,
calm, and unpretentious, and totally removed from all affectation.
For a while Beecher bestowed a watchful attention on Spicer, uneasy lest
by some adroit piece of malice he might either irritate Lizzy or lead
her covertly into some imprudent disclosures; but he soon saw that
it would have required a hardier spirit than Mr. Spicer's to have
adventured on impertinence in that quarter, and, lighting his cigar, he
sat moodily down by the window to think on the future.
Left with the field thus open, Spicer canvassed within himself how best
to profit by the opportunity. Should he declare himself an old friend
of her father's,--his associate and his colleague? Should he dexterously
intimate that, knowing all about her family and antecedents, she could
not do better than secure his friendship? Should he not also slyly
suggest that, married to a man like Beecher, the counsels of one prudent
and wily as himself would prove invaluable? "Now or never," thought he,
as he surveyed her pale features, and interpreted their expression as
implying timidity and fear.
"Your first visit to Rome, I believe?" said he, as he searched for a
cigar amidst the heap on the table.
A cold assent followed.
"Wonderful place; not merely for its old monuments and ruins, though
they are curious too, but its strange society,--all nations and all
ranks of each mixed and mingled together: great swells and snobs,
grand ladies, princes, cardinals and ambassadors, thrown together with
artistes, gamblers, and fast ones of either sex,--a regular fair of fine
company, with, plenty of amusement and lots of adventure."
"Indeed!" said she, languidly.
"Just the place your father would like," said he, dropping his voice to
a half-whisper.
"In what way, pray?" asked she, quietly.
"Why, in the way of trade, of course," said he, laughing. "For the
fine-lady part of the matter he 'd not care for it,--that never was
his line of country,--but for the young swells that thought themselves
sporting characters, for the soft young gents that fancied they
could play, Grog was always ready. I ask your pardon for the familiar
nickname, but we 've known each other about thirty years. He always
called me Ginger. Haven't you heard him speak of old Ginger?"
"Never, sir."
"Strange that; but perhaps he did not speak of his pals to you?"
"No, never."
"That was so like him. I never saw his equal to hunt over two different
kinds of country. He could get on the top of a bus and go down to St.
John's Wood, or to Putney, after a whole night at Crawley's, and with an
old shooting-jacket and Jim-crow on him, and a garden-rake in his hand,
you 'd never suspect he was the fellow who had cleared out the company
and carried off every shilling at billiards and blind-hookey. Poor old
Kit, how fond I am of him!"
A stare, whose meaning Spicer could not fathom, was the only reply to
the speech.
"And he was so fond of me! I was the only one of them all he could
trust. He liked Beech--I mean his Lordship there; he was always
attached to him, but whenever it was really a touch-and-go thing, a
nice operation, then he'd say, 'Where's Ginger? give me Ginger!' The
adventures we've had together would make a book; and do you know that
more than once I thought of writing them, or getting a fellow to write
them, for it's all the same. I'd have called it 'Grog and Ginger.'
Wouldn't that take?"
She made no reply; her face was, perhaps, a thought paler, but unchanged
in expression.
"And then the scenes we've gone through!--dangerous enough some of them;
he rather liked that, and I own it never was my taste."
"I am surprised to hear you say so, sir," said she, in a low but very
distinct voice; "I'd have imagined exactly the reverse."
"Indeed! and may I make so bold as to ask why?"
"Simply, sir, that a gentleman so worldly-wise as yourself must always
be supposed to calculate eventualities, and not incur, willingly at
least, those he has no mind for. To be plain, sir, I 'm at a loss to
understand how one not fond of peril should hazard the chance of being
thrown out of a window,--don't start, I 'm only a woman, and cannot do
it, nor, though I have rung for the servant, am I going to order him.
For this time it shall be the door." And, rising proudly, she walked
toward the window; but ere she reached it, Spicer was gone.
"What's become of Spicer, Lizzy?" said Beecher, indolently, as his eyes
traversed the room in search of him.
"He has taken his leave," said she, in a voice as careless.
"He's tiresome, I think," yawned he; "at least, I find him so."
She made no reply, but sat down to compose her thoughts, somewhat
ruffled by the late scene.
"Ain't it time to order the carriage? I told Georgy we'd come early,"
added he, after a pause.
"I almost think I'll not go to-night," said she, in a low voice.
"Not go! You don't mean that when my sister-in-law sends you a message
to come and see her that you 'll refuse!" cried he, in a mixture of
anger and astonishment.
"I'm afraid I could be guilty of so great an enormity," said she,
smiling superciliously.
"It's exactly the word for it, whatever you may think," said he,
doggedly. "All I can say is, that you don't know Georgina, or you'd
never have dreamt of it."
"In that case it is better I should know her; so I'll get my bonnet
and shawl at once."
She was back in the room in a moment, and they set out for the Palazzo
Gondi.
What would not Beecher have given, as they drove along, for courage to
counsel and advise her,--to admonish as to this, and caution as to that?
And yet he did not dare to utter a word, and she was as silent.
It would not be very easy to say exactly what sort of person Lady
Georgina expected in her sister-in-law; indeed, she had pictured her in
so many shapes to herself that there was not an incongruity omitted
in the composition, and she fancied her bold, daring, timid, awkward,
impertinent, and shy alternately, and, in this conflict of anticipation,
it was that Lizzy entered. So utterly overcome was Lady Georgina by
astonishment, that she actually advanced to meet her in some confusion,
and then, taking her hand, led her to a seat on the sofa beside her.
[Illustration: 372]
While the ordinary interchange of commonplaces went on,--and nothing
could be more ordinary or commonplace than the words of their
greeting,--each calmly surveyed the other. What thoughts passed in their
minds, what inferences were drawn, and what conclusions formed in
this moment, it is not for me to guess. To women alone pertains
that marvellous freemasonry that scans character at a glance, and
investigates the sincerity of a disposition and the value of a
lace flounce with the same practised facility. If Lady Georgina was
astonished by the striking beauty of her sister-in-law, she was amazed
still more by her manner and her tone. Where could she have learned that
graceful repose,--that simplicity, which is the very highest art? Where
and how had she caught up that gentle quietude which breathes like a
balmy odor over the well-bred world? How had she acquired that subtlety
by which wit is made to sparkle and never to startle; and what training
had told her how to weave through all she said the flattery of a wish to
please?
Woman of the world as she was, Lady Lackington had seen no such marvel
as this. It was no detraction from its merit that it might be all
acting, for it was still "high art." Not a fault could she detect in
look, gesture, or tone, and yet all seemed as easy and unstudied as
possible. Her Ladyship knew well that the practice of society confers
all these advantages; but here was one who had never mixed with the
world, who, by her own confession, "knew no one," and yet was a mistress
of every art that rules society.
Lady Georgina had yet to learn that there are instincts stronger than
all experience, and that, in the common intercourse of life, Tact is
Genius.
Though Lizzy was far more deeply versed in every theme on which it was
her Ladyship's pleasure to talk than herself,--though she knew more of
painting, of music, and of literature, than the Viscountess, she still
seemed like one gleaning impressions as they conversed, and at each
moment acquiring nearer and clearer views; and yet even this flattery
was so nicely modulated that it escaped detection.
There was a mystery in the case her Ladyship determined to fathom. "No
woman of her class," as she phrased it, could have been thus trained
without some specific object. The stage had latterly been used as a sort
of show mart where young girls display their attractive graces, at times
with immense success. Could this have been the goal for which she had
been destined? She adroitly turned the conversation to that topic, but
Lizzy's answers soon negatived the suspicion. Governesses, too, were
all-accomplished in these days; but here there was less of acquirement
exhibited than of all the little arts and devices of society.
"Is my trial nearly over?" whispered Lizzy in Beecher's ear as he passed
beside her chair. "I'd rather hear a verdict of Guilty at once than to
submit to further examining."
A look of caution, most imploringly given, was all his reply.
Though Lady Lackington had neither heard question nor answer, her quick
glance had penetrated something like a meaning in them, and her lip
curled impatiently as she said to Beecher, "Have you spoke to Lady
Lackington of our plans for her,--I mean during your absence?"
He muttered a sullen "No, not yet," and turned away.
"It was an arrangement that will, I hope, meet your approval," said Lady
Georgina, half coldly, "since Beecher must go over to England for some
weeks; and as you could not with either comfort or propriety remain
alone in your hotel, our plan was that you should come here."
Lizzy merely turned her eyes on Beecher, but there was that in their
expression that plainly said, "Is this your resolve?" He only moved
away, and did not speak.
"Not but if any of your own family," continued Lady Lackington, "could
come out here, and that you might prefer their company,--that would be
an arrangement equally satisfactory. Is such an event likely?"
"Nothing less so, my Lady," said Lizzy. "My father has affairs of
urgency to treat at this moment."
"Oh, I did not exactly allude to your father,--you might have sisters."
"I have none."
"An aunt, perhaps?"
"I never heard of one."
"Lizzy, you are aware, Georgina," broke in Beecher, whose voice trembled
at every word, "was brought up abroad,--she never saw any of her
family."
"How strange! I might even say, how unfortunate!" sighed her Ladyship,
superciliously.
"Stranger, and more unfortunate still, your Ladyship would perhaps say,
if I were to tell you that I never so much as heard of them."
"I am not certainly prepared to say that the circumstance is one to be
boastful of," said Lady Lackington, who resented the look of haughty
defiance of the other.
"I assure your Ladyship that you are mistaken in attributing to me such
a sentiment. I have nothing of which to be boastful."
"Your present position, Lady Lackington, might inspire a very natural
degree of pride."
"It has not done so yet, my Lady. My experience of the elevated class
to which I have been raised has been too brief to impress me; a wider
knowledge will probably supply this void."
"And yet," said Lady Georgina, sarcastically, "it is something,--the
change from Miss Davis to the Viscountess Lackington."
"When that change becomes more real, more actual, my Lady," said Lizzy,
boldly, "it will, assuredly, bear its fruits; when, in being reminded of
what I was and whence I came, I can only detect the envious malevolence
that would taunt me with what is no fault of mine, but a mere accident
of fortune,--when I hear these things with calm composure, and in my
rank as a peeress feel the equal of those who would disparage me,--then,
indeed, I may be proud."
"Such a day may never come," said Lady Georgina, coldly.
"Very possibly, my Lady. It has cost me no effort to win this station
you seem to prize so highly; it will not exact one to forego all its
great advantages."
"What a young lady to be so old a philosopher! I 'm sure Lord Lackington
never so much as suspected the wisdom he acquired in his wife. It may,
however, be a family trait."
"My father was so far wise, my Lady, that he warned me of the reception
that awaited me in my new station; but, in his ignorance of that great
world, he gave me, rather, to believe that I should meet insinuated
slights and covert impertinences than open insults. Perhaps I owe it to
my vulgar origin that I really like the last the best; at least, they
show me that my enemies are not formidable."
"Your remarks have convinced me that it would be quite superfluous in me
to offer my protection to a lady so conversant with life and the world."
"They will, at least, serve to show your Ladyship that I would not have
accepted the protection."
"But, Lizzy dearest, you don't know what you are saying. Lady Georgina
can establish your position in society as none other can."
"I mean to do that without aid."
"Just as her father, Mr. Grog, would force his way into the
stand-house," whispered Lady Lackington, but still loud enough for Lizzy
to overhear.
"Not exactly as your Ladyship would illustrate it," said Lizzy, smiling;
"but, in seeing the amount of those gifts which have won the suffrages
of society, I own that I am not discouraged. I am told," said she,
with a great air of artlessness, "that no one is more popular than your
Ladyship."
Lady Lackington arose, and stared at her with a look of open insolence;
and then turning, whispered something in Beecher's ear.
"After all," muttered he, "she did not begin it. Get your shawl,
Lizzy," added he, aloud; "my sister keeps early hours, and we must not
break in on them."
Lady Lackington and Lizzy courtesied to each other like ladies of high
comedy; it seemed, indeed, a sort of rivalry whose reverence should be
most formal and most deferential.
"Have n't you gone and done it!" cried Beecher, as they gained the
street. "Georgina will never forget this so long as she lives."
"And if she did I 'd take care to refresh her memory," said Lizzy,
laughing; and the mellow sounds rang out as if from a heart that never
knew a care.
"I shall require to set out for England to-morrow," said Beecher,
moodily, so soon as they had reached the hotel. The speech was uttered
to induce a rejoinder, but she made none.
"And probably be absent for several weeks," added he.
Still she never spoke, but seemed busily examining the embroidered
coronet on the corner of her handkerchief.
"And as circumstances require--I mean, as I shall be obliged to go
alone, and as it would be highly inconvenient, not to say unusual, for
a young married woman, more especially in the rank you occupy, to remain
in an hotel alone, without friends or relatives, we have thought--that
is, Georgy and I have considered--that you should stay with her."
Lizzy only smiled; but what that strange smile might signify it was far
beyond Beecher's skill to read.
"There is only one difficulty in the matter," resumed he; "and as it is
a difficulty almost entirely created by yourself, you will naturally
be the more ready to rectify it." He waited long enough to provoke a
question from her, but she seemed to have no curiosity on the subject,
and did not speak.
"I mean," added he, more boldly, "that before accepting my sister's
hospitality, you must necessarily make some amende for the manner in
which you have just treated her."
"In which I treated her!" said Lizzy, after him, her utterance being
slow and totally passionless.
"Yes, these were my words," said he.
"Have you forgotten how she treated me?" asked Lizzy, in the same
calm tone.
"As to that," said he, with a sort of fidgety confusion,--"as to
that, you ought to bear in mind who she is--what she is--and then it's
Georgy's way; even among her equals--those well born as herself--she has
always been permitted to exercise a certain sort of sway; in fact,
the world of fashion has decreed her a sort of eminence. You cannot
understand these things yet, though you may do so, one day or other. In
a word, she can do what you cannot, and must not, and the sooner you
know it the better."
"And what is it you propose that I should do?" asked she, with seeming
innocence.
"Write her a note,--brief if you like, but very civil,--full of excuses
for anything that may have given her offence; say all about your
ignorance of life, newness to the world, and so on; declare your
readiness to accept any suggestions she will kindly give you for future
conduct,--for she knows society like a book,--and conclude by assuring
her--Well!" cried he, suddenly, for she had started from him so abruptly
that he forgot his dictation.
"Go on,--go on," said she, resuming her calm tone.
"You 've put me out," cried he; "I can't remember where I was. Stay--I
was saying--What was it? it was something like--"
"Something like 'I 'll not do it any more,'" said Lizzy, with a low
laugh; while, at the same instant, she opened her writing-desk and sat
down to write.
Now, although Beecher would have preferred seeing her accept this lesson
with more show of humility, he was, on the whole, well satisfied with
her submission. He watched her as her pen moved across the paper,
and saw that she wrote in a way that indicated calm composure and not
passion. The note was quickly finished; and as she was folding it, she
stopped, and said, "But perhaps you might like to read it?"
"Of course I 'd like to read it," said he, eagerly, taking it op and
reading aloud:--
"'The Viscountess Lackington having received Lord
Lackington's orders to apologize to Georgina, Viscountess
Lackington, for certain expressions which may have offended
her, willingly accepts the task as one likely to indicate to
her Ladyship the propriety of excusing her own conduct to
one who had come to claim her kindness and protection.'
"And would you presume to send her such a note as this?" cried he, as he
crushed it up and flung it into the fire.
"Not now," said she, with a quiet smile.
"Sit down, and then write--"
"I'll not write another," said she, rising. She moved slowly across the
room; and as she gained the door, she turned and said, "If you don't
want Kuffner, I 'd be glad to have him here;" and without awaiting his
reply, she was gone.
"Haven't I made a precious mess of it?" cried Beecher, as he buried his
head between his hands, and sat down before the fire.
CHAPTER XXX. MRS. SEACOLE'S
In a dense fog, and under a thin cold rain, the "Tigris" steamed slowly
into the harbor of Balaklava. She had been chartered by the Government,
and sent out with some seventy thousand pair of shoes, and other like
indispensables for an army much in want, but destined to be ultimately
re-despatched to Constantinople,--some grave omissions in red tapery
having been discovered,--whereby she and the shoes remained till the
conclusion of the war, when the shoes were sold to the Russians, and the
ship returned to England.
Our concern is not, however, with the ship or the shoes, or the patent,
barley, the potted meats, or the "printed instructions" with which she
was copiously provided, but with two passengers who had come up in her
from Constantinople, and had, in a manner, struck up a sort of intimacy
by the way. They were each of them men rather advanced in life; somewhat
ordinary in appearance, of that commonplace turn in look, dress, and
bearing that rarely possesses attraction for the better-off class
of travellers, but, by the force of a grand law of compensations,
as certainly disposes them to fraternize with each other. There are,
unquestionably, some very powerful affinities which draw together men
past the prime of life, when they wear bad hats, seedy black coats very
wide in the skirt, and Berlin gloves. It is not alone that if they smoke
the tobacco is of the same coarse kind, and that brandy-and-water is a
fountain where they frequently meet, but there are mysterious points
of agreement about them which develop rapidly into close intimacy, and
would even rise to friendship if either of them was capable of such a
weakness.
They had met, casually, at "Miseri's" at Constantinople, and agreed to
go up the Black Sea together. Now, though assuredly any common observer
passing them might not readily be able to distinguish one from the other
again, both being fat, broad-shouldered, vulgar-looking men of about
fifty-four or more, yet each was a sort of puzzle to the other; and
in the curiosity thus inspired, there grew up a bond between them that
actually served to unite them.
If we forbore any attempt at mystification with our valued reader in an
early stage of this history, it is not now, that we draw to its close,
we would affect any secrecy. Let us, therefore, at once announce the
travellers by their names; one being Terry Driscoll, the other the
Reverend Paul Classon.
Driscoll had dropped hints--vague hints only--that he had come out
to look after a nephew of his, a kind of scapegrace who was always in
trouble; but in what regiment he served, or where, or whether he was yet
alive, or had been broke and sent home, were all little casualties which
he contemplated and discussed with a strange amount of composure. As
for Paul, without ever entering directly upon the personal question, he
suffered his ministerial character to ooze slowly out, and left it to
be surmised that he was a gentleman of the press, unengaged, and a
Christian minister, unattached.
Not that these personal facts were declared in the abrupt manner they
are here given to the reader. Far from it; they merely loomed through
the haze of their discourse as, walking the deck for hours, they
canvassed the war and its objects, and its probable results. Upon all
these themes they agreed wonderfully, each being fully satisfied that
the whole campaign was only a well-concerted roguery,--a scheme for the
dismemberment of Turkey, when she had been sufficiently debilitated by
the burden of an expensive contest to make all resistance impossible.
Heaven knows if either of them seriously believed this. At all events,
they said it to each other, and so often, so circumstantially, and so
energetically that it would be very rash in us to entertain a doubt of
their sincerity.
"I have been recommended to a house kept by a Mrs. Seacole," said
Classon, as they landed on the busy quay, where soldiers and sailors
and land-transport men, with Turks, Wallachs, Tartars, and Greeks, were
performing a small Babel of their own.
"God help me!" exclaimed Terry, plaintively, "I 'm like a new-born child
here; I know nobody, nor how to ask for anything."
"Come along with me, then. There are worse couriers than Paul Classon."
And bustling his way through the crowd, his Reverence shouldered his
carpet-bag, and pushed forward.
It was, indeed, a rare good fortune for Terry to have fallen upon a
fellow-traveller so gifted and so accomplished; for not only did
Paul seem a perfect polyglot, but he possessed that peculiar bustling
activity your regular traveller acquires, by which, on his very entrance
into an inn, he assumes the position less of guest than of one
in authority and in administration. And so now Paul had speedily
investigated the resources of the establishment, and ordered an
excellent supper, while poor Driscoll was still pottering about his
room, or vainly endeavoring to uncord a portmanteau which a sailor had
fastened more ingeniously than necessary.
"I wish I knew what he was," muttered Terry to himself. "He 'd be the
very man to help me in this business, if I could trust him."
Was it a strange coincidence that at the same moment Paul Classon should
be saying to himself, "That fellow's simplicity would be invaluable if I
could only enlist him in our cause; he is a fool well worth two wise men
at this conjuncture"?
The sort of coffee-room where they supped was densely crowded by
soldiers, sailors, and civilians of every imaginable class and
condition. Bronzed, weather-beaten captains, come off duty for a good
dinner and a bottle of real wine at Mother Seacole's, now mingled with
freshly arrived subs, who had never even seen their regiments; surgeons,
commissaries, naval lieutenants, Queen's messengers, and army chaplains
were all there, talking away, without previous acquaintance with each
other, in all the frankness of men who felt absolved from the rule of
ordinary etiquette; and thus, amid discussions of the campaign and its
chances, were mingled personal adventures, and even private narratives,
all told without the slightest reserve or hesitation: how such a one had
got up from his sick-bed, and reported himself well and fit for duty,
and how such another had pleaded urgent private affairs to get leave to
go home; what a capital pony Watkins had bought for a sovereign, what
execrable bitter beer Jones was paying six shillings the bottle for;
sailors canvassing the slow advances of landsmen, soldiers wondering
why the blue-jackets would n't "go in" and blow the whole mock
fortifications into the air; some boasting, some grumbling, many
ridiculing the French, and all cursing the Commissariat.
If opinions were boldly stated, and sentiments declared with very little
regard for any opposition they might create, there was, throughout, a
tone of hearty good-fellowship that could not be mistaken. The jests and
the merriment seemed to partake of the same hardy character that marked
each day's existence; and many a story was told with a laugh, that could
not be repeated at the "Rag," or reported at the Horse Guards. Classon
and Driscoll listened eagerly to all that went on around them. They were
under the potent spell that affects all men who feel themselves for the
first time in a scene of which they have heard much. They were actually
in the Crimea. The men around them had actually just come off duty in
the trenches: that little dark-bearded fellow had lost his arm in the
attack of the Mamelon; that blue-eyed youth, yonder, had led a party in
assault on the Cemetery; the jovial knot of fellows near the stove had
been "plotting" all night at the Russians from a rifle-pit. There was
a reality in all these things that imparted a marvellous degree of
interest to individuals that might otherwise have seemed commonplace and
ordinary.
Amidst the noisy narratives and noisier commentaries of the moment,
there seemed one discussion carried on with more than usual warmth. It
was as to the precise species of reward that could be accorded to one
whose military rank could not entitle him to the "Bath."
"I tell you, Chidley," cried one of the speakers, "if he had been a
Frenchman there would have been no end of boasting amongst our amiable
allies, and he 'd have had Heaven knows what grade of the Legion and a
pension, besides! Show me the fellow amongst them could have done the
feat! I don't speak of the pluck of it,--they have plenty of pluck; but
where's the rider could have sat his horse over it?"
"What height was it?" asked another, as he leisurely puffed his cigar.
"Some say six feet,--call it five, call it four, anything you please:
it was to go at a breastwork with two nine-pounders inside, that was
the feat; and I say, again, I don't know another fellow in the army that
would have thought of it but himself!"
[Illustration: 384]
"Dick Churchill once jumped into a square and out again!"
A hearty roar of laughter announced the amount of credit vouchsafed to
the story; but the speaker most circumstantially gave time and place,
and cited the names of those who had witnessed the fact.
"Be it all as you say," interposed the first speaker, "Churchill did
a foolhardy thing, without any object or any result; but Conway sabred
three gunners with his own hand."
If the story, up to this moment, had only interested our two travellers
by its heroic claims, no sooner was the name of Conway uttered than
each started with astonishment. As for Classon, he arose at once,
and, drawing near the narrator, politely begged to know if the Conway
mentioned was a one-armed man.
"The same, sir,--Charley the Smasher, as they used to call him long ago;
and, by George, he has earned some right to the title!"
"And he escaped unhurt after all this?" asked Classon.
"No, I never said that; he was almost hacked to pieces, and his horse
had four bullets in him and fell dead, after carrying him half-way back
to our lines."
"And Conway, is he alive? Is he likely to recover?" asked Paul, eagerly.
"The doctors say it is impossible; but Charley himself declares that he
has not the slightest intention of dying, and the chances are, he 'll
keep his word."
"Dear me! only think of that!" muttered Driscoll, as, with a look of
intense simplicity, he listened to this discourse. "And where is he now,
sir, if I might make so bould?"
"He's up at the Monastery of St George, about eight miles off."
"The Lord give him health and strength to go and fight the Russians
again!" said Terry; and the speech, uttered in a tone so natural and so
simple, was heard with a general laugh.
"Come over to this table, my old buck, and we 'll drink that toast in a
bumper!" cried one of the officers; and with many a bashful expression
of pleasure Mr. Driscoll accepted the invitation.
"Won't your friend join us?" asked another, looking towards Classon.
"I must, however reluctantly, decline, gentlemen," said Paul, blandly.
"I cannot indulge like my respected friend here; I stand in need of
rest and repose."
"He doesn't look a very delicate subject, notwithstanding," said a
subaltern, as Classon retired.
"There 's no judging from appearances," observed Driscoll. "You 'd
think me a strong man, but I 'm weak as a child. There's nothing left
of me since I had the 'faver,' and I 'll tell you how it happened."
CHAPTER XXXI. THE CONVENT OF ST. GEORGE
Day broke heavily and dull through the massively barred windows of the
Convent of St George, and dimly discovered a vast crowd assembled in
the great hall of waiting: officers--sailor and soldier--come to
inquire news of wounded comrades, camp-followers, sutlers, surgeons,
araba-drivers, Tartar-guides, hospital nurses, newspaper correspondents,
Jew money-changers, being only some of the varieties in that great and
motley crowd.
Two immense fireplaces threw a ruddy glare over two wide semicircles of
human faces before them; but here and there throughout the hall,
knots and groups were gathered, engaged in deep and earnest converse.
Occasionally, one speaker occupied the attention of a listening group;
but, more generally, there was a sort of discussion in which parties
suggested this or that explanation, and so supplied some piece of
omitted intelligence.
It is to this dropping and broken discourse of one of these small
gatherings that I would now draw my reader's attention. The group
consisted of nigh a dozen persons, of whom a staff-officer and a naval
captain were the principal speakers.
"My own opinion is," said the former, "that if the personal episodes
of this war come ever to be written, they will be found infinitely more
strange and interesting than all the great achievements of the campaign.
I ask you, for instance, where is there anything like this very case? A
wounded soldier, half cut to pieces by the enemy, is carried to the rear
to hear that his claim to a peerage has just been established, and that
he has only to get well again to enjoy fifteen thousand a year."
"The way the tidings reach him is yet stranger," broke in another.
"What is your version of that?"
"It is the correct one, I promise you," rejoined he; "I had it from
Colthorpe, who was present When the London lawyer--I don't know his
name--reached Balaklava, he discovered, to his horror, that Conway was
in the front; and when the fellow summons pluck enough to move on to
head-quarters, he learns that Charley has just gone out with a party of
eight, openly declaring they mean to do something before they come back.
Up to this, the man of parchment has studiously kept his secret; in
fact, the general belief about him was that he was charged with a writ,
or some such confounded thing, against the poor Smasher, and, of course,
the impression contributed little to secure him a polite reception.
Now, however, all his calm and prudential reserve is gone, and he rushes
madly into the General's tent, where the General is at breakfast with
all the staff and several guests, and, with the air of a man secure
of his position, he flings down upon the table a letter to the General
Commanding-in-chief from a Minister of State, saying, 'There, sir! may I
reckon upon your assistance?' It was some time before the General could
quite persuade himself that the man was in his senses, he talked away
so wildly and incoherently, repeatedly saying, 'I throw it all upon you,
sir. Remember, sir, I take none of the responsibility,--none!'
"'I wish you would kindly inform me as to the precise service you expect
at my hands, sir,' said the General, somewhat haughtily.
"'To have this document deposited in the hands of Lieutenant Charles
Conway, sir,' said he, pompously, laying down a heavily sealed package;
'to convey to him the news that his claim to the title and estates of
his family has been declared perfect; that before he can reach England
he will be Lord Viscount Cackington and Conway.'
"'Bad news from the front, sir,9 said an aide-de-camp, breaking in.
'After a successful attack on a small redoubt near the Cemetery; two
squadrons of the --th have been surprised, and nearly all cut up. Conway,
they say, killed.'
"'No, not killed,' broke in another; 'badly wounded, and left behind.'
"There was, as you may imagine, very little thought bestowed on the
lawyer after this. Indeed, the party was scattered almost immediately,
and Colthorpe was just going out, when one of Miss Nightingale's ladies
said to him, 'Will you do me a great favor, Major Colthorpe,--a very
great favor? It is to let me have my saddle put on your gray charger for
half an hour.' Colly says, if she had n't been the very prettiest girl
he had ever seen since they left England, he 'd have shirked it, but he
could not; and in less than ten minutes, there she was, cantering
away through the tents and heading straight for the front. It was not,
however, only the gray Arab she carried off, but the great letter of the
lawyer was gone too; and so now every one knew at once she was away to
the front."
"And after that,--after that?" asked three or four together, as the
narrator paused.
"After that," resumed he, "there is little to be told. Colthorpe's Arab
galloped back with a ball in his counter, and the saddle torn to rags
with shot. The girl has not been heard of."
"I can supply this portion of the story," said a young fellow, with his
arm in a sling. "She had come up with Conway, whom they had placed on
a horse, and were leading him back to the lines, when a Russian
skirmishing-party swept past and carried the girl off, and she is now in
Sebastopol, under the care of the Countess Woronzoff."
"And Conway?"
"Conway's here; and though he has, between shot and sabre-cuts, eight
severe wounds, they say that, but for his anxiety about this girl's
fate, his chances of recovery are not so bad. Here comes Dr. Raikes,
however, who could give us the latest tidings of him."
The gentleman thus alluded to moved hastily down the hall, followed by
a numerous train of assistants, to whom he gave his orders as he went
He continued, at the same time, to open and run his eyes over various
letters which an assistant handed to him, one by one.
"I will not be tormented with these requests, Parkes," said he,
peremptorily. "You are to refuse all applications to see patients who
are not in the convalescent wards. These interviews have, invariably,
one effect,--they double our labor here."
By this time the doctor was hemmed closely in by a dense crowd, eagerly
asking for news of some dear friend or kinsman. A brief "Badly,"
"Better," "Sinking," "Won't do," were, in general, the extent of his
replies; but in no case did he ever seem at a loss as to the name or
circumstance of the individual alluded to.
And now, at last, the great hall began to thin. Wrapping themselves well
in their warm cloaks, securing the hoods tightly over their heads, men
set out in twos and threes, on foot, on horseback, or in arabas, some
for the camp, some for Balaklava, and some for the far-away quarter at
the extreme right, near the Tchernaya. A heavy snow was falling, and a
cold and cutting wind came over the Black Sea, and howled drearily along
the vaulted corridors of the old Convent.
Matter enough for story was there beneath that venerable roof! It was
the week after the memorable fight of Inkermann, and some of the best
blood of Britain was ebbing in those dimly lighted cells, whose echoes
gave back heart-sick sighs for home from lips that were soon to be mute
forever. There are unlucky days in the calendar of medicine,--days when
the convalescent makes no progress, and the sick man grows worse; when
medicaments seem mulcted of half their efficacy, and disastrous chances
abound. Doctors rarely reject the influence of this superstition, but
accept it with calm resignation.
Such, at least, seemed the spirit in which two army surgeons now
discussed the events of the day, as they walked briskly for exercise
along one of the corridors of the Convent.
"We shall have a gloomy report to send in to-morrow, Parkes," said the
elder. "Not one of these late operation cases will recover. Hopeton is
sinking fast; Malcolm's wound has put on a treacherous appearance; that
compound fracture shows signs of gangrene; and there's Conway, we
all thought so well of last night, going rapidly, as though from some
internal hemorrhage."
"Poor fellow! it's rather hard to die just when he has arrived at so
much to live for. You know that he is to have a peerage."
"So he told me himself. He said laughingly to me, 'Becknell, my boy, be
careful, you are cutting up no common sort of fellow; it's all lordly
flesh and blood here!' We were afraid the news might over-excite him,
but he took it as easily as possible, and only said, 'How happy it will
make my poor mother;' and, after a moment, 'If I only get back to tell
it to her!'"
"A civilian below," said an hospital sergeant, "wishes to see Mr.
Conway."
"Can't be,--say so," was the curt reply, as the doctor tore, without
reading, the piece of paper on which a name was written.
"The lawyer, I have no doubt," said the other; "as if the poor fellow
could care to hear of title-deeds and rent-rolls now. He 'd rather
have twenty drops of morphine than know that his estate covered half a
county."
The sergeant waited for a second or two to see if the doctor should
reconsider his reply, and then respectfully retired. The stranger,
during the short interval of absence, had denuded himself of great-coat
and snow-shoes, and was briskly chafing his hands before the fire.
"Well, Sergeant, may I see him?" asked he, eagerly.
"No. The doctors won't permit it."
"You did n't tell them who I was, then, that's the reason. You did n't
say I was the confidential agent of his family, charged with a most
important communication?"
"If I didn't, it was, perhaps, because I didn't know it," said the man,
laughing.
"Well, then, go back at once, and say that I've come out special,--that
I must see him,--that the ten minutes I 'll stay will save years
and years of law and chancery,--and that"--here he dropped his
voice--"there's a hundred pounds here for the same minutes."
"You'd better keep that secret to yourself, my good friend," interposed
the sergeant, stiffly.
"Well, so I will, if you recommend it," said the other, submissively;
"but surely, a ten-pound note would do you no harm yourself, Sergeant."
An insolent laugh was the only answer the other vouchsafed, as he
lighted his cigar and sat down before the fire.
"They won't let me see him for the mischief it might do him," resumed
the other, "and little they know that what I have to tell him might be
the saving of his life."
"How so?"
"Just that I 've news for him here that would make a man a'most get out
of his coffin,--news that would do more to cure him than all the doctors
in Europe. There's paper in that bag there that only wants his name
to them' to be worth thousands and thousands of pounds, and if he dies
without signing them there's nothing but ruin to come of it; and when
I said a ten-pound note awhile ago to you, it was a hundred gold
sovereigns I meant, counted into the hollow of your fist, just as you
sat there. See now, show me your hand."
As if in a sort of Jocular pantomime, the man held out his hand, and the
other, taking a strong leather purse from his pocket, proceeded to
untie the string, fastened with many a cunning device. At length it was
opened, and, emptying out a quantity of its contents into one hand, he
began to deposit the pieces, one by one, in the other's palm. "One, two,
three, four," went he on, leisurely, till the last sovereign dropped
from his fingers with the words "one hundred!"
Secret and safe as the bargain seemed, a pair of keen eyes peering
through the half-snowed-up window had watched the whole negotiation,
following the sergeant's fingers as they closed upon the gold and
deposited it within his pocket.
"Wait here, and I'll see what can be done by and by," said the sergeant,
as he moved away.
Scarcely was the stranger left alone than the door opened, and a man
entered, shaking the snow from his heavy boots and his long capote.
"So, my worthy friend," cried he, in a rich, soft voice, "you stole a
march on me,--moved off without beat of drum, and took up a position
before I was stirring!"
"Ah, my reverend friend, you here!" said the other, in evident
confusion. "I never so much as suspected you were coming in this
direction."
Paul Classon and Terry Driscoll stared long and significantly at each
other. Of all those silences, which are more eloquent than words, none
can equal that interval in which two consummate knaves exchange glances
of recognition, so complete an appreciation is there of each other's
gifts, such an honest, unaffected, frank interchange of admiration.
"You are a clever fellow, Driscoll, you are!" said Paul, admiringly.
"No, no. The Lord help me, I'm a poor crayture," said Terry, shaking his
head despondingly.
"Don't believe it, man,--don't believe it," said Paul, clapping him on
the shoulder; "you have great natural gifts. Your face alone is worth a
thousand a year, and you have a shuffling, shambling way of coming into
a room that's better than an account at Coutts's. Joe Norris used to say
that a slight palsy he had in one hand was worth twelve hundred a year
to him at billiards alone."
"What a droll man you are, Mr. Classon!" said Terry, wiping his eyes as
he laughed. And again they looked at each other long and curiously.
"Driscoll," said Paul, after a considerable pause, "on which side do you
hold your brief?"
"My brief! God knows it's little I know about brief and parchments,"
sighed Terry, heavily.
"Come, come, man, what's the use of fencing? I see your hand; I know
every trump in it."
Driscoll shook his head, and muttered something about the "faver that
destroyed him entirely."
"Ah!" sighed Classon, "I cannot well picture to my mind what you
might have been anterior to that calamity, but what remains is still
remarkable,--very remarkable. And now I ask again, on which side are you
engaged?"
"Dear me,--dear me!" groaned out Terry; "it's a terrible world we live
in!"
"Truly and well observed, Driscoll. Life is nothing but a long and
harassing journey, with accidents at every stage, and mischances at
every halt; meanwhile, for whom do you act?"
The door at the end of the long gallery was slightly and noiselessly
opened at this instant, and a signal with a hand caught Driscoll's
attention. Rapid and stealthy as was the motion, Classon turned hastily
round and detected it.
"Sit still, Driscoll," said he, smiling, "and let us talk this matter
over like men of sense and business. It's clear enough, my worthy
friend, that neither you nor I are rich men."
Driscoll sighed an assent.
"That, on the contrary, we are poor, struggling, hard-toiling fellows,
mortgaging the good talents Fortune has blessed us with to men who have
been born to inferior gifts but better opportunities."
Another sigh from Terry.
"You and I, as I have observed, have been deputed out here to play a
certain game. Let us be, therefore, not opponents, but partners. One
side only can win, let us both be at that side."
Again Terry sighed, but more faintly than before.
"Besides," said Classon, rising and turning his back to the fire, while
he stuck his hands in his pockets, "I'm an excellent colleague, and,
unless the world wrongs me, a most inveterate enemy."
"Will he live, do you think?" said Terry, with a gesture of his thumb to
indicate him of whom he spoke.
"No; impossible," said Classon, confidently; "he stands in the report
fatally wounded, and I have it confidentially that there's not a chance
for him."
"And his claim dies with him?"
"That's by no means so sure; at least, we'd be all the safer if we had
his papers, Master Driscoll."
"Ay!" said Driscoll, knowingly.
"Now, which of us is to do the job, Driscoll? That's the question. I
have my claim to see him, as chaplain to the--I 'm not sure of the name
of what branch of the service--we'll say the 'Irregular Contingent'
Legion. What are you, my respected friend?"
"A connection of the family, on the mother's side," said Terry, with a
leer.
"A connection of the family!" laughed out Classon. "Nothing better."
"But, after all," sighed Terry, despondingly, "there's another fellow
before us both,--that chap had brought out the news to the camp, Mr.
Reggis, from the house of Swindal and Reggis."
"He's cared for already," said Classon, with a grin.
"The Lord protect us! what do you mean?" exclaimed Driscoll, in terror.
"He wanted to find his way out here last night, so I bribed two
Chasseurs d'Afrique to guide him. They took him off outside the French
advance, and dropped him within five hundred yards of a Cossack picket,
so that the worthy practitioner is now snug in Sebastopol. In fact,
Driscoll, my boy, I 'm--as I said before--an ugly antagonist!"
Terry laughed an assent, but there was little enjoyment in his mirth.
"The girl,--one of those hospital ladies," continued Classon,--"a
certain Miss Kellett, is also a prisoner."
"Miss Kellett!" cried Driscoll, in amazement and terror together. "I
know her well, and if she's here she 'll outwit us both."
"She's in safe hands this time, let her be as cunning as she will. In
fact, my dear Driscoll, the game is our own if we be but true to each
other."
"I 'm more afraid of that girl than them all," muttered Driscoll.
"Look over those hills yonder, Driscoll, and say if that prison-house be
not strong enough to keep her. Mr. Reggis and herself are likely to see
Moscow before they visit Cheapside. Remember, however, if the field be
our own, it is only for a very brief space of time. Conway is dying.
What is to be done must be done quickly; and as there is no time for
delay, Driscoll, tell me frankly what is it worth to you?" Terry sneezed
and wiped his eyes, and sneezed again,--all little artifices to gain
time and consider how he should act.
"My instructions are these," said Classon, boldly: "to get Conway to
sign a bond abdicating all claim to certain rights in lieu of a good
round sum in hand; or, if he refuse--" S.
"Which he certainly would refuse," broke in Driscoll.
"Well, then, to possess myself of his papers, deeds, letters, whatever
they were,--make away with them, or with any one holding them. Ay,
Driscoll, it is sharp practice, my boy; but we 're just now in a land
where sudden death dispenses with a coroner's inquest, and the keenest
inquirer would be puzzled whether the fatal bullet came from a Russian
rifle or a Croat carbine. Lend me a helping hand here, and I 'll pledge
myself that you are well paid for it. Try and dodge me, and I'll back
myself to beat you at your own game."
"Here's an order for one of you gentlemen," said an hospital orderly,
"coming up to see Lieutenant Conway."
"It is for me," said Driscoll, eagerly; "I'm a relation of his."
"And I am his family chaplain," said Classon, rising; "well go
together." And before Driscoll could interpose a word, Paul slipped his
arm within the other's and led him away.
CHAPTER XXXII. SHOWING "HOW WOUNDS ARE HEALED"
On a low little bed in a small chamber, once a cell of the Convent,
Charles Conway lay, pale, bloodless, and breathing heavily. The
surgeon's report of that morning called him "mortally wounded," and
several of his comrades had already come to bid him farewell. To
alleviate in some measure his sufferings, he was propped up with pillows
and cushions to a half-sitting posture, and so placed that his gaze
could rest upon the open sea, which lay calm and waveless beneath his
window; but even on this his eyes wandered vaguely, as though already
all fixity of thought was fled, and that the world and its scenes had
ceased to move or interest him. He was in that state of exhaustion which
follows great loss of blood, and in which the brain wanders dreamily and
incoherently, though ready at any sudden question to arouse itself to an
effort of right reason.
A faint, sad smile, a little nod, a gesture of the hand, were tokens
that one by one his comrades recorded of their last interview with him;
and now all were gone, and he was alone. A low murmur of voices at his
door bespoke several persons in earnest conversation, but the sounds
never reached the ears of the sick man.
"He spoke of making a will, then?" said Classon, in a whisper.
"Yes, sir," replied the sergeant. "He asked several times if there was
not some one who could take down his wishes in writing, and let him sign
it before witnesses."
"That will do admirably," said Paul, pushing his way into the room,
closely followed by Terry Driscoll. "Ah, Driscoll," said Paul,
unctuously, "if we were moralists instead of poor, frail, time-serving
creatures as we are, what a lesson might we not read in the fate of the
poor fellow that lies there!"
"Ay, indeed!" sighed out Terry, assentingly.
"What an empty sound 'my Lord' is, when a man comes to that!" said
Paul, in the same solemn tone, giving, however, to the words "my Lord" a
startling distinctness that immediately struck upon the sick man's ear.
Conway quickly looked up and fixed his eyes on the speaker.
"Is it all true, then,--am I not dreaming?" asked the wounded soldier,
eagerly.
"Every word of it true, my Lord," said Classon, sitting down beside the
bed.
"And I was the first, my Lord, to bring out the news," interposed Terry.
"'Twas myself found the papers in an old farm-house, and showed them to
Davenport Dunn."
"Hush, don't you see that you only confuse him?" whispered Classon,
cautiously.
"Dunn, Dunn," muttered Conway, trying to recollect. "Yes, we met at poor
Kellett's funeral,--poor Kellett! the last of the Albueras!"
"A gallant soldier, I have heard," chimed in Classon, merely to lead him
on.
"Not a whit more so than his son Jack. Where is he?--where is Jack?"
None could answer him, and there was a silence of some minutes.
"Jack Kellett would never have deserted me in this way if he were alive
and well," muttered Conway, painfully. "Can no one give me any tidings
of him?"
Another silence ensued.
"And I intended he should have been my heir," said Conway, dreamily.
"How strangely it sounds, to be sure, the notion of inheriting anything
from Charley Conway! How little chance there was a month or two back
that my best legacy might not have been a shabrack or a pair of pistols;
and now I'm the Lord Viscount--what is it?--Viscount--"
A wild gust of wind--one of those swooping blasts for which the Euxine
is famous--now struck the strong old walls, and made the massive
casements rattle. The sick man started at the noise, which recalled at
once the crash of the battle-field, and he cried out vigorously,
"Move up, men,--move up; keep together, and charge! Charge!" and with
bent-down head and compressed lips he seemed like one prepared to meet
a murderous onslaught. A sudden faintness succeeded to this excitement,
and he lay back weak and exhausted. As he fell back, a letter dropped
from his hand to the ground. Classon speedily caught it up, and opened
it. He had, however, but time to read the opening line, which ran
thus--"My dearest Charley, our cause is all but won--"
"From his mother," interposed Driscoll, leaning over his shoulder.
"Ay, my mother," murmured Conway, whose ear, preternaturally acute from
fever, caught the word; "she will see that my wishes are carried out,
and that all I leave behind me goes to poor Jack."
"We'll take care of that, sir," said Classon, blandly; "only let us know
what it is you desire. We have no other object here than to learn your
wishes."
With all the alacrity of one accustomed to such emergencies, Paul drew a
small portfolio from his pocket provided with all materials for writing,
and arrayed them neatly before him; but already the sick man had dropped
off into a sleep, and was breathing heavily.
"That box must contain all the papers," said Classon, rising stealthily
and crossing the room; "and see, the key is in the lock!" In a moment
they were both on the spot, busily ransacking the contents. One glance
showed their suspicions to be correct: there were heaps of legal
documents, copies of deeds, extracts of registries, with innumerable
letters of explanation. They had no time for more than the most hurried
look at these; in fact, they turned in terror at every movement, to see
if the sick man had recovered from his swoon.
"This is all; better than I ever looked for," said Classon. "Fill your
pockets with them: we must divide the spoil between us, and be off
before he rallies."
Driscoll obeyed with readiness. His eager eye scrutinized hastily so
much as he could catch of the import of each document; but he did not
venture, by any attempt at selection, to excite Classon's suspicions.
"If we cannot make our own terms after this night's work, Driscoll,
my name is not Paul Classon. The poor fellow here will soon be past
tale-telling, even if he were able to see us. There you have dropped a
large parchment."
"I' ll put it in the pocket of my cloak," said the other, in a whisper;
while he added, still more stealthily, "would n't you swear that he was
looking at us this minute?"
Classon started. The sick man's eyes were open, and their gaze directed
towards them; while his lips, slightly parted, seemed to indicate a
powerless attempt to speak.
"No," said Classon, in a scarcely audible whisper; "that is death."
"I declare I think he sees us," muttered Driscoll.
"And if he does, man, what signifies it? He's going where the knowledge
will little benefit him. Have you everything safe and sure now? There,
button your coat well up; we must start at once."
"May I never! if I can take my eyes off him," said Driscoll, trembling.
"You had better take yourself off bodily, my worthy friend; there's
no saying who might chance to come in upon us here. Is not that a
signet-ring on his finger? It would only be a proper attention to carry
it to his mother, Driscoll." There was a half-sarcasm about the tone of
this speech that made it sound strangely ambiguous, as, stooping down,
he proceeded to take off the ring.
"Leave it there,--leave it there! it will bring bad luck upon us,"
murmured Driscoll, in terror.
"There is no such bad luck as not to profit by an opportunity,"
whispered Classon, as he tried, but in vain, to withdraw the ring.
A sharp, half-suppressed cry suddenly escaped him, and Driscoll
exclaimed,--
"What is it? What's the matter?"
"Look, and see if he has n't got hold of me, and tightly too."
The affected jocularity of his tone accorded but ill with the expression
of pain and fright so written upon his features, for the dying man had
grasped him by the wrist, and held him with a grip of iron.
"That's what they call a dead man's grip, I suppose?" said Classon, in
assumed mockery. "Just try if you cannot unclasp his fingers."
"I wouldn't touch him if you offered me a thousand guineas for it," said
Driscoll, shuddering.
"Nonsense, man. We cannot stand fooling here, and I shall only hurt him
if I try it with one hand. Come, open his fingers gently. Be quick. I
hear voices without, and the tramp of horses' feet in the court below.
Where are you going? You're not about to leave me here?"
"May I never! if I know what to do," muttered Driscoll, in a voice of
despair. "And did n't I tell you from the first it would bring bad luck
upon us?"
"The worst of all luck is to be associated with a fool and a coward,"
said Classon, savagely. "Open these fingers at once, or give me a knife
and I 'll do it myself."
"The Lord forgive you, but you 're a terrible man!" cried Driscoll,
moving stealthily towards the door.
"So you are going?" muttered Paul, with a voice of intense passion.
"You would leave me here to take the consequences, whatever they might
be?"
Driscoll made no reply, but stepped hastily out of the room, and closed
the door.
For a moment Classon stood still and motionless; then bending down his
head, he tried to listen to what was passing outside, for there was
a sound of voices in the corridor, and Driscoll's one of them. "The
scoundrel is betraying me!" muttered Paul to himself. "At all events,
these must not be found upon me." And with this, and by the aid of his
one disengaged hand, he proceeded to strew the floor of the room with
the various papers he had abstracted from the box. Again, too, he
listened; but now all was still without. What could it mean? Had
Driscoll got clear away, without even alluding to him? And now he turned
his gaze upon the sick man, who lay there calm and motionless as
before. "This will end badly if I cannot make my escape," muttered he
to himself; and he once more strove with all his might to unclasp the
knotted fingers; but such was the rigid tenacity of their grasp, they
felt as though they must sooner be broken than yield. "Open your hand,
sir. Let me free," whispered he, in Conway's ear. "That fellow has
robbed you, and I must follow him. There, my poor man, unclasp your
fingers," said he, caressingly, "or it will be too late!"
[Illustration: 402]
Was it a delusion, that he thought a faint flickering of a smile passed
over that death-like countenance? And now, in whispered entreaty,
Classon begged and implored the other to set him free.
"There is nothing for it, then, but this," said Paul, with a muttered
curse, "and your own fault is it that I am driven to it!" And, so
saying, he drew a powerful clasp-knife from his pocket, and tried to
open it with his teeth; but the resistance of the spring still defied
all his efforts for some time, and it was only after a long struggle
that he succeeded. "He's insensible; he'll never feel it," muttered Paul
below his breath; "and even if he should, self-preservation is the first
of all cares." And with this he grasped the knife vigorously in his
strong hand, and gazed at the sick man, who seemed to return his
stare as fixedly. There was in Conway's look even a something of bold
defiance, that seemed to say, "I dare and defy you!" so at least did
Classon read it, and quailed before its haughty meaning. "What wretched
cowardice is over me, and at a time when minutes are worth days!"
muttered Classon. "Here goes!" But now a confused noise of many voices,
and the steps of advancing feet were heard in the corridor; and Classon
sank down beside the bed, a cold sweat covering his forehead and face,
while he trembled in every limb.
The room was speedily filled with staff officers and surgeons, in the
midst of whom was a civilian, travel-stained and tired-looking, who
pressed eagerly forward, saying, as he beheld Classon, "Who is this
man,--what is he doing here?"
"An humble missionary,--a weak vessel," said Paul, whiningly. "In a
paroxysm of his pain he caught me thus, and has held me ever since.
There--at last I am free!" And as he said these words, the sick man's
fingers unclasped and liberated him.
"There has been foul play here," said Mr. Reggie, the stranger in
civilian dress. "See! that box has been rifled; the floor is covered
with papers. This man must be detained."
"In bonds or in a dungeon, it matters not," said Paul, holding up his
hands as if about to open a lengthy discourse; but he was hurried away
ere he could continue.
"He is certainly no worse," said one of the surgeons, as he felt
Conway's pulse and examined the action of his heart; "but I am far from
saying that he will recover!"
"If I do not greatly mistake," said Reggis, "our friend the missionary
is the man through whose kind offices I was betrayed within the Russian
lines; but I' ll look to this later. As it was, I have had little to
complain of my treatment in Sebastopol, and my detention was of the
shortest."
"And Miss Kellett,--is she free also?" asked one of the bystanders.
"Yes; we came back together. She is up at headquarters, giving Lord
Raglan an account of her capture."
"What is it, Conway?" asked one of the surgeons, suddenly startled by
the intensity of the anxiety in his face. "Are you in pain?"
He shook his head in dissent.
"You are thirsty, perhaps? Will you have something to drink?"
"No," said he, with the faintest possible utterance.
"What is it, then, my poor fellow?" said he, affectionately.
"So it was not a dream!" gasped out Conway.
"What was it you fancied to be a dream?"
"All,--everything but this!" And he pointed to a deep wound from a
sabre-cut in his shoulder.
"Ay, and that, too, will be as a dream some years hence!" said the
other, cheeringly.
It was evident, now, that the excitement of talking and seeing so many
persons about him was injurious, and the surgeons silently motioned to
the bystanders to retire.
"May I remain with him?" asked the lawyer. "If he could give his consent
to certain measures, sign one or two papers, years of litigation might
be saved."
Conway had meanwhile beckoned to the surgeon to approach him; and then,
as the other leaned over the bed, he whispered,--
"Was it true what I have just heard,--was she really here?"
"Miss Kellett, do you mean? Yes; she carried up the news to you herself?
It was she that tied the handkerchief on your wounded artery, too, and
saved your life."
"Here,--in the Crimea? It cannot--cannot be!" sighed Conway.
"She is not the only noble-hearted woman who has left home and friends
to brave perils and face hardships, though, I own, she stands alone for
heroism and daring."
"So, then, it was not a delusion,--I did actually see her in the
trenches?" said Conway, eagerly.
"She was in the advanced parallel the night the Russians surprised the
5th. She was the first to give the alarm of the attack."
"Only think, doctor, of what happened to me that night! I was sent up
at speed to say that reinforcements were coming up. Two companies of the
Royals were already in march. My horse had twice fallen with me, and,
being one-armed, I was a good deal shaken, and so faint when I arrived
that I could scarcely deliver my message. It was just then a woman--I
could only perceive, in the darkness, that she seemed young--gave me her
brandy-flask; after drinking, I turned to give it back to her, but she
was gone. There was no time to search for her at such a moment, and
I was about to ride away, when a 'carcasse,' exploding on one of the
redoubts, lit up the whole scene for a considerable space around,
and whom should I see but Jack Kellett's sister, cheering the men and
encouraging them to hold their ground?
[Illustration: 406]
I could have sworn to her features, as I could now to yours; but that
she could really be there seemed so utterly impossible that I fancied
it was a delusion. Nay," added he, after a pause, "let me tell the whole
truth. I thought it was a warning! Ay, doctor, the weight is off my
heart now that I have confessed this weakness." As Conway spoke, he
seemed, indeed, as though he had relieved himself of some mighty care;
for already his eye had regained its lustre, and his bold features
recovered their wonted expression. "Now," cried he, with a renovated
vigor, "I have done with false terrors about second sight, and the rest
of it I am myself again."
"You can listen to my tidings, then," said Reggis, seating himself at
the bedside, and at once beginning a narrative, to which I am obliged to
own Conway did not always pay a becoming attention, his thoughts still
reverting to very different scenes and incidents from those which the
lawyer recounted. Indeed, more than once was the narrator's patience
sorely tried and tested. "I am doing my very best to be brief, sir. I
am limiting myself strictly to a mere outline of the case," said he, in
something of piqu: "It might interest you,--it ought to interest
you!"
"If the doctor yonder will promise me health and years to enjoy all this
same good fortune, so it will interest me," cried Conway. "What does the
income amount to?"
"If we only recover the English estates, it will be something under
twelve thousand a year. If we succeed with, the Irish, it will be about
three more."
"And how far are we on the road to this success?" "One verdict is
already won. The first action for ejectment on title has been brought,
and we are the victors. Upon this, all your counsel are agreed, your
claim to the Viscounty rests."
"I can scarcely credit--scarcely picture it to myself," said Conway,
half aloud. "My mind is confused by the thought of all the things I wish
to do, if this be true. First of all, I want to purchase Jack Kellett's
commission."
"If you mean Miss Kellett's brother, he is already gazetted an ensign,
and on his way to join his regiment in India."
"And how do you know this?"
"She told me so herself."
"She! When and where have you seen her?"
"Here, at headquarters; in Sebastopol, where we were prisoners together;
at the camp yesterday, where we parted."
"My poor head cannot bear this," said Conway, painfully; "I am
struggling between the delight of all these good tidings and a terrible
dread that I am to awake and find them but a dream. You said that she
was here in the camp?"
"That she is. If you but heard the cheer that greeted her arrival! It
began at the advanced pickets, and swelled loader and louder, till, like
the roar of the sea, it seemed to make the very air tremble. There, hear
that! As I live, it is the same shout again."
"Here comes the General and his staff into the court below," said the
doctor, hurrying away to receive them.
As the sounds of a distant cheer died away, the noise of horses' feet
resounded through the courtyard, and the clank of musketry in salute
announced the arrival of an officer of rank.
"I declare they are coming this way," cried Mr. Reggis, rising in some
confusion, "and I heard your name spoken. Coming, I have no doubt, to
see you."
"The General of your division, Conway, come to ask after you," said
an aide-de-camp, entering, and then standing aside to make place for a
venerable, soldier-like man, whose snow-white hair would have graced a
patriarch.
"I have come to shake your hand, Conway," said he, "and to tell you we
are all proud of you. There is nothing else talked of through our own
or the French camp than that daring feat of yours; and England will soon
hear of it."
A deep blush of manly shame covered Conway's face as he listened to
these words; but he could not speak.
"I have been talking the matter over with the General
Commanding-in-chief," resumed he, "who agrees with me that the Horse
Guards might, possibly, recognizing your former rank of Captain, make
you now a Brevet-major, and thus qualify you for the Bath."
"Time enough, General, for that," said Conway. "I have a very long
arrear of folly and absurdity to wipe out ere I have any pretension to
claim high rewards."
"Well, but if all that I hear be true, we are likely to lose your
services here; they have a story abroad about a peerage and a vast
fortune to which you have succeeded. Indeed, I heard this moment from
Miss Kellett--"
"Is she here, sir?--can I see her?" cried Conway, eagerly.
"Yes. She has come over to say good-bye; for, I regret to say, she too
is about to leave us to join her brother at Calcutta."
A sickly paleness spread itself over Conway's cheeks, and he muttered,
"I must see her--I must speak with her at once."
"So you shall, my poor fellow," said the other, affectionately; "and I
know of no such recompense for wounds and suffering as to see her gentle
smile and hear her soft voice. She shall come to you immediately."
Conway covered his face with his hand, to conceal the emotion that
stirred him, and heard no more. Nor was he conscious that, one by one,
the persons around him slipped noiselessly from the room, while into the
seat beside his bed glided a young girl's figure, dressed in deep black,
and veiled.
"Such a fate!" muttered he, half aloud. "All this, that they call my
good fortune, comes exactly when I do not care for it."
"And why so?" asked a low, soft voice, almost in his very ear.
"Is this, indeed, you?" cried he, eagerly. "Was it your hand I felt on
my temples as I lay wounded outside the trenches? Was it your voice that
cheered me as they carried me to the rear?"
She slightly bent her head in assent, and murmured, "Your old comrade's
sister could not do less."
"And now you are about to leave me," said he, with an overwhelming
sorrow in the tone.
She turned away her head slightly, and made no answer.
"I, who am utterly alone here," said he, in a broken voice. "Is this,
too, like my old comrade's sister?" There was a peevishness in the way
he spoke this of which he seemed himself to be ashamed the moment the
words were uttered; and he quickly added, "What a fellow I am to say
this to you!--you, who have done so much for me,--you, who promised to
be a daughter to my poor mother when I am gone!"
"But you are not to take this gloomy view," said she, hastily; "the
surgeons all pronounce you better; they agree that your wounds
progress favorably, and that, in a week or two, you may be removed to
Constantinople, and thence to England."
He gave a faint, sickly smile of most melancholy meaning.
"And what will not the cheery, bracing air of those Welsh mountains do,
aided by the kind care of that best of nurses, a fond mother?"
"And where will you be by that time?" asked he, eagerly.
"Journeying away eastward to some far-away land, still more friendless!"
said she, sadly.
"This, then, is the sum of all my good fortune, that when life opens
fairly for me, it shall be bereft of all that I care for!" cried he,
wildly.
Terrified by the excited tone in which he spoke, as well as by the
feverish lustre of his eyes, Sybella tried to calm and soothe him, but
he listened--if, indeed, he heard her--with utter apathy.
"Come!" cried he, at last, "if your resolve be taken, so is mine. If you
leave for India, I shall never quit the Crimea."
"It is not thus I expected one to speak who loves his mother as you do,"
said she, reproachfully.
"Ah, Sybella, it would indeed have been a happy day for me when I should
have returned to her in honor, could I but have said, 'You have not
alone a son beneath your roof, but a dear daughter also.' If all that
they call my great luck had brought this fortune, then had I been indeed
a fellow to be envied. Without that hope there is not another that I
want to cling to."
She tried gently to withdraw her hand from his, but he held it in his
grasp, and continued,--
"You, who never heard of me till the first day we met, know little
of the stored-up happiness your very name has afforded me for many a
day,--how, days long, Jack talked of you to me as we rambled together,
how the long nights of the trenches were beguiled by telling of
you,--till at length I scarcely knew whether I had not myself known
and loved you for years. I used to fancy, too, how every trait of poor
Jack--his noble ardor, his generous devotion--might be displayed amidst
the softer and more graceful virtues of womanhood; and at last I came to
know you, far and away above all I have ever dreamed of."
"Let me go,--let me say good-bye," said she, in a faint whisper.
"Bear with me a few moments longer, Sybella," cried he, passionately.
"With all their misery, they are the happiest of my life."
"This is unfair,--it is almost ungenerous of you," said she, with
scarcely stifled emotion, and still endeavoring to withdraw her hand.
"So it is!" cried he, suddenly; "it is unmanly and ignoble both, and it
is only a poor, selfish sick man could stoop to plead so abjectly." He
relinquished her hand as he spoke, and then, grasping it suddenly, he
pressed it to his lips, and burst into tears. "A soldier should be
made of better stuff, Sybella," said he, trying to smile.
"Goodbye,--good-bye."
"It is too late to say so now," said she, faintly; "I will not go."
"Not go,--not leave me, Sybella?" cried he. "Oh that I may have heard
you aright! Did you say you would remain with me, and for how long?"
"Forever!" said she, stooping down and kissing his forehead. The next
moment she was gone.
"Come, Conway," said the doctor, "cheer up, my good fellow; you 'll be
all right in a week or so. You 've got something worth living for, too,
if all accounts be true."
"More than you think for, doctor," said Conway, heartily,--"far more
than you think for."
"The lawyer talks of a peerage and a fine estate."
"Far more than that," cried Conway; "a million times better."
The surgeon turned a look of half apprehension on the sick man, and,
gently closing the shutters, he withdrew.
Dark as was that room, and silent as it was, what blissful hopes and
blessed anticipations crowded and clustered around that low "sick-bed"!
What years of happiness unfolded themselves before that poor brain,
which no longer felt a pang, save in the confusion of its bright
imaginings! How were wounds forgotten and sufferings unminded in those
hours wherein a whole future was revealed!
At last he fell off to sleep, and to dream of a fair white hand that
parted the hair upon his forehead, and then gently touched his feverish
cheek. Nor was it all a dream; she was at his bedside.
CHAPTER XXXIII. "GROG" IN COUNCIL
"What dreary little streets are those that lead from the Strand towards
the Thames! Pinched, frail, semi-genteel, and many-lodgered are the
houses, mysteriously indicative of a variously occupied population, and
painfully suggesting, by the surging conflict of busy life at one end,
and the dark flowing river at the other, an existence maintained between
struggle and suicide." This, most valued reader, if no reflection of
mine, but was the thought that occupied the mind of one who, in not
the very best of humors, and of a wet and dreary night, knocked,
in succession, at half the doors in the street in search after an
acquaintance.
"Yes, sir, the second back," said a sleepy maid-servant at last; "he is
just come in."
"All right," said the stranger. "Take that carpet-bag and writing-desk
upstairs to his room, and say that Captain Davis is coming after them.'"
"You owe me a tip, Captain," said the cabman, catching the name as he
was about to mount his box. "Do you remember the morning I drove you
down to Blackwall to catch the Antwerp boat, I went over Mr. Moss, the
sheriff's officer, and smashed his ankle, and may I never taste bitters
again if I got a farthing for it."
"I remember," said Davis, curtly. "Here's a crown. I 'd have made it a
sovereign if it had been his neck you 'd gone over."
"Better luck next time, sir, and thank you," said the man, as he drove
away.
The maid was yet knocking for admission when Grog arrived at the door.
"Captain Fisk, sir,--Captain Fisk, there 's a gent as says--"
"That will do," said Davis, taking the key from her hand and opening the
door for himself.
"Old Grog himself, as I'm a living man!" cried a tall, much whiskered
and moustached fellow, who was reading a "Bell's Life" at the fire.
"Ay, Master Fisk,--no other," said Davis, as he shook his friend
cordially by the hand. "I 've had precious work to find you out I was
up at Duke Street, then they sent me to the Adelphi; after that I tried
Ling's, in the Hay-market, and it was a waiter there--"
"Joe," broke in the other.
"Exactly. Joe told me that I might chance upon you here."
"Well, I 'm glad to see you, old fellow, and have a chat about long
ago," said Fisk, as he placed a square green bottle and some glasses on
the table. How well you 're looking, too; not an hour older than when I
saw you four years ago!"
"Ain't I, though!" muttered Grog. "Ay, and like the racers, I 've got
weight for age, besides. I'm a stone and a half heavier than I ought to
be, and there's nothing worse than that to a fellow that wants to work
with his head and sleep with one eye open."
"You can't complain much on that score, Kit; you never made so grand a
stroke in your life as that last one,--the marriage, I mean."
"It was n't bad," said Davis, as he mixed his liquor; "nor was it,
exactly, the kind of hazard that every man could make. Beecher was a
troublesome one,--a rare troublesome one; nobody could ever say when he
'd run straight."
"I always thought him rotten," said the other, angrily.
"Well, he is and he isn't," said Grog, deliberately.
"He has got no pluck," said Fisk, indignantly.
"He has quite enough."
"Enough--enough for what?"
"Enough for a lord. Look here, Master Fisk, so long as you have not to
gain your living by anything, it is quite sufficient if you can do it
moderately well. Many a first-rate amateur there is, who wouldn't be
thought a tenth-rate artist."
"I 'd like to know where you had been to-day if it was n't for your
pluck," said Fisk, doggedly.
"In a merchant's office in the City, belike, on a hundred and twenty
pounds a year; a land steward down in Dorsetshire, at half the salary;
skipper of a collier from North Shields, or an overseer in Jamaica.
These are the high prizes for such as you and me; and the droll part of
the matter is, they will talk of us as 'such lucky dogs,' whenever
we attain to one of these brilliant successes. Gazette my son-in-law
as Ambassador to Moscow, and nobody thinks it strange; announce, in the
same paper, that Kit Davis has been made a gauger, and five hundred open
mouths exclaim, 'How did he obtain that? Who the deuce got it for him?
Does n't he fall on his legs!' and so on."
"I suppose we shall have our turn one of these days," muttered the
other, sulkily.
"I hope not.   I 'd rather have things as they are," said Grog, gravely.
"Things as they are! And why so, I 'd wish to ask?"
"Look at it this way, Tom Fisk," said Grog, squaring his arms on the
table and talking with slow deliberation; "if you were going to cut into
a round game, wouldn't you rather take a hand where the players were all
soft ones, with plenty of cash, or would you prefer sitting down with a
set of downy coves, all up to every dodge, and not a copper farthing
in the company? Well, that's exactly what the world would be if the
Manchester fellows had their way; that's exactly what it is, this very
hour we 're sitting here, in America. There's nobody on the square
there. President, judges, editors, Congressmen, governors, are all
rogues; and they've come to that pass, that any fellow with a dash of
spirit about him must come over to Europe to gain his livelihood. I have
it from their own lips what I 'm telling you, for I was a-thinking about
going over there myself; but they said, 'Don't go, sir,'--they always
say 'sir,'--'don't go, sir. Our Western fellows are very wide awake; for
every trump you 'd have up your sleeve, they 'd have two in their
boots!'"
"For my own part," said Fisk, "I 'd not go live amongst them if you 'd
make me Minister at Washington, and so I told Simmy Hankes this morning,
when he came in such high feather about his appointment as consul--I
forget where to."
"Hankes--Hankes! The same fellow that used to be with Robins?"
"Just so; and for some years back Davenport Dunn managing man."
Grog gave a very slight start, and then asked, carelessly, why he was
leaving Dunn's employment.
"Dunn's going to shut up shop. Dunn is to be a peer, next week, and
retires from business. He is to be in Tuesday's 'Gazette,' so Hankes
tells me."
"He has done the thing well, I suppose?" said Davis, coolly.
"Hankes says something like two millions sterling. Pretty well for a
fellow that started without a sixpence."
"I wonder he could n't have done something better for Hankes than that
paltry place."
"So he might, and so he would; but you see, Simmy did n't like waiting.
He's a close fellow, and one can't get much out of him; but I can
perceive that he was anxious to get off the coach."
"Did n't like the pace,--didn't trust the tackle overmuch," said Grog,
carelessly.
"Something of that kind, I 've no doubt," rejoined Fisk.
"Have you any pull over this same Hankes, Tom?" said Grog,
confidentially.
"Well, I can't say I have. We were pals together long ago; we did a
little in the racing line,--in a very small way, of course. Then he used
to have a roulette-table at Doncaster; but somehow there was no 'go'
in him: he was over-cautious, and always saying, 'I 'd rather take to
"business;"' and as I hated business, we separated."
"It's odd enough that I can't remember the fellow. I thought I knew
every one that was on the 'lay' these five-and-thirty years."
"He wasn't Hankes at the time I speak of; he was a Jew at that period,
and went by the name of Simeon."
"Simeon, Simeon,--not the fellow that used to come down to Windsor, with
the Hexquite Habannar cigars?"
And Grog mimicked not alone the voice, but the face of the individual
alluded to, till Fisk burst into a roar of laughter.
"That's Simmy,--that's the man," cried Fisk, as he dried his eyes.
"Don't I know him! I had a class at that time,--young fellows in the
Blues. I used to give them lessons in billiards; and Simmy, as you call
him, discounted for the mess on a sliding scale,--ten per cent for the
Major, and sixty for cornets the first year they joined. He was good
fun, Simmy; he fancied he would have been a first-rate actor, and used
to give scenes out of 'Othello,' in Kean's manner: that was the only
soft thing about him, and many a fellow got a bill done by applauding
'Now is the winter of our discontent'!" And Grog gave a low growling
sort of a laugh at his reminiscences.
"You 'll see him to-morrow; he's to breakfast here," said Fisk, rather
amused at the prospect of a recognition between such men.
"He would never play 'Shylock,'" continued Grog, following out his
reminiscences, "though we all told him he 'd make a great hit in the
part. The Jew, you see,--the Jew couldn't stand that. And so Mr. Simmy
Hankes is no other than Simeon! It was an old theory of mine, whenever I
saw a fellow doing wonderfully well in the world, without any help from
friends or family, to fancy that one time or other he must have belonged
to what they are so fond of calling 'the Hebrew persuasion'!"
"I wouldn't rake up old memories with him, Grog, if I were you," said
Fisk, coaxingly.
"It ain't my way, Tom Fisk," said Davis, curtly.
"He 'll be at his ease at once when he perceives that you don't intend
to rip up old scores; and he 'll be just as delicate with you."
"Delicate with me?" cried Grog, bursting out into a fit of immoderate
laughter. "Well, if that ain't a good one! I wonder what he is! Do you
imagine Fitzroy Kelly is ashamed of being thought a lawyer, or Brodie
of being a surgeon? You must be precious soft, my worthy friend, if you
suppose that I don't know what the world thinks and says of me. No,
no, there's no need of what you call delicacy at all. You used to be
made of other stuff than this, Tom Fisk. It's keeping company with
them snobs of half-pay officers, clerks in the Treasury, and Press
reporters-has spoiled you; the demi-gents of the 'Garottaman Club' have
ruined hundreds."
"The Garottaman is one of the first clubs in town," broke in Fisk.
"You 're too much like sailors on a raft for my fancy," said Grog,
dryly.
"What do you mean by that?"
"Just that you are hungry and have got nothing to eat,--you 're
eternally casting lots who is to be devoured next! But we 'll not fall
out about that. I 've been turning over in my head about this Simmy
Hankes, and I 'd like to have an hour in his company, all alone. Could
you manage to be out of the way to-morrow morning and leave me to
entertain him at breakfast?"
"It will suit my book to a trivet, for I want to go over to Barnes to
look after a yearling I 've got there, and you can tell Hankes that the
colt was taken suddenly ill."
"He 'll not be very curious about the cause of your absence," said Grog,
dryly. "The pleasure of seeing me so unexpectedly will put everything
else out of his head." A grim smile showed the spirit in which he spoke
these words.
It was now very late, and Davis threw himself on a sofa, with his
great-coat over him, and, wishing his friend a goodnight, was soon sound
asleep; nor did he awake till aroused by the maid-servant getting the
room into readiness and arranging the table for breakfast. Then, indeed,
Grog arose and made his toilet for the day,--not a very elaborate nor
a very elegant one, but still a disguise such as the most practised
detective could not have penetrated, and yet removable in a moment,
so that he might, by merely taking off eyebrows and moustaches, become
himself at once.
Having given orders that the gentleman he expected should be shown in on
his arrival, Grog solaced himself at the fire with a morning paper, in
all the ease of slippers and an arm-chair. Almost the first thing that
struck his eye was a paragraph informing the world that the marriage of
a distinguished individual--whose approaching elevation to the peerage
had been already announced--with one of the most beautiful daughters of
the aristocracy would take place early in the ensuing week. And then,
like a codicil to a will, followed a brilliant description of the gold
dressing-case ordered by Mr. Davenport Dunn, at Storr's, for his bride.
He was yet occupied with the paragraph when Mr. Hankes entered the room.
"I am afraid I have made a mistake," said that bland gentleman. "I
thought this was Captain Fisk's apartment."
"You're all right," said Grog, leisurely surveying the visitor, whose
"get up" was really splendid. Amethyst studs glittered on his shirt;
his ample chest seemed a shrine in its display of amulets and charmed
offerings, while a massive chain crossed and recrossed him so frequently
that he appeared to be held together by its coils. Fur and velvet, too,
abounded in his costume; and even to the immense "gland" that depended
from his cane, there was an amount of costliness that bespoke affluence.
"I regret, sir," began Hankes, pompously, "that I have not the honor--"
"Yes, yes; you have the honor," broke in Grog. "You've had it this
many a year. Sit down here. I don't wear exactly so well as you, but you
'll remember me presently. I 'm Kit Davis, man. You don't require me to
say who you are."
"Davis,--Grog Davis," muttered Hankes to himself, while an ashy paleness
spread over his face.
"You don't look overjoyed to meet with an old friend," said Grog, with
a peculiar grin; "but you ought, man. There's no friendships like early
ones. The fellows who knew us in our first scrapes are always more
lenient to our last wickednesses."
"Captain Davis,--Captain Davis!" stammered out Hankes, "this is indeed
an unexpected pleasure!"
"So much so that you can hardly get accustomed to it," said Grog, with
another grin. "Fisk received a hasty message that called him away to the
country this morning, and left me to fill his place; and I, as you may
guess, was little loath to have a cosey chat with an old friend that I
have not seen--how many years is it?"
"It must be nigh ten, or even twelve!"
"Say, seven or eight and twenty, man, and you 'll be nigher the mark.
Let me see," said he, trying to remember, "the last time I saw you was
at Exeter. You were waiting for your trial about those bills of George
Colborne. Don't look so frightened; there's no one to hear us here.
It was as narrow an escape there as ever man had. It was after that, I
suppose, you took the name of Hankes?"
"Yes," said the other, in a faint whisper.
"Well, I must say Christianity does n't seem to have disagreed with you.
You 're in capital case,--a little pluffy for work, but in rare health,
and sleek as a beaver."
"Always the same. He will have his joke," muttered Hankes, as though
addressing some third party to the colloquy.
"I can't say that I have committed any excesses in that line of late,"
said Grog, dryly. "I 've had rather a tough fight with the world!"
"But you've fought it well, and successfully," Davis said the other, with
confidence. "Have n't you married your daughter to a Viscount?"
"Who told you that? Who knows it here?" cried Grog, hurriedly.
"I heard it from Fordyce's people a fortnight ago. It was I myself
brought the first news of it to Davenport Dunn."
"And what did he say?"
"Well, he didn't say much; he wondered a little how it came about;
hinted that you must be an uncommon clever fellow, for it was a great
stroke, if all should come right."
"You mean about the disputed claim to the title?"
"Yes."
"He has his doubts about that, then, has he?"
"He has n't much doubt on the subject, for it lies with himself to
decide the matter either way. If he likes to produce certain papers,
Conway's claim is as good as established. You are aware that they have
already gained two of their actions on ejectment; but Dunn could save
them a world of time and labor, and that's why he's coming up to-morrow.
Fordyce is to meet him at Calvert's Hotel, and they 're to go into the
entire question."
"What are his terms? How much does he ask?" said Grog, bluntly.
"I can't possibly say; I can only suspect."
"What do you suspect, then?"
"Well," said Hankes, drawing a long breath, "my impression is that if he
decide for the present Viscount, he 'll insist upon an assignment of the
whole Irish property in his favor."
"Two thousand a year, landed property!" exclaimed Grog.
"Two thousand eight hundred, and well paid," said Hankes, coolly; "but
that is not all."
"Not all! what do you mean?"
"Why, there's another hitch. But what am I saying?" cried he, in terror.
"I don't believe that I'd speak of these things on my death-bed."
"Be frank and open with me, Simeon. I am a true pal to the man that
trusts me, and the very devil to him that plays me false."
"I know it," said the other, gloomily.
"Well, now for that other hitch, as you called it What is it?"
"It's about an estate that was sold under the 'Encumbered Court,' and
bought by the late Lord Lackington--at least in his name--and then
resold at a profit--" Here he stopped, and seemed as though he had
already gone too far.
"I understand," broke in Grog; "the purchase-money was never placed to
the Viscount's credit, and your friend Dunn wants an acquittance in full
of the claim."
"You've hit it!"
"What's the figure,--how much?"
"Thirty-seven thousand six hundred pounds."
"He 's no retail-dealer, this same Davenport Dunn," said Grog, with a
grin; "that much I will say of him."
"He has a wonderful head," said Hankes, admiringly.
"I 'll agree with you, if it save his neck!" said Davis-, and then
added, after a moment, "He's bringing up all these documents and papers
with him, you said?"
"Yes; he intends to make some settlement or other of the matter before
he marries. After that he bids farewell to business forever."
"He'll go abroad, I suppose?" said Davis, not attaching any strong
signification to his remark; but suddenly perceiving an expression of
anxiety in Hankes's face, he said, "Mayhap it were all as well; he'd be
out of the way for a year or so!"
The other nodded an assent.
"He has 'realized' largely, I take it?"
Another nod.
"Foreign funds and railways, eh?"
"Not railways,--no, scrip!" said Hankes, curtly.
"Won't there be a Jolly smash!" said Davis, with a bitter laugh. "I take
it there's not been any one has 'done the trick' these fifty years like
this fellow."
"I suspect you 're right there," murmured Hankes.
"I have never seen him but once, and then only for a few minutes, but
I read him like a printed book. He had put on the grand integrity and
British-mercantile-honesty frown to scowl me down, to remind Davis, 'the
leg,' that he was in the presence of Dunn, the Unimpeachable, but I put
one eye a little aslant, this way, and I just said, 'Round the corner,
old fellow,--round the corner!' Oh, didn't he look what the Yankees call
'mean ugly'!"
"He 'll never forget it to you, that's certain."
"If he did, I 'd try and brush up his memory a bit," said Davis, curtly.
"He must be a rare sharp one," added he, after a pause.
"The cleverest man in England, I don't care who the other is," cried
Hankes, with enthusiasm. "When the crash comes,--it will be in less than
a month from this day,--the world will discover that they're done to the
tune of between three and four millions sterling, and I defy the
best accountant that ever stepped to trace out where the frauds
originated,--whether it was the Railways smashed the Mines, the Mines
that ruined the Great Ossory, the Great Ossory that dipped the Drainage,
or the Drainage that swamped the Glengariff, not to speak of all the
incidental confusion about estates never paid for, and sums advanced
on mock mortgage, together, with cancelled scrip reissued, preference
shares circulated before the current ones, and dock warrants for goods
that never existed. And that ain't all" continued Hankes, to whom
the attentive eagerness of Grog's manner vouched for the interest
his narrative excited,--"that ain't all; but there isn't a class nor
condition in life, from the peer to the poorest laboring-man, that he
has n't in some way involved in his rogueries, and made him almost
a partner in the success. Each speculation being dependent for its
solvency on the ruin of some other, Ossory will hate Glengariff,
Drainage detest Mines, Railways curse Patent Fuel, and so on. I 'll give
the Equity Court and the Bankrupt Commissioners fifty years and they'll
not wind up the concern."
Grog rubbed his hands gleefully, and laughed aloud.
"Then all the people that will be compromised!" said Hankes; "Glumthal
himself is not too clean-handed; lords and fine ladies that lent their
names to this or that company, chairmen of committees in the House that
did n't disdain to accept five hundred or a thousand shares as a mark of
grateful recognition for pushing a bill through its second reading;
ay, and great mercantile houses that discounted freely on forged
acceptances, owning that they thought the best of all security was the
sight of a convict-hulk and a felon's jacket, and that no man was
such prompt pay as he that took a loan of a friend's signature. What a
knockdown blow for all that lath-and-plaster edifice we dignify by the
name of Credit, when the world sees that it is a loaf the rogue can take
a slice out of as well as the honest man!"
"Won't we have stunning leaders in the 'Times' about it!" cried Grog.
"It will go deuced hard with the Ministry that have made this fellow a
peer."
"Yes, they'll have to go out," said Hanked, gravely; "a cabinet may
defend a bad measure,--they 'll never fight for a bad man."
"And they can't hang this fellow?" said Grog, after a pause.
"Hang! I should think not, indeed."
"Nor even transport him?"
"No, not touch a hair of his head. He'll have to live abroad for a year
or two,--in Paris or Rome,--no great hardship if it were Naples; he
'll make a surrender of his property,--an old house somewhere and some
brick-fields, a mine of Daryamon coal, and a flax-mill on a river that
has scarcely any water, together with a sheaf of bad bills and Guatemala
bonds. They 'll want to examine him before the Court, and he'll send
them a sick-certificate, showing how agitation and his recent losses
have almost made him imbecile; and even Mr. Linklater will talk
feelingly about his great reverse of condition."
"It's as good as a play to hear about this," said Grog; "it beats
Newmarket all to sticks."
"If it's a play, it won't be a benefit to a good many folk," said
Hankes, grinning.
"Well, he is a clever fellow,--far and away cleverer than I ever
thought him," said Grog. "Any man--I don't care who he is--can do the
world to a short extent, but to go in at them on this scale a fellow
must be a genius."
"He is a genius," said Hankes, in a tone of decision. "Just think for
a moment what a head it must have been that kept all that machinery at
work for years back without a flaw or a crack to be detected, started
companies, opened banks, worked mines, railroads, and telegraphs, built
refuge harbors, drained whole counties, brought vast tracts of waste
land into cultivation, equalizing the chances of all enterprises by
making the success of this come to the aid of the failure of that: the
grand secret of the whole being the dexterous application of what is
called 'Credit.'"
"All that wouldn't do at Doncaster," said Grog; "puff your horse as much
as you like, back him up how you will in the betting-ring, if he has n't
the speed in him it won't do. It's only on 'Change you can 'brag out of
a bad hand.' Dunn would never cut any figure on the turf."
"There you are all wrong; there never yet was the place, or the station,
where that man would n't have distinguished himself. Why, it was that
marvellous power of his kept me with him for years back. I knew all that
was going on. I knew that we hadn't--so to say--coals for one boiler
while we had forty engines in full stroke; but I could n't get away. It
was a sort of fascination; and when he 'd strike out a new scheme, and
say carelessly, 'Call the capital one million, Hankes,' he spoke like
a man that had only to put his hand in a bag and produce the money.
Nothing daunted, nothing deterred him. He'd smash a rival company as
coolly as you 'd crush a shell under your heel, and he 'd turn out a
Government with the same indifference he 'd discharge a footman."
"Well," grumbled out Grog, at last, for he was getting irritable at the
exaggerated estimate Hankes formed of his chief, "what has it all come
to? Ain't he smashed at last?"
"He smashed!" cried Hankes, in derision. "He smashed! You are
smashed! I am smashed! any one else you like is smashed, but he is
not! Mind my words, Davis, Davenport Dunn will be back here, in London,
before two years are over, with the grandest house and the finest
retinue in town. His dinners will be the best, and his balls the most
splendid of the season. No club will rival his cook, no equipage beat
his in the Park. When he rises in the Lords,--which he 'll do only
seldom,--there will be a most courteous attention to his words; and,
above all, you'll never read one disparaging word about him in the
papers. I give him two years, but it's just as likely he 'll do it in
less."
"It may be all as you say," said Grog, sullenly, "though I won't say I
believe it myself; but, at all events, it does n't help me on my way
to my own business with him. I want these papers of Lackington's out of
his hands! He may 'walk into' the whole world, for all that I care:
but I want to secure my daughter as the Viscountess,--that's how it
stands."
"How much ready money can you command? What sum can you lay your hand
on?"
Grog drew his much-worn pocket-book from his breast, and, opening the
leaves, began to count to himself.
"Something like fifty-seven pounds odd shillings," said he, with a grin.
"If you could have said twelve or fourteen thousand down, it might be
nearer the mark. Conway's people are ready with about ten thousand."
"How do you know?" asked Grog, savagely.
"Dunn told me as much. But he does n't like to treat with them, because
the difficulty about the Irish estate would still remain unsettled."
"Then what am I to do? How shall I act?" asked Grog.
"It's not an easy matter to advise upon," said Hankes, thoughtfully,
"for Dunn holds to one maxim with invariable tenacity, which is never
to open any negotiation with a stranger which cannot be completed in
one interview. If you couldn't begin by showing the bank-notes, he'd not
discuss the question at all."
Grog arose and walked the room with hasty steps: he tried to seem calm,
but in the impatient gesture with which he threw his cigar into the fire
might be read the agitation he could not conquer nor conceal.
"What could you yourself do with him, Hankes?" said he, at last.
"Nothing,--absolutely nothing," said the other. "He never in his life
permitted a subordinate to treat, except on his own behalf; that was a
fixed law with him."
"Curse the fellow!" burst out Davis, "he made rules and laws as if the
world was all his own."
"Well, he managed to have it pretty much his own way, it must be
confessed," said Hankes, with a half-smile.
"He is to be in town to-morrow, you said," muttered Grog, half aloud.
"Where does he stop?"
"This time it will be at Calvert's, Upper Brook Street. His house in
Piccadilly is ready, but he 'll not go there at present."
"He makes a mystery of everything, so far as I can see," said Grog,
angrily. "He comes up by the express-train, does n't he?" grumbled he,
after a pause.
"If he has n't a special engine," said Hankes. "He always, however, has
his own coup furnished and fitted up for himself and never, by any
chance, given to any one else. There 's a capital bed in it, and a
desk, where he writes generally the whole night through, and a small
cooking-apparatus, where he makes his coffee, so that no servant ever
interrupts him at his work. Indeed, except from some interruption, or
accident on the line, the guard would not dare to open his door. Of
course his orders are very strictly obeyed. I remember one night Lord
Jedburg sent in his name, and Dunn returned for answer, 'I can't see
him.'"
"And did the Prime Minister put up with that?" asked Davis.
"What could he do?" said the other, with a shrug of the shoulder.
"If I were Lord Jedburg, I'd have unkennelled him, I promise you that,
Simmy. But here, it's nigh twelve o'clock, and I have a mass of things
to do. I say, Hankes, could you contrive to look in here to-morrow
evening, after nightfall? I may have something to tell you."
"We were strictly confidential,--all on honor, this morning, Kit," said
the other, whispering.
"I think you know me, Mister Simmy," was all Grog's reply. "I don't
think my worst enemy could say that I ever 'split' on the fellow that
trusted me."
A hearty shake-hands followed, and they parted.
CHAPTER XXXIV. THE TRAIN
The up-train from Holyhead was a few minutes behind time at Chester,
and the travellers who awaited its arrival manifested that mixture of
impatience and anxiety which in our railroad age is inseparable from all
delay. One stranger, however, displayed a more than ordinary eagerness
for its coming, and compared the time of his watch repeatedly with the
clock of the station.
At length from the far-away distance the wild scream of the engine was
heard, and with many a cranking clash and many a heavy sob the vast
machine swept smoothly in beneath the vaulted roof. As the stranger
moved forward to take his place, he stopped to hear a few words that met
his ear. It was a railroad official said: "Mr. Davenport Dunn delayed
us about a quarter of an hour; he wanted to give a look at the new
pier, but we have nearly made it up already." "All right!" replied the
station-master. The stranger now moved on till he came in front of a
coup carriage, whose window-blinds rigidly drawn down excluded all
view from without. For an instant he seemed to fumble at the door, in
an endeavor to open it, but was speedily interrupted by a guard calling
out, "Not there, sir,--that's a private carriage;" and thus warned,
the traveller entered another lower down the line. There were two other
travellers in the same compartment, apparently strangers to each other.
As the stranger with whom we are immediately concerned took his place,
he slipped into his pocket a small latch-key, of which, in the
very brief attempt to try the door of the private carriage, he had
successfully proved the utility, and, drawing his rug across his knees,
lay calmly back.
"Here we are, detained again," grumbled out one of the travellers. "I
say, guard, what is it now?"
"Waiting for a telegram for Mr. Davenport Dunn, sir. There it comes! all
right" A low bell rings out, a wild screech following, and with many a
clank and shock the dusky monster sets out once more.
"Public convenience should scarcely be sacrificed in this manner,"
grumbled out the former speaker. "What is this Mr. Dunn to you or to me
that we should be delayed for his good pleasure?"
"I am afraid, sir," replied the other, whose dress and manner bespoke a
clergyman, "that we live in an age when wealth is all-powerful, and its
possessors dictate the law to all poorer than themselves."
"And can you tell me of any age when it was otherwise?" broke in the
last arrival, with a half-rude chuckle. "It's all very fine to lay the
whole blame of this, that, and t' other to the peculiar degeneracy
of our own time; but my notion is, the world grows neither worse nor
better." There was that amount of defiance in the tone of the speaker
that seemed to warn his companions, for they each of them maintained
a strict silence. Not so with him; he talked away glibly about the
influence of money, pretty plainly intimating that, as nobody ever met
the man who was indifferent to its possession, the abuse showered upon
riches was nothing but cant and humbug. "Look at the parsons," said he;
"they tell you it is all dross and rubbish, and yet they make it the
test of your sincerity whenever they preach a charity sermon. Look at
the lawyers, and they own that it is the only measure they know by which
to recompense an injury; then take the doctors, and you 'll see that
their humanity has its price, and the good Samaritan charges a guinea a
visit."
The individuals to whom these words were addressed made no reply;
indeed, there was a tone of confident assumption in the speaker that was
far from inviting converse, and now a silence ensued on all sides.
"Do either of you gentlemen object to tobacco?" said the last speaker,
after a pause of some duration; and at the same time, without waiting
for the reply, he produced a cigar-case from his pocket, and began
deliberately to strike a light.
"I am sorry to say, sir," responded the clergyman, "that smoking
disagrees with me, and I cannot accustom myself to endure the smell of
tobacco."
"All habit," rejoined the other, as he lighted his cigar. "I was that
way myself for years, and might have remained so, too, but that I saw
the distress and inconvenience I occasioned to many jolly fellows who
loved their pipe; and so I overcame my foolish prejudices, and even took
to the weed myself."
The other travellers muttered some low words of dissatisfaction; and the
clergyman, opening the window, looked out, apparently in search of the
guard.
"It's only a cheroot, and a prime one," said the smoker, coolly; "and as
you object, I 'll not light another."
"A vast condescension on your part, sir, seeing that we have already
signified our dislike to tobacco," said the lay traveller.
"I did not remark that you gave any opinion at all," said the smoker;
"and my vast condescension, as you term it, is entirely in favor of this
gentleman."
There was no mistaking the provocation of this speech, rendered actually
insulting by the mode in which it was delivered; and the traveller to
whom it was addressed, enveloping himself in his cloak, sat moodily
back, without a word. The train soon halted for a few seconds; and,
brief as was the interval, this traveller employed it to spring from his
place and seek a refuge elsewhere,--a dexterous manouvre which seemed
to excite the envy of the parson, now left alone with his uncongenial
companion. The man of peace, however, made the best of it, and, drawing
his travelling-cap over his eyes, resolved himself to sleep. For a
considerable while the other sat still, calmly watching him; and at
last, when perfectly assured that the slumber was not counterfeited, he
gently arose, and drew the curtain across the lamp in the roof of the
carriage. A dim, half-lurid light succeeded, and by this uncertain glare
the stranger proceeded to make various changes in his appearance. A
large bushy wig of black hair was first discarded, with heavy eyebrows,
and whiskers to match; an immense overcoat was taken off, so heavily
padded and stuffed that when denuded of it the wearer seemed half his
size; large heels were unscrewed from his boots, reducing his height
by full a couple of inches; till, at length, in place of a large,
unwieldy-looking man of sixty, lumbering and beetle-browed, there came
forth a short, thick-set figure, with red hair and beard, twinkling eyes
of a fierce gray, and a mouth the very type of unflinching resolution.
Producing a small looking-glass, he combed and arranged his whiskers
carefully, re-tied his cravat, and bestowed a most minute scrutiny on
his appearance, muttering, as he finished, to himself, "Ay, Kit, you 're
more like yourself now!" It is, perhaps, unnecessary to say this speech
was addressed to our acquaintance Grog Davis, nor was it altogether what
is called a "French compliment;" he did look terribly like himself.
There was in his hard, stern face, his pinched-up eyes, and his puckered
mouth, an amount of resolute vigor that showed he was on the eve of some
hazardous enterprise. His toilet completed, he felt in his breastpocket,
to assure himself that something there was not missing; and then, taking
out his watch, he consulted the time. He had scarcely time to replace
it in his pocket, when the train entered a deep cutting between two high
banks of clay. It was, apparently, the spot he had waited for; and in
an instant he had unfastened the door by his latch-key, and stood on the
ledge outside. One more look within to assure himself that the other was
still asleep, and he closed the door, and locked it.
The night was dark as pitch, and a thin soft rain was falling, as Davis,
with a rapidity that showed this was no first essay in such a walk,
glided along from carriage to carriage, till he reached a heavy luggage
van, immediately beyond which was the coup of Mr. Davenport Dunn.
The brief prayer that good men utter ere they rush upon an enterprise
of deadly peril must have its representative in some shape or other with
those whose hearts are callous. Nature will have her due; and in that
short interval--the bridge between two worlds--the worst must surely
experience intense emotion. Whatever those of Davis, they were of the
briefest. In another second he was at the door of Dunn's carriage, his
eyes glaring beneath the drawn-down blind, where, by a narrow slip of
light, he could detect a figure busily employed in writing. So bent was
he on mastering every portion and detail of the arrangement within, that
he actually crept around till he reached the front windows, and could
plainly see the whole coup lighted up brilliantly with wax candles.
Surrounded with papers and letters and despatch-boxes, the man of
business labored away as though in his office, every appliance for
refreshment beside him. These Davis noted well, remarking the pistols
that hung between the windows, and a bell-pull quite close to the
writing-table. This latter passed through the roof of the carriage,
and was evidently intended to signalize the guard when wanted. Before
another minute had elapsed Davis had cut off this communication, and,
knotting the string outside, still suffered it to hang down within as
before.
All that precaution could demand was now done; the remainder must be
decided by action. Noiselessly introducing the latch-key, Davis turned
the lock, and, opening the door, stepped inside. Dunn started as the
door banged, and there beheld him. To ring and summon the guard was the
quick impulse of his ready wit; but when the bell-rope came down as
he pulled it, the whole truth flashed across him that all had been
concerted and plotted carefully.
"Never mind your pistols. I'm armed too," said Davis, coolly. "If it was
your life I wanted, I could have taken it easily enough at any minute
during the last ten or twelve."
"What do you mean, then, sir, by this violence? By what right do you
dare to enter here?" cried Dunn, passionately.
"There has been no great violence up to this," said Davis, with a grin.
"As to my right to be here, we'll talk about that presently. You know
me, I believe?"
"I want to know why you are here," cried Dunn, again.
"And so you shall; but, first of all, no treachery. Deal fairly, and a
very few minutes will settle all business between us."
"There is no business to be settled between us," said Dunn, haughtily,
"except the insolence of your intrusion here, and for that you shall pay
dearly."
"Don't try bluster with me, man," said Grog, contemptuously. "If you
just stood as high in integrity as I know you to stand low in knavery,
it would n't serve you. I've braved pluckier fellows than ever you
were."
With a sudden jerk Dunn let down the window; but Grog's iron grip held
him down in his place, as he said sternly, "I 'll not stand nonsense.
I have come here for a purpose, and I 'll not leave it till it's
accomplished. You know me."
"I do know you," said Dunn, with an insolent irony.
"And I know you. Hankes--Simmy Hankes--has told me a thing or two; but
the world will soon be as wise as either of us."
Dunn's face became deadly pale, and, in a voice broken And faint, he
said, "What do you mean? What has Hankes said?"
"All,--everything. Why, bless your heart, man, it was no secret to me
that you were cheating, the only mystery was how you did the trick;
now Hankes has shown me that. I know it all now. You had n't so many
trumps in your hand, but you played them twice over,--that was the
way you won the game. But that's no affair of mine. 'Rook' them all
round,--only don't 'try it on' with Kit Davis! What brought me here is
this: my daughter is married to Annesley Beecher that was, the now
Viscount Lackington; there's another fellow about to contest the title
and the estates. You know all about his claim and his chances, and you
can, they tell me, make it all 'snag' to either party. Now, I 'm here to
treat with you. How much shall it be? There's no use in going about the
bush,--how much shall it be?"
"I can be of no use to you in this business," said Dunn, hesitatingly;
"the papers are not in my keeping. Conway's suit is in the hands of the
first men at the bar--"
"I know all that, and I know, besides, you have an appointment with
Fordyce at Calvert's Hotel, to arrange the whole matter; so go in at
once, and be on the square with me. Who has these papers? Where are
they?"
Dunn started at the sudden tone of the question, and then his eyes
turned as quickly towards a brass-bound despatch-box at the bottom of
the carriage. If the glance was of the speediest, it yet had not escaped
the intense watchfulness of Davis, who now reiterated his question of
"Where are they?"
"If you 'd come to me after my interview with Fordyce," said Dunn, with
a slow deliberation, as though giving the matter a full reflection, "I
think we might hit upon something together."
"To be sure, we might," said Grog, laughing; "there 's only one obstacle
to that pleasant arrangement,--that I should find an inspector and two
constables of the police ready waiting for my visit. No, Master Dunn,
what we 're to do we 'll do here and now."
"You appear to measure all men by your own standard, sir," said Dunn,
indignantly; "and let me tell you that in point of honor it is a scant
one."
"We're neither of us fit for a grenadier-company of integrity, that's a
fact, Dunn; but, upon my solemn oath, I believe I 'm the best man of the
two. But what's the use of this 'chaff'? I have heard from Hankes how it
stands about that Irish estate you pretended to buy for the late
Lord, and never paid for. Now you want to stand all square upon that,
naturally enough; it is a pot of money,--seven-and-thirty thousand
pounds. Don't you see, old fellow, I have the whole story all correct
and clear; so once more, do be business-like, and say what's your
figure,--how much?"
Again did Dunn's eyes revert to the box at his feet, but it was
difficult to say whether intentionally or not Davis, however, never
ceased to watch their gaze; and when Dunn, becoming suddenly conscious
of the scrutiny, grew slightly red, Grog chuckled to himself and
muttered, "You're no match for Kit Davis, deep as you are."
"Until we learn to repose some trust in each other, sir," said Dunn,
whose confusion still continued, "all dealing together is useless."
"Well, if you mean by that," retorted Davis, "that you and I are going
to start for a ten years' friendship, I declare off, and say it's no
match. I told you what brought me here, and now I want you to say how
I 'm to go back again. Where are these same papers?--answer me that."
"Some are in the hands of Conway's lawyers; some are in the Crimea,
carded away surreptitiously by a person who was once in my confidence;
some are, I suspect, in the keeping of Conway's mother, in Wales--"
"And some are locked up in that red box there," said Grog, with a
defiant look.
"Not one. I can swear by all that is most solemn and awful there's not a
document there that concerns the cause." As Dunn spoke these words, his
voice trembled with intense agitation, and he grew sickly pale.
"What if I wouldn't believe you on your oath?" broke in Grog, whose keen
eyes seemed actually to pierce the other's secret thoughts. "It was n't
to-day, or yesterday, that you and I learned how to dodge an oath.
Open that box there; I 'll have a look through it for myself."
"That you never shall," said Dunn, fiercely, as he grasped the bundle of
keys that lay before him and placed them in his breast-pocket.
"Come, I like your pluck, Dunn, though it won't serve your turn this
time. I 'll either see that box opened before me now, or I'll carry it
off with me,--which shall it be?"
"Neither, by Heaven!" cried Dunn, whose passion was now roused
effectually.
"We 'll, first of all, get these out of the way; they're ugly
playthings," said Davis, as with a spring he seized the pistols
and hurled them through the open window; in doing so, however, he
necessarily leaned forward, and partly turned his back towards Dunn.
With a gesture quick as lightning, Dunn drew a loaded pistol from his
breast, and, placing the muzzle almost close to the other's head, drew
the trigger. A quick motion of the neck made the ball glance from the
bone of the skull, and passing down amongst the muscles of the neck,
settle above the shoulder. Terrible as the wound was, Davis sprang upon
him with the ferocity of a tiger. Not a word nor a cry escaped his lips,
as, in all the agony of his suffering, he seized Dunn by the throat
with one hand, while, drawing from his breast a heavy life-preserver, he
struck him on the head with the other. A wild scream,--a cry for help,
half smothered in the groan that followed, rang out, and Dunn reeled
from his seat and fell dead on the floor! Two fearful fractures had rent
the skull open, and life was extinguished at once. Davis bent down, and
gazed long and eagerly at the ghastly wounds; but it was not till he
had laid his hand over the heart that he knew them to be fatal. A
short shudder, more like the sense of sudden cold than any sentiment of
horror, passed over him as he stood for a few seconds motionless; then,
opening the dead man's coat, he drew forth his keys and searched for
that one which pertained to the red box. He carefully placed the box
upon the table and unlocked it The contents were title-deeds of the
Glengariff family, but all in duplicate, and so artfully imitated that
it would have been scarcely possible to distinguish original from copy.
Of the Lackingtons there was nothing but a release of all claims against
Davenport Dunn, purporting to have been the act of the late Lord, but of
which the signature was only indicated in pencil.
"The discovery was n't worth the price," muttered Davis, as he turned a
half-sickly look upon the lifeless mass at his feet. "I 'm not the first
who found out that the swag did n't pay for the smash; not," added he,
after a moment, "that I was to blame here: it was he began it!"
With some strange mysterious blending of reverence for the dead, with
a vague sense of how the sight would strike the first beholders, Davis
raised the corpse from the floor and placed it on the seat He then
wiped the clotted gore from the forehead, and dried the hair. It was a
gruesome sight, and even he was not insensible to its terrors; for, as
he turned away, he heaved a short, thick sigh. How long he stood
thus, half stunned and bewildered, he knew not; but he was, at length,
recalled to thought and activity by the loud whistle that announced the
train was approaching a station. The next minute they glided softly in
beside a platform, densely crowded with travellers. Davis did not wait
for the guard, but opened the door himself, and slowly, for he was in
pain, descended from the carriage.
"Call the station-master here," said he to the first official he met
"Let some one, too, fetch a doctor, for I am badly wounded, and a
policeman, for I want to surrender myself." He then added, after a
pause, "There's a dead man in that carriage yonder!"
The terrible tidings soon spread abroad, and crowds pressed eagerly
forward to gaze upon the horrible spectacle. No sooner was it announced
that the murdered man was the celebrated Davenport Dunn, than the
interest increased tenfold, and, with that marvellous ingenuity
falsehood would seem ever to have at her disposal, a dozen artfully
conceived versions of the late event were already in circulation. It
was the act of a maniac,--a poor creature driven mad by injustice and
persecution. It was the vengeance of a man whose fortune had been ruined
by Dunn. It was the father of a girl he had seduced and abandoned.
It was a beggared speculator,--a ruined trustee,--and so on; each
narrative, strangely enough, inferring that the fatal catastrophe was an
expiation! How ready is the world to accept this explanation of the sad
reverses that befall those it once has stooped to adulate,--how greedily
does it seek to repay itself for its own degrading homage, by maligning
the idol of its former worship! Up to this hour no man had ever dared to
whisper a suspicion of Dunn's integrity; and now, ere his lifeless clay
was cold, many were floundering away in this pseudo-morality about the
little benefit all his wealth was to him, and wondering if his fate
would not be a lesson! And so the train went on its way, the coup
with the dead body detached and left for the inspection of the inquest,
And Davis on a sick-bed and in custody of the police.
His wound was far more serious than at first was apprehended; the
direction the ball had taken could not be ascertained, and the pain was
intense. Grog, however, would not condescend to speak of his suffering,
but addressed himself vigorously to all the cares of his situation.
"Let me have some strong cavendish tobacco and a pint of British gin,
pen, ink, and paper, and no visitors."
The remonstrances of the doctor he treated with scorn.
"I'm not one of your West-end swells," said he, "that's afraid of a
little pain, nor one of your Guy's Hospital wretches that's frightened
by the surgeon's tools; only no tinkering, no probing. If you leave me
alone, I have a constitution that will soon pull me through."
His first care was to dictate a telegraphic despatch to a well-known
lawyer, whose skill in criminal cases had made him a wide celebrity. He
requested him to come down at once and confer with him. His next was to
write to his daughter, and in this latter task he passed nearly half the
night. Written as it was in great bodily pain and no small suffering of
mind, the letter was marvellously indicative of the man who penned it.
He narrated the whole incident to its fatal termination exactly as it
occurred; not the slightest effort did he make at exculpation for his
own share in it; and he only deplored the misfortune in its effect upon
the object he had in view.
"If Dunn," said he, "hadn't been so ready with his pistol, I believe we
might have come to terms; but there's no guarding against accidents. As
matters stand, Annesley must make his own fight, for, of course, I can
be of little use to him or to any one else till the assizes are over.
So far as I can see, the case is a bad one, and Conway most likely to
succeed; but there's yet time for a compromise. I wish you 'd take the
whole affair into your own hands."
To enable her to enter clearly upon a question of such complication,
he gave a full narrative, so far as he could, of the contested claim,
showing each step he had himself taken in defence, and with what object
he had despatched Paul Classon to the Crimea. Three entire pages were
filled with this theme; of himself, and his own precarious fortunes, he
said very little indeed.
"Don't be alarmed, Lizzy," wrote he; "if the coroner's inquest should
find a verdict of 'Wilful Murder' against me, such a decision does not
signify a rush; and as I mean to reserve all my defence for the trial,
such a verdict is likely enough. There will be, besides this, the
regular hue and cry people get up against the gambler, the leg, and who
knows what else they 'll call me. Don't mind that, either, girl. Let the
moralists wag their charitable tongues; we can afford to make a
waiting race, and, if I don't mistake much, before the trial comes off,
Davenport Dunn himself will be more ill thought of than Kit Davis. Above
all, however, don't show in public; get away from Rome, and stay for a
month or two in some quiet, out-of-the-way place, where people cannot
make remarks upon your manner, and either say, 'See how this disgraceful
affair has cut her up,' or, 'Did you ever see any one so brazen under an
open shame?'
"I have sent for Ewin Jones, the lawyer, and expect him by the down
train; if he should say anything worth repeating to you, I 'll add it
ere I seal this."
A little lower down the page were scrawled, half illegibly, the
following few words:--
"Another search for the ball, and no better luck; it has got down
amongst some nerves, where they 're afraid to follow it,--a sort of
Chancery Court Jones is here, and thinks 'we 'll do,' particularly if
'the Press' blackguards Dunn well in the mean time. Remember me to A.
B., and keep him from talking nonsense about the business,--for a while,
at least,--that is, if you can, and
"Believe me, yours, as ever,
"C. Davis."
CHAPTER XXXV. THE TRIAL
Scarcely had the town been struck by the large placards announcing the
dreadful murder of Davenport Dunn, which paraded the streets in all
directions, when a second edition of the morning papers brought the
first tidings of the ruin that was to follow that event; and now, in
quick succession, came news that the treasurer of the grand Glengariff
Company had gone off with some fifty thousand pounds; that the great
Ossory Bank had stopped payment; companies on every hand smashing';
misfortune and calamity everywhere. Terrible as was the detail which the
inquest revealed, the whole interest of the world was turned to the less
striking but scarcely less astounding news that society had for years
back been the dupe of the most crafty and unprincipled knave of all
Europe, that the great idol of its worship, the venerated and respected
in all enterprises of industry, the man of large philanthropy and wide
benevolence, was a schemer and a swindler, unprincipled and unfeeling.
The fatal machinery of deception and falsehood which his life maintained
crumbled to ruin at the very moment of his death; he was himself the
mainspring of all fraud, and when he ceased to dictate, the game of
roguery was over. While, therefore, many deplored the awful crime which
had just been committed, and sorrowed over the stain cast upon our age
and our civilization, there arose amidst their grief the wilder and more
heartrending cry of thousands brought to destitution and beggary by this
bold, bad man.
Of the vast numbers who had dealings with him, scarcely any escaped:
false title-deeds, counterfeited shares, forged scrip abounded. The
securities intrusted to his keeping in all the trustfulness of an
unlimited confidence had been pledged for loans of money; vast sums
alleged to have been advanced on mortgage were embezzled without a
shadow of security. From the highest in the peerage to the poorest
peasant, all were involved in the same scheme of ruin, and the great
fortunes of the rich and the hardly saved pittance of the poor alike
engulfed. So suddenly did the news break upon the world that it actually
seemed incredible. It was not alone a shock given to mercantile credit
and commercial honesty, but it seemed an outrage against whatever
assumed to be high-principled and honorable. It could not be denied that
this man had been the world's choicest favorite. Upon him had been
lavished all the honors and rewards usually reserved for the greatest
benefactors of their kind. The favors of the Crown, the friendship and
intimacy with the highest in station, immense influence with the members
of the Government, power and patronage to any extent, and, greater
than all these, because more wide-spread and far-reaching, a sort
of acceptance that all he said and did and planned and projected was
certain to be for the best, and that they who opposed his views or
disparaged his conceptions were sure to be mean-minded and envious
men, jealous of the noble ascendancy of his great nature. And all this
because he was rich and could enrich others! Had the insane estimate of
this man been formed by those fighting the hard battle of fortune, and
so crushed by poverty that even a glimpse of affluence was a gleam of
Paradise, it might have been more pardonable; but far from it. Davenport
Dunn's chief adherents and his primest flatterers were themselves great
in station and rolling in wealth; they were many of them the princes of
the land. The richest banker of all Europe--he whose influence has often
decided the fate of contending nations--was Dunn's tried and trusted
friend. The great Minister, whose opening speech of a session was the
mot d'ordre for half the globe, had taken counsel with him, stooping
to ask his advice, and condescending to indorse his opinions. A proud
old noble, as haughty a member of his order as the peerage possessed,
did not disdain to accept him for a son-in-law; and now the great banker
was to find himself defrauded, the great minister disgraced, and
the noble Lord who had stooped to his alliance was to see his estate
dissipated and his fortune lost!
What a moral strain did not the great monitors of our age pour forth;
what noble words of reproof fell from Pulpit and Press upon the lust
of wealth, the base pursuit of gold; what touching contrasts were drawn
between the hard-won competence of the poor man and the ill-gotten
abundance of the gambler! How impressively was the lesson proclaimed,
that patient industry was a nobler characteristic of a people than
successful enterprise, and that it was not to lucky chances and
accidental success, but to the virtues of truthfulness, order, untiring
labor, and economy, that England owed the high place she occupied
amongst the nations of the earth. All this was, perhaps, true; the only
pity was that the pan over our greatness should be also a funeral wail
over thousands reduced to beggary and want! For weeks the newspapers had
no other themes than the misery of this man's cruel frauds. Magistrates
were besieged by appeals from people reduced to the last destitution;
public offices crowded with applicants, pressing to know if the titles
or securities they held as the sole guarantees of a livelihood, were
true or false. All confidence seemed gone. Men trembled at every letter
they opened; and none knew whether the tidings of each moment might not
be the announcement of utter ruin.
Until the event had actually occurred, it was not easy to conceive how
the dishonesty of one man could so effectually derange the whole complex
machinery of a vast society; but so it really proved. So intensely had
the money-getting passion taken possession of the national mind, so
associated had national prosperity seemed to be with individual wealth,
that nothing appeared great, noble, or desirable but gold, and the
standard of material value was constituted to be the standard of all
moral excellence: intending to honor Industry, the nation had paid its
homage to Money!
Of all the victims to Dunn's perfidy, there was one who never could be
brought to believe in his guilt This was the old Earl of Glengariff. So
stunned was he by the first news of the murder that his faculties never
rightly recovered the shock, and his mind balanced between a nervous
impatience for Dunn's arrival and a dreary despondency as to his coming;
and in this way he lived for years, his daughter watching over him with
every care and devotion, hiding with many an artifice the painful signs
of their reduced fortune, and feeding with many a false hope the old
man's yearnings for wealth and riches. The quiet old town of Bruges was
their resting-place; and there, amidst deserted streets and grass-grown
pavements, they lived, pitied and unknown.
The "Dunn Frauds," as by journalist phrase they were now recognized,
formed for months long a daily portion of the public reading, and only
at length yielded their interest to a case before the "Lords,"--the
claim preferred by a Crimean hero to the title of Viscount Lackington,
and of which some successful trials at Bar gave speedy promise of good
result. Indeed, had the question been one to be decided by popular
suffrage, the issue would not have been very doubtful. Through the
brilliant records of "our own correspondent" and the illustrated columns
of a distinguished "weekly," Charles Conway had now become a celebrity,
and meetings were held and councils consulted how best to honor his
arrival on his return to England. As though glad to turn from the
disparaging stories of fraud, baseness, and deception which Dunn's fall
disclosed, to nobler and more spirit-stirring themes, the nation seemed
to hail with a sort of enthusiasm the character of this brave soldier!
His whole military career was narrated at length, and national pride
deeply flattered by a record which proved that in an age stigmatized by
late disclosures, chivalry and heroism had not died out, but survived in
all their most brilliant and ennobling features. While municipal bodies
voted their freedom and swords of honor, and public journals discussed
the probable rewards of the Crown, another turn was given to popular
interest by the announcement that, on a certain day, Christopher Davis
was to be tried at the Old Bailey for the murder of Davenport Dunn. Had
the hand which took away his life been that of some one brought down
to beggary by his machinations, a certain amount of sympathy would
certainly have been wrung from national feeling. Here, however, if any
such plea existed, no token was given. Davis had maintained, at the
coroner's inquest, a dogged, unbroken silence, simply declaring that he
reserved whatever he meant to say for the time of his trial. He did not
scruple, besides, to exhibit an insolent contempt for a verdict which he
felt could exercise little influence on the future, while to his
lawyer he explained that he was not going to give "Conway's people" the
information that he had so totally failed in securing the documents
he sought for, and his presumed possession of which might induce a
compromise with Beecher.
In vain was he assured that his obstinate refusal to answer the
questions of the jury would seriously endanger his safety by arming
the public mind against him; he sternly resisted every argument on this
score, and curtly said, "There are higher interests at stake than mine
here,--it is my daughter, the Viscountess, is to be thought of, not me."
Nor did his reserve end there. Through the long interval which preceded
his trial, he confided very sparingly in his lawyer, his interviews with
him being mainly occupied in discussing points of law, what was and what
was not evidence, and asking for a history of such cases--if any there
were--as resembled his own. In fact, it soon appeared that, having
mastered certain details, Davis was determined to conduct his own
defence, and address the jury in his own behalf.
The interest the public takes in a criminal trial is often mainly
dependent on the rank of the persons implicated; not only is sympathy
more naturally attracted to those whose condition in life would seem to
have removed them from the casualties of crime, but, in such cases,
the whole circumstances are sure to be surrounded with features of more
dramatic interest. Now, although Davis by no means occupied that station
which could conciliate such sympathy, he was widely known, and to men of
the first rank in England. The habits of the turf and the ring establish
a sort of acquaintanceship, and even intimacy, between men who have no
other neutral territory in life; and, through these, Davis was on the
most familiar terms with noble lords and honorable gentlemen, who took
his bets and pocketed his money as freely as from their equals.
With these, his indomitable resolution, his "pluck" had made him almost
a favorite. They well knew, too, how they could count upon these same
faculties in any hour of need, and "Old Grog" was the resource in many a
difficulty that none but himself could have confronted.
If his present condition excited no very warm anxiety for his fate, it
at least created the liveliest curiosity to see the man, to watch how he
would comport himself in such a terrible exigency, to hear the sort
of defence he would make, and to mark how far his noted courage would
sustain him in an ordeal so novel and so appalling. The newspapers also
contributed to increase this interest, by daily publishing some curious
story or other illustrating Davis's early life, and, as may be
surmised, not always to his advantage on the score of probity and
honor. Photographers were equally active; so that when, on the eventful
morning, the clerk of the arraigns demanded of the prisoner whether he
pleaded guilty or not guilty, the face and features of the respondent
were familiar to every one in the Court. Some expected to see him
downcast and crestfallen, some looked for a manner of insolent swagger
and pretension. He was equally free from either, and in his calm
but resolute bearing, as he surveyed bench and jury-box, there was
unmistakable dignity and power. If he did not seek the recognitions
of his acquaintances throughout the Court, he never avoided them,
returning the salutations of the "swells," as he called them, with the
easy indifference he would have accorded them at Newmarket.
I have no pretension to delay my reader by any details of the trial
itself. It was a case where all the evidence was purely circumstantial,
but wherein the most deliberate and deep-laid scheme could be distinctly
traced. With all the force of that consummate skill in narrative which a
criminal lawyer possesses, Davis was tracked from his leaving London
to his arrival at Chester. Of his two hours spent there the most exact
account was given, and although some difficulty existed in proving the
identity of the traveller who had taken his place at that station with
the prisoner, there was the strongest presumption to believe they were
one and the same. As to the dreadful events of the crime itself, all
must be inferred from the condition in which the murdered man was found
and the nature of the wounds that caused his death. Of these, none could
entertain a doubt; the medical witnesses agreed in declaring that life
must have been immediately extinguished. Lastly, as to the motive of
the crime,--although not essential in a legal point of view,--the
prosecutor, in suggesting some possible cause, took occasion to dwell
upon the character of the prisoner, and even allude to some early
events in his life. Davis abruptly stopped this train of argument, by
exclaiming, "None of these are in the indictment, sir. I am here on a
charge of murder, and not for having horsewhipped you at Ascot, the
year Comas won the Queen's Cup."
An interruption so insulting, uttered in a voice that resounded
throughout the Court, now led to a passionate appeal from the counsel
to the bench, and a rebuke from the Judge to Davis, who reminded him
how unbecoming such an outrage was, from one standing in the solemn
situation that he did.
"Solemn enough if guilty, my Lord, but only irksome and unpleasant to a
man with as easy a conscience as mine," was the quick reply of Grog,
who now eyed the Court in every part with an expression of insolent
defiance.
The evidence for the prosecution having closed, Davis arose, and with a
calm self-possession addressed the Court:--
"I believe," said he, "that if I followed the approved method in cases
like the present, I'd begin by expressing the great confidence and
satisfaction I feel in being tried by a Judge so just and a jury so
intelligent as that before me; and then, after a slight diversion as
to the blessings of a good conscience, I 'd give you fifteen or twenty
minutes of pathetic lamentation for the good and great man whose
untimely death is the cause of this trial. Now, I'm not about to do any
of these. Judges are generally upright; juries are, for the most part,
painstaking and fair. I conclude, therefore, that I'm as safe with his
Lordship and yourselves as with any others; and as to Mr. Davenport Dunn
and his virtues, why, gentlemen, like the character of him who addresses
you, the least said the better! Not," added he, sternly, "that I fear
comparison with him,--far from it; we were both adventurers, each of us
traded upon the weakness of his fellows; the only difference was, that
he played a game that could not but win, while I took my risks like a
man, and as often suffered as I succeeded. My victims--if that's
the phrase in vogue for them--were young fellows starting in life with
plenty of cash and small experience: his were widows, with a miserable
pittance, scarcely enough for support; orphan children, with a thousand
or two trust money; or, as you might see in the papers, poor governesses
eagerly seizing the occasion to provide for the last years of a toilsome
life. But my opinion is you have no concern with his character or with
mine; you are there to know how he came by his death, and I 'll tell
you that."
In a narrative told calmly, without stop or impediment, and utterly free
from a word of exaggeration or a sentiment of passion, he narrated how,
by an appointment, the nature of which he refused to enter upon, he
had met Davenport Dunn on the eventful night in question. The business
matter between them, he said,--and of this, too, he declined to give any
particular information,--had led to much and angry recrimination, till
at length, carried beyond the bounds of all temper and reserve, Davis
rashly avowed that he was in the possession of the secret history of all
Dunn's frauds; he showed, by details the most exact, that he knew how
for years and years this man had been a swindler and a cheat, and he
declared that the time for unmasking him had arrived, and that the world
should soon know the stuff he was made of. "There was, I suspected,"
continued he, "in the red box at my feet a document whose production in
a trial would have saved a friend of my own from ruin, and which Dunn
was then carrying up to London to dispose of to the opponent in the
suit. I affected to be certain that it was there, and I quickly saw by
his confusion that I guessed aright. I proposed terms for it as liberal
as he could wish, equal to any he could obtain elsewhere. He refused my
offers. I asked then to see and read it, to assure myself that it was
the paper I suspected. This, too, he refused. The altercation grew warm;
time pressed, for we were not far from the station where I meant to
stop, and, driven to half desperation, I declared that I 'd smash the
box, if he would not consent to unlock it. I stooped as I said this, and
as my head was bent he drew a pistol and shot me. The ball glanced from
my skull and entered my neck. This is the wound," said he, baring his
throat, "and here is the bullet. I was scarcely stunned, and I sprang to
my legs and killed him!".
The sensation of horror the last words created was felt throughout
the Court, and manifested by a low murmur of terror and disgust. Davis
looked around him with a cold, resolute stare, as if he did not shrink
in the least from this show of disapprobation.
"I am well aware," said he, calmly, "there are many here at this moment
would have acted differently. That lady with the lace veil yonder, for
instance, would have fainted; the noble Lord next the Bench, there,
would have dropped on his knees and begged his life. I see one of the
jury, and if I can read a human countenance, his tells me he 'd have
screamed out for the guard. Well, I have nothing to say against any of
these ways of treating the matter. None of them occurred to me, and I
killed him! The Crown lawyer has told you the rest; that I surrendered
myself at once to the police, and never attempted an escape. A legal
friend has mentioned to me that witnesses to character are occasionally
called in cases like the present, and that I might derive benefit from
such testimony. Nothing would be easier for me than this. There is
a noble lord, a member of the Cabinet, knows me long and intimately;
there's a venerable bishop now in town could also speak for me. He
taught me chicken hazard thirty years ago, and I have never ceased to
think affectionately of him. There 's a Judge in the adjoining Court who
was my chum and companion for two years--Well, my Lord, I have done. I
shall call none of them; nor have I anything more to observe."
The Jury, after a short address from the Judge, retired; and Davis's
lawyer, rising, approached the dock and whispered something to the
prisoner.
"What's the betting?" murmured Grog.
"Even as to the first charge. Two to one for a verdict of manslaughter."
"Take all you can get for me on the first," said Grog, "and I'll take
the odds on the other in hundreds. It's a sort of a hedge for me. There,
let's lose no time; they 'll be back soon."
In a few minutes after this brief conversation, the jury returned into
Court. Their finding was Not Guilty of murder, Guilty of manslaughter
only.
Davis listened to the decision calmly, and then, having pencilled down
a few figures in his note-book, he muttered, "Not so bad, neither; seven
hundred on the double event!" So occupied was he in his calculations,
that he had not heard a recommendation to mercy, which the jury had
appended, though somewhat informally, to their verdict.
"What a pot of money one might have had against that!" said Davis. "Is
n't it strange none of us should ever have thought of it!"
The Judge reserved sentence till he had thought over the recommendation,
and the trial was over.
CHAPTER XXXVI. THE END OF ALL THINGS
From the day of Davenport Dunn's death to the trial of Kit Davis three
whole months elapsed,--a short period in the term of human life, but
often sufficient to include great events. It only took three months,
once on a time, for a certain great Emperor to break up his camp at
Boulogne-sur-Mer and lay Austria at his feet! In the same short space
the self-same Emperor regained and lost his own great empire. What
wonder, then, if three months brought great and important changes to the
fortunes of some of the individuals in this story!
I have not any pretension to try to interest my reader for the
circumstances by which Charles Conway recovered the ancient title and
the estates that rightfully belonged to him, nor to ask his company
through the long and intricate course of law proceedings by which this
claim was established. Enough to say that amidst the documents which
contributed to this success, none possessed the same conclusive force
as that discovered so accidentally by Sybella Kellett. It formed the
connecting link in a most important chain of evidence, and was in a
great measure the cause of ultimate success. It rarely happens that the
great mass of the public feels any strong interest in the issue of cases
like this; the very rank of the litigants removing them, by reason of
their elevation, from so much of common-place sympathy, as well as the
fact that the investigation so frequently involves the very driest of
details, the general public regards these suits with a sentiment of
almost indifference.
Far different was it on the present occasion. Every trial at Bar was
watched with deep interest, the newspapers commenting largely on the
evidence, and prognosticating in unmistakable terms the result. Crimean
Conway was the national favorite, and even the lawyers engaged against
him were exposed to a certain unpopularity. At length came the hearing
before the Privilege Committee of the Lords, and the decision by which
the claim was fully established and Charles Conway declared to be the
Viscount Lackington. The announcement created a sort of jubilee. Whether
the good public thought that the honors of the Crown were bestowed upon
their favorite with a somewhat niggard hand, or whether the romance of
the case--the elevation of one who had served in the ranks and was now a
peer of the realm--had captivated their imaginations, certain it is they
had adopted his cause as their own, and made of his success a popular
triumph.
Few people of Europe indulge in such hearty bursts of enthusiasm as our
own, and there is no more genuine holiday than that when they can honor
one who has conferred credit upon his nation. Conway, whose name but
a short time back was unknown, had now become a celebrity, and every
paragraph about him was read with the liveliest interest. To learn that
he had arrived safely at Constantinople, that he was perfectly recovered
from his wounds, that he had dined on a certain day with the Ambassador,
and that at a special audience from the Sultan he had been decorated
with the first class of the Medjidi, were details that men interchanged
when they met as great and gratifying tidings, when suddenly there burst
upon the world the more joyful announcement of his marriage: "At the
Embassy chapel at Pera, this morning, the Viscount Lackington, better
known to our readers as Crimean Conway, was married to Miss Kellett,
only daughter of the late Captain Kellett, of Kellett's Court. A novel
feature of the ceremony consisted in the presence of Rifaz Bey, sent by
order of the Sultan to compliment the distinguished bridegroom, and
to be the bearer of some very magnificent ornaments for the bride. The
happy couple are to leave this in H.M.S. 'Daedalus' to-morrow for Malta;
but, intending to visit Italy before their return, will not probably
reach England for two or three months."
Within a few weeks after, a passage in the "Gazette" announced
that Viscount Lackington had been honored with the Bath, and named
Aide-de-camp to the Queen. It is not for poor chroniclers like ourselves
to obtrude upon good fortune like this, and destroy, by attempted
description, all that constitutes its real happiness. The impertinence
that presses itself in personal visits on those who seek seclusion is
only equalled by that which would endeavor to make history of moments
too sacred for recording.
Our story opened of a lovely morning in autumn,--it closes of an evening
in the same mellow season, and in the self-same spot, too, the Lake
of Como. Long motionless shadows stretched across the calm lake as,
many-colored, from the tints of the surrounding woods, it lay bathed
in the last rays of a rich sunset. It was the hour when, loaded with
perfume, the air moves languidly through the leaves and the grass, and
a sense of tender sadness seems to pervade nature. Was it to watch the
last changes of the rich coloring, as from a rose pink the mountain
summits grew a deep crimson, then faded again to violet, and, after a
few minutes of deepest blue, darkened into night, that a small group was
gathered silently on the lake terrace of the Villa d'Este? They were but
three,--a lady and two gentlemen. She, seated a little apart from the
others, appeared to watch the scene before her with intense interest,
bending down her head at moments as if to listen, and then resuming her
former attitude.
The younger of the men seemed to participate in her anxiety,--if such it
could be called,--and peered no less eagerly through the gathering gloom
that now spread over the lake. The elder, a short, thick-set figure,
displayed his impatience in many a hurried walk of a few paces, and a
glance, quick and short, over the water. None of them spoke a word. At
last the short man asked, in a gruff, coarse tone, "Are you quite sure
she said it was this evening they were to arrive?"
"Quite sure; she read the letter over for me. Besides, my sister
Georgina makes no mistakes of this kind, and she 'd not have moved off
to Lugano so suddenly if she was not convinced that they would be here
to-night."
"Well, I will say your grand folk have their own notions of gratitude as
they have of everything else. She owes these people the enjoyment of a
capital income, which, out of delicacy, they have left her for her life,
and the mode she takes to acknowledge the favor is by avoiding to meet
them."
"And what more natural!" broke in the lady's voice. "Can she possibly
forget that they have despoiled her of her title, her station, her very
name? In her place, I feel I should have done exactly the same."
"That's true," burst out the younger man. "Lizzy is right. But for them,
Georgina had still been the Viscountess Lackington."
"You have a right to feel it that way," laughed out the short man,
scornfully. "You are both in the same boat as herself, only that they
have n't left you twelve hundred per annum!"
"I hear a boat now; yes, I can mark the sound of the oars," said the
lady.
"What a jolly change would a good squall now make in your fortunes!"
said the short man. "A puff of wind and a few gallons of water are small
things to stand between a man and twelve thousand a year!"
The suggestion did not seem to find favor with the others, for they made
no reply.
"You never sent off your letter, I think?" resumed he, addressing the
younger man.
"Of course not, father," broke in the female voice. "It was an indignity
I could not stoop to."
"Not stoop to?" cried out Grog, for it is needless to say that it was
himself, with his daughter and son-in-law, who formed the group. "I like
that,--I like our not stooping when it's crawling we 're come to!"
"Ay, by Jove!" muttered Beecher, ruefully, "that it is, and over a rough
road too!"
"Well, I'd have sent the letter," resumed Grog. "I'd have put it this
way: 'You did n't deal harshly with the Dowager; don't treat us worse
than her.'"
"Father, father!" cried Lizzy, imploringly, "how unlike you all this
is!"
"I know it is, girl,--I know it well enough. Since that six months I
passed in Newgate I don't know myself. I 'm not the man I was, nor
I never shall be again. That same dull life and its dreary diet have
broken up old Grog." A heavy sigh closed these words, and for some
minutes the silence was unbroken.
"There comes a boat up to the landing-place," cried Beecher, suddenly.
"I must see them, and I will," said Lizzy, rising, and drawing her shawl
around her. "I have more than a mere curiosity to see this Crimean hero
and his heroic wife." It was hard to say in what spirit the words were
uttered, so blended was the ardor and the sarcasm in their tone. "Are
you coming, father?"
"I--no. Not a bit of it," said Grog, rudely. "I'd rather see a promising
two-year-old than all the heroes and all the beauties in Europe."
"And you, Beecher?" asked she, with a half-smile.
"Well, I've no great wish on the subject. They have both of them cost me
rather too heavily to inspire any warm interest in their behalf."
The words were scarcely uttered, when the large window of the room
adjoining the terrace was flung open, and a great flood of light
extended to where they stood: at the same moment a gentleman with a lady
on his arm advanced towards them.
"Mr. Annesley Beecher is here, I believe?" said the stranger.
"Yes; that is my name, sir," was the answer.
"Let me claim a cousin's privilege to shake your hand, then," said the
other. "You knew me once as Charles Conway, and my wife claims you as a
still older friend."
"My father bore you the warmest affection," said Sybella, eagerly.
Beecher could but mutter some half-inarticulate words.
"I have done you what you must feel a cruel injury," said Conway, "but
I believe the game was never yet found out where all could rise winners.
There is, however, a slight reparation yet in my power. The lawyers tell
me that a separate suit will be required to establish our claim to the
Irish estates. Take them, therefore;, you shall never be disturbed in
their possession by me or mine. All I ask is, let there be no bad blood
between us. Let us be friends."
"You may count upon me, at all events," said Lizzy, extending her hand
to him. "I am, indeed, proud to know you."
"Nor would I be forgotten in this pleasant compact," said Sybella,
advancing towards Lizzy. "We have less to forgive, my dear cousin, and
we can be friends without even an explanation."
The acquaintance thus happily opened, they continued to walk the terrace
together for hours, till at length the chill night air warned Conway
that he was still an invalid.
"Till to-morrow, then," said Sybella, as she kissed Lizzy's cheek
affectionately.
"Till to-morrow!" replied the other, as a heavy tear rolled down her
cheek, for hers was a sad heart, as she followed with her eyes their
retreating figures.
"Ain't he a trump!" cried Beecher, as he drew his wife's arm within his
own, and led her along at his side. "He doesn't believe one syllable
about our sending those fellows over to the Crimea to crib the papers;
he fancies we were all 'on the square'--Oh, I forgot," broke he in,
suddenly, "you were never in the secret yourself. At all events, he's a
splendid fellow, and he's going to leave the Irish estates with us, and
that old house at Kellett's Court. But where's your father? I 'm dying
to tell him this piece of news."
"Here I am," said Grog, gruffly, as he came forth from a little arbor,
where he had been hiding.
"We're all right, old boy," burst in Beecher, joyfully. "I tried the
cousin dodge with Conway, rubbed him down smoothly, and the upshot is,
he has offered us the Irish property."
Grog gave a short grunt and fixed his eyes steadfastly on his daughter,
who, pale and trembling all over, caught her father's arm for support.
"He felt, naturally enough," resumed Beecher, "that ours was a deuced
hard case."
"I want to hear what your answer was,--what reply you made him!"
gasped out Lizzy, painfully.
"Could there be much doubt about that?" cried Beecher. "I booked the bet
at once."
"No, no, I will not believe it," said she, in a voice of deep emotion:
"you never did so. It was but last night, as we walked here on this very
spot, I told you how, in some far-away colony of England, we could not
fail to earn an honorable living; that I was well content to bear my
share of labor, and you agreed with me that such a life was far better
than one of dependence or mere emergency. You surely could not have
forgotten this!"
"I did n't exactly forget it, but I own I fancied twelve hundred a year
and a snug old house a better thing than road-making at Victoria or
keeping a grammar-school at Auckland."
"And you had the courage to reason thus to the man who had descended
to the ranks as a common soldier to vindicate a name to which nothing
graver attached than a life of waste and extravagance! No, no, tell me
that you are only jesting with me, Annesley. You never said this!"
"Lizzy's right--by Heaven, she's right!" broke in Grog, resolutely.
"If you mean that I refused him, you're both much mistaken; and to
clinch the compact, I even said I 'd set out for Ireland to-morrow."
"I 'm for New Orleans," said Grog, with a rough shake, as though
throwing a weight from his shoulders.
"Will you have a travelling-companion, father?" asked Lizzy, in a low
voice.
"Who is it to be, girl?"
"Lizzy,--your own Lizzy!"
"That will I, girl," cried he, as he threw his arms about her, and
kissed her in sincere affection.
"Good-bye, sir," said she, holding out her hand to Beecher. "Our compact
was a hollow one from the first. It would be but a miserable deception
to maintain it."
"I knew luck was going to turn with me!" muttered Beecher, as he watched
her leaving the terrace, "but I 'd never have believed any one if he 'd
told me that I 'd have booked an estate and scratched my marriage all on
the same evening!"
THE END.